The American Eclectic Dispensatory
John King
The American Eclectic Dispensatory. Cincinnati: Moore, Wilstach & Keys, 1854 (first edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/61660590R.nlm.nih.gov).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

M.  77.


V/K/S?


$#>? \/e  i $rf


^


SWSK3


fc\ . „•?


*.


'.'


I


J "»■


"^v**


£1*


r #


THU


AMERICAN


ECLECTIC  DISPENSATORY.


BY


JOHN  KING,  M.  D.


PEOFESSOE  OF  OBSTETEICS  AND  TUE  DISEASES  OF  WOMEN  AND  CHILDREN,  IN  THE  CINCINNATI

ECLECTIC  MEDICAL  INSTITUTE  ; FOEMEELY  PEOFESSOE  OF  MATERIA  MEDICA,  THEBA-

PEUTICS,  AND  MEDICAL  JURISPEUDENCE  IN  THE  MEMPHIS  INSTITUTE.


1*'

i1


CINCINNATI:
MO  ORE, W1LSTACH & KEYS,

2.r> WEST FOURTH STREET.
18  5  4.


N


QV '
K3\Z7*


o.ZcS'i .


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1854,  by

MOORE,  WILSTACH  AND  KEYS,

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  for  the  District  of  Ohio.


C. A. MORGAN & CO..

BTBEBOTTPERS AND PUBLISHER?,

BAUMOMS BtBMl.


TO

ALL TRUE  FRIENDS

OF

ECLECTIC REFORM

THROUGHOUT THE UNION,

Cbt0  8?  ink


BY

THE AUTHOR.


ABBREVIATIONS, ETC.

The  Abbreviations  employed  in  the  work,  both  where  credit  is  given  or  for  other
purposes,  are  as  follows:

Nat.  Ord., Natural  Order.

Sex.  Syst., Sexual  System  of  Linnseus.

U.  S., United  States  Pharmacopoeia.

U.  S.  Disp., United  States  Dispensatory.

Dub., Dublin  Pharmacopoeia.

W.  S.  M., Mr.  Wm.  S.  Merrell.

T.V.M., Professor  T.Y.  Morrow.

R.S.N., " R.  S.  Newton.

Z.F., " Z.  Freeman.

JR., « J.King.

In  a  few  places,  in  speaking  of  doses,  they  are  given  "from  half  to  three  grains,"
instead  of  "  from  half  a  grain  to  three  grains  ;"  also,  in  speaking  of  liquids,  when
measured  by  fiuidounces  or  fluidrachms,  the  term  "fluid"  is  occasionally  omitted.
The  reader  will  please  observe  and  rectify  the  omissions,  as  well  as  any  other  that
may  not  have  been  observed  by  us.


PREFACE.


In  laying  before  the  public  the  AMERICAN  ECLECTIC  DISPENSA-
TORY, we  are  fully  aware  that  the  profession  have  been  abundantly  supplied
with  similar  works  of  a  high  scientific  character,  which  would  leave  no  excuse
for  the  publication  of  another,  unless  it  should  present  important  information
not  contained  in  the  standard  works.

It  may  not  be  known  to  some  of  the  readers  of  this  work,  that  a  great  amount
of  highly  important  knowledge,  in  reference  to  the  Therapeutic  value  of  remedies,
and  especially  of  our  native-American  plants,  has  been  accumulated  by  liberal-
minded  physicians  in  America ;  which  knowledge,  owing  to  various  causes,  has
never  yet  been  sufficiently  brought  before  the  medical  profession  generally,
and  has  not  been  embodied  in  the  voluminous  standard  works  of  Pereira,
Wood  and  Bache,  Dunglison,  etc.  This  knowledge  being  especially  American
in  its  origin,  and  having  produced  a  marked  peculiarity  in  the  practice  of  a
large  number  of  American  physicians,  we  deem  it  proper  to  style  this  work  the
"American  Eclectic  Dispensatory,"  to  distinguish  it  from  other  works,  which
contain  only  the  ideas  or  views  which  are  common  to  both  American  and
European  physicians.

Another  urgent  reason  for  the  publication  of  this  work,  lies  in  the  fact,  that
the  important  improvements  and  discoveries  of  American  Eclectic  physicians
have  not  only  been,  to  a  great  extent,  overlooked  by  authors,  but  have  already
begun  to  find  their  way  into  medical  works  without  any  reference  whatever  to
their  paternity  ;  and  in  some  instances,  articles  familiarly  known  and  used  for
twenty  years  past  by  Medical  Reformers,  have  been  gravely  brought  forward
as  new  discoveries.

The  use  of  the  term  Eclectic,  in  our  title,  implies  something  more  than
what  we  usually  associate  with  that  word  as  a  common  adjective.  It  refers  to
the  existence  of  a  large  class  of  physicians  in  America,  who  believe  that  the
profession  has  been  too  much  trammeled  by  the  influence  of  authority,  and  by
the  disposition  to  impose  upon  the  young  members  of  the  profession,  certain
scientific  and  ethical  doctrines  which  their  seniors  have  sanctioned  ;  thus  reduc-
ing a  noble  profession,  with  a  comprehensive  science,  to  the  character  of  a  sect,
with  certain  cherished  dogmas.  American  Eclecticism  is  thus  opposed  to
medical  sectarianism,  and  especially  to  that  most  oppressive  form  of  secta-
rianism, which,  like  the  Roman  Hierarchy,  denying  that  it  is  sectarian,  assumes
to  be  an  embodiment  of  unquestionable  truth,  and  pronounces  the  medical
system  which  may  be  sanctioned  by  the  majority  of  the  present  generation,  a
standard  of  scientific  truth,  from  which  any  deviation,  or  even  the  expression
of  dissent,  should  be  condemned  and  punished  by  professional  and  even  social

ostracism.

(iii)


•v  Preface.

This  assumption  of  infallibility,  in  the  existing  and  prevalent  system  of  the
rapeutics,  or  rather,  of  the  right  to  enforce  its  acceptance,  by  dishonoring  aU
who  dissent  from  its  doctrines,  is  too  extravagant  to  bear  the  test  of  se nous
examination.  No  one  who  is  familiar  with  medical  history  who  recollects
the  incessant  changes  in  medical  doctrines  and  practice  from  the  days  of  ttar
len's  infallibility  to  the  present  time,  and  who  remembers  how  sternly  the
main  body  of  the  profession  have  rejected  and  condemned  the  doctrines  which
their  successors  were  compelled  to  adopt,  can  suppose  that  a  profession  so
very  fallible  in  all  past  time,  has  even  yet  acquired  infallibility  ;  nor  can  any
one  seriously  believe  it,  when  he  observes  in  the  doctrines  and  practice  of
the  present  day  the  same  slow,  steady,  progressive  change  as  in  past  times.
And  if  the  idea  of  doctrinal  infallibility  as  to  Therapeutics,  either  in  the  mass
of  the  profession  or  in  its  most  gifted  leaders,  be,  in  fact,  too  absurd  for  serious
argument,  what  possible  foundation  can  there  be  for  the  assumption  that  truth-
fulness and  professional  respectability  belong  exclusively  to  the  majority,  and
to  their  transitory  doctrines,  and  that  any  different  scientific  doctrines  should
be  branded  as  empirical  and  disreputable?

Such  assumptions,  being  essentially  absurd  and  groundless,  are  based  now,
as  they  always  have  been,  on  that  arrogant  and  intolerant  element  of  human
nature,  which  leads  all  large  masses  of  men  to  attempt  to  enforce  conformity
to  their  own  sentiments,  and  to  dishonor  all  that  opposes  them — as  an  Egyptian
rabble  hoot  at  a  passing  Christian.  The  liberal  and  humane  spirit  of  the  age
is  opposed  to  such  intolerance,  and  demands  that  sectarians  in  theology  and  in
science  shall  extend  mutual  toleration  to  each  other.

This  toleration  is  demanded  not  only  by  sound  morals,  by  the  spirit  of  hu-
manity and  the  amenities  of  social  life,  but  by  justice  to  truth  ;  for  as  no  sect
or  doctrine  can  be  based  exclusively  upon  falsehood,  and  as  it  is  certain  that
whatever  has  been  received  by  any  considerable  number  of  men  must  contain
an  appreciable  amount  of  truth,  true  philosophy  dictates  that  we  should
receive  and  examine  with  candor  all  medical  doctrines,  not  only  through  cour-
tesy to  their  supporters,  but  for  the  sake  of  profiting  by  their  truths.  This
duty  is  especially  urgent  when  the  supporters  of  such  doctrines  claim  to  have
achieved  much  good  by  their  medical  practice ;  and  if  their  claims  are  well-
grounded,  we  should  be  culpable  indeed,  in  neglecting  to  avail  ourselves  of
the  instruction  which  they  proffer  for  the  sake  of  humanity.

Those  physicians  who,  in  America,  have  been  most  zealous  in  maintaining
these  liberal  principles,  have  been  called  Eclectics,  and  the  principal  school
in  which  such  doctrines  have  been  taught  has  been  called  the  "  Eclectic  Med-
ical Institute."  It  is  true,  that  many  physicians  have  contended  that  the
whole  profession  should  be  Eclectic,  and  that  some  even  maintain  that  it  is  at
present  Eclectic,  and  liberally  examines  or  adopts  whatever  may  be  presented
that  is  new  and  true.  It  is  true,  that  the  profession  is  not  totally  destitute  of
the  spirit  of  Eclecticism,  for  such  destitution  would  imply  a  total  destitution
of  liberality,  but  we  cannot  recognize  Eclectic  liberality  in  those  who  treat
with  bitter  scorn  the  personal  and  professional  characters  of  scientific  physi-
cians whose  doctrines  differ  from  the  more  prevalent  views  of  therapeutics,
and  who,  instead  of  recommending,  endeavor  to  discourage  or  prevent  the  free
examination  of  what  they  consider  heretical  doctrines,  and  who  attach  profes-
sional penalties  to  the  avowal  of  what  they  deem  heretical  sentiments. If  the


Preface.  v

investigation  of  different  medical  doctrines  is  to  be  carried  on  under  the  threat
of  professional  excommunication,  unless  certain  conclusions  are  adopted,  and  if
as  has  been  recently  arranged  in  certain  medical  colleges,  the  young  practitioner
shall  be  entitled  to  hold  his  diploma  only  so  long  as  he  adheres  to  certain
opinions,  there  is  no  more  freedom  of  investigation  conceded  on  medical  sub-
jects than  there  would  be  freedom  of  suffrage  when  the  polls  were  overawed
by  the  bayonets  of  one  of  the  candidates.

In  extending  our  personal  courtesy  and  professional  liberality  to  the  followers
of  Hahnemann,  Priessnitz,  and  minor  leaders  of  medical  parties,  we  are  merely
obeying  the  positive  dictates  of  morality  and  religion,  which  forbid  unkind,
illiberal  sentiments;  and  as  the  time  must  come  when  all  that  has  been  devel-
oped by  the  labors  of  medical  sectarians  shall  be  incorporated  with  the  estab-
lished mass  of  recognized  science,  it  is  unwise  and  injurious  to  the  progress
of  the  profession  to  delay  such  incorporation  by  encouraging  animosities  and
isolation  among  the  cultivators  of  medical  science.

Such  is  the  kindly  and  harmonious  spirit  which  American  Eclectics  desire
to  see  introduced  into  the  profession  ;  but  in  addition  to  these  ethical  improve-
ments, they  desire  a  more  faithful  and  prompt  adherence  to  the  dictates  of
Clinical  experience.  There  are  many  changes  in  the  details  of  medical  prac-
tice, the  value  of  which  has  been  amply  demonstrated  by  experience,  in  the
various  climates  of  the  United  States,  but  which  have  not  yet  been  adopted
by  the  profession  generally,  because  they  are  not  yet  sufficiently  known  and
understood  by  those  who  have  not  been  pupils  of  the  Eclectic  Medical  Insti-
tute. For  the  nature  of  these  improvements,  and  their  gratifying  results  in
the  treatment  of  disease,  we  must  refer  to  the  "American  Eclectic  Practice,
by  Professors  Jones  and  Morrow,"  the  "  Eclectic  Practice  of  Medicine,  by
Professors  Newton  and  Powell,"  as  well  as  the  "Lectures  on  the  American
Eclectic  System  of  Surgery,  by  Professor  Hill,"  and  the  forthcoming  system
of  Eclectic  Obstetrics,  by  the  author  of  the  present  volume.

Fo:  further  information  of  the  Eclectic  system,  we  would  refer  to  the  prac-
tice of  Eclectic  physicians,  and  to  the  Lectures  of  the  Institute.  This  College,
chartered  in  1845,  has  been  for  some  years  the  leading  Medical  College  of  the
West,  in  point  of  numerical  attendance;  the  whole  number  of  matriculants  in
1852-3,  and  1853-4,  was  six  hundred,  and  the  whole  number  of  graduates
amounted  to  one  hundred  and  thirty-three.  We  make  this  reference  because
the  highest  evidence  of  the  value  of  Eclecticism  is  found  in  the  successful
treatment  of  disease  by  Eclectic  physicians  ;  in  the  treatment  of  1503  cases  of
cholera  in  Cincinnati,  in  1849,  with  a  mortality  of  only  65,  and  many  analogous
facts,  which  will  hereafter  be  more  fully  authenticated.  These  great  practical
improvements  are  simply  the  fruits  of  patient  and  faithful  attention  by  numerous
physicians  to  the  results  of  experience,  and  the  liberal  spirit  of  the  Faculty
of  the  Institute,  who  have  not  disdained  to  gather  knowledge  from  any  source.
We  should  not  overlook,  in  our  passing  reference,  the  distinguished  services
of  individuals  who,  if  they  were  not  like  Hahnemann  or  Dixon,  the  authors
of  a  special  and  exclusive  theory  of  therapeutics,  have  the  more  exemplary
merit  of  faithful  scientific  observation  in  a  liberal  and  candid  spirit  of  improve-
ment, and  the  honor  of  arranging  and  presenting  before  the  public,  with  untiring
energy  and  unshrinking  moral  courage,  a  mass  of  science  much  in  advance  of
prevalent  ideas,  and  consequently  greatly  embarrassed  by  the  habitual,  resolute


vi  Preface.

opposition  of  conservative  minds.  We  allude  especially  to  Dr.  Thomas  V.
Morrow,  to  whose  reputation  as  a  practitioner,  and  untiring  zeal  as  a  med-
ical professor,  we  are  mainly  indebted  for  the  establishment  and  maintenance
of  a  school  devoted  to  the  Eclectic  system  of  medicine  at  Worthington,  Ohio,
and  the  subsequent  successful  establishment  of  the  Eclectic  Medical  Institute
of  Cincinnati.  This  reference  to  Professor  Morrow  is  especially  demanded  by
the  fact  that  so  little  has  been  left  from  his  pen  to  bear  witness  to  the  value
of  his  services  as  a  medical  teacher  and  pioneer  laborer  in  medical  reform  and
improvement.  His  distinguished  co-laborers,  Professors  J.  R.  Buchanan  and
I.  G.  Jones,  have  already,  by  their  pens,  made  known  to  medical  readers  their
conspicuous  agency  in  medical  progress.

We  are  greatly  indebted  to  Professor  Buchanan,  the  present  Dean  of  the
Institute,  for  his  able  and  zealous  services,  especially  since  1846,  in  maintain-
ing the  success,  the  reputation  and  unity  of  the  Institute,  and  shaping  its  pol-
icy, while  at  the  same  time  he  has  been  known  as  a  peculiarly  original  and
philosophic  teacher  of  medicine,  and  most  distinguished  exponent,  before  the
public,  of  the  philosophy  of  Eclecticism.

To  Professor  I.  Gr.  Jones,  we  are  greatly  indebted  as  an  early  co-laborer  of
Professor  Morrow,  at  Worthington  ;  as  an  eminent  and  veteran  practitioner  ;  an
able  teacher  of  medical  practice,  and  a  successful  author,  whose  writings  will
contribute  much  to  the  diffusion  and  adoption  of  the  improved  system  of  thera-
peutics, the  value  of  which  has  been  so  well  displayed  in  his  own  practice.
If  the  Eclectic  improvements  in  medicine  are  even  one  half  of  what  is  be-
lieved by  those  who  have  personally  tested  them,  they  who  have  devoted
their  best  energies  and  risked  the  entire  loss  of  reputation  for  the  sake  of
such  truths,  will  be  gratefully  remembered  by  posterity,  and  the  names  of
Morrow,  Buchanan  and  Jones,  with  their  coadjutors  and  successors  in  the
labor  of  scientific  reform,  will  be  held  in  distinguished  honor.

To  this  cause,  the  author  of  the  present  volume  has  been  devoted  for  about
twenty  years  as  a  medical  practitioner,  and  latterly  as  a  medical  professor  and
author,  and  he  wishes  no  higher  honor  than  to  be  recognized  as  one  of  those
who,  at  the  commencement  of  the  Eclectic  movement,  have  participated  in  the
labors  of  its  pioneers.

An  important  characteristic  of  American  Eclecticism,  which  may  be  illus-
trated by  this  volume,  is  the  superior  zeal  displayed  by  Eclectic  physicians  in
making  important  and  much  needed  improvements  in  the  Materia  Medica,  and
especially  in  developing  the  medicinal  value  of  our  native  plants.  There  are
many  results  attainable  in  practice,  by  the  use  of  these  new  resources,  which
could  not  be  satisfactorily  realized  by  the  agents  in  ordinary  use.  One  of
these  important  results  is  the  ability  to  dispense  partially,  if  not  wholly,  with
various  unsafe  or  deleterious  agents,  and  accomplish  the  purposes  for  which
they  are  used  by  safer  and  more  scientific  treatment.  We  say  more  scientific,
because  that  is  certainly  the  most  scientific  prescription  which  accomplishes
the  object  desired  without  incidentally  inflicting  unnecessary  injury.  The  many
inconveniences  and  dangers  attending  the  use  of  mercurial  medicines  have
produced  a  strong  desire  to  find  some  safe  and  efficient  substitute.  There  is
no  single  remedy  ever  known  to  man  which  has  produced  a  greater  amount  of
mischief  by  Us  indiscriminate  use  than  Mercury;  nor  is  there  anv  other  dru<r
which  has  done  one-hundredth  part  as  much  to  create  a  prejudice  against


Preface.


VI  i


scientific  medicine,  to  destroy  the  confidence  of  the  community  in  its  practition-
ers, and  to  repel  them  from  the  physician  to  the  nostrum-dealer.  But  with
the  mass  of  the  profession,  the  desire  to  find  a  substitute  for  Mercury  has  been
rather  an  idle  fancy  than  a  positive  desire  or  purpose,  and  has  produced  no
result  whatever.  Indeed,  the  conviction  still  prevails,  that  no  substitute  for
mercury  can  be  found,  and  we  regret  to  record  the  fact,  in  the  year  1854,  that
medical  schools  and  medical  authors  generally,  still  regard  mercury  as  the  only
powerful  and  reliable  cholagogue,  simply  because  they  are  not  acquainted  with
the  powers  of  other  agents  ;  the  most  specific  cholagogue  known,  Leptandrin,
not  having  obtained  a  place  in  any  but  the  Eclectic  Dispensatory,  and  Leptandra
itself  having  been  excluded  from  the  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeia  and  the  officinal  part
of  the  U.  S.  Dispensatory,  on  account  of  its  supposed  worthlessness.  Leptan-
drin, Podophyllin,  Apocynin,  and  Iridin,  with  Sanguinaria,  Taraxacum,  Ber-
beris,  and  Euonymus,  and  occasional  combinations  of  other  articles,  accomplish
far  more  than  Mercury  performs,  in  the  way  of  arousing  the  liver,  affecting  the
secretions  generally,  and  even  producing  salivation  of  a  harmless  character.
It  is  not  merely  in  substitutes  for  mercurials,  and  for  various  prescriptions
which  the  physician  uses  with  caution,  and  without  entire  satisfaction,  that  the
improvement  of  the  Eclectic  Materia  Medica  consists,  but  also  in  the  intro-
duction of  agents  and  powers  of  a  novel  character,  or  the  extensive  applica-
tion of  articles  previously  little  known  and  seldom  used.  Of  articles,  pre-
viously little  known  or  used  by  the  profession,  which  are  extensively  used  by
Eclectic  physicians,  we  may  enumerate:


Achillea,

Cypripedium,

Leonurus,

Pteris,

Actsea,

Daucus,

Leptandra,

Pterospora,

Adiantum,

Diervilla,

Liatris,

Pycnanthemum,

Aletris,

Dioscorea,

Ligustrum,

Pyrola,

Alnus,

Epigaea,

Liquidambar,

Rhus,

Althaea,

Erechthites,

Liriodendron,

Robinia,

Amaranthus,

Erigeron,

Lobelia,

Rubus,

Ampelopsis,

Eryngium,

Lycopus,

Rudbeckia,

Apoeynum,

Erythronium,

Lythrum,

Rumex,

Aralia  's,

Euonymus,

Marrubium,

Sabbatia,

Arum,

Eupatorium,

Menispermvuii,

Salix,

Asarum,

Euphorbia,

Menyanthes,

Sanicula,

Asclepias,

Frasera,

Mitchella,

Saponaria,

Aster,

Fraxinus,

Monotropa,

Scutellaria,

Baptisia,

Galium,

Myrica,

Senecio,

Berheria,

Gelseminum,

Nymphaea,

Silpbium,

Betula,

Geranium,

Onosmodium,

Solidago,

Bidens,

Gerardia,

Orobanche,

Spiraea,

Buxus,

Geum,

Osmunda,

Spirit  Vapor  Bath.

Capsicum,

Gillenia,

Ostrya,

Stillingia,

Caulophyllum,

Hamamelis,

Paeonia,

Symphytum,

Ceanothus,

Helianthemum,

Panax,

Trifolium,

Celastrus,

Helonias,

Parthenium.

Trillium,

Chelidonium,

Heracleum,

Phytolacca,

Ulmus,

Chelone,

Heuchera,

Plantago,

Urtica,

Chimaphila,

Hieracium,

Podophyllum,

Uvaria,

Cimicifuga,

Hydrastis,

Polemonium,

Uvularia,

Clematis,

Hypericum,

Polypodium,

Verbascum,

Cochlearia,

Inula,

Polytrichum,

Verbena,

Coniptonia,

Iris,

Populus,

Vernonia,

Convallaria,

Jeffersonia,

Prinos,

Viburnum,

Corydallis,

Kalmia,

Ptelea,

Xanthoxylum.

Together  with  numerous  others  not  herein  referred  to.


viii  Preface.

It  is  true,  that  a  number  of  the  foregoing  articles  have  been  referred  to  by
medical  writers,  and  a  few  have  been  occasionally  used  in  practice,  but  in  gene-
ral,  they  have  been  located  at  the  extreme  verge  of  the  visible  horizon  of  the
profession— in  the  outside  regions  of  empiricism  unknown  to  the  mass  of  phy-
sicians, and  but  slightly  known  to  any  who  were  not  especially  addicted  to
botanical  pursuits.  The  honor  of  their  introduction  into  regular  medical  prac-
tice, belongs  to  the  Medical  Reformers  of  America,  through  whom  their  virtues
have  been" made  known;  and  by  whom  articles  have  been  made  prominent
and  important  agents  in  the  Materia  Medica,  which  were  previously  treated
with  so  much  contempt,  that  a  physician  felt  almost  ashamed  to  investigate
their  virtues,  or  acknowledge  any  acquaintance  with  them.

Of  the  above  articles,  or  their  concentrated  principles,  which  are  absolutely
new,  and  at  present  confined  to  the  circle  of  practice  of  Medical  Reformers,  by
whom  they  were  introduced,  we  may  mention:


Alctridin,

Alnuine,

Ainpelopsis,

Antennaria,

Apocynin,

Asclepias  Incar.

Asclepidin,

Aster,

Baptism,

Bidens,

Buxus,

Caulophyllum,

Caulophyllin,

Ceanothus,

Ceanothine,

Chelone,

Cimicifugin,


Diervilla,

Dioscorea,

Dioscorein,

Echinospermum,

Epigsea,

Equisetum,

Erechthites,

Erechthites,  oil  of,

Euonymus,

Euonymine,

Eupatorin,

Eupatorium  Purp.,

Eupurpurin,

Galium,

Gelseminum,

Geraniin,

Gerardia,


Cornu  cervina:  calcinatumGoodyera,
Corydalia,  Ilelonine,

Corydalia,  Ilieracium,

Cypripedin,  Ili^roehloa,


Hydrastin,

Iridin,

Jeffersonia,

Juglandin,

Leptandrin,

Lobelia,  oil  of,

Menisperine,

Mitchella,

Monotropa,

Myricin,

Onosmodium,

Osmunda,

Ostrya,

Parthenium,

Phytolaccin,

Podophyllin,

Polemonium,

Polytrichum,

Prunin,

Ptelea,

Ptelein,


Pteris  Atrop.,

Pterospora,

Pycnanthemum,

Rhusine,

Robinia,

Rudbeekia,

Scutellarin,

Senecin,

Sesquicarbonate  of  potassa

Silpbium,

Spirit  vapor  bath,

Staphylea,

Stellaria,

Stillingia,  oil  of,

Uvaria,

Uvularia,

Vernonia,

Viburnum,

Viburine,

Xanthoxylin,  and  oil  of

Xanthoxylum,  etc


The  extensive  use  of  the  foregoing  articles,  and  their  consequent  substitu-
tion, on  many  occasions,  for  the  favorite  remedies  formerly  in  use,  constitutes
a  practical  improvement,  the  value  of  which  can  scarcely  be  estimated,  and
the  simplest  statement  of  what  we  believe  and  know  to  be  true,  as  regards
the  superior  success  in  practice  resulting  from  these  improvements  in  the  Ma-
teria Medica,  would  be  regarded,  by  those  entirely  unacquainted  with  the  facts,
as  the  language  of  extravagant  enthusiasm.  For  their  truth,  however,  we  can
but  appeal  to  the  final  tribunal,  universal  experience  ;  and  it  is  partly  with  the
view  of  facilitating  this  appeal  by  candid  physicians,  that  this  volume  is  laid
before  the  public,  in  which,  we  trust,  every  medical  reader  will  find  sufficient
information,  in  reference  to  the  favorite  remedies  of  Eclectic  physicians,  to
enable  him  to  enjoy  in  practice  what  we  deem  the  richest  fruits 'of  modern
clinical  experience,  constituting  the  most  recent  and  important  practical  im-
provements in  the  healing  art.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  work  is  divided  into  three  parts:

Part  I,  is  devoted  to  an  explanation  of  the  Natural  Orders  of  the  various
Medicinal  Plants  named  in  the  work,  and  which  will  prove  a  valuable  reference
for  the  practitioner in  collecting  them;  indeed,  without this reference  the


Preface.


IX


work  would  have  been  very  imperfect,  especially  for  those  who  practice  as
Medical  Reformers.

Part  II,  is  devoted  to  the  Materia  Medica ;  the  various  plants  are  arranged
alphabetically,  and  their  Botanical  characters  are  given  with  sufficient  accuracy
to  enable  the  medical  botanist  to  select  and  determine  them  when  met  with.
The  Natural  and  Artificial  classifications  of  each  are  mentioned,  together  with
the  Vulgar  names  by  which  they  are  known  in  different  sections  of  our  country.
A  brief  reference  is  likewise  made  to  their  general  History,  with  a  statement
of  such  Chemical  relations  and  incompatibilities,  medically  considered,  as  will
be  necessary  for  practical  purposes ;  and  as  far  as  known,  the  Therapeutic
influence  of  each  agent  is  fully  but  concisely  presented.  Since  the  introduction
of  our  new  remedies,  some  of  which  were  discovered  and  introduced  to  the
profession  by  the  author,  as  Podophyllin,*  Iridin,  Cimicifugin,  etc.,  a  great
improvement  has  taken  place  in  Eclectic  treatment,  and  the  successful  results
have  been  so  well  marked  and  undisputed  as  to  have  recently  invited  the
investigation  of  the  more  liberal  old  school  physicians  ;  and  it  is  with  no  little
pleasure  we  state,  that  already  hundreds  of  them,  notwithstanding  arbitrary
prejudices,  aro  adopting  our  new  remedies,  and  are  gratified  by  finding  them
greatly  superior  to  the  agents  for  which  they  have  been  substituted.

Part  III,  is  occupied  principally  with  Eclectic  Pharmacy,  and  those  Prepara-
has  justly  entitled  to  the  rank  of  officinal ;  many  others  might  have  been  men-
tioned, but  further  investigations  are  required  to  test  their  permanent  utility.
Indeed,  the  Pharmacy  of  Eclectic  Practice  may  be  said  to  be  almost  endless,
as  a  vast  amount  of  agents,  both  simple  and  compound,  are  in  constant  use,
which  would  require  a  volume  equal  in  size  to  the  present  for  their  thorough
consideration  ;  and  to  select  from  these  the  more  common  and  successful  pre-
parations has  been  a  task  of  no  ordinary  labor.  Our  Resinoids,  Oleo-resins,  etc.,
which  some  might  deem  to  be  in  their  proper  place  only  in  this  part  of  the
work,  we  preferred  to  arrange  in  Part  II,  accompanying  the  history,  etc.,  of  the
plants  from  which  they  are  obtained.  Decoctions  and  Infusions  which  are
largely  used  in  practice,  have  been  briefly  noticed,  without  any  special  list,
although  the  general  rules  for  their  preparation  are  laid  down  ;  and  wherever
there  is  a  departure  from  these  in  any  article  required  in  infusion  or  decoction,
it  will  be  ascertained  under  the  description  of  the  article  in  Part  II.

*  Many  of  our  most  valuable  therapeutical  agents  have  from  time  to  time  found  their  way  into  the
Old  School  text-books  without  due  credit  having  been  given  to  their  origin,  thus  leading  many  to  be-
lieve that  those  agents  were  discovered  and  introduced  to  the  profession  by  Old  School  physicians;
when  in  truth  they  were  merely  transferred  from  the  various  reformed  publications,  to  the  pages  of
these  text-hooka  at  different  periods,  as  Reformers  made  them  known.  Our  Podophyllin.  since  its
value  and  usefulness  have  been  demonstrated,  is  about  to  have  the  same  course  pursued  with  it,  as
various  means  r.re  being  adopted  to  bring  the  credit  of  its  origin  into  the  Old  School  ranks.  In  the
new  edition  of  Griffith's  Universal  Formulary,  edited  by  Dr.  Kobt.  P.  Thomas.  .1.  R.  Lewis'  method  of
preparing  this  resinoid,  (a  method  adopted  long  after  its  discovery  by  the  author.)  is  given,  in  which
it  is  presented,  by  imputation,  as  a  pure  article;  for  the  editor  remarks — '-An  impure  podophyllin  has
been  prepared  by  VV.  S.  Merrell,  by  precipitating  the  resin  from  a  concentrated  alcoholic  tincture  by
the  addition  of  water."  But  unfortunately  for  the  purity  and  medicinal  activity  of  Lewis'  Podophyl-
lin, it  requires  six  grains  to  act  as  an  ordinary  cathartic,  while  that  of  Merrell's  requires  only  from
half  a  grain  to  a  grain  and  a  half,  thus  proving  the  latter  to  contain  three  or  four  times  as  much  of
the  medicinal  activity  of  the  root  as  the  former.  The  medical  reader  will,  therefore,  please  bear  in
mind  the  ditference  between  Eclectic  Podophyllin,  and  that  claimed  by  the  Old  School,  as  well  as  the
difference  in  their  modes  of  preparation.


x  Preface.

In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  an  amount  of  selected  matter  of  a  valuable
character,  consisting  of  Medical  Abbreviations  and  Latin  terms ;  Tables  of
Weights  and  Measures  ;  of  Mineral  Waters  ;  Specific  Gravities  ;  Solubility  of
Salts,  etc.,  which  will  be  of  much  utility  to  the  chemist  and  pharmaceutist,
and  which,  we  hope,  will  prove  acceptable  to  all.

The  Index  has  been  rendered  as  full  and  complete  as  possible,  that  no  diffi-
culty may  be  experienced  in  readily  finding  any  subject  contained  in  "he  work.

In  scientific  matters,  to  write  a  purely  original  work  is  out  of  the  question ;
authors  have  to  avail  themselves  of  the  information  and  discoveries  promul-
gated by  each  other,  and  in  the  endeavor  to  present  a  complete  practical  knowl-
edge.of  medicines,  we  have  not  hesitated  to  consult  many  excellent  authorities  ;
and  though  considerable  information  is  introduced  not  to  be  had  in  other  publi-
cations, yet  the  only  originality  claimed  is  the  introduction  of  New  M  dicinal
Plants;  of  Concentrated  Remedies  —  their  Preparations  and  uses;  of  valuable
and  Officinal  Eclectic  Pharmaceutic  Preparations  ;  the  selection  and  disposition
of  the  matter,  and  the  endeavor  to  systematically  methodize  the  hitherto  crude
material  floating  among  Eclectics,  as  well  as  to  rectify  the  irregular  classification
of  many  valuable  remedies,  thus  preserving  for  Eclecticism  the  proper  credit
for  all  to  which  it  is  justly  entitled.  And  as  Eclecticism  has  heretofore,  by
silence,  lost  much  of  the  credit  to  which  it  was  justly  entitled,  it  is  hoped  that
this  work,  by  a  systematic  presentation  of  its  ample  and  original  resources,  may
serve  to  secure  the  honor  of  medical  improvements  to  their  true  sources.

We  acknowledge  our  indebtedness  to  the  following  authorities,  which  have
been  freely  consulted  and  selected  from,  viz  :  United  States  Pharmacopoeia,
United  States  Dispensatory,  Christison's  Materia  Medica,  Griffith's  Medical  Bot-
any, Edwards'  and  Vavasseur's  Materia  Medica,  Mitchell's  Therapeutics,  Dun-
glison's  New  Remedies,  Barton's  Collections,  Eberle's  Practice,  Thatcher's
Practice,  London,  Edinburgh,  and  Dublin  Philosophical  Magazine,  Southern
Journal  of  Medicine  and  Pharmacy,  Silliman's  Journal,  Boston  Medical  and
Surgical  Journal,  Dublin  Journal  of  Medical  Science,  Brande's  Manual  of
Pharmacy,  Dublin  Pharmacopoeia,  London  Dispensatory,  Gray's  Bo  any  of  the
Northern  United  States,  Mohr  and  Redwood's  Pharmacy  by  Procter,  Journal
de  Pharmacie,  Philosophical  Magazine,  Pereira's  Materia'Medica,  Medical  Ex-
aminer, Chemical  Gazette,  Wood's  Class-Book  of  Botany,  Woodv'ille's  Medical
Botany,  Bigelow's  Vegetable  Materia  Medica,  American  Journal  of  Pharmacy
American  Journal  of  Medical  Sciences,  Braithwaite's  Retrospect,  London  Lan-
cet, Eaton's  Botany,  Lindley's  Medical  Flora  and  Vegetable  Kingdom,  Merat
and  De  Len's  Dictionnaire  de  Matiere  Medicale,  Rafinesque's  Medical  Flora"
Smith's  Botanic  Physician,  Howard's  Botanic  Practice,  Western  Medical  Re-
former, Eclectic  Medical  Journal,  Jones  and  Morrow's  American  Eclectic  Prac-
tice, Newton  and  Powell's  Eclectic  Practice,  Hill's  Eclectic  Surgen etc etc

We  are  likewise  under  many  obligations  to  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell,  and  Drs  F
D  Hil  &  Co.,  of  Cincinnati,  for  several  pharmaceutical  communh  M  s  of  a
valuable  character,  also  to  Professor  J.  Milton  Sanders  for  the  formula  of  sev-
eral new  salts  recently  discovered  by  him,  and  some  of  which  have  been  suc-
cessfully employed  as  remedial  agents.  We  likewise  return  our  thanks  to  those
members  of  the  profession  who  have  imparted  to  us  new  and  useful  medical
information,  or  who  have  in  anv  «,0r,  „«„*  -i ,.  j  . ■  ■>  "oeiui  uiuucai

of  the  work.  y 7  contnbuted  to  ^d  us  in  the  preparation


THE


AMERICAN

ECLECTIC DISPENSATORY


PAR  T I,


DESCRIPTION

OF THE

NATURAL ORDERS

OF

MEDICINAL PLANTS.


The  study  of  Botany  is  an  important  part  of  the  Physician's  educa-
tion, especially  the  Eclectic  Physician,  whose  Materia  Medica  is,  for  the
greater  part,  derived  from  the  Vegetable  Kingdom.  In  order,  therefore,
to  invite  attention  to  the  science  of  Botany,  as  well  as  to  assist  the  prac-
titioner in  the  Botanical  investigation  of  the  various  Medicinal  Plants
referred  to  in  the  body  of  this  work,  a  departure  from  the  usual  course
pursued  in  the  preparation  of  Dispensatories  has  been  taken,  and  as  full
a  description  of  their  Natural  Orders,  as  could  be  obtained  from  the
various  authors  consulted,  given  in  the  following  pages.  These,  together
with  the  individual  characters  related  under  the  head  of  each  article  of
the  Materia  Medica,  Part  II,  will  enable  the  Practitioner  to  select  with
accuracy,  our  various  indigenous  Medicinal  Plants,  from  those  not  yet
recognized  as  such.  This  will,  undoubtedly,  be  viewed  as  a  most  import-
ant acquisition  to  the  work,  one  which  must  materially  enhance  its  value,
in  a  practical  sense,  when  it  is  remembered,  that  for  want  of  a  reference
of  this  kind,  many  efficacious  Remedial  Plants,  have  remained  unnoticed,
or  been  entirely  forgotten.

Botanists  have  divided  the  Vegetable  Kingdom  into  two  great  natural
divisions,  viz  ;  1.  Ph^enogamous  or  Flowering  Plants,  which  are  also
called  Vasculares,  from  their  abounding  with  ligneous  and  vascular
tissue  ;  2.  Cryptogamia  or  Flowerless  Plants,  also  called  Cellulares
from  consisting  chiefly  of  cellular  tissue.  These  have  again  been  divi-
ded into  Orders,  Classes,  Genus,  Species,  etc.,  to  enter  into  a  detail  of
which  is  out  of  the  province  of  this  work.

(11)


12  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

PHJNOGAMIA,

Or Flowering  Plants.

Are  plants  consisting  of  a  regular  axis  of  growth,  with  leafy  append-
ages ;  composed  of  a  cellular,  vascular,  and  ligneous  structure  ;  devel-
oping flowers  and  producing  seeds.

SUBDIVISION I.

Exogens,  or,  Dicotyledonous  Plants.

Stems  with  a  distinct  pith  and  bark,  between  which  are  layers  of
woody  fiber  and  vessels.  Growth  by  annual,  concentric,  external
zones  or  layers,  and  traversed  by  rays,  Leaves  mostly  with  reticulated
veins,  and  falling  off  by  an  articulation.  Sepals  and  Petals  in  fives  and
fours,  much  oftener  than  in  threes.  Seeds  in  a  pericarp.  Embryo
with  two  or  more  opposite  cotyledons.

CLASS  I. Angiosperms.

Ovules  produced  within  an  ovary  and  fertilized  by  the  pollen  through
the  medium  of  the  instil,  becoming  seeds  inclosed  in  a  pericarp.  Cotyle-
dons, only  two,  opposite.

SUB- CLASS  I. Polypetalous  Plants.

Floral  envelops  usually  consisting  of  both  calyx  and  corolla;  the
latter  composed  of  distinct  petals,  (occasionally  absent.)

ORDER  I. Ranunculace^e. Crowfoots.

Herbs,  (or  woody  vines)  with  a  colorless  acrid  juice.  Leaves  mostly
alternate  and  much  divided,  with  half-clasping  petioles.  Calyx  of
mostly  five  sepals,  sometimes  three,  four,  or  six,  mostly  deciduous,  and
imbricated  in  aestivation.  Corolla  with  from  three  to  fifteen  petals,
sometimes  irregular,  or  wanting.  Stamens  many,  distinct,  hypogynous.
Anthers  adnate  or  innate.  Ovaries  many,  occasionally  few  or  solitary
distinct,  seated  on  the  torus.  Fruit  either  dry  achenia,  or  baccate,  or
follicular. Embryo  minute,  at  the  base  of  horny  or  fleshy  albumen.

1.  Clematis.  Sepals  four,  colored,  pubescent,  the  valvate  margins
more  or  less  bent  inwards  in  the  bud.  Petals  none,  or  shorter  than  the
sepals.  Filaments  numerous,  shorter  than  the  sepals.  Anthers  linear
extror-e.  Ovaries  from  four  to  twenty.  Styles  longer  than  the  stamens'.
Achenia  numerous  in  a  head,  bearing  the  persistent  styles  mostly  as
hairy  or  plumose  tails.— Perennial  herbs  or  vines,  a  little  woody,  with
opposite  and  mostly  compound  leaves.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  13

2.  Anemone.  Involucre  of  three  divided  leaves,  distant  from  the
flower,  its  leaflets  incised.  Calyx  regular,  of  five  to  fifteen  colored
sepals,  petaloid.  Corolla  none.  Stamens  numerous,  much  shorter  than
the  sepals.  Ovaries  many,  free,  collected  into  a  roundish  or  oval  head.
Achenia  many,  mucronate  or  caudate.— Perennials  with  radical  leaves,
and  scapes  with  leaf-like  involucres.

3.  Hepatica.  Involucre  of  three  entire,  ovate,  obtuse  bracts,  calyci-
form,  very  near  the  flower,  persistent.  Calyx  of  five  to  nine  petaloid
sepals,  disposed  in  two  or  three  rows.  Corolla  none.  Stamina  many,
short.  Achenia  awnless. — Leaves  all  radical,  thick,  and  persistent;
flowers  sino-le.

O

4.  Ranunculus.  Sepals  five.  Petals  five,  occasionally  ten,  with  a
nectariferous  scale  or  pore  at  the  base  inside.  Stamens  and  ovaries
numerous.  Achenia  numerous  in  a  head,  ovate,  flattened,  pointed.
Seed  erect. — Annuals  or  perennials,  with  alternate  stem-leaves,  and
flowers  solitary  or  somewhat  corymbed,  yellow,  rarely  white.

5.  Coptis.  Sepals  five  or  six,  oblong,  concave,  colored,  deciduous.
Petals  five  or  six,  small,  cucullate,  obconic.  Stamens  twenty  to  twenty-
five,  hypogynous.  Pistils  from  three  to  seven,  on  slender  stalks.  Cap-
sules, many,  stipitate,  rostrate,  diverging  in  a  stellate  manner,  and  from
four  to  six  seeded. — Low  smooth  perennials,  with  ternately  divided  root-
leaves,  a  long,  slender,  creeping  rhizoma,  and  small  white  flowers  on
scapes.

6.  Helleborus.  Sepals  five,  petaloid,  greenish,  rounded,  persistent
Petals,  from  eight  to  ten,  very  short,  tubular,  two-lipped.  Stamens
numerous.  Stigmas  from  three  to  ten,  orbicular,  terminal.  Follicles
coriaceous,  many-seeded,  nearly  erect.  Seeds  arranged  in  two  rows,
elliptical,  umbilicated. — Perennials  with  divided,  coriaceous  leaves,  and
large  nodding  flowers.

7.  Delphinium.  Sepals  five,  colored,  the  upper  one  spurred,  decidu-
ous. Petals  four,  irregular,  the  two  upper  ones  terminating  behind  in
a  tubular,  nectariferous  spur,  inclosed  in  the  spur  of  the  calyx.  Styles
one  to  five,  mostly  three.  Follicles  one  to  five,  many-seeded. — Plants
with  leaves  much  divided,  flowers  in  terminal  racemes,  blue,  red  or
purple,  never  yellow.

8.  Aconitum.  Sepals  five,  very  irregular,  petaloid,  deciduous,  the
upper  one  helmet-shaped,  larger  than  the  others.  Petals  five,  the  three
lower  very  minute  or  wanting,  the  upper  two  on  long  claws,  concealed
beneath  the  helmet-shaped  sepal,  recurved,  and  nectariferous  at  the


14  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

apex. — Perennials,  with  digitate  or  palmate  leaves,  and  flowers  in  ter-
minal spikes.

9.  Act^a.  Sepals  four,  roundish,  deciduous.  Petals  four  to  eight,
spatulate,  unguiculate.  Stamens  numerous,  dilated  above.  Anthers
two  lobed,  introrse.  Stigma  sessile,  depressed,  two-lobed.  Ovary
ovoid.  Fruit  globose,  with  a  lateral  furrow,  one-celled.  Seeds  many,
smooth,  compressed,  horizontal.  —  Perennials  with  ternately  divided
leaves,  and  a  thick  terminal  raceme  of  white  flowers.

10.  Cimictfuga.  Sepals  four  or  five,  deciduous.  Petals  three  to
five,  concave  or  unguiculate,  sometimes  wanting.  Stamens  many.
Anthers  introrse.  Style  short.  Stigma  simple.  Follicles,  one  to  eight,
oblong,  many-seeded. — Perennials  with  ternately  divided  leaves,  the
leaflets  cut-serrate,  and  white  fetid  flowers  in  long  slender  racemes.

1 1 .  Xanthoriza.  Sepals  five,  regular,  spreading,  deciduous.  Petals
five,  much  smaller  than  the  sepals,  concave,  two-lobed,  and  raised  on  a
claw.  Stamens  five  or  ten.  Pistils  and  ovaries  five  or  ten.  Ovaries
beaked  with  the  styles,  two  or  three  ovuled.  Follicles  oblong,  mostly
one-seeded.  Seed  suspended. — Low  suflruticose  plants  ;  stem  and  bark
yellow  and  bitter ;  leaves  pinnately  divided  ;  flowers  small,  dark  purple,
often  polygamous,  in  axillary,  compound,  drooping  racemes.

12.  Hydrastis.  Sepals  three,  ovate,  petaloid,  equal,  falling  away
when  the  flower  opens.  Petals  none.  Stamens  and  ovaries  numerous.
Anthers  innate.  Pistils  many,  two-ovuled.  Stigma  flat,  two-lipped.
Fruit  baccate,  compound,  terminated  by  a  style,  one  celled,  one  or  two
seeded.  Seeds  obovate,  polished. — Perennials  with  two  leaves,  and
one  flower.

13.  P^eonia.  Sepals  five,  unequal,  leafy,  persistent.  Petals,  five  to
ten,  roundish.  Stamens  many,  mostly  changed  to  petals  by  cultivation.
Ovaries  from  two  to  five,  surrounded  by  the  fleshy  disk.  Style  none.
Stigmas  double,  persistent,  sessile.  Follicles  fleshy,  many-seeded.  Seeds
dry,  round,  numerous.  —  Perennials  with  fasciculate  roots,  biternate
leaves,  and  large,  terminal,  solitary  flowers.

ORDER  II.  Magnoliace^e.  Magnoliads.
Trees  or  shrubs,  with  alternate,  coriaceous,  simple,  entire  or  lobed
never  serrate,  minutely  punctate  leaves,  and  deciduous,  membranaceous
stipules,  either  convolute  in  the  leaf-bud,  or  placed  face  to  face.  The
flowers  are  large,  solitary,  showy,  perfect,  and  fragrant.  The  calyx  is
deciduous,  of  three  to  six  sepals,  and  colored  like  the  petals ;  the  corolla
consists  of  from  three  to  thirty  petals  in  several  rows.  Stamens  numer-
ous, hypogynous,  distinct,  with short  filaments,  and  adnate  anthers.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  15

Ovaries  several,  in  many  rows  upon  an  elongated  torus;  style  short,  with.
a  simple  stigma.  Fruit  various,  of  numerous  one  or  two-seeded  follicu-
lar or  baccate  carpels,  woody  or  fleshy,  and  aggregated  in  a  cone-like
form.  Seeds  anatropous,  suspended  or  ascending,  with  a  fleshy  albumen
containing  a  small  embryo  at  base.

1.  Magnolia.  Calyx  with  five  sepals,  often  none  or  petaloid.  Petals
six  to  twelve,  caducous.  Stamens  with  very  short  filaments,  and  long
anthers  opening  inward.  Pistils  aggregated  and  coherent  in  a  mass,
together  forming  a  fleshy  and  rather  woody  cone'like  fruit ;  each  carpel
opening  on  the  back  at  maturity,  from  which  the  one  or  two  berry-like
seeds  hang  by  an  extensile  stalk  composed  of  a  fine  web  of  unrolled
spiral  vessels.  Inner  seed  coat  bony. — Mostly  trees  with  luxuriant  foliage
and  large  fragrant  flowers  ;  buds  conical,  formed  of  the  successive  pairs
of  stipules  rolled  up,  each  pair  enveloping  the  leaf  next  above,  which  is
folded  lengthwise,  and  applied  straight  against  the  side  of  the  next
stipular  sheath,  and  so  on.

2.  Liriodendron.  Sepals  three,  reflexed,  caducous.  Petals  six,
spreading,  in  two  rows,  making  a  bell-shaped  corolla.  Anthers  linear,
opening  outward.  Pistils  flat  and  scale-form,  long  and  narrow,  imbri-
cated and  cohering  together  in  an  oblong  cone,  dry,  separating  from
each  other,  and  from  the  prolonged  slender  axis  in  the  fruit,  and  falling
away  whole,  like  a  samara  or  key,  indehiscent,  one  or  two-seeded  in
the  small  cavity  at  the  base.  Buds  flattish,  sheathed  by  the  successive
pairs  of  flat  stipules  joined  at  their  edges,  the  folded  leaves  bent  down
on  the  petiole  so  that  their  apex  points  to  the  base  of  the  bud.— Trees
with  large  and  fragrant  flowers.

3.  Drimys.  Calyx  two  or  three-cleft,  or  with  two  or  three  deep
divisions.  Corolla  with  two  or  three  petals,  sometimes  more.  Stamens
numerous,  with  the  filaments  thickened  at  the  summit,  and  anthers
having  two  cells.  Ovaries  four  to  eight.  Carpels  congested,  baccate,
many  seeded.

ORDER  III.  Anonace^:.  Custard  Apples.
Trees  or  shrubs,  with  alternate,  simple,  entire  leaves,  no  stipules,  naked
buds,  and  flowers  usually  green  or  brown,  axillary,  large,  shorter  than
the  leaves.  The  sepals  are  three  or  four,  persistent,  often  united  at
base  Petals  six,  in  two  rows,  coriaceous,  hypogynous,  aestivation
valvate  Stamens  numerous,  densely  crowded,  with  extrorse  adnate
anthers.  Filaments  very  short.  Pistils  several  or  many,  separate  or
cohering  in  a  mass.  Style  short  or  none.  Stigma  simple.  Frmtdvj
or  succulent,  from  one  to  many  seeded,  distinct,  or  aggregated. Seeds


16  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

anatropous,  large,  with  a  crustaceous  seed-coat,  and  a  minute  embryo
at  the  base  of  the  ruminated  albumen.

1.  Uvaria.  Sepals  three,  united  at  base.  Petals  six,  in  two  rows,
their  margins  in  each  set  slightly  overlapping  in  the  bud  ;  the  outer  set
larger.  Stamens  numerous  in  a  globular  mass.  Pistils  few.  Fruit
oblong,  baccate,  often  torulose,  pulpy  within.  Seeds  several. — Shrubs
or  small  trees,  of  an  unpleasant  odor  when  bruised;  flowers  dull-colored,
axillary  and  solitary.

ORDER.  IV. Menispermace^e. Moonseed.

Twinino-  or  climbing  shrubs,  with  alternate,  entire  leaves,  and  small
flowers  in  panicles  or  racemes,  usually  dioecious.  Sepals  from  three  to
eio-ht,  in  a  double  series,  from  two  to  four  in  each,  imbricated  in  aestiva-
tion,  hypogynous,  deciduous.  Petals  from  one  to  eight,  hypogynous,
usually  as  many  as  the  sepals.  Stamens  distinct  or  monadelphous,
equal  in  number  to  the  petals,  and  opposite  to  them,  or  three  or  four
times  as  many.  Anthers  innate,  and  consisting  of  four  globose  lobes.
Fruit  a  one-seeded  drupe,  with  a  large  curved  embryo.  Albumen
sparing.

1.  Cocculus.  Flowers  unisexual,  dioecious.  Sepals  six,  in  two  rows.
Petals  six,  distinct.  Stamens  six,  opposite,  free.  Ovaries  from  three  to
six.  Drupes  one  to  six,  one-celled,  one-seeded.  Racemes  axillary,
rarely  lateral. — Flexible  or  twining  plants.

2.  Menispermum.  Sepals  four  to  eight,  in  a  double  row.  Petals  four
to  seven,  minute,  retuse.  Flowers  dioecious.  Stamens  twelve  to  twenty.
Anthers  four-celled.  Ovuries  and  styles  two  to  four.  Drupes  round,  one-
seeded. Seeds  lunate  and  compressed. — Twining  or  climbing  plants.

3.  Anamirta.  Flowers  dioecious.  Sepals  six,  in  a  double  series,
with  two  closely-pressed  bracteoles.  Stamens  united.  Columns  dilated
at  the  apex.  Anthers  numerous,  covering  the  whole  globose  apex  of
the  column.  Female  flowers  unknown.  Drupes  one  to  three,  one-celled,
one-seeded.  Seed  globose,  deeply  excavated  at  the  hilum.  Albumen
fleshy  ;  cotyledons  very  thin,  diverging. — Twining  plants  with  a  corky
bark,  leaves  more  or  less  cordate-ovate,  and  flowers  in  lateral  compound
racemes.

4.  Cissampelos.  Flowers  dioecious.  Male  flowers,  with  four  sepals  in  a
double  series.  Petals  four,  united  into  a  cup-shaped  corolla.  Stamens
five  ;  anthers  connate.  Fertile  flowers,  with  one„ rounded  sepal,  and  one
petal. Fruit  a  one- seeded  berry.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  17


ORDER  V. Myristicace^e. Nutmeg.

Trees  with  alternate,  exstipulate,  not  dotted,  entire,  petiolate,  coria-
ceous leaves.  Flowers  in  axillary  or  terminal  racemes  or  panicles,  very
small,  often  each  with  one  short,  cucullate  bract.  Calyx  coriaceous,
usually  tomentose  outside,  trifid  or  rarely  quadrifid,  with  a  valvate  aesti-
vation. Unisexual ;  male  flowers  with  the  filaments  separate  or  united
in  a  cylinder.  Anthers  from  three  to  twelve  or  more,  extrorse,  with  a
longitudinal  dehiscence,  connate  or  distinct.  Female  flowers,  with  a  deci-
duous calyx ;  carpels  solitary  or  many,  with  a  single  erect  anatropal
ovule  ;  style  very  short ;  stigma  somewhat  lobed.  Fruit  baccate  ;  albu-
men ruminate,  between  fleshy  and  fatty  ;  embryo  small ;  cotyledons
diverging. Radicle  inferior.

1.  Myristica.  Flowers  dioecious.  Calyx  urceolate,  three-toothed.
Male,  stamens  united  into  a  columnar  tube  ;  anthers  from  six  to  ten,
cohering.  Female,  ovary  simple  ;  style  none  ;  stigma  two-lobed.  Peri-
carp fleshy,  two-valved,  one-seeded.  Seed  inclosed  in  a  coriaceous,
many-cleft  arillus. — Aromatic  and  stimulant  trees.

ORDER  VI. Berberidacejs. Barberry.

Herbs  or  shrubs  with  alternate,  usually  exstipulate,  simple  or  com-
pound leaves.  Flowers  solitary,  racemose,  or  panicled,  perfect.  Calyx
of  three  to  six  sepals,  imbricate  in  two  rows,  often  reinforced  by  peta-
loid  scales,  deciduous.  Corolla  hypogynous,  with  one  to  three  times  as
many  petals  as  sepals,  and  opposite  to  them.  Stamens  as  many  or  twice
as  many  as  the  petals  and  opposite  to  them.  Filaments  short.  Anthers
generally  opening  by  recurved  valves,  adnate,  extrorse.  Ovary  one-
celled,  solitary,  simple.  Style  sometimes  lateral  or  oblique,  sometimes
wanting.  Stigma  orbicular  or  peltate.  Fruit  baccate  or  capsular.  Seeds
one  or  few,  attached  to  the  bottom  of  the  cell ;  or  many,  attached  to
lateral  placenta?.  Embryo  in  the  axis  or  near  the  base  of  the  fleshy  or
horny  albumen.

1.  Berberis.  Sepals  six,  obovate,  spreading,  colored,  with  two  or
three  bractlets  outside.  Petals  six,  suborbicular,  biglandular  at  base.
Stamens  six,  without  denticulations,  and  with  flattened  filaments.  An-
thers two  separate  lobes  on  opposite  edges  of  the  connectile.  Stigma
orbicular,  nearly  sessile.  Fruit  a  fleshy,  one-celled  berry,  oblong,  two
or  three-seeded.  Seeds  erect,  oblong,  with  a  crustaceous  integument. —
Shrubs,  with  yellow  wood  and  inner  bark,  yellow  flowers  in  drooping
racemes,  and  sour  berries  and  leaves  ;  stamens  irritable.
2


18  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

2.  Leontice.  (Caulophyllum.)  Calyx  free  from  the  ovary,  and
consists  of  from  three  to  six  green  sepals,  with  two,  three  or  more  fuga-
cious bractlets  at  base,  ovate- oblong.  Petals  six,  gland-like,  somewhat
kidney-shaped  or  hooded  bodies  with  short  claws,  much  smaller  than  the
sepals,  one  at  the  base  of  each  of  them.  Stamens  six,  opposite  the
petals  ;  anthers  oblong  ;  the  face  of  each  cell  opening  like  a  lid  or  valve,
hinged  at  the  top.  Pistil  gibbous;  style  short ;  stigma  minute ;  ovary
bursting  at  an  early  stage  by  the  pressure  of  the  two  erect  enlarging
seeds,  soon  withering  away.  Pericarp  membranaceous,  caducous,  two
to  four-seeded.  Seeds  erect,  globose,  naked  on  their  thick  seed-stalks,
looking  like  drupes ;  the  fleshy  integument  blue  ;  the  solid  albumen
horny.

3.  Podophyllum.  Sepals  three,  oval,  obtuse,  concave,  deciduous.
Petals  six  to  nine,  obovate,  concave.  Stamens  six  to  eighteen,  with
linear  anthers,  not  opening  by  perfect  uplifted  valves.  Ovary  ovoid ;
stigma  large.  Fruit  a  large  fleshy  berry,  ovoid,  one-celled,  many-seed-
ed, crowned  by  the  solitary,  crenated,  sessile  stigma.  Seeds  covering
the  thick  lateral  placenta,  inclosed  in  pulpy  arils,  all  forming  a  mass
which  fills  the  cavity  of  the  fruit. — Perennials  with  creeping  rootstocks
and  thick  fibrous  roots,  acrid  and  purgative  ;  stems  two-leaved,  one-
flowered.

4.  Jeffersonia.  Sepals  four,  colored,  deciduous.  Petals  eight,  oblong,
flat,  spreading,  incurved.  Stamens  eight,  with  oblong-linear  anthers,
on  slender  filaments.  Ovary  ovoid,  soon  gibbous,  pointed ;  stigma  two-
lobed,  peltate.  Capsule  obovate,  stipitate,  opening  half-way  round  hori-
zontally, making  a  lid.  Seeds  many  on  the  lateral  placenta,  with  a
fleshy  lacerate  aril  on  one  side. — Perennial  glabrous  herbs,  with  matted
fibrous  roots,  long-petioled  root-leaves,  bearing  two  half-ovate  leaflets,
and  simple  naked  one-flowered  scapes.

ORDER  VI.  Nymphace^e.  Water-Lily.
Aquatic  herbs,  with  peltate  or  cordate  floating  leaves  from  a  prostrate
rhizoma.  The  flowers  are  large,  showy,  solitary,  often  sweet-scented.
Sepals  and  petals  numerous,  imbricated,  gradually  passing  into  each
other;  sepals  persistent;  petals  inserted  upon  the  disk  which  surrounds
the  pistil.  Stamens  numerous,  in  several  rows  upon  the  disk,  with
petaloid  filaments,  and  adnate,  introrse  anthers.  Fruit  a  pod-like
berry  ripening  under  water,  crowned  with  the  radiate  stigmas,  many-
celled,  many-seeded  ;  seeds  anatropous,  attached  to  the  spongy  placentae,
and  enveloped  in  a  gelatinous  aril ;  embryo  small,  inclosed  in  a  little  bag
at  the  end  of  the  farinaceous  albumen,  next  the  hilum,  with  a  distinct
plumule,  inclosed  by  the  two  cotyledons.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  19

1.  Nymph.ea.  Sepals  four,  arising  from  the  side  of  the  ovary,  green
outside.  Petals  numerous  in  many  rows,  perigynous,  the  inner  narrower
and  gradually  passing  into  numerous  perigynous  stamens.  Fruit  a
depressed-globular  pericarp,  dry,  indehiscent,  many-celled,  with  a  ses-
sile, linear,  separate,  peltate  stigma  surrounded  with  rays  ;  covered  over
by  the  withered  sepals  and  petals  ;  a  papilla  in  the  center  of  the  stigma.
Seeds  numerous,  inclosed  in  a  sac-like  aril. — Perennial  aquatic  plants,
with  white,  blue  or  rose-colored  flowers.

2.  Nuphar.  Sepals  five  or  six,  oblong,  concave,  colored  within,  pe-
taloid,  hypogynous,  permanent.  Petals,  ten  to  eighteen,  hypogynous,
much  smaller  than  the  sepals  and  stamen-like,  furrowed  externally,
inserted  with  the  stamens  on  the  torus,  and  secreting  honey  from  their
back.  Stamens  numerous,  truncated,  linear,  springing  with  elasticity
from  the  ovary  about  the  time  of  flowering.  Fruit  a  dry,  indehiscent,
many-celled,  many-seeded  pericarp,  ovoid,  naked,  and  crowned  by  a
stellate,  peltate,  sessile,  compound  stigma;  aril  none. — Perennial,  aqua-
tic plants  with  yellow  flowers ;  the  root  in  infusion  with  milk  said  to  kill
cockroaches ;  also  reputed  anti-aphrodisiac.

ORDER  VII.  Sarraceniace^e.  Water  Pitchers.
Perennial  bog-plants  with  fibrous  roots,  and  hollow  pitcher-form,  or
trumpet-shaped  radical  leaves.  The  flowers  are  large,  solitary,  or  seve-
ral on  scapes.  Sepals  five,  persistent,  with  a  three-leaved  involucel  at
base ;  aestivation  imbricate.  Petals  five,  unguiculate,  hypogynous,  con-
cave. Stamens  numerous,  hypogynous,  with  oblong,  adnate,  introrse
anthers.  Ovaries  five-celled,  placentae  central.  Style  single,  petaloid,
umbrella-shaped.  Stigma  dilated,  peltate,  five-angled.  Fruit  capsular,
five-celled,  five-valved,  crowned  with  the  persistent  stigma.  Seeds
numerous,  minute.

1 .  Sarracenia.  Sepals  five,  with  three  small  bracts  at  base,  colored,
persistent.  Petals  five,  oblong  or  obovate,  incurved,  deciduous.  Sta-
mens numerous,  hypogynous.  Ovary  compound,  globose,  crowned  with
a  short  style,  which  is  expanded  at  the  summit  into  a  very  broad  and
petal-like  five-angled  and  five-rayed  umbrella-shaped  body;  the  five
delicate  rays  terminating  under  the  angles  in  as  many  little  hooked  stig-
mas. Capsule  with  a  granular  surface,  protected  by  the  persistent  style,
five-celled,  with  many-seeded  placentae  in  the  axis,  five-valved.  Seeds
anatropous,  with  a  small  embryo  at  the  base  of  fleshy  albumen. — Per-
ennials, yellowish-green  and  purplish ;  the  hollow  leaves  having  a  wing
on  one  side,  and  a  rounded,  arching  hood  at  the  apex.

ORDER  VIII. Papaveracejs. Poppy.
Herbaceous  plants,  with  milky  or  colored  juice,  and  alternate  simple
or  divided  leaves,  without  stipules. The  flowers  are  solitary,  on  long


20  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

peduncles,  never  blue.  Sepals  two,  rarely  three,  deciduous,  imbricated
in  aestivation.  Petals  four  to  twelve,  hypogynous,  spreading,  imbri-
cated in  the  bud,  deciduous.  Stamens  distinct,  numerous,  but  some
multiple  of  four,  rarely  polyadelphous,  with  innate  anthers.  Ovary  of
one  or  more  united  carpels ;  style  very  short  or  none ;  stigmas  two,  or
if  more,  stellate  upon  the  flat  apex  of  the  ovary.  Fruit  either  pod-
shaped,  with  two  parietal  placentae,  or  a  one-celled  capsule,  opening  by
valves,  holes,  or  pores  under  the  permanent  stigma.  Seeds  numerous,
anatropous,  minute,  often  crested  with  a  minute  embryo  at  the  base  of
fleshy  or  oily  albumen.

1.  Papaver.  Sepals  two,  convex,  deciduous.  Petals  four.  Stamens
numerous.  Style  wanting;  stigmas  united  in  a  fiat  four  to  twenty  radi-
ate crown  resting  on  the  summit  of  the  ovary  and  capsule.  Capsule
superior,  short,  turgid,  spheroidal,  one-celled,  with  many-seeded  pla-
centae, forming  incomplete  septa,  opening  by  many  pores  beneath  the
lobes  of  the  broad,  persistent  stigma. — Exotic  herbs,  mostly  biennial,
with  white  juice,  and  nodding  flower-buds.

2.  Sanguinaria.  Sep>als  two,  caducous.  Petals  eight  to  twelve,
spatulate-oblong,  the  inner  narrower.  Stamens  twenty-four.  Style
short.  Stigmas  two,  sessile,  one  or  two-lobed,  connate.  Capsule  pod-
like, oblong,  acute  at  each  end,  one-celled,  two-valved,  many-seeded.
Seeds  obovate,  with  a  large  crest. — Perennials,  with  thick  prostrate  root-
stocks  containing  a  red-orange  acrid  juice,  with  white  flowers.

3.  Chelidonium.  Sepals  two,  suborbicular.  Petals  four,  suborbicu-
lar,  contracted  at  base.  Stamens  numerous,  shorter  than  the  petals.
Style  nearly  wanting.  Stigmas  small,  sessile,  two-lobed.  Capsule
silique-form,  linear,  slender,  smooth,  two-valved,  one-celled,  the  valves
opening  from  the  bottom.  Seeds  numerous,  with  a  glandular  cristate
raphe. — Perennials,  with  brittle  stems,  saffron-colored  acrid  juice,  and
small  yellow  flowei-s  in  umbel-like  clusters.

ORDER  IX.  Fumariace^e.  Fumitory.
Herbaceous  plants  with  brittle  stems  and  a  watery  juice.  Leaves  usu-
ally alternate,  multifid,  often  furnished  with  tendrils.  Flowers  irregular,
purple,  white,  or  yellow.  Sepals  two,  small  and  scale-like,  deciduous.
Petals  four,  hypogynous,  parallel,  one  or  both  of  the  outer  saccate,  two
inner  cohering  at  apex.  Stamens  six,  diadelphous,  with  dilated  fila-
ments, and  adnate,  extrorse  anthers,  the  two  outer  one-celled,  middle
one  two-celled.  Ovary  superior,  one-celled ;  ovules  horizontal,  amphi-
tropal ;  style  filiform ;  stigma  with  one  or  more  points,  flattened  at  rio-ht
angles  with  the  ovary. Fruit  either  an  indehiscent,  one  or  two-seeded


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  21

nut,  or  a  two-valved,  or  succulent  indehiscent,  polyspermous  pod.  Seeds
horizontal,  shining,  arilled.  Albumen  fleshy.  Embryo  minute,  out  of  the
axis;  straight  where  the  fruit  is  indehiscent,  and  somewhat  curved
where  it  dehisces.

1.  Dielytra.  {  Cory dallis  Formosa.)  Sepals  two,  small;  Petals  four,
the  two  outer  equally  spurred  or  gibbous  at  the  base,  deciduous.  Sta-
mens united  in  two  sets  of  three  each.  Stigma  two-crested  and  some-
times two-horned.  Pod  two-valved,  ten  to  twenty-seeded.  Seeds  with
a  lateral  crest. — Low,  stemless  perennials,  with  ternately  compound
and  dissected  leaves  and  simple  scapes,  bearing  racemose  nodding
flowers. Pedicels  two-bracted.

2.  Fumaria.  Sepals  two,  caducous.  Petals  four,  unequal,  one  of
them  spurred  at  the  base.  Filaments  in  two  sets  each  with  three
anthers.  Style  deciduous.  Fruit,  an  ovoid  or  globose  achenium,  small,
one-seeded,  and  valveless. Seeds  crestless.

ORDER  X. Brassicace^:,  or  Crucifer^:. Mustard.

Herbaceous  plants,  with  a  pungent,  watery  juice,  very  rarely  suffru-
ticose,  with  alternate  leaves  and  no  stipules.  The  flowers  are  yellow  or
white,  rarely  purple,  without  bracts,  generally  in  racemes.  Sepals  four,
deciduous.  Petals  four,  hypogynous,  alternate  with  the  sepals,  cruciate,
regular,  nearly  equal.  Stamens  six,  two  of  them  inserted  lower  down
and  shorter  than  the  others,  which  are  in  pairs.  Anthers  introrse.
Torus  with  two  or  more  glands,  between  the  stamens  and  the  ovary.
Ovary  generally  of  two  cells,  with  a  membranaceous  false  dissepiment.
Style  short  or  none,  with  a  two-lobed,  or  double  stigma.  Fruit  a  silique
or  silicle,  usually  two-celled,  many  seeded,  opening  by  the  two  valves
separating  from  the  permanent  placenta ;  rarely  one-celled,  and  indehis-
cent. Seeds  campylotropous,  mostly  pendulous,  attached  in  single  rows
to  each  edge  of  the  placenta,  with  no  albumen.  Embryo  with  the  cotyle-
dons variously  folded  on  the  radicle.

SECTION  I. Siliculos^e.

1 .  Cochlearia.  Calyx  equal  at  the  base,  spreading ;  sepals  concave.
Petals  obovate,  obtuse,  entire.  Stamens  not  toothed.  Style  short,  or
none.  Silicle  sessile,  oblong  or  ovoid-globose  ;  dissepiment  thin ;  valves
ventricose  thickish ;  cells  seldom  two-seeded,  usually  many-seeded.
Seeds  not  margined.  Cotyledons  flat,  accumbent.— White  flowers  ;  leaves
usually  fleshy.

2.  Iberis.  The  two  outside  petals  larger  than  the  two  inner.  Silicles
compressed,  truncate,  emarginate  ;  cells  one-seeded.— Exotic.


22  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

SECTION  II. Siliquos,k

3.  Cardamine.  Calyx  closed,  or  somewhat  spreading,  equal  at  the
base.  Petals  unguiculate,  entire.  Stamens  distinct,  not  toothed.  Pod
or  silique  sessile,  linear,  compressed,  with  flat  nerveless  valves  rather
narrower  than  the  thickened  dissepiment,  and  often  separating  with  elas-
ticity. Style  short  or  wanting.  Stigma  nearly  simple.  Seeds  ovate,  in
one  row,  not  bordered,  with  a  slender  funiculus.  Cotyledons  accumbent. —
Mostly  perennials,  with  white  or  purple  flowers.

4.  Sisymbrium.  Calyx  mostly  spreading,  equal  at  base.  Petals  un-
guiculate, entire.  Silique  subterete  ;  valves  concave  ;  style  very  short ;
seeds  in  a  single  series,  ovoid  ;  cotyledons  incumbent,  sometimes  oblique. —
Flowers  small,  white  or  yellow.

5.  Sinapis.  Sepals  equal  at  base,  spreading.  Petals  obovate,  with
straight  claws.  Stamens  distinct,  entire.  Silique  subterete,  with  a  short
beak,  two-celled,  two-valved ;  cells  many-seeded  ;  valves  concave,  or
keeled  with  a  central  nerve.  Style  short  and  acute,  or  ensiform,  or  ros-
trate subulate  conical  ;  seedless  or  one-seeded.  Seeds  globose,  one
rowed  ;  cotyledons  conduplicate. — Annuals  or  biennials,  with  the  lower
leaves  lyrate,  incised  or  pinnatifid  ;  flowers  always  yellow.

ORDER XL PoLYGALACE.E. MILKWORT.

Herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants,  sometimes  twining,  with  alternate,  or
rarely  opposite,  mostly  simple  leaves,  without  stipules.  The  flowers  are
perfect,  unsymmetrical.  Pedicels  with  three  bracts.  Sepals  five,  often
irregular  and  unequal,  green,  somewhat  united  at  base ;  three  exterior,
of  which  one  is  superior,  and  two  interior.  Petals  usually  three,  hypo-
gynous,  deciduous,  one  anterior  and  larger  than  the  others,  which  are
alternate  with  the  upper  and  lateral  sepals,  sometimes  united  at  base  ;
or  when  live  petals,  the  two  additional  ones  are  very  small.  Stamens  six
to  eight,  united  by  the  anthers  into  two  fasciculi ;  anthers  innate,  one-
celled,  opening  at  the  apex.  Ovary  superior,  compressed,  two-celled,
each  cell  with  one  pendulous  ovule,  rarely  two  to  six,  one  cell  often
abortive.  Style  curved  and  often  cucullate.  Fruit  a  loculicidal,  or  in-
dehiscent  small  capsule. Seeds  pendulous  with  a  fleshy  albumen.

1.  Polygala.  Septals  five,  persistent,  two  of  them  wing-shaped  and
petaloid.  Petals  three,  cohering  by  their  claws  to  the  filaments,  the
lower  one  carinate,  the  two  additional  ones  abortive.  Stamens  united
into  a  tube  at  base,  which  is  cleft  in  front ;  anthers  opening  by  a  pore.
Capsule  obcordate,  compressed,  two-celled,  two-valved,  two-seeded.
Seeds  pendulous,  pubescent,  with  a  carunculate  arillus  at  the  hilum  ;
albumen  abundant,  fleshy  ;  embryo  large  ;  cotyledons  flat  and  broad. —
Bitter  plants,  with  the  lower  petal  mostly  tipped  with  a  crest.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  23

SUB-ORDER.  Krameriace^e.  Rhatany.
2.  Krameria.  Sepals  four  or  five,  irregular,  colored,  spreading,  de-
ciduous. Petals,  four  or  five,  hypogynous,  smaller  than  the  sepals  ;
two  or  three  superior  ones  unguiculate  ;  two  lower  ones  small,  scale-
like. Stamens  one,  three,  or  four,  hypogynous,  unequal.  Ovary  one-
celled,  or  incompletely  two-celled  ;  style  terminal ;  stigma  simple  ;  ovules
in  pairs,  suspended.  Fruit  between  hairy  and  leathery,  globose,  covered
with  hooked  prickles,  by  abortion  one-seeded,  indehiscent.  Seeds  round-
ish-ovate ;  albumen  none. — Exotic.

ORDER  XII.  Violace^e.  Violet.
Herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants,  with  simple,  alternate,  sometimes  op-
posite, stipulate  leaves,  involute  in  vernation.  Sepals  five,  persistent,
slightly  united,  elongated  at  base,  the  two  lateral  interior.  Petals  five,
alternate  with  the  sepals,  hypogynous,  usually  unequal,  the  upper  one
generally  spurred  or  saccate  at  base  ;  twisted-imbricate  in  the  bud.
Stamens  five,  usually  inserted  on  the  hypogynous  disk,  alternate  with  the
petals  ;  filaments  dilated  and  projecting  beyond  the  anthers,  and  more  or
less  coherent  over  the  stigma,  two  of  them  usually  with  a  gland  at  base.
Anthers  two-celled,  introrse,  opening  longitudinally.  Ovary  one-celled,
of  three  united  carpels,  with  three  parietal  placentae  ;  style  one,  club-
shaped,  sometimes  declined  or  curved,  with  an  oblique  cucullate  stigma.
Fruit  a  three-valved  capsule,  one-celled,  many-seeded.  Seeds  often  with
a  tumor  at  base,  and  a  horny  testa  ;  embryo  straight  in  the  axis  of  a
fleshy  albumen  ;  cotyledons  flat.

1.  Viola.  Sepals  five,  oblong,  acute,  unequal,  auricular  at  base.
Petals  five,  unequal,  the  upper  one  (by  resupination  the  lower,)  broad-
est, spurred  at  base  ;  the  two  lateral  equal,  opposite.  Stamens  five,
approximate  ;  filaments  distinct ;  the  two  anterior  having  anthers  that  are
often  spurred ;  anthers  connate,  the  lobes  diverging  at  base.  Capsule
many-seeded,  three-valved,  bursting  with  elasticity,  seeds  attached  to
the  valves. — Low  herbaceous  perennials,  acaulescent  or  caulescent,  with
angular  peduncles,  and  solitary  flowers  in  a  resupinate  position.

ORDER  XIII.  Cistace^:.  Rock-Rose.
Herbs  or  low  shrubs,  often  with  viscid  branches,  having  opposite  or
alternate,  simple,  entire,  usually  feather-veined  leaves;  generally  the
lower  are  opposite,  and  the  upper  alternate.  Floivers  white,  yellow,  or
red,  very  fugacious,  in  one-sided  racemes.  Sepals  five,  unequal,  per-
sistent, the  three  inner  with  a  twisted  aestivation ;  the  two  external  small
like  bracts,  sometimes  wanting.  Petals  five,  or  by  abortion  three,  fuga-
cious hypogynous,  convolute  in  the  opposite  direction  from  the  sepals
in aestivation. Stamens  indefinite,  seldom  few,  distinct,  hypogynous;


24  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

anthers  short,  innate.  Ovary  of  three  to  five  connected  carpels  ;  styles
and  stigmas,  single  or  none,  generally  united.  Fruit,  capsular,  either
one-celled  with  parietal  placentae,  or  imperfectly  three  to  five-celled,
with  dissepiments  proceeding  from  the  middle  of  the  valves.  Seeds  few
or  numerous,  on  slender  stalks,  with  the  orifice  at  the  apex  ;  embryo
slender,  nearly  straight  or  spirally  convolute,  in  mealy  albumen.

1.  Helianthemum.  Sepals  five,  the  two  outer  smaller.  Petals  five,
or  rarely  three  by  abortion,  fugacious,  crumpled  in  the  bud.  Stamens
numerous.  Stigmas  three,  scarcely  distinct;  style  short  or  none.  Cap-
sule triangular,  one-celled,  three-valved,  opening  at  top.  Seeds  angular;
embryo  curved  like  the  letter  S. — The  flowers  are  yellow,  open  in  sun-
shine, and  cast  their  petals  by  the  next  day ;  roots  perennial.

ORDER  XIV.  Hypericace^e.  St.  John's  Wort.
Herbs,  shrubs,  or  trees,  with  a  resinous  and  acrid  juice,  and  often
with  angular  branches.  Leaves  opposite,  entire,  mostly  sessile  and
punctate  with  pellucid  dots,  and  black  glands  ;  no  stipules.  The  flowers
are  perfect,  mostly  yellow,  with  cymose  inflorescence.  Sepals  four  or
five,  distinct  or  united  at  base,  persistent,  unequal,  dotted,  imbricated  in
aestivation.  Petals  four  or  five,  hypogynous,  veins  oblique,  dotted,
twisted  in  aestivation,  mostly  deciduous.  Stamens  numerous,  hypogynous,
in  three  or  more  parcels.  Anthers  versatile,  introrse.  Ovary  single,
superior;  style  slender,  persistent;  stigma  simple.  Fruit  a  capsule  or
berry,  two  to  five,  rarely  six  or  seven-lobed,  many  celled,  with  as  many
styles  as  lobes,  which  are  sometimes  united.  Seeds  numerous,  minute,
anatropous,  with  little  or  no  albumen.

1.  Hypericum.  Sepals  five,  united  at  base,  sub-equal,  leaf-like.
Petals  five,  oblique.  Stamens  few  or  numerous,  united  at  base  into
three  or  five  parcels,  with  no  glands  between  them.  Styles  three  to
five,  distinct  or  rarely  united  at  base,  persistent.  Capsules  unilocular,
or  with  several  cells,  membranaceous,  three  to  five-valved,  many-seeded.
Seeds  roundish  ;  seed-coat  double  ;  albumen  none ;  embryo  with  semicy-
lindrical  cotyledons. — Herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants,  with  opposite,  entire,
pellucid,  punctate  leaves,  and  yellow,  solitary  flowers,  or  in  cymose
panicles.

ORDER  XV.  Caryophyllace^e.  Pink.
Herbs  with  the  stems  swelling  at  the  joints  or  nodes,  with  opposite,
entire  leaves,  the  uppermost  rarely  alternate,  and  destitute  of  stipules.
Flowers  regular.  Sepals  four  or  five,  distinct,  or  cohering  in  a  tube
continuous  with  the  peduncle,  persistent.  Petals  four  or  five,  sometimes
none,  either  unguiculate  and  inserted  upon  the  pedicel  of  the  ovary,  or
without  claws  and  inserted on  the  outside  of  a  fleshy  disk. Stamens


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  25

twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  rarely  equal  or  few  ;  filaments  subulate,
sometimes  monadelphous  ;  anthers  innate,  two-celled,  with  a  longitudinal
dehiscence.  Ovary  often  stipitate  ;  styles  stigmatic  the  whole  length  of
their  inner  surface  ;  stigmas  two  to  five,  filiform.  Fruit  a  one-celled
capsule,  rarely  two  to  five-celled,  opening  at  the  apex  by  twice  as  many
teeth  as  there  are  stigmas.  Seeds  numerous,  campy lotropous  ;  albumen
mealy ;  embryo  external,  curved  round  the  albumen,  or  sometimes
straight.

TRIBE  I. Alsine^e.
Sepals  distinct  or  nearly  so. Petals  without  claws  inserted  on  the
outside  of  the  disk. Stamens  inserted  on  the  margin  of  the  disk.

1.  Stellaria.  Sepals  five,  connected  at  base.  Petals  two  to
five  parted.  Stamens  ten,  rarely  fewer;  styles  three,  sometimes  four.
Capsule  superior,  one-celled,  three- valved,  many-seeded. — Small  grass-
like herbs,  in  moist,  shady  places,  with  white  flowers  in  forked  cymes.

TRIBE  II. Silene.e.
Sepals  united  into  a  cylindrical  tube. Petals clawed,  inserted  with
the  stamens  upon  the  stipe  of  the  ovary.

2.  Saponaria.  Calyx  tubular,  five-toothed,  without  scales.  Petals
five,  unguiculate.  Stamens  ten  ;  styles  two ;  capsule  short-stalked,
oblono-,  one-celled,  or  partly  two-celled  at  the  base,  four-toothed  at  the
apex.  Embryo  coiled  into  a  ring. — Perennials  with  a  mucilaginous
juice,  flowers  in  cymose  clusters,  petals  often  crowned.

ORDER  XVI.  Linacejs.  Flax.
Herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants  with  sessile,  entire,  alternate,  some-
times nearly  opposite  leaves,  without  stipules.  Flowers  terminal,  usu-
ally in  corymbs  or  panicles,  regular  and  symmetrical.  Sepals  three,  four,
or  o-enerally  five,  distinct,  or  more  or  less  united,  persistent ;  aestivation
strongly  imbricated.  Petals  as  many  as  sepals,  and  alternate  with
them,  hypogynous,  unguiculate,  caducous,  twisted  in  aestivation.
Stamens  equal  in  number  to  the  petals,  united  at  base  into  a  hypogy-
nous ring,  which  is  often  toothed,  often  with  an  abortive  filament  between
each ;  anthers  innate.  Ovary  with  as  many  cells  as  there  are  sepals
and  styles,  with  capitate  stigmas.  Fruit  a  globose  capsule,  with  three,
four,  or  five  cells,  containing  two  seeds  in  each  cell.  Seeds  suspended,
compressed.  Albumen  none,  or  very  thin  ;  testa  mucilaginous  ;  embryo
flat,  oily.

1.  Linum. Sepals,  petals,  stamens  and  styles  five,  the  latter rarely
three. Capsule globose,  five-celled; cells nearly  divided  by  a  false


26  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

dissepiment.  Seeds  ovate,  compressed,  anatropous,  mucilaginous,  con-
taining a  large  embryo  with  plano-convex  cotyledons. — Herbs  with  a
fibrous  bark,  and  terminal,  corymbose  or  panicled  flowers.

ORDER  XVII. Geraniace^e. Geranium.

Plants  with  herbaceous  or  shrubby  stems,  tumid  and  separable  at  the
nodes,  with  opposite  or  alternate  leaves,  petiolate,  palmately-veined,  mostly
stipulate.  Flowers  on  terminal  peduncles,  or  opposite  the  leaves,  some-
times axillary.  Sepals  five,  persistent,  veined,  one  sometimes  saccate
or  spurred  at  the  base,  with  an  imbricate  aestivation.  Petals  five,  or  by
abortion  four,  hypogynous,  or  perigynous,  unguiculate,  with  a  twisted
aestivation.  Stamens  usually  monadelphous,  hypogynous,  twice  or  thrice
as  many  as  the  petals  ;  anthers  fixed  by  the  middle,  introrse.  Ovary  of
five  lobes,  each  one  or  two-celled,  placed  alternate  with  the  sepals,  round
an  elongated,  elevated  axis  ;  styles  five,  persistent,  cohering  round  the
axis.  Fruit  five  carpels,  united  to  the  central  axis,  membranaceous,  and
when  mature  separating  by  the  twisting  of  the  style.  Seeds  solitary,  ex-
albuminous,  with  a  lateral  hilum  ;  radicle  straight ;  cotyledons  convolute,
plaited.

J.  Geranium.  Sepals  and  petals  each  five,  equal.  Stamens  ten,  fer-
tile, the  five  alternate  ones  longer,  and  each  with  a  nectariferous  gland
at  its  base.  Fruit  rostrate,  at  length  separating  into  five  long-styled,
one-seeded  carpels  ;  styles  smooth  inside,  at  length  recurved  from  the
base  upward  and  adhering  by  the  point  to  the  summit  of  the  axis. —
Perennial  herbs,  with  forking  stems,  rarely  shrubby  at  base  ;  peduncles
one  to  three-flowered.

ORDER  XVIII.  Oxalidace^e.  Wood-Sorrel.
Plants  with  sour  juice,  low,  herbaceous  stems,  alternate  and  com-
pound leaves ;  stipules  rarely  present.  Flowers  regular  and  symmetri-
cal. Sepals  five,  persistent,  equal,  sometimes  slightly  cohering  at  base,
imbricated  in  aestivation.  Petals  five,  hypogynous,  deciduous,  equal,
unguiculate,  twisted  in  aestivation.  Stamens  ten,  hypogynous,  more  or
less  monadelphous,  those  opposite  the  petals  longest.  Ovary  of  five
united  carpels,  opposite  the  petals  ;  styles  five,  distinct.  Fruit  capsular,
usually  membranaceous,  five-lobed,  five -celled  ;  carpels  one  to  twelve-
seeded.  Seeds  anatropous  ;  embryo  straight ;  cotyledons  broad  and
foliaceous.

1.  Oxalis.  Sepals  five,  distinct  or  united  at  base,  persistent,  Petals
five,  withering  after  expansion.  Stamens  ten  ;  filaments  slightly  mona-
delphous. Styles  five,  capitate.  Capsule  oblong  or  subglobose  ;  carpels
five,  one  to  several-seeded. Seeds  with  an  elastic  testa,  pendulous  from


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  27

the  axis,  their  outer  coat  loose  and  separating  ;  albumen  fleshy. — Peren-
nials, mostly  with  trifoliate  leaves.

ORDER  XIX. Balsaminace^e. Jewel Weeds.

Annual  herbs  with  succulent  stems  and  a  bland  watery  juice.  Leaves
simple,  without  stipules.  Flowers  very  irregular  and  unsymmetrical.
Sepah  five,  deciduous,  the  two  upper  connate,  the  lowest  spurred  or
gibbous.  Petals  four,  hypogynous,  united  by  pairs,  or  rarely  five,  dis-
tinct. Stamens  five,  hypogynous  ;  filaments  subulate ;  anthers  two-
celled.  Ovary  five-celled,  compound.  Stigmas  sessile.  Fruit  capsular,
five-celled,  bursting  elastically  by  five  valves.  Seeds  anatropous,  several
in  each  cell  ;  embryo  straight ;  albumen  none.

1 .  Impatiens.  Calyx  and  corolla  colored  alike  and  confounded,  im-
bricated in  the  bud.  Sepals  apparently  but  four ;  the  two  upper  being-
united,  with  a  notch  at  the  apex,  the  lowest  gibbous  and  spurred.
Petals  apparently  two,  each  of  the  lower  being  united  to  the  two  lateral
ones.  Anthers  cohering  at  the  apex,  and  opening  on  the  inner  face.
Capsule  often  one-celled  by  the  obliteration  of  the  dissepiments,  five
valved,  bursting  elastically. — Annuals,  with  tender,  smooth,  juicy,  and
sub-pellucid  stems  with  tumid  joints.

ORDER XX. XANTHOXYLACEiE. PRICKLY Ash.

Trees  or  shrubs,  pungent  and  bitter-aromatic,  with  alternate  or  op-
posite pinnate,  rarely  simple  leaves,  with  pellucid  dots  and  no  stipules.
The  flowers  are  regular,  gray,  green,  or  pink,  dioecious,  or  polygamous
by  abortion.  Sepals  three  to  five,  rarely  six  to  nine,  connected  at  base.
Petals  as  many  as  sepals,  and  longer,  sometimes  wanting,  twisted  in
aestivation.  Stamens  alternate  with  the  petals,  of  the  same  number,
seldom  twice  as  many;  in  the  pistillate  flowers  either  wanting  or  imper-
fect ;  anthers  introrse.  Ovaries  usually  of  the  same  number  as  sepals,
stipitate,  distinct  or  united  ;  ovules  two  to  four  in  each  carpel ;  styles  dis-
tinct, or  connate  when  the  ovaries  are  separate,  and  combined  when
these  are  united.  Fruit  baccate,  membranaceous,  or  drupaceous,  of
one  to  five  drupes  or  two-valved  capsules.  Seeds  solitary  or  in  pairs,
pendulous  ;  embryo  within  a  fleshy  albumen  ;  cotyledons  oval,  flat.

1.  Xanthoxylum.  Flowers  dioecious.  Calyx  inferior.  Sepals  three
to  five,  petaloid  when  there  are  no  petals.  Petals  as  many  and  longer
than  the  sepals,  sometimes  wanting.  Male  flowers  ;  stamens  as  many
as  the  sepals,  equal  to  them  or  longer,  inserted  round  the  base  of  the
gynophore.  Pistils  rudimentary,  simple  or  compound.  Female  flowers  ;
stamens  usually  wanting,  sometimes  very  short,  and  either  with  or
without abortive  anthers. Pistils  three to five, raised on a short


28  Natural  Ordeks  of  Plants.

base  or  stalk,  distinct  ;  styles,  one  from  the  apex  of  each  ovary,  distinct
or  united  at  the  apex  ;  sometimes  very  short  or  scarcely  any.  Ovaries
one  to  five,  on  a  globose  or  cylindrical  gynophore  ;  ovules  two  in  each
cell,  suspended,  collateral.  Capsules  one  to  five,  sessile,  or  stalked  on
the  gynophore  (receptacle,)  two-valved,  one  or  two-seeded.  Seeds  black
and  shining  ;  when  solitary  globose,  when  in  pairs  hemispherical :  em-
bryo straight  or  slightly  curved.— Trees  or  shrubs,  usually  with  prickles
on  the  branches,  petioles,  and  nerves  of  the  leaves  ;  leaves  pinnately
three  to  five-foliate.

2.  Ptelea.  Flowers  polygamous.  Sepals  three  to  six,  mostly  four,
much  shorter  than  the  three  to  six,  spreading  petals.  Male  flowers  ;
stamens  three  to  six,  longer  than  the  petals  and  alternate  with  them,  in-
serted round  a  receptacle  bearing  a  sterile  pistil.  Female  flowers  ;  sta-
mens very  short  and  imperfect.  Ovary  on  a  convex  receptacle,  com-
pressed, two-celled,  formed  of  two  united  carpels  ;  styles  short,  united,
or  wanting  ;  stigmas  two.  Fruit  a  two-celled,  two-seeded  samara,  com-
pressed, membranous,  indehiscent,  winged  all  round,  nearly  orbicular.—
Shrubs  with  three  to  five  foliate  leaves,  and  greenish-white  small  flowers
in  compound  terminal  cymes.

ORDER  XXI. Simarubaceje. Quassia.

Flowers  hermaphrodite  or  unisexual.  Calyx  four  or  five-sepaled,  per-
sistent. Petals  four  or  five,  hypogynous,  deciduous,  aestivation  twisted.
Stamens  equal  or  twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  placed  on  a  hypogynous
disk.  Ovary  four  to  five-lobed,  containing  one  suspended  ovule  in  each
cell  ;  style  single,  filiform,  larger  at  base.  Carpels  as  many  as  petals,
capsular,  bivalved,  opening  inwardly,  monospermous.  Seeds  pendulous,
exalbuminous,  with  two  thick  cotyledons,  and  a  short,  superior  radicle.

1.  Simaruba.  Flowers  unisexual.  Calyx  small,  cup-shaped,  five-
parted.  Petals  five,  longer,  spreading.  Male  flowers  ;  stamens  nearly
as  long  as  the  petals,  arranged  round  a  receptacle,  having  five  minute
lobes  at  its  apex,  (rudiments  of  ovaries,)  sometimes  none.  Female
flowers  ;  ovaries  five,  placed  on  an  even  disk,  surrounded  at  the  base
by  ten  short  hairy  scales,  (rudiments  of  stamens).  Styles  five,  short,
distinct  at  the  base,  united  at  apex  and  crowned  by  a  broad  five-lobed
stigma. Fruit  five  drupes.

2.  Quassia.  Flowers  hermaphrodite.  Sepals  five.  Petals  five,  longer
than  the  sepals,  and  arranged  in  a  tubular  form.  Stamens  ten,  longer
than  the  petals  ;  anthers  transverse.  Ovaries  five,  placed  on  a  receptacle
broader  than  themselves  ;  styles  five,  distinct  at  base,  united  at  apex,  and
terminating  in  a  nearly  equal  five-furrowed  stigma. Fruit  drupaceous.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  29

3.  Picr.«xa.  Flowers  polygamous.  Sepals  five,  minute.  Petals
five,  longer  than  the  sepals.  Stamens  five,  about  as  long  as  the  petals,
rather  shaggy  ;  anthers  roundish.  Ovaries  three,  seated  on  a  round,
tumid  receptacle.  Style  three-cornered,  trifid  ;  stigmas  simple,  spread-
ing. Fruit  three  drupes,  globose,  one-celled,  two-valved,  distant  from
each  other,  and  placed  on  a  broad,  hemispherical  receptacle.

ORDER  XXII. Anacardiaceje. Sumach.

Trees  or  shrubs  with  a  resinous,  gummy,  caustic,  or  even  milky
juice,  with  dotless,  alternate,  simple,  or  ternate,  or  unequally  pinnate
leaves.  Flowers  terminal  or  axillary,  commonly  dioecious,  with  bracts.
Sepals  three  to  seven,  usually  five  and  persistent.  Petals  as  many  as
sepals  or  wanting ;  aestivation  imbricated.  Stamens  as  many  as  sepals,
alternate  with  the  petals,  distinct,  on  the  base  of  the  calyx ;  anthers  in-
trorse.  Ovary  solitary,  free,  one-celled,  with  a  solitary  ovule ;  styles
three  to  five,  or  wanting  ;  stigmas  three.  Fruit  indehiscent,  commonly
drupaceous,  one-seeded.  Seeds  erect  or  suspended,  exalbuminous  ;  em-
bryo more  or  less  curved  ;  cotyledons  very  thick  and  fleshy,  sometimes
foliaceous.

1.  Rhus.  Flowers  polygamous  or  hermaphrodite.  Sepals  five,
united  at  base,  persistent.  Petals  five,  ovate,  spreading.  Stamens  five,
rarely  ten,  equal,  free.  Disk  orbicular.  Styles  three,  short,  distinct,
or  united.  Stigmas  three,  capitate.  Fruit  almost  a  dry  drupe,  sub-
globose,  one-seeded.  Seed  solitary,  suspended  on  a  funiculus,  arising
from  the  base  of  the  nut ;  embryo  inverted  ;  cotyledons  foliaceous ;  radicle
opposite  to  the  hilum,  bent  downward  along  the  margin  of  the  cotyle-
dons.— Small  shrubs  or  trees,  with  alternate,  mostly  compound  leaves  ;
peduncles  axillary  or  terminal.

2.  Pistacia.  Flowers  dioecious,  apetalous.  Males  ;  se}ials  five  ;  sta-
mens five  ;  anthers  sub-sessile,  four-cornered.  Females  ;  calyx  three  or
four- cleft ;  styles  three  ;  stigmas  three.  Drupe,  dry,  ovate,  one-seeded;
seeds  solitary,  erect,  exalbuminous;  cotyledons  thick,  fleshy,  oily,  with  a
superior  lateral  radicle.

ORDER  XXIII. Rutace^e. Rue.

Herbs,  shrubs,  or  trees,  with  punctate  leaves  and  no  stipules.  Flowers
perfect.  Sepals  and  petals  four  or  five,  the  latter  rarely  wanting ;
aestivation  a  little  twisted,  sometimes  valvular.  Stamens  as  many,  or
twice  or  thrice  as  many  as  the  petals,  or  fewer  by  abortion,  hypogy-
nous,  on  the  outside  of  a  cup-like  disk  surrounding  the  ovary,  and  free
or  combined  with  the  base  of  the  corolla. Ovary,  sessile  or  stipitate,


30  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

its  lobes  equal  in  number  to  the  petals,  or  fewer ; .  styles  united  or  dis-
tinct only  at  base  ;  stigma  simple  or  dilated.  Fruit  of  several  capsules,
either  firmly  united,  or  more  or  less  distinct.  Seeds  two  or  solitary,
with  a  testaceous  integument ;  embryo  with  or  without  albumen  ;  cotyle-
dons variable.

1.  Ruta.  Sepals  four  or  five,  united  at  base,  at  length  deciduous.
Petals  equal  in  number  to  sepals,  concave,  obovate,  distinct,  longer
than  the  calyx,  unguiculate  ;  the  limb  vaulted,  usually  waved  or  jag-
ged. Stamens  twice  as  many  as  the  petals  ;  filaments  subulate,  gla-
brous ;  anthers  ovate,  obtuse.  Torus  surrounded  with  as  many  nectari-
ferous pores  or  glands  as  there  are  stamens.  Styles  four,  distinct  at
the  base,  united  above  ;  stigma  four-furrowed.  Capsules  somewhat
globose,  four-lobed,  dehiscing  internally  at  the  apex.  Seeds  dotted. —
Exotic.

2.  Barosma.  Sepals  five,  united  at  base,  dotted.  Disk  at  the  base
of  calyx  with  a  small  rim.  Petals  five,  unguiculate.  Stamens  ten,  the
five  opposite  the  petals  are  sterile,  petaloid,  sessile,  ciliated,  and  obscure-
ly glandular  at  base  ;  the  other  five  longer,  smooth,  or  hispid,  subulate  ;
anthers  with  a  minute  gland  at  the  apex.  Style  as  long  as  the  petals;
stigma,  minute,  five-lobed.  Fruit  five  cocci  covered  with  glandular  dots
at  the  back.

3.  Galipea.  Calyx  short,  cup-shaped,  five-toothed.  Petals  five,
longer  than  the  calyx,  somewhat  unequal,  united  at  base  into  a  short
tube,  bell-shaped.  Stamens  five  to  eight,  adhering  to  the  tube  of  the
corolla,  of  which  two  to  four  are  sterile,  or  five  all  fertile  ;  anthers  ob-
long, sometimes  revolute  after  flowering.  Style  one,  bearing  a  four  or
five-grooved  stigma.  Capsides  five,  sometimes  by  abortion  fewer;  seeds
solitary  by  abortion.

ORDER  XXIV. Aurantiace^e. Orange.

Trees  or  shrubs  glabrous,  abounding  in  little  transparent  receptacles
of  volatile  oil,  with  alternate  leaves,  articulated  with  the  petioles,  which
are  frequently  winged.  Sepals  three  to  five,  united  into  a  short  urceo-
late  or  campanulate  cup,  marescent.  Petals  three  to  five,  broad  at
base,  slightly  imbricated  in  aestivation,  inserted  on  the  outside  of  a  hy-
pogynous  dish.  Stamens  as  many  as  the  petals,  or  some  multiple  of
their  number,  in  a  single  row,  hypogynous  ;  filaments  flattened  below,
distinct  or  united  ;  anthers  terminal,  innate.  .  Ovary  many-celled,  com-
posed of  several  united  carpels  ;  style  one,  cylindrical ;  stigma  sliohtly
divided,  somewhat  lobed.  Fruit  globular,  large,  baccate,  pulpy,  many-
celled,  covered with  a leathery indehiscent rind, abounding with


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  31

vesicles  of  volatile  oil.  Seeds  solitary  or  many,  attached  to  the  inner
angle  of  each  cell,  usually  pendulous ;  raphe  and  chalaza  usually  very
distinctly  marked,  exalbuminous  ;  embryo  straight ;  cotyledons  thick
and  fleshy.

1.  Citrus.  Calyx  three  to  five-cleft,  urceolate.  Petals  three  to  eight,
oblong.  Stamens  twenty  to  sixty;  filaments  dilated  at  base,  polyadel-
phous ;  anthers  oblong.  Style  terete  ;  stigma  hemispherical.  Fruit  bac-
cate, seven  to  twelve  or  eighteen-celled ;  cells  with  several  seeds,  filled
with  a  fleshy  substance  composed  of  numerous  irregular  pulpy  bags  or
vesicles,  which  are  mere  cellular  extensions  of  the  sides  of  the  carpels. —
Trees  or  shrubs  with  axillary  solitary  spines,  simple  leaves  articulated
with  the  petiole,  or  pinnate  leaves  reduced  to  one  terminal  leaflet,  odorif-
erous flowers,  and  delicious  fruit.

ORDER  XXV.  Ternstromiace^e.  Tea.
Trees  or  shrubs  with  alternate,  coriaceous,  exstipulate  leaves.  The
flowers  axillary  or  terminal,  white,  rarely  red  or  pink.  Sepals  three  to
seven,  concave,  coriaceous,  deciduous,  the  inner  often  the  largest;
imbricate  in  aestivation.  Petals  mostly  five,  but  sometimes  six  or  nine,
bypogynous,  alternate  with  the  sepals,  often  united  at  base.  Stamens
numerous,  inserted  on  the  petals  ;  filaments  distinct,  or  usually  united  in
one  or  more  sets  at  base  ;  anthers  adnate  or  versatile.  Ovary  superior,
two  to  seven-celled,  usually  sessile  on  a  discoid  torus  ;  ovules  two  or
more  in  each  cell ;  styles  two  to  seven,  distinct  or  united.  Fruit  two  to
seven-celled,  capsular,  baccate,  or  coriaceous  and  indehiscent.  Seeds  com-
monly few  and  large,  somewhat  reniform,  downy,  albuminous,  or  exal-
buminous ;  embryo  curved  or  straight ;  cotyledons  often  large,  and  con-
taining oil.

1.  Tiiea.  Calyx  without  bracts  ;  sepals  five  or  six,  rounded,  imbri-
cated, equal.  Petals  five  to  nine,  sessile,  unequal,  the  outer  shorter.
Stamens  numerous,  smooth,  adhering  to  the  very  base  of  the  petals ;
style  simple  at  the  base,  trifid  upward.  Capsule  spheroidal,  three-
celled,  often  by  abortion  one-celled ;  cells  opening  at  the  apex,  one  or
rarely  two-seeded. Seeds  spheroidal,  wingless.

ORDER  XXVI. Zygophyllace^e. Guaiacum.

Floivers  regular.  Sepals  five,  distinct,  or  scarcely  cohering  at  base.
Petals  five,  alternate  with  the  sepals,  unguiculate,  inserted  on  the  recep-
tacle. Stamens  twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  hypogynous;  anthers  fixed
near  their  middle.  Ovary  of  four  or  five  united  carpels,  surrounded  at
base  with  five  scales  on  a  sinuate  disk.  Styles  five,  united  into  one.
Fruit  a  capsule  of  five carpels,  four  or  five-seeded,  dehiscent  at  the


32  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

superior  angle. Seeds  albuminous  or  exalbuminous;  albumen  cartilagin-
ous or  horny  ;  embryo  green,  straight ;  cotyledons  foliaceous.

I.  Guaiacum.  Calyx  deeply  five-parted,  unequal,  obtuse.  Petals
five,  longer  than  the  sepals,  equal,  unguiculate.  Stamens  ten,  without
scales.  Ovary  stipitate  with  two  to  five  angles,  two  to  five  cells,  and
about  eight  suspended  ovules  in  a  cell.  Styles  short,  acute,  and  united.
Capsule,  on  a  very  short  stalk,  somewhat  fleshy,  angular.  Seeds
solitary  by  abortion,  smooth,  pendulous.

ORDER  XXVII.  Malvaceae.  Mallows.
Herbs,  shrubs  or  trees  with  alternate,  stipulate  and  divided  leaves ;
hairs  stellate  or  none.  The  flowers  are  axillary,  showy,  regular,  often
with  an  involucel  at  base.  Sejmls  five,  seldom  three  or  four,  united  at
base,  persistent,  valvate  in  aestivation.  Petals  five,  hypogynous,  valvate
in  aestivation.  Stamens  as  many  as  the  petals,  or  some  multiple  of  them,
hypogynous,  monadelphous ;  anthers  reniform,  one-celled,  opening
transversely.  Ovary  of  several  carpels,  arranged  in  one  or  more  rows
around  a  common  axis,  distinct  or  coherent.  Styles  as  many  as  carpels,
united  or  distinct.  Stigmas  as  many,  or  twice  as  many  as  styles.  Fruit
capsular  or  baccate  ;  carpels  one  or  many-seeded,  distinct  or  united,  the
dehiscence  septicidal  or  loculicidal.  Seeds  sometimes  hairy,  exalbumin-
ous ;  embryo  curved  ;  cotyledons  foliaceous,  twisted.

1.  Malva.  Calyx  five-cleft,  the  involucel  mostly  three-leaved,  some-
what like  an  outer  calyx.  Styles  and  carpels  numerous.  Fruit  de-
pressed, separating  at  maturity  into  as  many  one-seeded,  and  usually
indehiscent  reniform  little  pods  as  there  are  styles,  arranged  circularly.
Radicle  pointing  downward. — Perennials,  with  perfect  flowers.

2.  Althaea.  Calyx  surrounded  at  base  by  a  six  to  nine-cleft  invo-
lucel. Carpels  numerous,  capsular,  closely  and  circularly  arranged
round  the  axis.

3.  Gossypium.  Calyx  cup-shaped,  obtusely  five-toothed,  surrounded
by  an  involucel  of  three  cordate  leaves,  deeply  and  incisely  toothed.
Stigmas  three  to  five.  Capsules  three  to  five-celled,  loculicidal.  Seeds
numerous,  imbedded  in  cotton. — Plants  with  yellow  flowers.

4.  Abelmoschus. Hibiscus. Calyx  five-toothed,  spathaceous,  decid-
uous, surrounded  by  a  five  to  ten-leaved  involucel,  often  very  caducous.
Ovarium  five-celled  ;  cells  with  many  ovules. Style  one,  five-cleft  at
the  apex. Stigmas  five. Capsule  five-celled,  five-valved,  loculicidal
polyspermous. Seeds  naked.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  33

ORDER  XXVIII.  Vitace.e.  Grape-Vines.
Shrubs  climbing  by  tendrils,  with  tumid,  separable  joints.  Leaves
simple  or  compound,  the  lower  opposite,  upper  alternate.  The  flowers
are  racemose,  often  polygamous  or  dioecious.  Calyx  minute,  nearly
entire  or  five-toothed.  Corolla  with  four  or  five  petals  inserted  on  the
outside  of  a  hypogynous  disk,  valvate  and  inflexed  in  aestivation,  often
cohering  above  and  caducous.  Stamens  four  or  five,  opposite  the  petals,
inserted  on  the  disk  ;  anthers  ovate,  versatile.  Ovary  superior,  two-
celled,  with  two  erect,  collateral  ovules  in  each  cell.  Style  one,  very
short,  with  a  simple  stigma.  Fruit  a  globose,  pulpy  berry,  two  celled,
four-seeded,  often  from  abortion  one-celled.  Seeds  with  a  hard,  bony
testa,  and  a  cartilaginous,  or  fleshy  albumen  ;  embryo  shorter  than  the
albumen  ;  radicle  slender  ;  cotyledons  lanceolate  or  subulate.

1.  Vitis.  Calyx  nearly  entire,  somewhat  five-toothed.  Petals  four
or  five,  united  at  apex,  distinct  at  base,  deciduous.  Disk  elevated  in
the  center,  and  bearing  the  stamens  at  base.  Stamens  five.  Ovary
partly  inclosed  within  the  torus,  two-celled  ;  cells  two-ovuled ;  style  short,
or  none  ;  stigma  capitate.  Berry  one  to  four-seeded,  cells  and  seeds
often  abortive. — Peduncles  often  changed  into  tendrils.

2.  Ampelopsis.  Calyx  entire  or  slightly  five-toothed.  Petals  five,
concave,  distinct,  spreading,  deciduous  after  expansion.  Ovary  two-
celled.  No  five-lobed  ring  around  the  ovary.  Style  very  short  ;  berry
two-celled  ;  cells  one  or  two  seeded. —  Vine  with  digitate  leaves  having
five  leaflets  and  flowers  in  cymose-clusters.

ORDER XXIX. HlPPOCASTANACEJE. ^EsCULACE.E. BUCKEYE.

Trees  or  shrubs,  with  opposite,  rarely  alternate,  compound  leaves,
without  stipules.  Flowers  showy,  with  the  pedicels  articulated.  Calyx
campanulate,  of  five  united  sepals.  Petals  five,  one  of  them  sometimes
abortive,  unequal,  hypogynous.  Stamens  six  to  eight,  distinct,  unequal,
inserted  upon  a  disk  with  the  petals.  Ovary  roundish,  three-cornered,
three-celled,  crowned  with  a  single,  filiform,  conical  style  ;  cells  two
ovules  in  each,  only  one  of  which,  or  one  in  each  cell,  ripens  into  a
seed.  Fruit  roundish,  coriaceous,  with  one  to  three  large,  roundish,
smooth  seeds.  Seeds  with  a  thick  and  shining  coat  and  a  large  round
pale  scar,  without  albumen  ;  cotyledons  very  thick  and  fleshy,  somewhat
crumpled  and  united,  remaining  under  ground  in  germination  ;  plumule
two-leaved  ;  radicle conical,  curved.

ORDER  XXX. Sapindace^.
Trees,  shrubs,  or  herbs,  the  latter  furnished  with  tendrils. Leaves
alternate,  usually  compound,  and  without  stipules.  Flowers  small,  usually


34  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

polygamous.  Sepals  four  or  five,  imbricated  in  aestivation.  Petals  four
or  five,  sometimes  wanting-,  alternate  with  the  sepals,  hypogynous,  some-
times naked,  sometimes  with  a  doubled  appendage  on  the  inside.  Disk
fleshy,  regular,  expanded  between  the  petals  and  stamens,  sometimes
glandular,  the  glands  between  the  stamens  and  petals.  Stamens  eight
to  ten,  seldom  twenty,  inserted  on  the  disk,  or  on  the  receptacle  ;  fila-
ments free,  or  connected  at  base  ;  anthers  introrse.  Ovary  three-celled,
rarely  two  or  four-celled ;  cells  containing  one  to  three,  seldom  more,
ovules.  Style  simple,  or  two  or  three-cleft.  Fruit  sometimes  capsular,
two  or  three-valved,  sometimes  a  samara,  sometimes  fleshy  and  indehis-
cent.  Seeds  one  to  three  in  each  cell,  usually  arilled,  exalbuminous ;
the  outer  integument  crustaceous,  or  membranous,  the  inner  pellucid ;
embryo  curved  or  spiral,  seldom  straight.

1.  ^Esculus.  Calyx  campanulate,  or  tubular,  five-lobed.  Petals  four
or  five,  irregular,  unequal,  expanded,  with  an  ovate  limb.  Filaments
curved  inward.  Capsules  prickly.  —  Trees  with  palmately  five  or
seven-foliate  leaves,  leaflets  sessile  or  nearly  so  ;  fiowers  in  thyrse-like
panicles.

ORDER  XXXI. Celastrace^e. Spindle-Tree.

Shrubs,  or  rarely  trees,  with  opposite  or  alternate  leaves,  and  flowers
not  always  perfect.  Sepals  four  or  five,  united  at  base,  imbricated,  and
inserted  in  the  edge  of  an  expanded  disk.  Petals  as  many  as  sepals,
inserted  by  a  broad  base  under  the  margin  of  the  flat,  expanded  disk,
which  surrounds  the  ovary.  Stamens  as  many  as  petals,  and  alternate
with  them,  inserted  on  the  margin,  or  within  the  edge  of  the  disk  ;  anthers
innate.  Ovary  superior,  immersed  in  and  adhering  to  the  disk.  Fruit
drupaceous  or  capsular,  two  to  five-celled.  Seeds  solitary  or  few,  ana-
tropous,  either  arillate  or  the  reverse;  embryo  large;  albumen  fleshy;
cotyledons  broad  and  leaf- like.

TRIBE  I. Staphtle^:.

Leaves  pinnate,  opposite.  Seeds  bony,  not  arilled.  Cotyledons  thick.
Ovary  many-ovuled,  free  from  the  cup-shaped  disk.

1.  Staphylea.  Flowers  perfect.  Sepals  five,  colored,  erect,  persis-
tent. Petals  five,  with  short  claws.  Stamens  five.  Pistil  of  three
carpels  united  in  the  axis,  their  long  styles  cohering,  but  separating  as
the  ovary  enlarges  into  the  membranaceous,  inflated,  three-lobed  and

three-celled  pod. Seeds  two  or  three  in  each  cell,  naked  and  bony.

Upright  shrubs  with  opposite  pinnate  leaves,  and  white  flowers  in  ter-
minal, drooping,  raceme-like  clusters.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  35

TRIBE  II. Euontme^:.

Leaves  simple.  Ovules  two  in  each  cell ;  style  one  ;  stigma  three-
lobed.  Disk  adhering  to  the  bottom  of  the  calyx.  Seeds  with  pulpy
arils. Cotyledons  leafy.

2.  Celastrus.  Flowers  sometimes  polygamous.  Calyx  fiat,  of  five
united  sepals.  Corolla  spreading,  of  five  sessile  petals.  Disk  fleshy,
orbicular.  Stamens  five,  inserted  into  or  under  the  margin  of  the  cup-
shaped  disk  ;  anthers  opening  longitudinally.  Ovary  two  or  three-celled  ;
ovules  usually  in  pairs,  rarely  five  or  six  in  each  cell.  Styles  thick,  en-
tire, or  two-cleft.  Capsule  subglobose,  or  three-angled,  three-celled,  the
dissepiments  sometimes  incomplete  or  evanescent.  Seeds  one  or  two  in
each  cell,  inclosed  by  a  pulpy  scarlet  aril. — Climbing  shrubs  with  alter-
nate, deciduous  leaves  ;  minute,  deciduous  stipules,  and  small,  greenish
flowers,  in  terminal  or  axillary  raceme-like  clusters.

3.  Euonymus.  Calyx  flat,  of  five,  sometimes  four  or  six,  united  sepals.
Petals  four  or  five,  rounded,  spreading,  inserted  on  the  outer  margin  of  a
glandular  disk.  Stamens  five,  with  short  filaments,  inserted  on  the
upper  face  of  a  broad  and  flat  four  or  five-angled  disk,  which  coheres
with  the  calyx  and  is  stretched  over  the  ovary.  Style  short  or  none.
Capsule  colored,  five-angled,  five-celled,  five-valved,  loculicidal.  Seeds
one  or  two  in  each  cell,  inclosed  in  a  red  aril. —  Shrubs  erect  or  trailing,
with  four-sided  branchlets,  opposite  serrate  leaves,  and  loose  cymes  of
small  green,  or  dark  purple  flowers,  on  axillary  peduncles.

ORDER  XXXII.  Rhamnace^e.  Buckthorn.
Shrubs  or  trees  often  spiny,  with  simple,  alternate  leaves,  and  minute
or  no  stipules.  Flowers  small,  axillary  or  terminal,  greenish,  sometimes
dioecious.  Sepals  four  or  five,  united  at  base,  valvate  in  aestivation.  Petals
four  or  five,  sometimes  wanting,  distinct,  cucullate  or  convolute,  inserted
into  the  orifice  of  the  calyx.  Stamens  as  many  as  the  petals,  opposite  to
them ;  anthers  introrse,  or  versatile.  Ovary  superior,  or  half-superior,
two  to  four-celled,  with  a  solitary,  erect  ovule  in  each  cell.  Styles  more
or  less  united.  Stigmas  usually  distinct,  simple.  Fruit  sometimes  dry
and  capsular,  dehiscing  by  three  valves,  sometimes  fleshy  and  indehis-
cent.  Seed  erect,  not  arilled  ;  albumen  fleshy  ;  embryo  large,  erect ;
radicle  short ;  cotyledons  large,  flat.

1.  Rhamnus.  Calyx  urceolate,  four  or  five-cleft,  often  circumscissile
after  flowering,  the  lower  part  permanent.  Petals  four  or  five,  or  none,
emarginate  at  the  apex  and  slightly  convolute,  or  nearly  flat,  inserted


36  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

upon  the  calyx.  Stamens  opposite  the  petals  ;  anthers  ovate,  two-celled.
Torus  thin,  lining  the  tube  of  the  calyx.  Ovary  free  from  the  calyx,  not
immersed  in  the  torus,  two  to  four-celled.  Styles  two  to  four,  more  or
less  connected,  or  distinct.  Fruit  drupaceous,  two  to  four-celled,  con-
taining two  to  four  indehiscent,  cartilaginous  seeds,  one  of  them  occasion-
ally  abortive.  Seeds  with  a  deep  groove.  —  Shrubs  or  small  trees  with
leaves  mostly  alternate,  and  minute  flowers  in  short  axillary  clusters,
often  polygamous.

2.  Ceanothus.  Calyx  tubular,  campanulate,  five-cleft,  separating
transversely  after  flowering,  the  lower  part  permanent.  Petals  five,  hood-
form,  unguiculate.  Stamens  five,  exserted.  Styles  two  or  three,  united
to  the  middle,  diverging  above.  Capsule  obtusely  triangular,  three-celled,
three-seeded,  surrounded  at  base  by  the  persistent  tube  of  the  calyx ;
dry  and  splitting  into  its  three  carpels  when  ripe ;  valves  papery ;  cells
one-seeded,  opening  by  the  inner  suture. —  Shrubby  plants,  unarmed,
with  alternate  leaves,  and  white,  blue,  or  yellowish  flowers,  in  umbel-like
clusters.

ORDER XXXIII. Amyridace^e. Balsamic  Trees.

Trees  or  shrubs  abounding  in  a  balsamic  juice,  with  alternate  or  oppo-
site leaves,  which  are  ternate  or  unequally  pinnate,  sometimes  with  sti-
pules, and  occasionally  with  pellucid  dots.  The  flowers  are  hermaphro-
dite, or  sometimes  unisexual  by  abortion.  Sepals  two  to  five,  persistent.
Petals  three  to  five,  inserted  below  a  disk,  arising  from  the  calyx,  with  a
valvate  and  occasionally  an  imbricate  aestivation.  Stamens  two  or  four
times  as  many  as  the  petals,  all  fertile.  Disk  orbicular  or  annular.  Ovary
one  to  five-celled,  superior,  sessile  in  or  on  the  disk.  Style  solitary  and
compound  ;  stigmas  equal  in  number  to  the  cells.  Fruit  hard  and  dry,
one  to  five-celled,  with  its  outer  part  often  valvular.  Seeds  exalbuminous.
Cotyledons  wrinkled,  plaited  or  amygdaloid. Radicle  straight.

1.  Balsamodendron.  Flowers  irregular.  Calyx  four- toothed,  per-
sistent. Petals  four,  oblong-linear.  Stamens  eight,  with  elevated  warts
between  them.  Ovary  single  supporting  a  short,  obtuse  style.  Drupe
ovate,  acute,  with  four  sutures,  one  or  two-celled. Cells  one-seeded.

2.  Boswellia.  (Nat.  Ord.  Burseraceae  of  Lindley.  Terebintaceae,
of  Kunth.)  Flowers  bisexual.  Calyx  small,  five-toothed,  persistent.
Petals  live,  obovHLe-oblong,  acute  at  base.  Stamens  ten,  inserted
under  a  torus.  Torus  a  crenate  ring  around  the  base  of  the  ovary.  Style
one,  caducous.  Capsule  triangular,  three-valved,  three-celled.  Seeds
solitary,  winged. (See  Copai/era  and  Myrospermum,  under  Fubaccce.)


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  37

ORDER  XXXIV. Meliace^e. Canell^e.

Trees  and  shrubs  with  alternate  or  occasionally  somewhat  opposite
leaves,  which  are  simple  or  pinnate,  and  without  stipules.  Sepals  three
to  five,  somewhat  united  at  base.  Petals  three  to  five,  hypogynous,
uniting  at  base,  sometimes  unequal,  imbricate  in  aestivation.  Stamens
as  many  or  twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  monadelphous  at  base,  inserted
on  the  outside  of  the  torus.  Anthers  sessile,  within  the  ring  of  fila-
ments. Ovary  three  to  five-celled,  each  cell  containing  one  or  two
ovules.  Styles  and  stigmas  usually  united  into  one,  three  to  five-lobed.
Fruit  drupaceous,  baccate,  or  capsular,  three  to  five-celled,  each  one  or
two-seeded,  when  dehiscent,  loculicidal.  Seeds  never  winged  or  flat;
albumen  scanty  or  none.

1.  Melia.  Calyx  small,  five-parted,  sepals  united  below.  Petals
five,  oblong,  spreading.  Stamens  ten,  united  into  a  tube,  bearing  ten
anthers  in  the  orifice  ;  segments,  two  or  three-parted  ;  anthers  opposite  to
the  segments  and  a  little  shorter,  oblong,  slightly  apiculate.  Ovary
seated  on  a  short  disk,  five-celled;  cells  with  two  superposed  ovules  each.
Style  columnar,  breaking  off  from  the  top  of  the  ovary,  with  a  five-
lobed  stigma.  Fruit  a  drupe,  ovate,  with  a  five-celled  bony  nut;  cells
one-seeded. Cotyledons  foliaceous.

2.  Canella.  Sepals  five.  Petals  five,  somewhat  coriaceous,
glaucous,  twisted  in  aestivation.  Stamens  fifteen,  connected,  with  fifteen
furrowed  anthers.  Stigmas  three.  Berry  three-celled,  or  by  abortion
one  ;  cells  one  or  two-seeded  ;  embryo  surrounded  by  fleshy  albumen,
curved,  with  linear  cotyledons.

ORDER  XXXV. Clusiace^e  or  Guttifer^e. Gamboge.

Trees  or  shrubs,  some  of  which  are  parasitical.  Leaves  opposite,
rarely  alternate,  coriaceous,  with  a  strong  midrib  and  numerous  lateral
veins,  and  without  stipules.  Flowers  axillary  or  terminal,  and  articu-
lated with  their  peduncle ;  hermaphrodite  or  unisexual.  Sepals  two  or
six,  usually  persistent,  aestivation  imbricated.  Petals  hypogynous,  four
to  ten.  Stumens  numerous,  distinct,  or  united  in  one  or  more  parcels  ;
filaments  unequal  ;  anthers  adnate,  introrse  or  extrorse.  Torus  fleshy,
sometimes  five-lobed.  Ovary  solitary,  superior,  one  or  many-celled.
Ovules  solitary,  erect.  Style  none  or  very  short.  Stigma  peltate  or
radiate.  Fruit  dry  or  succulent,  one  or  many-celled,  one  or  many-
seeded,  dehiscent  or  indehiscent.  Seeds  immersed  in  a  pulp,  apterous,
often  with  an  arillus.  Testa  thin  and  membranaceous,  exalbuminous.
Embryo  straight. — Abounding  in  a  viscid,  acrid,  yellow,  and  purgative
gum-resinous  juice ;  tropicaL


38  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

1.  Hebradendron.  Flowers  unisexual.  Males;  sepals  four,  mem-
branous, persistent.  Petals  four.  Stamens  monadelphous,  with  a
quadrangular  column  ;  anthers  terminal,  with  an  umbilicate,  circum-
scissile  operculum.  Females  unknown.  Berry  many  or  four-celled  ;
cells  one-seeded,  surrounded  by  a  few  abortive  distinct  stamens  and
crowned  by  a  sessile-lobed  muricated  stigma.  Cotyledons  thick,  con-
solidated. Radicle  central,  filiform.

ORDER  XXXVI. Fabace^e  or  Leguminos^e. Leguminous  Plants.

Herbs,  shrubs,  or  trees,  with  alternate,  usually  compound  leaves,
margins  entire,  sometimes  reduced  to  a  single  leaflet.  Stipules  two  at
the  tumid  base  of  the  petiole;  stipels  commonly  two.  Flowers  are  most
generally  papilionaceous,  solitary,  in  racemes  or  panicles,  usually  with
articulated  peduncles,  and  often  with  two  bracts  under  each  flower.
Sejmls  generally  five,  more  or  less  united,  often  unequal.  Petals  five,
perigynous  or  hypogynous,  irregular  and  unequal,  or  regular,  distinct
or  cohering,  the  odd  petal  superior.  Stamens  definite  or  indefinite,  dis-
tinct, monadelphous,  or  diadelphous,  inserted  with  the  petals  ;  anthers
versatile.  Ovary  superior,  solitary,  distinct  from  the  calyx  ;  ovules  one
or  several ;  style  and  stigma  simple.  Fruit  a  legume  or  drupe.  Seeds
solitary  or  many,  sometimes  with  an  aril  or  large  caruncle,  exalbumin-
ous.  Embryo  straight,  or  with  the  radicle  bent  back  along  the  edge
of  the  cotyledons;  cotyledons  thick  and  fleshy,  or  thin  and  somewhat
foliaceous.

SUB-ORDER  I. PAPILIONACE.E.

Petals  truly  papilionaceous,  imbricate  in  aestivation,  the  upper  one
external.  Stamens  mostly  ten  and  diadelphous.  Flowers  usually
perfect.

1.  Robinia.  Calyx  short,  campanulate,  five-cleft,  the  two  upper  seg-
ments more  or  less  coherent.  Vexillum  large  and  rounded,  turned
back,  scarcely  longer  than  the  wings  and  keel.  Stamens  diadelphous,
nine  and  one.  Style  bearded  inside.  Legume  linear,  compressed,  elon-
gated, many-seeded,  margined  on  the  seed-bearing  edge.  Seeds  small,
compressed. — Trees  and  shrubs  often  with  prickly  spines  for  stipules  ;
leaves  unequally  pinnate  ;  flowers  showy,  in  axillary  racemes.

2.  Trifolium.  Calyx  tubular  or  campanulate,  five-toothed,  persist-
ent. Petals  more  or  less  united  at  base,  withering  or  persistent.  Vex-
ilium  reflexed,  longer  than  the  oblong  alee  ;  carina  shorter  than  the
alae.  Stamens  ten,  diadelphous.  Legume  small,  membranous,  often  in-
cluded in  the  calyx,  one  to  six-seeded,  indehiscent,  or  opening  by  one  of
the  sutures  ;  seeds  roundish. — Tufted  or  diffuse  herbs  with  leaves  mostly


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  39

palmately  trifoliate  ;  leaflets  with  straight,  scarcely  reticulated  veins,
toothed  ;  flowers  in  dense  heads  or  spikes.

3.  Mellilotus.  Calyx  tubular,  five-toothed,  persistent.  Corolla  de-
ciduous, keel  petals  completely  united,  shorter  than  the  alse  or  vexillum.
Stamens  diadelphous.  Legume  ovoid,  rugose,  coriaceous,  longer  than
the  calyx,  scarcely  dehiscent,  one  or  two-seeded. — Herbs  fragrant  in
drying  ;  leaves  pinnately  trifoliate  ;  leaflets  with  simple  or  forked  veins  ;
flowers  in  racemes.

4.  Baptisia.  Calyx  four  or  five-cleft  half  way,  two-lipped,  persistent.
Petals  of  about  equal  length,  somewhat  united ;  vexillum  orbicular,
emarginate,  reflected  laterally,  not  longer  than  the  alae  ;  keel-petals
somewhat  united.  Stamens  ten,  distinct,  deciduous.  Legume  ventri-
cose,  stipitate,  many,  or  by  abortion,  few-seeded. — Perennial  herbs  with
palmately  trifoliate,  rarely  simple  leaves,  which  become  blackish  on
drying ;  flowers  generally  yellow,  rarely  white  or  blue,  in  racemes.

5.  Cytisus.  Calyx  bilabiate,  upper  lip  generally  entire,  lower  some-
what three-toothed.  Vexillum  ovate,  broad  ;  carina  very  obtuse,  inclos-
ing the  stamens.  Stamens  monadelphous.  Legume  piano-compressed,
many-seeded,  not  glandular. — Shrubs  or  small  trees  with  ternate  leaves,
no  spines,  and  yellow,  purple,  or  white  flowers.

6.  Indigofera.  Calyx  five-cleft,  lobes  acute.  Vexillum  roundish,
emarginate  ;  carina  with  a  subulate  spur  on  both  sides,  at  length  bending
back  elastically.  Stamens  diadelphous.  Legume  linear,  small,  terete  or
quadrangular,  one  or  more  seeded,  two-valved.  Seeds  usually  trunca-
ted, separated  by  cellular  spurious  partitions. — Herbs  or  shrubs,  with
various  leaves,  stipules  small  and  free  from  the  petiole  ;  all  more  or  less
tomentose  or  hirsute,  with  purple,  blue,  or  white  racemose  flowers.

7.  Glyctrrhiza.  Calyx  tubular,  naked,  five-cleft,  bilabiate,  with  the
two  upper  lobes  united  more  than  the  others.  Vexillum  ovate-lanceo-
late, straight ;  carina  bipetalous  or  two-parted,  straight,  acute.  Stamens
diadelphous.  Style  filiform.  Legume  ovate  or  oblong,  compressed,  one-
celled,  one  to  four-seeded. — Perennial  herbaceous  plants,  generally  with
sweet  roots,  unequally  pinnated  leaves,  and  blue,  white,  or  violet  flowers
in  axillary  racemes.

8.  Astragalus.  Calyx  five-toothed.  Corolla  with  an  obtuse  carina.
Stamens  diadelphous.  Legume  gibbous,  of  two  longitudinal  cells  or  half
cells  ;  lower  suture  turned  inward.  Plants  with  pinnate  leaves,  sti-
pules, and  axillary  or  terminal,  often  glomerate  or  spiked  flowers.


40  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

9.  Mucuna.  Calyx  campanulate,  bilabiate,  the  lower  lip  trifid,  the
upper  entire.  Vexillum  cordate,  ascending,  shorter  than  the  carina  or
alae ;  carina  oblong,  straight,  acute;  alee  oblong,  the  length  of  the
carina.  Stamens  diadelphous  ;  anthers  twenty,  five  oblong,  linear,  and
five  ovate,  hirsute.  Legume  oblong,  two-valved,  with  cellular  partitions.
Seeds  oval,  roundish,  or  reniform,  with  a  narrow  oblong  or  linear
hilum. — Twining  plants,  with  pinnately  trifoliate  leaves,  axillary  racemes,
and  legumes  densely  covered  with  sharp,  rigid  and  brittle  hairs.

10.  Pterocarpus.  Calyx  five-cleft,  somewhat  bilabiate.  Petals
five  ;  keel-petals  disiinct  or  slightly  cohering.  Stamens  ten,  variously
combined.  Ovary  long  stalked.  Legume  indehiscent,  irregular,  some-
what orbicular,  surrounded  by  a  wing,  woody,  and  often  rugose  in  the
middle,  one  to  three-celled.  Seeds  one  in  each  cell,  reniform. — Unarmed
trees  or  shrubs  ;  leaves  unequally  pinnated  ;  racemes  terminal  or  axil-
lary ;  abounding  in  a  red-colored  resinous  juice,  and  having  an  astrin-
gent bark.

11.  Andira.  Calyx  urceolate,  five-toothed  or  entire;  teeth  nearly
equal,  acute,  erect.  Vexillum  roundish  emarginate,  longer  than  the
carina.  Ovary  containing  three  ovules.  Legume  stipitate,  roundish,
hard,  one-celled,  one-seeded.

12.  Myrospermum.  Calyx  campanulate,  five-toothed,  persistent.
Petals  five,  the  upper  one  largest.  Stamens  ten,  distinct.  Ovary
oblong,  stipitate,  membranous,  with  two  to  six  ovules,  and  a  filiform,
lateral  style.  Legume  with  the  stalk  naked  at  base,  but  winged  above,
terminating  in  an  oblique,  indehiscent,  one-celled,  one  or  two-seeded
samara.  Seeds  covered  with  a  balsamic  juice. — Trees  with  unequally
pinnate  dotted  leaves,  and  compressed,  membranous  legumes.

SUB-ORDER  II. C^salpin^.
Corolla  not  papilionaceous,  irregular  ;  petals  imbricated  in  aestivation  ;
the  uppermost  interior. Stamens  ten  or  fewer,  all  distinct,  perigynous.

13.  Cassia.  Sepals  five,  scarcely  united  at  base,  more  or  less
unequal.  Petals  five,  unequal.  Stamens  ten,  distinct,  unequal,  and
some  of  them  imperfect,  spreading  ;  anthers  opening  at  apex  by  two  pores
or  clefts,  or  by  an  opening  at  base;  three  upper  ones  often  sterile,  three
lower  ones  beaked.  Ovary  pedicellate.  Legume  compressed,  many-
seeded. — Trees,  shrubs  or  herbs,  with  simply  abrupt  pinnate  leaves  ■
leaflets  opposite  ;  petioles  often  bearing  glands ;  flowers  mostly  yellow.

14.  Tamarindus.  Calyx  tubular  at  base;  limb  bilabiate,  reflexed  •
upper  lip  three-parted;  lower  broad,  two-toothed. Petals  three,  alter-


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  41

noting  with  the  segments  of  the  upper  lip  of  the  calyx  ;  two  of  them
ovate,  the  middle  one  cucullate.  Stamens  nine  or  ten  ;  seven  very  short
and  sterile  ;  the  others  longer,  monadelphous,  bearing  anthers.  Style
subulate.  Legume  stalked,  linear,  more  or  less  curved,  slightly  com-
pressed, one-celled,  three  to  twelve-seeded,  the  endocarp  pulpy.  Seeds
compressed,  bluntly  four-angled,  obliquely  truncated  at  the  hiluin. —
Trees  with  abruptly  pinnated  leaves,  and  racemose  flowers.

15.  Copaifera.  Calyx  with  four  sepals  united  at  base,  ebracteolate  ;
segments  diverging,  the  lowest  the  narrowest.  Petals  none.  Stamens
ten,  distinct,  declinate.  Ovary  roundish,  compressed,  with  two  ovules.
Fruit  pedicellate,  oblique,  obovate,  rounded,  compressed,  between
woody  and  leathery,  two-valved,  one-seeded.  Seed  inclosed  in  a  one-
sided aril. — Trees  or  shrubs  having  abruptly  pinnate  leaves,  alternate  ;
leaflets  coriaceous,  ovate,  opposite  or  alternate,  dotted  or  not,  and
abounding  in  a  balsamic  juice.

16.  ELematoxylon.  Sepals  five,  united  at  base  into  a  permanent
tube ;  lobes  caducous.  Petals  five,  not  much  longer  than  the  sepals.
Stamens  ten,  diadelphous  ;  filaments  hairy  at  the  base ;  anthers  without
glands.  Style  capillary.  Legume  compressed,  flat,  lanceolate,  acumi-
nate at  each  end,  two-seeded ;  the  sutures  indehiscent,  the  valves
bursting  longitudinally. — Trees  with  the  heart-wood  of  a  blood-red
color.

SUB-ORDER  III. Mimose^e.
Sepals  and  petals  valvate  in  aestivation,  subregular. Stamens  five  to
many. Embryo  straight. Leaves  abruptly  pinnate  or  bipinnate.

17.  Acacia.  Flowers  polygamous,  bisexual,  and  male.  Calyx  four
or  five-toothed.  Petals  four  or  five,  distinct,  or  uniting  to  form  a  gamo-
petalous,  four  or  five-cleft  corolla.  Stamens  from  five  to  two  hundred.
Legume  continuous,  dry,  two-valved  ;  seeds  without  pulp. — Trees  and
shrubs  unarmed,  or  armed  with  stipular  thorns  or  scattered  prickles  ;
flowers  yellow,  white,  or  rarely  red,  in  globular  heads  or  longish  spikes.
An  ill-detioed  species,  requiring  revision.

ORDER  XXXVII.  Rosacea.  Rose.
Herbs,  shrubs  or  trees,  with  alternate  leaves,  and  usually  large  or
conspicuous  stipules,  sometimes  none.  Flowers  regular,  commonly
showy,  rarely  dioecious.  Sepals  five,  rarely  fewer,  united,  often  rein-
forced by  as  many  bracts;  the  tube  lined  with  a  disk,  or  the  orifice
surrounded  by  it.  Petals  five,  perigynous,  rarely  wanting.  Stamens
usually  numerous,  arising  from  the  calyx,  distinct;  anthers  innate,  two-
celled, dehiscing longitudinally. Ovaries superior, one or several,


42  Natural  Orders  of Plants.

distinct,  one-celled,  sometimes  forming  a  many-celled  pistil ;  ovules  two
or  more,  anatropal,  suspended,  rarely  erect ;  styles  lateral ;  stigmas
usually  simple.  Fruit  either  one-seeded,  nuts,  acini,  or  follicles  con-
taining several  seeds. Seeds  anatropous,  exalbuminous.

SUB-ORDER  I. Rosacea.
Ovaries  solitary  or  several,  distinct ;  fruit  achenia  or  follicular.

1.  Rosa.  Calyx-tube,  urceolate,  fleshy,  contracted  at  the  orifice,  limb
five-cleft,  the  segments  somewhat  imbricated  in  aestivation,  and  mostly
with  a  leafy  appendage.  Petals  five,  multiplied  by  cultivation,  inversely
heart-shaped,  as  long  as  the  calyx  and  attached  to  the  rim  of  its  tube
by  broad  claws,  deciduous.  Filaments  numerous,  capillary,  shorter
than  the  petals.  Carpels  numerous,  oblong,  lining  the  tube  of  the  calyx,
interspersed  with  dense  silky  hairs  ;  styles  one  to  each,  lateral,  smooth
or  hairy,  all  passing  through  the  contracted  mouth  of  the  calyx ;  in  some
cases  united  into  a  cylinder;  stigmas  obtuse.  Fruit  globular  or  ovate,
formed  of  the  permanent,  pulpy,  colored  tube  of  the  calyx,  closed  at
the  summit,  and  containing  numerous,  oblong,  angular,  hard,  bristly
achenia,  interspersed  with  rigid  hairs. — Shrubs  with  pinnated  leaves,
and  large  showy  flowers  ;  stipules  mostly  adnate  to  the  petiole ;  prickly.

2.  Rubus.  Calyx  concave  or  flatfish  at  base,  five-parted,  without
bractlets.  Petals  five,  deciduous.  Stamens  numerous,  inserted  in  the
calyx.  Ovaries  many,  with  two  ovules,  one  of  them  abortive.  Achenia
numerous,  collected  on  a  conical  or  oblong,  spongy  or  succulent,  recep-
tacle, becoming  small  drupes ;  styles  nearly  terminal.  Radicle  superior. —
Perennial  suffruticose  herbs,  stems  usually  biennial,  generally  prickly;
leaves  petioled,  pinnate,  palmate,  or  simple  ;  fruit  edible.

3.  Potentilla.  Calyx  concave,  deeply  four  or  five-cleft,  with  four
or  five  bractlets.  Petals  four  or  five,  obcordate,  deciduous.  Stamens
many;  filaments  slender.  Ovaries  collected  into  a  head  on  a  small,  dry
receptacle ;  styles  lateral  or  terminal,  deciduous.  Achenia  numerous ;
seeds  suspended. — Herbs  or  rarely  shrubs  with  pinnately  or  palmately
compound  leaves;  flowers  solitary  or  racemose,  white  or  yellow,  rarely  red.

4.  Fragaria.  Same  as  in  Potentilla.  Receptacle  in  fruit  much
enlarged  and  conical,  becoming  pulpy  and  scarlet,  bearing  the  minute,
dry  achenia  scattered  over  its  surface.— Low  perennials  with  runners ;
stems  stoloniferous ;  leaves  radical,  trifoliate;  flowers  on  a  scape,'
white.  '

5.  Geum.  Calyx  sub-campanulate,  deeply  five-cleft,  permanent,  with
five small alternate bractlets. Petals five, obtuse or emarginate


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  43

attached  by  their  claws  to  the  calyx-rim.  Filaments  numerous,  awl-
shaped,  from  the  rim  of  the  calyx,  shorter  than  the  corolla.  Caipels
superior,  ovate,  compressed,  very  numerous,  in  a  round  head  ;  styles
long,  lateral,  with  a  joint  above  the  middle ;  lower  part  permanent ;
upper  deciduous  ;  stigmas  simple.  Achenia  hairy,  each  with  a  long
lateral  tail,  terminating  in  a  hook.  Receptacle  dry,  cylindrical,  hairy,
seated  on  the  permanent  reflexed  calyx.  Seed  erect. — Perennial  herbs,
with  pinnate  or  lyrate  leaves,  white,  yellow,  or  purplish  flowers,  and
somewhat  aromatic  roots.

6.  Agrimonia.  Calyx-tube  turbinate,  contracted  at  the  throat,  armed
with  hooked  bristles  above,  indurated  and  inclosing  the  fruit ;  the  limb
five-cleft,  closed  after  flowering.  Petals  five,  flat,  spreading,  notched,
attached  to  the  rim  of  the  calyx  with  a  small  narrow  claw.  Stamens
twelve  to  fifteen  ;  filaments  capillary,  shorter  than  the  corolla.  Styles
lateral,  simple,  terminal.  Achenia  two,  occasionally  one  or  three,  ovate,
smooth,  compressed,  pointed,  erect,  inclosed  in  the  indurated  tube  of
the  calyx.  Seed  suspended. — Perennial  herbs  with  interruptedly  pin-
nate leaves,  and  yellow  flowers  in  long,  slender  racemes  ;  bracts  three-
cleft.

7.  Spiraea.  Calyx  inferior,  nearly  flat  at  the  base,  five-cleft,  persist-
ent. Petals  five,  roundish,  or  oblong,  equal.  Stamens  ten  to  fifty,
exscrted  ;  filaments  capillary.  Carpels  five,  distinct,  rarely  coherent  at
base,  sessile,  rarely  stipitate.  Styles  terminal ;  stigmas  spreading,
obtuse.  Capsules  five,  oblong,  pointed,  more  or  less  compressed,  each
of  one  or  two  rather  membranous  valves,  one-celled,  one  to  ten-seeded.
Seeds  small,  oblong,  pendulous  from  the  outer  margin  of  each  valve,
exalbuminous. — Unarmed  herbs  or  shrubs,  with  alternate  branches  and
leaves  ;  flowers  white  or  rose-color,  rarely  yellow  or  dioecious.

8.  Gillenia.  Calyx  tubular-campanulate,  contracted  at  the  orifice,
five-cleft ;  teeth  erect.  Petals  five,  linear-lanceolate,  very  long,  rather
unequal,  inserted  in  the  throat  of  the  calyx.  Stamens  ten  to  twenty,
very  short;  inclosed  in  the  tube.  Carpels  five,  connate  at  base  ;  styles
terminal,  filiform,  erect,  capitate.  Follicles  five,  two-valved,  two  to  four
seeded. — Perennial  herbs  with  almost  sessile,  trifoliate,  doubly  serrate
leaves  ;  flowers  white  or  pale  rose-color,  loosely  paniculate-corymbed.

9.  Brayera.  Calyx  campanulate ;  limb  ten-parted,  membranous ;
half  the  segments  with  pinnate  veins,  and  thrice  as  large  as  the  other
five,  with  three  veins  each.  Petals  minute,  subulate,  opposite  the  larger
segments  of  the  calyx.  Stamens  twelve  to  twenty,  short,  inserted  into
the  throat  of  the  calyx.  Disk  conical,  projecting  from  the  throat  of  the
calyx,  and  pierced  at  the  apex  to  allow  the  styles  to  pass  through.


44  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

Ovaries  two,  stipitate,  each  with  one  suspended  ovule ;  stigmas  duated,
slightly  lacerated.

ORDER  XXXVIII.  Drupace^e.  Almond.
Trees  and  shrubs  with  simple,  alternate  leaves,  glandular  toward  the
base,  usually  with  glandular  stipules.  Calyx  five-toothed,  deciduous,
lined  with  a  disk.  Petals  five,  perigynous.  Stamens  fifteen  to  thirty,
inserted  on  the  throat  of  the  calyx.  Anthers  innate,  two-celled,  de-
hiscing longitudinally.  Ovary  superior,  solitary,  simple,  one-celled.
Ovules  two,  suspended.  Styles  terminal,  with  a  furrow  on  one  side,  ter-
minating in  a  reniform  stigma.  Fruit  a  drupe,  with  the  putamen  some-
times separating  spontaneously  from  the  sarcocarp.  Seeds  usually  soli-
tary, suspended. Embryo  straight;  albumen  none.

1.  Amygdalus.  Calyx  tubular  or  campanulate,  five-cleft,  deciduous.
Petals  five,  spreading.  Drupe  velvety,  compressed,  with  a  separable
fleshy  epicarp ;  stone  or  nucleus  perforate,  furrowed,  ovate,  compressed,
one  edge  acute,  the  other  broad-obtuse. — Trees  or  shrubs,  with  leaves
conduplicate  in  aestivation  ;  flowers  subsessile,  solitary  or  in  pairs,  earlier
than  the  leaves,  proceeding  from  scaly  buds.

2.  Prunus.  Calyx  inferior,  bell-shaped,  deciduous,  with  five  obtuse
concave  segments.  Petals  five,  roundish,  concave,  spreading,  larger
than  the  segments  of  the  calyx.  Filaments  twenty  to  thirty,  awl-shaped,
nearly  as  long  as  the  petals ;  anthers  short,  of  two  round  lobes.  Ovary
superior,  roundish,  glabrous,  with  two  pendulous  ovules.  Style  filiform,
terminal,  as  long  as  the  stamens;  stigma  orbicular,  peltate.  Drupe
ovoid  or  oblong,  fleshy,  usually  covered  with  a  glaucous  bloom.  Xucleus
hard,  compressed,  smooth,  acute,  smooth,  margins  somewhat  grooved,
of  one  cell,  and  two  more  or  less  distinct  sutures. — Small  trees  or  shrubs,
having  simple  leaves,  which  are  convolute  in  vernation ;  fruit  edible,  and
many  parts  of  the  tree  yielding  hydrocyanic  acid.

3.  Cerasus.  Same  as  Prunus.  Fruit  globose,  destitute  of  bloom ;
stone  globose,  smooth ;  leaves  conduplicate  in  aestivation.

ORDER  XXXIX.  Pomaces.  Pear.
Trees  or  shrubs  with  alternate,  simple  or  compound,  stipulate  leaves,
with  edible  fruit,  and  bitter  tonic  barks.  Calyx  adherent,  five-toothed!
Petals  five,  unguiculate,  inserted  in  the  throat  of  the  calyx;  the  odd  one
anterior.  Stamens  indefinite,  inserted  in  a  ring  in  the  throat  of  the
calyx.  Disk  thin;  ovaries  one  to  five,  adhering  more  or  less  to  the
sides  of  the  calyx,  and  to  each  other  ;  ovules  usually  two,  collateral
ascending,  rarely  solitary,  sometimes  none  ;  styles  one  to  five  ;  stigma's


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  45

simple.  Fruit  a  pome,  one  to  five-ce]led,  seldom  spuriously  ten-celled ;
the  endocarp  either  cartilaginous,  spongy,  or  bony.  Seeds  ascending,
solitary,  exalbuminous  ;  embryo  erect.

1.  Pyrus.  Calyx-tube  urceolate,  superior;  limb  five-cleft,  permanent.
Petals  five,  roundish,  concave,  larger  than  the  calyx,  and  proceeding
from  its  rim,  with  short  claws.  Filaments  twenty,  awl-shaped,  shorter
than  the.  petals,  arising  from  the  rim  of  the  calyx;  anthers  oblong,  two-
lobed.  Ovary  inferior ;  styles  two  or  three  to  five,  filiform,  about  the
length  of  the  stamens ;  stigmas  simple,  bluntish.  Pome  roundish  or
somewhat  oblong,  umbilicated,  fleshy,  with  as  many  cartilaginous  or
membranous  cells  as  there  are  styles.  Seeds  two  in  each  cell,  ascend-
ing, obovate,  flattened  at  one  side;  testa  chartaceous  or  cartilaginous.

2.  Cydonia.  Same  as  Pyrus.  Cells  of  the  fruit  many-seeded,  carti-
laginous ;  seeds  enveloped  in  a  thick  mucilaginous  pulp.

ORDER  XL.  Mtrtace^e.  Myrtle-blooms.
Trees  and  shrubs  with  opposite  or  alternate  entire  leaves,  generally
with  transparent  dots,  and  a  vein  running  parallel  to  their  margin ;  no
stipules.  Floioers  red,  white,  or  yellow,  never  blue.  Calyx  adherent  below
to  the  compound  ovary,  valvate,  limb  four  or  five-cleft.  Petals  as  many
as  the  calyx-segments,  with  a  quincuncial  aestivation ;  rarely  none.
Stamens  indefinite,  or  twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  rarely  equal  to
them  in  number ;  filaments  distinct,  or  united  in  several  parcels ;  anthers
ovate,  two-celled,  small,  introrse,  with  a  longitudinal  dehiscence.  Ovary
inferior,  one  to  six-celled;  style  simple,  springing  directly  from  the  pla-
centa ;  stigma  simple ;  ovules  usually  pendulous,  or  erect  and  anatropal ;
occasionally  peltate  and  amphitropal,  always  inserted  into  a  central  or
axile  placenta.  Fruit  dry  or  fleshy,  dehiscent  or  indehiscent.  Seeds
numerous,  variable  in  form ;  embryo  straight  or  curved,  with  no
albumen.

1.  Punica.  Tube  of  the  calyx  turbinate  ;  limb  five  to  seven-cleft,  coria-
ceous; valvate  in  aestivation.  Petals  five  to  seven.  Stamens  numerous ;
filaments  distinct;  anthers  anteriorly  two-celled,  dehiscing  by  a  double
chink.  Style  filiform ;  stigma  capitate.  Fruit  large,  spherical,  crowned
with  the  limb  of  the  calyx,  baccate,  indehiscent,  coated  with  the  calyx-
tube,  unequally  divided  into  two  parts  by  a  horizontal  diaphragm ;  the
lower  division  three-celled,  the  upper  five  to  nine-celled ;  dissepiments
membranous ;  placentae  of  upper  chamber  fleshy,  spreading  from  its
sides  to  the  center;  those  of  the  lower  chamber  in  irregular  processes
from  its  base.  Seeds  very  numerous,  mixed  with  a  pellucid  pulp,  exal-
buminous ;  embryo  oblong ;  radicle  short ;  cotyledons  straight,  foliaceous,


46  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

spirally  convolute. — Small  trees  or  shrubs  with  spinescent  branchlets,
deciduous  leaves,  and  flowers  usually  scarlet.

2.  Mvrtus.  Calyx-tube  somewhat  globose ;  limb  five  or  very  rarely
four-cleft.  Petals  five  or  very  rarely  four.  Stamens  distinct.  Berry
two  or  three-celled,  somewhat  globose,  crowned  with  the  segments  of
the  calyx.  Seeds,  when  ripe  several  in  each  cell,  or  very  rarely  solitary,
reniform;  testa  bony.  Embryo  curved ;  cotyledons  semicylindrical,  very
short;  radicle  twice  the  length  of  the  cotyledons. — Shrubs  with  opposite,
entire,  pellucid-dotted,  evergreen  leaves;  peduncles  axillary,  one  or
rarely  three-flowered.

3.  Eugenia.  Calyx-tube  roundish ;  limb  four-cleft.  Petals  four.  Sta-
mens numerous,  distinct.  Perry  nearly  globular,  crowned  by  the  per-
sistent calyx ;  one  or  two-celled,  one  or  two-seeded.

4.  Melaleuca.  Calyx-tube  nearly  hemispherical ;  limb  five-cleft.
Petals  five.  Stamens  numerous,  very  long,  in  five  bundles  which  alter-
nate with  the  petals ;  anthers  incumbent.  Styles  filiform.  Stigmas
obtuse.  Capsule  connate  with  and  inclosed  in  the  thickened  tube  of  the
calyx,  which  is  sessile  on  and  adnate  at  its  base  to  the  flower-bearing
branch ;  three-celled,  many-seeded.  Seeds  angular. — Trees  or  shrubs
with  entire,  alternate,  or  opposite  leaves;  flowers  white,  yellowish,  or
purplish,  in  spikes  or  heads ;  trees  furnishing  an  aromatic  volatile  oil.

5.  Caryophyllus.  Calyx-tube  cylindrical ;  limb  four-parted.  Petals
four,  adhering  by  their  ends  in  a  sort  of  calyptra.  Stamens  distinct,  in
four  parcels,  inserted  in  a  quadrangular  fleshy  hollow  near  the  calyx-
teeth.  Ovary  two-celled  ;  ovules  about  twenty  in  each  cell.  Perry  one
or  two-celled,  one  or  two-seeded.  Seeds  cylindrical,  or  half  ovate;  coty-
ledons thick,  fleshy,  convex  externally,  sinuous  internally. — Trees  with
opposite,  rigid,  dotted  leaves,  and  cymose,  somewhat  corymbose,  termi-
nal and  axillary  flowers.

6.  Eucalyptus.  Calyx-tube  obovate  or  globose,  cup-shaped,  perma-
nent ;  limb  entire,  resembling  a  lid,  cut  all  round  the  base,  and  decidu-
ous. Petals  none.  Stamens  numerous,  distinct.  Capsule  four-celled,
or  by  abortion  three-celled,  many-seeded,  opening  at  the  apex.— New
Holland  trees  with  simple,  entire,  glaucous  leaves,  and  apetalous  flowers;
the  leaves  dotted  with  numerous  vesicles  of  oil.

ORDER  XLI. Lythrace^e. Loosestrife.
Herbs, rarely shrubs, frequently  with four-angled branches and
opposite, verticillate, or alternate, entire, not dotted leaves,  without


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  47

stipules  or  glands.  Calyx  tubular,  persistent;  limb  four  to  seven-lobed,
sometimes  with  as  many  intermediate  teeth.  Petals  inserted  into  the  calyx
between  the  lobes,  deciduous,  sometimes  wanting.  Stamens  as  many,  or
two  or  four  times  as  many  as  the  petals,  and  inserted  below  them.
Styles  united  into  one ;  stigma  capitate  or  rarely  two-lobed.  Ovary
superior,  inclosed  in  the  calyx-tube,  two  to  four-celled.  Fruit,  a  mem-
branous capsule,  enveloped  in  the  calyx,  usually  one-celled  by  abortion.
Seeds  small,  numerous,  attached  to  a  central  placenta,  anatropous,
exalbuminous.

1.  Lythrum.  Calyx  cylindrical,  striate;  limb  four  to  six  broad  teeth,
with  as  many  minute  intermediate  teeth  or  processes.  Petals  four  to
six,  equal,  alternate  with  the  erect  teeth  of  the  calyx.  Stamens  as  many
or  twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  inserted  at  the  middle  or  near  the  base
of  the  calyx,  nearly  equal.  Style  filiform ;  stigma  capitate.  Capsule
oblong,  inclosed  in  the  calyx,  two-celled,  many-seeded.  Placentae  thick,
adhering  to  the  dissepiment. — Mostly  perennials  with  entire  leaves,  and
white  or  purple  axillary  flowers.

ORDER  XLII.  Onagrace^e.  Evening  Primrose.
Herbs,  sometimes  shrubby,  with  alternate  or  opposite  leaves,  not
dotted  and  without  stipules.  Flowers  axillary,  or  in  terminal  spikes  or
racemes.  Sepals  four,  sometimes  two  or  six,  united  below  into  a  tube,
valvate  in  testivation.  Petals  four,  sometimes  two  or  six,  and,  with  the
four  or  eight,  sometimes  one  to  four  stamens,  inserted  into  the  throat  of
the  calyx ;  pollen  triangular,  often  cohering  by  threads.  Ovary  usually
four-celled ;  placenta  in  the  axis.  Styles  united  ;  stigmas  four,  or  united
into  one.  Fruit  generally  capsular,  sometimes  baccate,  two  to  four-
celled,  many-seeded,  exalbuminous.

SUB-ORDER  I. Onagre^:.
Flowers  perfect,  the  parts  arranged  in  fours,  rarely  threes;  pollen
connected  by  threads.

1.  Epilobium.  Calyx-tube  not  prolonged  beyond  the  ovary;  limb
deeply  four-cleft,  four-parted,  and  deciduous.  Petals  four.  Stamens
eight ;  anthers  short,  fixed  near  the  middle  ;  stigma  often  with  four
spreading  lobes.  Ovary  and  capsule  linear,  four-cornered,  four-celled,
four-valved,  many-seeded ;  seeds  comose,  with  a  tuft  of  long  hairs  at  the
end. — Perennials  with  nearly  sessile  leaves,  and  violet,  purple,  or
white  flowers.

2.  CEnothera.  Calyx-tube  prolonged  beyond  the  ovary,  deciduous;
segments four,  reflexed. Petals four,  equal, obcordate or obovate,


48  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

inserted  into  the  top  of  the  tube.  Stamens  eight,  nearly  equal.  Ovary
four-celled,  with  numerous  horizontal  or  ascending  ovules.  Stigma  four-
lobed  or  capitate.  Capsule  various  in  form,  four-celled,  four-valved,
many-seeded  ;  seeds  naked. Herbs  whh  alternate  leaves.

ORDER  XLIII.  Cucurbitace.e.  Gourd.
Succulent  herbs  creeping  or  climbing  by  tendrils,  with  rough,  alter-
nate, and  palmately-veined  leaves.  Flowers  monoecious  or  polygamous,
often  monadelphous,  never  blue.  Calyx  four  or  five,  rarely  six,  sepals
united  in  a  tube,  and  in  the  fertile  flowers  adherent  to  the  ovary.  Petals  as
many  as  sepals,  more  or  less  united  into  a  monopetalous  corolla  which
coheres  to  the  calyx,  very  cellular,  and  strongly  marked  with  reticu-
lated veins.  Stamens  five,  rarely  three,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the
corolla  or  calyx,  either  distinct,  or  variously  united  by  their  filaments
and  long,  contorted  anthers.  Ovary  inferior,  two  to  five-celled,  the
thick  and  fleshy  placentae  often  filling  the  cells,  or  carried  back  so  as  to
reach  the  walls  of  the  pericarp,  the  dissepiments  often  disappearing
during  its  growth.  Stigmas  thick,  dilated,  or  fringed.  Fruit  a  pepo,
usually  fleshy,  with  a  hard  rind;  sometimes  membranous;  often  one-
celled  by  obliteration.  Seeds  large,  flat,  often  arilled,  anatropous,  exal-
buminous. Cotyledons  foliaceous.

1.  Momordica.  Flowers  monoecious,  yellow  or  white.  Males;
calyx  five-cleft,  with  a  very  short  tube ;  petals  five,  united  at  base  ;
stamens  five,  triadelphous ;  anthers  connate.  Females ;  calyx  and
corolla  as  in  the  males;  filaments  three,  sterile  ;  style  three-cleft;  ovary
three-celled.  Pepo  fleshy,  bursting  elastically,  three-valved  ;  seeds  com-
pressed, reticulated,  with  a  fleshy  arillus.

2.  Cucumis.  Flowers  monoecious  or  perfect.  Calyx  tubular-campanu-
late,  with  subulate  segments  scarcely  the  length  of  the  tube.  Petals
scarcely  adhering  to  each  other,  five.  Males  ;  stamens  five  ;  triadelph-
ous. Females;  style  short;  stigmas  three,  thick,  two-lobed.  Pepo
fleshy,  indehiscent,  three  to  six  celled ;  seeds  compressed,  ovate,  acute,
not  margined  at  the  edge.— Creeping  or  climbing  plants  with  axillary,'
solitary,  yellow  flowers.

3.  Cucurbita.  Flowers  monoecious;  corolla  campanulate ;  petals
united  and  coherent  with  the  calyx.  Males  ;  calyx  five-toothed  ;  'stamens
five,  triadelphous;  anthers  syngenecious,  straight,  parallel.  Females-
calyx  five-toothed,  upper  part  deciduous  after  flowering;  stigmas
three,  tlnck,  two-lobed.  Pepo  fleshy  or  ligneous,  three  to  "five-celled
Seeds  thickened  at  margin,  obovate,  compressed.— Flowers  mostlv
yellow.  '


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  49

4.  Citrullus.  Corolla  persistent,  five-parted,  sub-rotate.  Anthers
triadelphous,  bilocular.  Style  trifid.  Stigma  obcordate,  convex.  Fruit
a  fleshy,  or  dry  and  fibrous,  many-seeded  peponida.

5.  Ecbalium.  Corolla  five  or  six-cleft ;  anthers  triadelphous ;  ovules
in  two  rows  in  each  cell.  Stigmas  three,  two-horned.  Fruit  an  elastic-
ally  and  irregularly-bursting  peponida.

6.  Bryonia.  Flowers  monoecious  or  dioecious.  Petals  hardly  united
at  the  base.  Males  ;  calyx  five-toothed  ;  stamens  triadelphous  ;  anthers
flexuose.  Females  ;  style  mostly  three-cleft.  Fruit  an  ovate  or  globose,
smooth  berry,  generally  few-seeded.  Seeds  ovate,  scarcely  compressed,
more  or  less  edged. Tendrils  simple,  seldom  forked.

ORDER  XLIV.  Grossulace.e.  Currants.
Unarmed  or  spiny  shrubs,  with  alternate,  lobed  leaves,  plaited  in  ver-
nation. Flowers  in  axillary  racemes  with  bracts  at  their  base.  Calyx
superior,  four  or  five  cleft,  regular,  colored,  marescent,  imbricate  in
aestivation.  Petals  inserted  in  the  throat  of  the  calyx,  small,  distinct,
as  many  as  sepals.  Stamens  as  many  as  petals  and  alternate  with  them,
very  short ;  anthers  introrse.  Ovary  one-celled,  with  two  parietal  pla-
centae ;  ovules  numerous ;  styles  two.  Fruit  a  one-celled  berry,  pulpy,
crowned  with  the  remains  of  the  flower.  Seeds  anatropous,  the  embryo
minute,  radicle  next  the  micropyle.

1.  Ribes.  Calyx  five-lobed,  the  segments  more  or  less  colored.  Petals
five,  minute,  scale -like.  Stamens  five,  distinct,  inserted  in  the  throat  of
the  calyx.  Styles  one  to  four-cleft.  Berry  one-celled,  succulent,  with
narrow  parietal  placentae. Seeds  oblong,  slightly  compressed.

ORDER  XLV.  Crassulace^e.  Houseleek.
Succulent  herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants,  with  entire  or  pinnatifid
leaves,  without  stipules.  Flowers  sessile,  usually  in  cymes.  Sepals
three  to  twenty,  persistent,  more  or  less  united  at  base.  Petals  as  many
as  the  sepals,  distinct,  rarely  cohering,  inserted  with  the  distinct  sta-
mens on  the  base  of  the  calyx  ;  imbricated  in  aestivation.  Stamens  as
many,  or  twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  and  alternate  with  them  ;  anthers
two-celled,  bursting  lengthwise.  Ovaries  as  many  as  the  petals  and
opposite  to  them.  Fruit  follicles,  as  many  as  ovaries,  each  opening  by
the  ventral  suture,  many-seeded.  Seeds  anatropous  ;  embryo  surrounded
by  thin  albumen.

1.  Sempervivum.  Calyx  concave,  permanent,  with  from  six  to
twenty,  more or  less  deep, uniform,  fleshy,  rather acute  segments.


4


"^TON. D.  c


50  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

Petals  as  many  as  calyx-segments,  larger,  lanceolate,  acute,  channeled,
equal,  spreading,  withering.  A  small  lacerated  scale  at  the  base  of
each  carpel.  Filaments  as  many  or  twice  as  many  as  the  petals,  but
shorter,  awl-shaped,  compressed,  each  terminating  in  a  spreading  style,
with  a  blunt  stigma  ;  when  ripe  bursting  along  their  inner  margins.
Perennial  herbaceous  plants  or  shrubs,  propagated  by  axillary  offsets,
with  thick,  fleshy  leaves.

ORDER XLVI. Saxifragaces. Saxifrage.

Herbs  or  shrubs  with  alternate  or  opposite  leaves,  sometimes  stipu-
late. Sepals  four  or  five,  more  or  less  united,  persistent.  Petals  as
many  as  the  sepals,  inserted  between  the  lobes  of  the  calyx  ;  rarely
wanting.  Stamens  mostly  five  or  ten  ;  anthers  three-celled,  opening
longitudinally.  Ovaries  inferior,  usually  of  two,  sometimes  three  or
four  carpels,  cohering  at  base,  distinct  and  divergent  above.  Fruit
generally  capsular,  one  or  two  celled,  many-seeded.  Seeds  small,  ana-
tropous,  with  a  slender  embryo  in  the  albumen.

SUB-ORDER  I. Saxifrages.
Petals  imbricate  in  aestivation  ;  carpels  united,  the  summits  distinct,
forming  a  beaked  capsule. Herbs.

1.  Heuchera.  Calyx  campanulate,  cohering  at  the  base  with  the
ovary,  five-cleft,  segments  obtuse.  Corolla  inferior,  of  five  small,  entire,
erect,  spatulate  petals,  inserted  with  the  five  stamens  on  the  throat  of
the  calyx.  Styles  two.  Capsule  one-celled,  with  two  parietal  adnate
placentae  ;  many-seeded,  two-beaked,  opening  between  the  beaks. — Per-
ennials, with  round  cordate,  long-petioled,  principally  radical  leaves  ;
those  on  the  scapes,  if  any,  alternate ;  flowers  in  panicles  on  long
scapes,  greenish-white,  tinged  with  purple  ;  roots  astringent.

SUB-ORDER  II. Hydrangea.
Petals  valvate  in  the  bud ;  leaves  opposite,  exstipulate  ;  calyx-tube
coherent  with  the  ovary  ;  capsules  two-celled. Shrubs.

2.  Hydrangea.  Marginal  flowers  usually  sterile  and  radiant,  consist-
ing of  a  broad,  rotate,  membranaceous,  four  or  five-cleft,  colored  calyx,
with  neither  petals,  stamens,  nor  styles.  Fertile  flowers ;  calyx-tube  hemi-
spherical, adherent  to  the  ovary,  eight  or  ten  ribbed,  limb  four  or  five-
toothed,  persistent.  Petals  four  or  five,  ovate,  sessile.  Stamens  eight
or  ten,  slender. Capsule  crowned  by  the  two  diverging  styles,  opening

by  a  foramen  between  them,  two-celled  below,  many-seeded. Shrubs

with opposite  petioled  leaves, and numerous flowers in compound
cymes.


"**n


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  51

ORDER XLVII. Hamamelace^e. Witch  Hazel.

Shrubs  with  alternate,  simple,  dentate  leaves,  the  veinlets  running
direct  from  the  mid-vein  to  the  margin,  and  deciduous  stijmles.  Flowers
clustered,  often  polygamous.  Calyx  cohering  with  the  base  of  the
ovary,  four  or  five-cleft.  Petals,  when  present,  four  or  five,  linear,
with  an  imbricate  aestivation.  Stamens  eight,  of  which  four  are  altern-
ate with  the  petals,  those  opposite  barren  ;  or  many,  and  all  fertile  with
no  petals  ;  anthers  introrse,  two-celled.  Ovary  inferior,  two-celled.
Ovules  solitary  or  several,  pendulous  or  suspended  ;  styles  two.  Fruit
semi -inferior,  capsular,  coriaceous,  two-beaked,  two-celled  ;  cells  one-
seeded.  Seeds  pendulous  ;  embryo  surrounded  by  fleshy  or  horny
albumen.

1.  Hamamelis.  Calyx  four-parted,  persistent,  with  an  involucel  of
two  or  three  bractlets  at  base.  Petals  four,  ligulate,  long  and  narrow.
Stamens  eight,  very  short ;  four  alternate  with  the  petals  are  fertile,  the
others  imperfect  and  scale-like  ;  anthers  introrse,  two-celled  ;  each  cell
with  an  operculate  valve.  Styles  two,  short.  Capsule  coriaceous  or
bony,  two-celled,  two-lobed  ;  apex  two-valved  ;  valves  cleft.  The  cap-
sule opens  loculicidally  from  the  top  ;  the  outer  coat  separating  from
the  inner,  which  incloses  the  seeds,  but  soon  bursts  elastically  into  two
pieces.  Seeds  two,  arillate. — Tall  shrubs  or  small  trees  with  short  peti-
oled,  straight-veined  leaves,  and  yellow  flowers.

ORDER  XLVIII. Apiace^  or  Umbellifer^e. Parsley.

Plants  with  herbaceous,  hollow,  furrowed  stems,  and  mostly  alternate
and  much  divided  leaves,  with  sheathing  or  dilated  petioles  at  the  base.
Flowers  arranged  in  umbels,  mostly  white,  often  yellow,  pink,  blue,  or
greenish.  Umbels  usually  compound,  when  the  secondary  ones  are
termed  umbellets  ;  both  often  subtended  by  a  whorl  of  bracts,  {involucre
and  involucels).  Calyx  adhering  to  the  ovary,  entire,  five-toothed,  or
obsolete.  Petals  five,  usually  inflected  at  the  point,  imbricate  in  aestiva-
tion. Stamens  five,  alternate  with  the  petals,  and  with  them  inserted  on
the  disk  that  crowns  the  ovary,  and  surrounds  the  base  of  the  two  styles ;
styles  sometimes  united  and  dilated  at  base  (stylopodium).  Ovary  infe-
rior, two-celled.  Stigmas  simple.  Fruit  dry,  consisting  of  two  indehis-
cent  carpels,  (called  mericarps,)  cohering  by  their  inner  face,  (the
commissure,)  and  when  ripe  separating  from  each  other  into  two  halves,
and  usually  suspended  from  the  summit  of  a  slender  prolongation  of  the
axis  (carpophore)  ;  each  carpel  marked  lengthwise  with  five  large  ridges,
(primary  ribs,)  and  often  with  five  intermediate  and  smaller  ones,
(secondary  ribs);  in  the  interstices,  or  intervals  between  the  ribs,  as  well
as  the  commissure,  are  sometimes  contained  the  (vittw)  oil-tubes,  which


*•


52  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

are  little  linear  canals  or  receptacles  of  colored  volatile  oil.  Seeds  soli-
tary and  suspended  from  the  summit  of  each  cell,  anatropous,  with  a
minute  embryo  in  hard  horn-like  albumen.

SUB-ORDER  I. Orthosperm^e.
The  inner  surface  of  the  seeds  and  albumen  flat  or  nearly  so ;  vittae
often  wanting.

1.  Sanicula.  Flowers  polygamous.  Calyx-tube  echinate  ;  segments
acute,  leafy,  persistent.  Petals  obovate,  erect,  with  a  long,  inflected
point.  Fruit  subglobose,  the  carpels  not  separating  spontaneously,  rib-
less,  thickly  clothed  with  hooked  prickles,  each  with  five  oil-tubes  or
vittaz. — Perennial  herbs  with  palmately-lobed  or  parted  leaves,  those
from  the  root  long-petioled.  Umbels  irregular  or  compound,  the  green-
ish or  yellowish  flowers  capitate  in  the  umbellets,  perfect,  with  staminate
ones  intermixed ;  involucre  of  few,  often  cleft  leaflets ;  invoked  of
several,  entire.

2.  Eryngium.  Flowers  sessile,  collected  in  dense  heads.  Calyx-tube
rough  with  scales  and  vesicles  ;  teeth  five,  leafy.  Petals  erect,  connivent,
oblong,  emarginate,  with  a  long  inflexed  point.  Styles  filiform.  Fruit
top-shaped,  terete,  covered  with  little  scales  or  tubercles,  without  ribs  or
vittsa ;  carpophore  adnate  with  the  carpels. — Herbaceous  or  suffruticose
plants,  chiefly  perennials,  with  coriaceous,  toothed,  cut,  or  prickly  leaves,
blue  or  white  flowers,  bracetate ;  lower  bracts  involucrate,  the  others
smaller  and  paleaceous.

3.  Cicota.  Calyx-margin  five-toothed,  foliaceous.  Petals  obcordate,
points  inflected.  Fruit  roundish,  double,  contracted  laterally,  didymous.
Carpels  with  five  flattish,  equal  ribs  ;  the  lateral  ones  marginal;  intervals
filled  with  single  vittae ;  commissure  with  two  vittae;  carpophore  two-
parted  ;  seeds  terete. — Perennial,  aquatic,  smooth,  and  poisonous  herbs,
with  taper,  fistular  stems,  and  tripinnately  or  ternately  compound
leaves;  the  veins  of  the  lanceolate  leaves  terminating  in  the  notches;
umbels  perfect ;  involucre  few-leaved  or  none ;  involucels  many-leaved ;
flowers  white.

4.  Carum.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  obovate,  emarginate,  the
point  inflexed.  Disk  and  stylo-podium  depressed.  Fruit  contracted  at
the  side,  ovate  or  oblong.  Mcricarps  with  five  equal  ridges,  of  which
the  lateral  form  the  border.  Intervals  with  single  vittae;  commissure
wi  h  two;  carpophore  free,  bifid  at  apex.— Smooth  and  often  perennial
herbs,  with  tuberous,  edible  roots ;  leaves  pinnated  with  multifid  seg-
ments ;  umbels  perfect ;  involucre  various ;  flowers  white.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  53

5.  Pimpinella.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  obcordate,  emargi-
nate,  with  an  inflexed  lobe.  Flowers  perfect  or  diclinous.  Fruit  con-
tracted from  the  side,  crowned  by  a  cushion-like  disk,  and  the  reflexed,
capillary,  somewhat  capitate  styles.  Mericarps  with  five,  filiform,  equal
ribs,  the  lateral  of  which  are  on  the  edge.  Intervals  trivittate ;  carpo-
phore bifid,  free ;  seed  convex,  anteriorly  flattish. — European  smooth
herbs,  often  perennial,  with  compound  umbels,  white  flowers,  sometimes
pink  or  yellow,  and  no  involucre.

6.  Apium.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  roundish,  entire,  with  a
small,  inflexed  point.  Disk  depressed.  Fruit  roundish,  laterally  con-
tracted, double.  Mericarps  with  five  filiform  equal  ribs,  the  lateral  ribs
marginal ;  dorsal  intervals  with  single  vittse,  lateral  with  two  or  three ;
carpophore  undivided. — European  herbaceous  plants  with  the  root  thick-
ened at  the  neck ;  stem  furrowed  and  branched ;  leaves  pinnated,  with
wedge-shaped  cut  segments;  umbels  perfect,  naked ;  flowers  greenish-
white.

7.  Petroselinum.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  roundish,  incurved,
scarcely  emarginate,  with  a  narrow,  inflexed  point.  Disk  short,  coni-
cal, somewhat  crenulate.  Styles  diverging.  Fruit  ovate,  compressed
at  the  sides.  Mericarps  with  five  filiform  equal  ribs,  of  which  the  late-
ral ones  form  the  margin.  Intervals  with  single  vittse ;  commissure  with
two;  carpophore  biparted.  Involucre  few-leaved;  involucels  many-
leaved. — Smooth  branching  European  herbs,  with  decompound  leaves,
stamens  longer  than  the  corolla,  and  uniform,  white  or  greenish  flowers ;
those  of  the  disk  often  sterile.

8.  Selinum,  or  Conioselinum.  Calyx-teeth  obsolete.  Petals  obovate,
with  an  inflected  point.  Fruit  oval,  compressed  on  the  back.  Mericarps
with  five  winged  ribs,  lateral  ones  marginal  and  much  the  broadest.
Intervals  with  one  to  three  vittse  ;  commissure  with  four  to  eight. — Smooth
biennials,  with  leaves  on  very  large  inflated  petioles,  and  white  flowers;
involucre  scarcely  any ;  involucels  five  to  seven-leaved,  awl-shaped.

9.  Fceniculum.  Margin  of  calyx  tumid,  toothless.  Petals  roundish,
entire,  involute,  with  a  broad,  retuse  apex.  Fruit  elliptic-oblong,  late-
rally subcompressed.  Mericarps  with  five  prominent,  bluntly-keeled
ribs,  the  lateral  ones  broader  and  marginal.  Intervals  univittate;
commissure  bivittate.  Seed  nearly  semi-terete. — Biennials  or  perennials
with  pinnated,  decompound  leaves,  and  yellow  flowers ;  no  involucre  nor
involucels.

10.  Angelica.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  lanceolate,  entire,
acuminate,  with  the  point  straight  or  curved  inward. Fruit  compressed


54  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

at  the  back,  with  a  central  raphe,  two-winged  on  each  side.  Mericarps
with  three  filiform  dorsal  elevated  ribs,  the  two  lateral  dilated  into  a
membranous  wing.  Intervals  univittate.  —  Perennials  or  biennials,  with
bipinnate  leaves,  and  white  flowers;  involucre  none  or  few-leaved;
involucel  many-leaved.

11.  Archangelica.  Calyx-teeth  short.  Pefafo  elliptical,  entire,  acu-
minate, with  the  point  incurved.  Fruit  dorsally  compressed.  Mencarps
with  three  rather  thick,  carinated,  dorsal  ribs ;  lateral  ribs  dilated  into
marginal  wings.  Seed  not  adhering  to  the  integument,  covered  all  over
with  vittte.— Perennials,  with  greenish  or  white  flowers.

12.  Heracleum.  Calyx-limb  of  five,  small  acute  teeth.  Petals
obovate,  emarginate,  with  an  inflected  lobe;  the  outer  often  radiating
and  bifid.  Fruit  flattened  at  the  back,  surrounded  by  a  broad  flat
border.  Mericarps  with  very  fine  ribs ;  the  three  dorsal  equidistant,
the  two  lateral  distant  from  the  others,  and  contiguous  to  the  dilated
margin.  Viltce  solitary  in  the  interstices,  generally  two  on  the  commis-
sure, all  shorter  than  the  fruit,  and  mostly  clavellate. — Large,  coarse,
herbaceous  plants,  with  many-rayed  umbels,  large  sheathing  petioles,
and  few,  deciduous,  involucral  leaves.

13.  Daucus.  Calyx-margin  five-toothed.  Petals  obovate,  emargi.-
nate,  with  an  inflexed  point,  the  outer  usually  radiating  and  bifid.  Fruit
somewhat  compressed  from  the  back,  ovate  or  oblong.  Mericarps  with
five  filiform  and  bristly  primary  ribs ;  the  three  middle  ones  at  the  back,
the  lateral  on  the  plane  of  the  commissure ;  the  four  secondary  equal,
more  prominent,  winged,  and  divided  into  a  single  row  of  prickles.
Intervals  univittate  below  the  secondary  ribs ;  carpophore  entire,  free. —
Mostly  biennials,  with  bipinnate  leaves  ;  bracts  of  the  involucre  multifid
and  leafy  ;  flowers  white  or  yellowish,  the  central  one  usually  dark-
purple,  fleshy  and  sterile.

14.  Cuminum.  Calyx-teeth  five,  lanceolate,  setaceous,  unequal,  per-
sistent. Petals  oblong,  emarginate,  erect,  spreading,  with  an  inflexed
lobe.  Fruit  contracted  at  the  side.  Mericarps  with  wingless  ribs,  the
five  primary  filiform,  minutely  muricated,  the  laterals  forming  a  border  ;
the  four  secondary  more  prominent  and  aculeated.  Intervals  under  the
secondary  ridges  with  one  vitta  in  each  ;  carpophore  bipartite. — Annuals,
with  multifid  leaves  having  setaceous  segments  ;  flowers  white  or  pink.

15  Opoponax.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  roundish,  entire
involute.  Stylopodium  broad,  thick ;  styles  very  short.  Fruit  elliptical
compressed,  with  a  dilated  margin. Mericarps  with  the three dorsal


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  55

ribs  thin,  prominent,  and  no  distinct,  lateral  ones.  Vittae  three  to  each
interval ;  six  to  ten  to  each  commissure. — Perennials,  with  a  thick  root,
and  rough  stem ;  leaves  bipinnate  ;  flowers  yellow.

16.  Ferula.  Calyx -mar gin  with  five  short  teeth.  Petals  ovate,
entire,  acuminate,  with  an  incurved  point.  Fruit  flattened  at  the  back,
with  a  dilated  flat  border.  Mericarps  with  three  dorsal  filiform  ribs,  the
two  lateral  obsolete  and  lost  in  the  dilated  margin.  Vittai  in  the  dorsal
intervals  three  or  more  ;  in  the  commissure  four  or  more.  Seeds  flat.
Carpophore  bipartite. — Herbaceous  plants  with  fleshy  roots,  tall  smooth
stems,  and  supra-decompound  leaves  ;  flowers  yellow.

17.  Narthex.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals?  Stylopodium  plicate-
urceolate.  Styles  filiform,  finally  reflexed.  Fruit  plano-convex,  with  a
dilated  border.  Mericarps  with  five  primary  ribs  ;  the  three  interme-
diate ones  filiform,  the  two  lateral  obsolete,  immersed  in  the  contiguous
margin.  Yittm  in  the  dorsal  intervals  usually  single  ;  in  the  commis-
sure four  to  six,  unequal  and  variable.  Seeds  flat.  Carpophore  bi-
partite.

18.  Dorema.  Disk  epigynous,  cup-shaped.  Fruit  slightly  com-
pressed from  the  back,  edged  ;  with  three  distinct,  filiform,  primary  ribs
near  the  middle,  and  four  obtuse  secondary  ridges  alternating  with
them  ;  the  whole  tomentose.  Vilta?,  one  to  each  secondary  ridge,  one  to
each  primary  marginal  ridge,  and  four  to  the  commissure  of  which  two
are  very  small.

19.  Galbanum.  Fruit  compressed  at  the  back,  elliptical;  ridges
seven,  elevated,  compressed,  bluntly  keeled,  not  winged  ;  the  lateral
distinct,  next  the  margin.  Channels  broadish,  concave,  without  vittae  ;
commissure  flat,  dilated,  with  two  broad  curved  vittae. Don.

20.  Anetiium.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  roundish,  entire,
involute,  with  a  squarish  retuse  lobe.  Fruit  lenticular,  flattened  from
the  back,  surrounded  by  a  flattened  border.  Mericarps  with  equidistant
filiform  ridges,  the  three  dorsal  acutely  keeled,  the  two  lateral  more
obsolete,  losing  themselves  in  the  border.  Vittaz  broad,  solitary,  filling
the  intervals,  two  on  the  commissure. — Upright  smooth  annuals,  with
decompound  leaves  having  setaceous  linear  segments,  and  yellow  flowers.

21.  (Enanthe.  Calyx  permanent,  growing  rather  larger  after  flower-
ing. Petals  obovate,  emarginate,  with  an  inflexed  lobe.  Disk  conical.
Fruit  cylindrical-ovate,  surmounted  by  long  erect  styles.  Mericarps
with  five  convex  obtuse  ridges,  of  which  the  marginal  ones  are  a
little the broadest. — Usually  aquatic herbs  with compound umbels,


56  Natural  Orders of  Plants.

and  white  petals  ;  flowers  of  the  ray  long  stalked,  abortive  ;  of  the  disk
sessile  or  nearly  so,  and  fertile.

22.  Peucedanum.  Calyx-margin  five-toothed.  Petals  obovate,  con-
tracted into  an  inflexed  segment,  emarginate  or  nearly  entire.  Fruit
flattened  at  the  back,  surrounded  by  a  dilated  flat  border.  Mericarps
with  equidistant  ridges ;  the  three  dorsal  filiform,  the  lateral  more
obsolete,  next  the  lateral  border,  or  lost  in  it.  Villa;  single  in  the  chan-
nels, or  in  the  lateral  ones,  one  and  a  half  to  two  ;  usually  two  on  the
commissure. — Perennials,  generally  smooth,  with  pinnated  leaves,  more
or  less  compound  ;  umbels  compound,  terminal ;  flowers  white,  yellow
or  yellowish-green.

SUB-ORDER  II. Campylospermje.

The  inner  surface  of  the  seed  deeply  furrowed,  or  with  involute
margins.

23.  Osmorrhiza.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  oblong,  nearly
entire,  the  cuspidate  point  inflexed  ;  styles  conical  at  base.  Fruit  linear -
oblong,  elavate,  attenuate  at  base,  crowned  with  the  styles.  Carpels
with  five  equal,  acute,  bristly  ribs ;  intervals  without  vittse  ;  commissure
with  a  deep,  bristly  channel. — Perennials,  with  thick  aromatic  roots,  and
large  two  or  three  ternately  compound  leaves,  with  the  umbels  opposite;
involucre  and  involucels  few-leaved  ;  flowers  white.

24.  Conium.  Calyx-margin  obsolete.  Petals  obcordate,  somewhat
emarginate,  with  a  very  short  inflexed  lobe.  Fruit  ovate  laterally  com-
pressed. Mericarps  with  five  prominent,  acute,  equal,  undulate-crenu-
late  ribs,  the  lateral  ones  marginal.  Intervals  without  vittae,  but  with
many  strise  ;  seeds  with  a  deep,  narrow  groove  on  the  face. — Biennials,
with  fusiform  roots,  decompound  leaves,  and  white  flowers,  all  fertile.
Poisonous  herbs.

SUB-ORDER  III. CtELOSPERMjs.
Seeds  incurved  at  base  and  apex.

25.  Coriandrum.  Calyx-teeth  five,  acute,  unequal,  permanent.
Petals  obovate,  emarginate,  with  an  inflexed  segment,  the  exterior
radiating  and  bifid.  Fruit  globose,  with  ten  ribs,  scarcely  separating.
Mericarps  with  five  depressed,  primary  ribs,  wavy,  and  four  secondary
ones,  beside  the  marginals,  more  prominent  and  keeled.  Intervals
without  vittae  ;  commissure  with  two.  Seed  excavated  in  front,  with  a
loose  skin. — A  smooth  annual,  with  multiOd  leaves,  three  to  five-rayed
umbels,  and  no  involucre ;  involucels  three-leaved,  unilateral.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  57

ORDER XLIX. ARALiACEiE. Spikenard.

Herbs,  shrubs  or  trees,  with  the  habit  of  umbellifers.  Leaves  exstipu-
late,  simple,  or  compound,  the  petioles  thickened  and  dilated  at  base.
Floivers  usually  umbellate.  Calyx  adherent  to  the  ovary,  entire  or
toothed.  Petals  five  to  ten,  deciduous,  rarely  wanting,  valvate  in  aesti-
vation. Stamens  equal  in  number  to  the  petals,  rarely  double  the
number,  alternate  with  them,  and  inserted  with  them  on  the  top  of  the
ovary.  Anthers  introrse.  Ovaries  crowned  with  a  disk,  two  or  many-
celled  ;  ovules  solitary  ;  styles  as  many  as  cells ;  stigmas  simple.  Fruit
baccate  or  drupaceous,  sometimes  nearly  dry,  but  the  carpels  adherent.
Seed  solitary  in  each  cell.  Embryo  short,  at  the  base  of  the  copious,
fleshy  albumen.

1.  Aralia.  Flowers  mostly  perfect;  calyx-limb  short,  entire,  or  five
toothed.  Petals  five,  spreading,  apex  not  inflexed.  Stamens  five  or
ten,  alternate  with  the  petals;  filaments  short.  Styles  five,  spreading.
Fruit  a  berry  or  drupe,  five-lobed,  five-celled,  five-seeded,  crowned  with
the  remains  of  the  calyx  and  styles.  Stones  papery. — Shrubs,  low  trees
or  perennial  herbs,  with  compound  leaves,  and  greenish-white  flowers,
in  simple,  solitary  or  racemose  panicles.

2.  Panax.  Flowers  diceciously  polygamous.  Perfect  flowers  ;  calyx
adnate  to  the  ovary,  limb  short,  obsoletely  five-toothed ;  petals  five  ;
stcanens  five,  alternate  with  the  petals  ;  styles  two  or  three,  short;  fruit
baccate,  succulent,  compressed,  orbicular,  two  or  three-celled ;  cells
one-seeded,  leathery.  Sterile  flowers ;  calyx-limb  nearly  entire  ;  petals
and  stamens  five. — Chiefly  perennial  herbs  with  greenish-white  flowers,
in  a  solitary,  simple  umbel ;  only  three  stem  leaves  in  a  whorl,  in  the
herbaceous.

3.  Hedera.  Calyx  an  elevated  or  five-toothed  edge.  Petals  not
five,  not  calyptrate  and  cohering,  dilated  at  the  base.  Stamens  and
styles  five  to  ten,  the  latter  converging  or  consolidated.  Berry  five-
seeded,  crowned  by  the  persistent  calyx. — European  shrubby  plants,
climbing  or  erect,  with  simple,  evergreen  leaves,  and  green  flowers.

ORDER  L. Cornace^e. Dogwood.

Trees  and  shrubs,  rarely  herbs,  with  a  bitter  bark,  and  simple,  mostly
opposite  and  entire  leaves,  with  pinnate  veinlets,  exstipulate  ;  in  one
species  alternate.  Hairs  fixed  by  the  center.  Flowers  cymose  and
sometimes  involucrate.  Sepals  adherent  to  the  ovary  ;  the  limb  minute,
four  or  five-toothed  or  lobed.  Petals  four  or  five,  distinct,  alternate  with
the  calyx-teeth  ;  aestivation  valvate. Stamens  four  or  five,  inserted  with


53  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

the  petals  and  alternate  with  them.  Ovary  one  or  two-celled.  Styles
single.  Fruit  a  baccate  drupe,  with  a  one  or  two-celled  nucleus,
crowned  with  the  calyx.  Seeds  two,  anatropous ;  embryo  nearly  the
length  of  the  fleshy  albumen.

1.  Cornus.  Calyx-limb  minutely  four-toothed.  Petals  four,  oblong,
sessile,  spreading.  Stamens  four  ;  filaments  slender.  Style  one,  sub-
clavate ;  stigma  obtuse  or  capitate.  Drupes  baccate,  not  connate,  with
a  two  or  three-celled  nut.  Seeds  solitary,  pendulous.  Albumen  fleshy;
radicle  of  the  embryo  shorter  than  the  cotyledons.— Trees,  shrubs,  or
perennial  herbs,  with  entire,  mostly  opposite  leaves,  and  whitish  flowers
in  cymes.

ORDER  LI. Loranthace^e. Mistletoe.

Shrubby  plants  with  parasitical,  dichotomous  stems,  and  coriaceous,
opposite,  fleshy,  evergreen  leaves,  without  stipules.  Flowers  small  and
dioecious,  whitish  or  greenish-yellow, sometimes  perfect  and brilliant.

Calyx  adnate  to  the  ovary  in  perfect  flower ;  limb  three  to  five-cleft  or
obsolete.  Petals  three,  four,  or  eight,  united  in  a  tube,  sometimes  dis-
tinct, inserted  into  the  epigynous  disk.  Stamens  as  many  as  the  petals
and opposite  to  them,  or  to  the  sepals  when  the  petals  are  wanting.

Ovary  one-celled,  with  a  single,  suspended  ovule  ;  style  simple  or  none.
Fruit  baccate,  with  one  anatropous  seed.

1.  Viscum.  Flowers  monoecious  or  dioecious.  Males  ;  calyx  with
from  three  to  five,  usually  four  triangular,  erect  segments,  valvate  in
aestivation.  Anthers  as  many  as  the  sepals,  and  inserted  on  them.
Petals  none.  Females  ;  calyx-limb  obsolete.  Petals  four,  fleshy,  epi-
gynous. Stamens  none ;  stigma  sessile.  Berry  fleshy,  one-seeded. —
Leaves  very  rarely  alternate  or  scale-like.

SUB- CLASS  II. Monopetalous  Plants.

Floral  envelops  consisting  of  both  calyx  and  corolla ;  the  latter  com-
posed of  petals  more  or  less  united,  or  monopetalous.

ORDER  LII.  Caprifoliace^e.  Honeysuckle.
Shrubs,  rarely  herbs,  often  twining,  with  opposite  leaves  and  no
stipules.  Flowers  cymose  and  often  fragrant.  Calyx  adherent  to  the
ovary ;  limb  five,  rarely  four-toothed.  Corolla  tubular  or  rotate,  regu-
lar or  irregular,  imbricate  in  aestivation.  Stamens  as  many,  or  one  less
than  the  lobes  of  the  corolla,  alternate  with  them,  and  inserted  into  the
tube.  Anthers  introrse,  versatile.  Ovary  three,  rarely  four  or  five-
celled,  with  one  to  several  pendulous  ovules  in  each  cell.  Style  one
filiform,  with  a  somewhat  capitate  stigma,  or  wanting. Stigmas  one  to


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  59

four. Fruit  baccate,  fleshy,  or  sometimes  dry,  sometimes  one-celled  by
abortion. Seeds  anatropous. Embryo  in  the  axis  of  the  fleshy  albumen.

SUB- ORDER  I. Lonicerejs.
Corolla tubular; the  limb often irregular; style filiform; stigma
capitate.

1.  Diervilla.  Calyx-tube  oblong,  tapering  at  the  summit ;  limb  five-
cleft  ;  lobes  slender,  awl-shaped,  persistent.  Corolla  twice  as  long  as
the  calyx,  funnel-form,  five-lobed,  almost  regular.  Stamens  five.  Pod
ovoid-oblong,  pointed,  two-celled,  two-valved,  septicidal,  many-seeded. —
Low  upright  shrubs  with  opposite,  serrate,  deciduous  leaves,  and  flowers
in  axillary  or  terminal  cymose  peduncles.

2.  Triosteum.  Calyx-tube  ovoid  ;  limb  five-parted  ;  lobes  linear,  nearly
as  long  as  the  corolla,  persistent.  Corolla  tubular,  gibbous  at  base,  five-
lobed,  sub-equal,  scarcely  longer  than  the  calyx.  Stamens  five,  included.
Stigma  capitate,  lobed.  Fruit  drupaceous,  rather  dry,  crowned  with
the  calyx,  three-celled,  three-seeded ;  seeds  ribbed  and  bony. — Coarse
hairy  perennial  herbs,  leafy  to  the  top,  with  the  ample  entire  pointed
leaves  tapering  to  the  base,  but  connate  round  the  simple  stem ;  flower
sessile,  and  solitary,  or  clustered  in  the  axils.

SUB-ORDER  II. Sambuce^e.

Corolla  regular,  rotate,  deeply  five-lobed.  Stigmas  three,  rarely  five,
sessile. Flowers  in  cymes.

3.  Sambucus.  Calyx-limb  small,  five-cleft.  Corolla  rotate  or  urceo-
late,  five-cleft,  segments  obtuse.  Stamens  five.  Stigmas  three,  sessile,
obtuse,  small.  Fruit  baccate,  pulpy,  subglobose,  three  or  four-seeded,
hardly  crowned  by  the  remains  of  the  calyx. — Shrubs  or  perennial  herbs
with  opposite  pinnate  or  bipinnate  leaves,  and  numerous,  small,  white
or  reddish  flowers  in  compound  cymes.

4.  Viburnum.  Calyx  small,  five-toothed,  persistent.  Corolla  spread-
ing ;  limb  five-lobed,  segments  obtuse.  Stamens  five,  equal,  longer
than  the  corolla.  Stigmas  three,  mostly  sessile.  Drupe  one-celled,  one-
seeded,  with  thin  pulp,  and  a  crustaceous  flattened  stone. — Shrubs  with
simple  petioled  leaves,  and  white  sessile  flowers  in  flat,  compound
cymes,  sometimes  radiant.

ORDER.  LIII. Rubiace/e. Madder.

Herbs,  shrubs,  or  trees,  with  angular  stems  and  opposite,  entire,
eometimes  verticillate  leaves;  stipules  between the petioles,  somewhat


60  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

resembling  the  leaves.  Calyx -tube  more  or  less  adherent;  limb  five-
cleft.  Corolla  monopetalous,  valvate,  rotate,  or  tubular,  inserted  on  the
calyx  ;  lobes  equal  in  number  to  those  of  the  calyx.  Stamens  as  many
as  corolla-segnients,  alternate  with  them,  and  inserted  upon  the  corolla-
tube.  Ovary  peltate,  or  two-celled.  Ovules  solitary,  erect.  Styles
two  ;  stigma  simple.  Fruit  various.  Seeds  anatropous  or  amphitropous,
with  copious  hard  albumen.

SUB-ORDER  I. Stellate.

Calyx  wholly  adherent  to  the  ovary,  which  is  two-celled,  two-seeded.
Leaves  verticillate,  with  apparently  no  stipules.  Calyx  valvate  in  aesti-
vation.

1.  Rubia.  Calyx-tube  ovate,  globose  ;  limb  almost  wanting.  Corolla
rotate,  live-parted.  Stamens  five,  short.  Styles  two,  short.  Fruit
didymous,  globose,  baccate,  juicy. — Herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants  with
square  stems,  verticillate  leaves,  and  small,  white,  or  ochroleucous
flowers.

2.  Galium.  Ca lyx  minute,  four-toothed.  Corolla  rotate,  four-parted,
rarely  three.  Stamens  four,  rarely  three,  short.  Styles  two.  Fruit
dry,  or  a  little  fleshy,  globular,  twin,  separating  when  ripe  into  the  two
seed-like,  indehiscent,  one-seeded  carpels. — Slender  herbs  with  square
stems,  whorled  leaves,  and  small  cymose  flowers.

SUB-ORDER II. ClNCHONE.E,  or  Mitchelle^e.

Calyx  adherent  to  the  ovary.  Leaves  opposite,  rarely  verticillate,
with  stipules  between  the  petioles,  often  united  with  them  into  a  sheath.

3.  Mitchella.  Flowers  two  on  each  double  ovary.  Calyx  four-
parted.  Corolla  funnel-form,  four-lobed ;  lobes  spreading,  densely
bearded  within.  Stamens  four,  short,  inserted  on  the  corolla.  Style
slender  ;  stigmas  four.  Fruit  a  dry  berry-like  double  drupe,  crowned
with  the  calyx-teeth  of  the  two  flowers,  each  containing  four  small  and
seed-like  bony  nutlets.  —  Smooth  and  creeping  evergreen  herbs,  with
round-ovate,  petiolate  leaves,  minute  stipules,  white  fragrant  flowers
often  tinged  with  red,  and  bright  scarlet  dry  berries,  which  remain  over
winter. Parts  of  the  flower  occasionally  in  threes,  fives,  or  sixes.

4.  Cephalanthus.  Calyx-tube  inversely-pyramidal ;  limb  four-tooth-
ed. Corolla  tubular,  slender,  four-cleft  ;  lobes  erect,  with  a  valvate
aestivation. Stamens  four,  somewhat  exserted. Style  filiform,  very  lono-,


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  61

with  a  capitate  stir/ma.  Fruit  dry  and  hard,  inversely  pyramidal,  two  to
four-celled,  separating  from  the  base  upward  into  two  to  four  closed  one-
seeded  portions.  Seeds  with  a  rind  or  corky  arillus. — Shrubs  with  oval
or  lanceolate,  opposite  or  ternate  leaves,  furnished  with  short  stipules,
and  white  flowers  densely  aggregated  in  spherical  peduncled  heads.

SUB-ORDER  III. Spigelie^e  or  Loganie^e.

Calyx  persistent,  almost  entirely  free  from  the  ovary ;  corolla  not  con-
volute in  aestivation.  Leaves  opposite,  with  intermediate  stipules,  united
with  the  petioles.

5.  Spigelia.  This  is  placed  by  some  authors  in  the  order  Gentian-
aceae,  and  by  others  in  Loganiacese.  Calyx  inferior,  deeply  five-cleft,
persistent;  segments  linear-subulate.  Corolla  tubular-funnel  form,  much
longer  than  the  calyx,  narrowed  at  base ;  limb  spreading,  five-cleft ;
segments  broad,  acuminate  ;  valvate  in  aestivation.  Stamens  five,  simple  ;
anthers  simple,  linear,  converging.  Ovary  superior;  style  single,  slen-
der, hairy  above,  as  long  as  the  corolla,  jointed  near  the  middle ;  stigma
simple.  Capsule  didymous,  two-celled,  four-valved.  Seeds  few  or
many,  minute. — Shrubs  or  chiefly  herbs  with  opposite  and  often  connate
leaves  on  the  lower  part  of  the  stem,  and  quaternate  above ;  flowers  of
a  blue  or  red  color,  mostly  sessile,  and  in  one-sided  terminal  cymes  or
spikes.

ORDER  LIV. CiNCHONACE^E. Cinchona.

The  plants  which  I  have  placed  under  this  order,  are  arranged  by
many  authors  in  the  preceding  one,  in  Cinchoneae ;  but  as  others  have
arranged  them  again  in  several  different  orders,  I  have  deemed  it  best
to  make  the  present  division,  especially  as  it  is  in  accordance  with  the
views  of  several  eminent  botanists,  among  whom  may  be  named  Lindley.
In  many  respects  it  resembles  the  preceding  order.

A  very  extensive  order  of  trees,  shrubs,  or  herbs,  with  simple,  entire,
opposite  or  verticillate  leaves  having  interpetiolary  stipules.  Flouws
usually  in  corymbs  or  panicles.  Calyx  adherent,  with  a  definite  number
of  divisions,  or  none.  Corolla  superior,  regular,  tubular ;  divisions  defi-
nite ;  aestivation  valvate  or  imbricate.  Stamens  inserted  on  the  corolla,
and  alternate  with  its  lobes.  Ovary  inferior,  crowned  with  a  disk,  usu-
ally two-celled,  sometimes  with  several;  ovules  numerous,  attached  to  a
central  placenta,  or  few  and  erect,  or  ascending.  Style  single,  some-
times partly  divided.  Stigma  commonly  simple,  occasionally  divided.
Fruk  inferior,  either  dividing  into  two  cocci,  or  indehiscent  and  dry  or
succulent,  sometimes  with  several  cells.  Seeds  definite  or  numerous.
Embryo  small,  oblong,  surrounded  by  a  horny  albumen.


62  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

SUB-ORDER  I. Cinchonbje.
Leaves  opposite; stipules interpetiolar; fruit capsular, two-celled;
cells  many-seeded ;  seeds  winged ;  albumen  fleshy. Trees  or  shrubs.

1.  Cinchona.  Calyx  persistent,  five-toothed.  Corolla  with  a  terete
tube ;  limb  hypocrateriform,  five-parted,  valvate  in  aestivation.  Stamens
inserted  in  the  middle  of  the  tube;  filaments  short;  anthers  linear,  in-
cluded. Capsule  ovate  or  oblong,  dividing  along  the  dissepiment  into
two  carpels,  open  at  the  commissure,  and  crowned  by  the  persistent
calyx.  Seeds  many,  with  a  membranaceous  lacerated  wing  or  margin ;
albumen  fleshy. — Trees  and  shrubs  with  white  or  reddish  flowers.  South
American.  Variously  arranged  by  botanists,  according  to  the  character
of  the  corolla-limb,  and  leaves.

2.  Uncaria.  Limb  of  calyx  short,  urceolate,  five-cleft.  Corolla
funnel-shaped;  tube  slender;  throat  naked;  lobes  five,  spreading,  oval-
oblong.  Anthers  inclosed  or  protruded.  Style  filiform,  protruded;
stigma  tumid,  undivided.  Capsules  pedicellate,  clavate,  tapering  to  the
base. Seeds  numerous,  imbricated,  winged. — Climbing  shrubs. Exotics.

SUB-ORDER  II. Coffee.

Fruit  two-celled,  berried,  with  two  bony  or  crustaceous  one-sided
nuts,  which  are  flat  and  furrowed  in  the  inside;  or  occasionally  by
abortion,  having  but  one  nut,  and  then  the  seeds  are  erect,  depressed,
or  laterally  adherent.  Albumen  horny.  Leaves  opposite.  Stipules
interpetiolar,  united  or  distinct.

3.  Chiococca.  Calyx-limb  five-toothed.  Corolla  funnel-shaped,
with  an  obconical  tube  or  throat,  and  a  five-lobed  acute  limb.  Stamens
five,  downy,  hardly  adnate  to  the  base  of  the  corolla;  anthers  linear,
included.  Style  single,  with  the  apex  sub-clavate  or  sub-bilobed.  Berry
somewhat  didymous,  small,  roundish,  compressed,  crowned  with  the
persistent  calyx ;  two-celled,  two-seeded.  Seeds  pendulous,  compressed,
roundish.— Shrubby,  somewhat  climbing  plants,  with  yellowish-white
flowers. Exotic.

4.  Coffea.  Calyx-tube  ovate,  globose  or  turbinate ;  limb  small,  four
or  five -toothed.  Corolla  tubular,  funnel-form,  with  a  dilated  four  or
five-parted  limb,  with  oblong  lobes.  Stamens  four  or  five,  included  or
exserted.  Style  bifid  at  the  apex.  Berry  umbilicate,  naked,  or  crowned
with  the  calyx,  containing  two  seeds  inclosed  in  a  parchment-like  puta-
men.  Seed  convex  above,  flat  beneath,  with  a  longitudinal  furrow.—
Shrubs  or  trees  with  opposite,  stipulate  leaves.


Natural Orders  of  Plants.  63

5.  Cephaelis.  Heads  of  flowers  inclosed  in  a  large  two  to  ei^ht-
leaved  involucre.  Calyx-lube  obovate ;  limb  very  short,  five-toothed.
Corolla  somewhat  funnel-shaped,  five-parted;  segments  small,  obtuse.
Anthers  included.  Stigma  bifid,  often  exserted.  Fruit  an  obovate-
oblong  berry,  crowned  with  the  remains  of  the  calyx,  two-celled,  two-
seeded. — Shrubs  and  herbs  of  S.  America;  imperfectly  known.

ORDER  LV.  Valerianace^e.  Valerian.
Herbs  with  opposite  leaves  and  no  stipules.  Floivcrs  generally  in
cymes  or  panicles.  Calyx-tube  coherent  with  the  ovary ;  limb  two  to
four-toothed,  obsolete,  or  else  either  membranous,  or  resembling  a  pap-
pus. Corolla  tubular  or  funnel-form,  sometimes  with  a  spur  at  base,
four  or  five-lobed.  Stamens  distinct,  usually  fewer  than  the  lobes  of  the
corolla,  alternate  with  them  and  inserted  into  the  corolla-tube.  Ovary
inferior,  with  one  perfect  cell,  and  two  abortive  ones.  Seeds  solitary,
pendulous,  in  a  dry,  indehisccnt  pericarp,  anatropous,  with  a  large
embryo,  and  no  albumen.

1.  Valeriana.  Calyx-limb  involute  during  flowering,  then  unrolled
into  a  deciduous,  feathery  pappus,  consisting  of  many  plumose  bristles.
Corolla-tube  obconical  or  cylindrical,  equal  at  the  base  or  gibbous,  but
without  a  spur;  limb  bluntly  five,  rarely  three-cleft.  Stamens  three.
Fruit  indehiscent,  one-celled,  one- seeded. — Perennial  herbs  with  deep
and  thickened,  strong-scented  roots,  and  opposite,  simple  or  pinnate
leaves;  flowers  in  close  cymes.

ORDER  LVI.  Asteraceje  or  Composite.  Asters.
Herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants  with  alternate  or  opposite  leaves,  with-
out stipules,  simple  though  often  much  divided.  Floivers  collected  into
a  dense  head  (capitidum),  upon  a  common  receptacle,  surrounded  by  an
involucre  of  many  bracts  or  scales,  (palecc).  Calyx-limb  obsolete,  or
membranaceous,  consisting  of  bristles,  awns,  scales,  teeth,  hairs,  etc.,  called
pappus;  tube  adherent  to  the  ovary.  Corolla,  mostly  of  five  united
petals,  superior,  ligulate  or  tubular,  valvate  in  aestivation,  the  veins  bor-
dering the  margins  of  the  lobes.  Stamens  five,  rarely  four,  inserted  on
the  corolla,  and  alternate  with  its  lobes ;  filaments  distinct,  or  united
above ;  anthers  linear,  cohering  into  a  cylinder,  (syngenesious).  Ovary
inferior,  one-celled,  one-ovuled.  Style  two-cleft  at  the  apex,  usually
undivided  in  sterile  flowers;  the  inner  margins  of  the  branches  occupied
by  the  stigmas.  Fruit  a  dry,  indehiscent,  one-seeded  pericarp  [ache-
nium),  crowrned  with  the  limb  of  the  calyx  or  pappus.  Seed  erect,  ana-
tropous, without  albumen.  —  A  very  extensive  family,  chiefly  herbs  in
temperate  regions,  with  perfect,  polygamous,  monoecious,  or  dioecious
flowers.


6i  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

SUB-ORDER  I. Tubuliflok.e.
Corolla  of  the  perfect  or  disk  flowers  tubular,  regular,  the  limb  iive-
lobed,  rarely four;  the  ligulate or ray flowers,  when present,  either
pistillate  only,  or  neutral  (with  neither  stamens  nor  pistil),  and  occupy-
ing the  border.

TRIBE  I. Vernoniace^e. Ironweed.
Heads  discoid;  the  flowers  all  alike,  perfect,  tubular. Branches  of
the  style  slender,  filiform,  acute,  hairy  all  over,  the  stigmatic  lines  only
on  the  lower  part. Corolla  often  slightly  irregular.

1.  Vernoma.  Flowers  all  tubular;  heads  few  or  many-flowered,  in
corymbose  cymes.  Involucre  semicylindric,  of  ovate,  imbricated  scales,
shorter  than  the  florets,  with  the  inner  scales  longest.  Receptacle  naked,
or  rarely  honeycombed  and  fringed.  Corolla  regular,  five-cleft  with  the
lobes  in  the  entire  part  nearly  equal.  Filaments  smooth.  Achenium
with  a  cartilaginous  callus  at  the  base,  and  a  large  epigynous  disk.
Pappus  usually  in  two  rows,  of  which  the  inner  is  bristly,  and  much
longer  than  the  outer  which  is  paleaceous  or  chaffy ;  rarely  in  two  equal
rows. — Perennial  herbs  or  shrubs,  mostly  with  alternate  leaves.

TRIBE II. EuPATORIACE^E. EuPATORIUM.

Heads  discoid  or  radiate.  Branches  of  the  style  much  elongated,
obtuse,  or  club-shaped,  minutely  pubescent  above  on  the  outside ;  the
stigmatic  lines  obscure  within,  below  the  middle.  Anthers  not  caudate.
Leaves  mostly  opposite.

SUB-TRIBE  I. Eupatorie^e.
Heads  discoid,  homogamous ;  flowers  seldom  yellow.

2.  Liatris.  Flowers  all  tubular ;  heads  five  to  thirty-flowered.  Scales
of  involucre  few  or  numerous,  oblong,  imbricate,  appressed.  Receptacle
naked.  Corolla  five-lobed,  lobes  all  slender,  long.  Branches  of  style
much  exserted,  cylindrical,  obtuse.  Achenium  about  ten-ribbed,  nearly
terete,  tapering  to  the  base.  Pappus  in  one  to  three  rows  of  fifteen  to
forty  plumose  or  barbellate  bristles.  —  Perennial  herbs  with  tuberous
roots,  simple  wand-like  stems,  alternate  leaves,  and  cyanic  flowers.

3.  Eupatorium.  Corolla  tubular,  five-toothed.  Heads  three  to  many-
flowered.  Involucre  cylindrical  or  campanulate,  the  scales  imbricated
in  twro,  three,  or  more  series,  equal  or  unequal,  loosely  or  closely
imbricated;  sometimes  only  in  a  single  series.  Receptacle  flat,  naked.
Anthers included. Branches  of  style  mostly  exserted  and elongated


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  65

cylindrical,  obtuse.  Achenia  five-angled,  without  intermediate  striee.
Pappus  a  single  row  of  slender,  capillary,  barely  roughish  bristles. —
Perennial  herbs  with  opposite  or  verticillate  leaves,  often  covered  with
resinous  dots,  and  cyanic  flowers  in  corymbose  heads.

SUB-TRIBE  II. Tussilagine^e.
Head-flowers  dissimilar  or  dioecious  ;  the  pistillate  often  ligulate.

4.  Tussilago.  Heads  many-flowered,  heterogamous ;  ray-florets  in
many  rows,  pistillate,  narrowly  ligulate  ;  disk-florets  tubular,  few,  stami-
nate,  with  a  five-toothed  limb.  Receptacle  naked.  Anthers  scarcely
caudate.  Scales  of  involucre  oblong,  obtuse,  nearly  in  a  single  row.
Styles  of  the  disk  included,  sterile ;  of  the  rays  bifid,  with  terete
branches.  Achenia  of  the  ray  oblong,  cylindrical,  smooth ;  of  the  disk
abortive.  Pappus  of  the  ray-florets  in  several  rows  ;  of  the  disk,  in  one
series,  capillary. — Perennials  with  radical  leaves,  and  yellow  flowers  with
narrow  rays.

TRIBE  III.  Asteroide^e.  Aster.
Heads  radiate,  rarely  discoid.  Style  of  perfect  flowers  cylindrical  ;
branches  more  or  less  flattened ;  mostly  linear  or  lanceolate  above,
equally  pubescent  above  outside ;  conspicuous  stigmatic  lines,  terminat-
ing where  the  exterior  pubescence  commences,  not  confluent.  Leaves
alternate,  rarely  opposite.

SUB-TRIBE I. ASTERINE.E.
Heads  with  the  flowers  all  alike  and  perfect,  or  with  ligulate  rays;
receptacle  not  chaffy ;  anthers  without  tails  at  base.

5.  Aster.  Heads  many-flowered ;  ray-flowers  in  a  single  series,  fer-
tile. Involucre  oblong,  imbricate  ;  scales  loose,  often  with  green  leaf-
like tips,  the  outer  spreading ;  disk-flowers  tubular,  perfect.  Receptacle
flat,  alveolate.  Achenia  usually  more  or  less  compressed.  Pappus  sim-
ple, of  rough,  capillary  bristles. — A  large  genus  of  perennial,  rarely  an-
nual herbs,  with  alternate  leaves,  and  corymbed-panicled,  or  racemose
heads.  Ray-flowers  white,  purple,  or  blue  ;  those  of  the  disk  yellow,
often  changing  to  purple.

6.  Erigeron.  Heads  many-flowered,  subhemispherical  ;  ray-flowers
numerous,  in  several  series,  narrow,  linear,  pistillate  ;  disk-florets  tubular,
perfect;  some  of  the  external  ones  filiform-tubular  and  truncate,  pistil-
late. Receptacle  flat,  naked,  dotted  with  the  sockets  of  the  florets  fringed.
Scales  of  the  involucre  nearly  equal,  narrow,  in  almost  a  double  series.
Appendages  of  the  style  short  and  obtuse.  Achenia  compressed,  usually
pubescent  and  two-nerved. Pappus  a  single  row  of  capillary  bristles,

5


GO  Natural  Orders  of Plants.

with  minuter  ones  intermixed,  or  with  a  distinct  short  outer  pappus  of
little  bristles  or  chaffy  scales.— Herbs  with  alternate  leaves  and  cyanic
ray-flowers.

SUB-TRIBE  II. Solidage^e.
Heads  radiate  ;  rays  yellow,  rarely  yellowish-white.

7.  Solidago.  Heads  few,  many-flowered,  radiate  ;  ray-flowers  about
five,  pistillate,  in  one  row,  often  wide  apart ;  disk-florets  tubular,  five-
toothed,  perfect.  Scales  of  the  oblong  involucre  imbricated,  appressed,
without  foliaceous  or  herbaceous  tips.  Receptacle  narrow,  usually  alveo-
late. Achenia  many-ribbed,  rather  terete.  Pappus  simple,  of  numer-
ous scabrous  capillary  bristles. — Perennial  herbs,  with  erect  wand-like
stems,  alternate,  subsessile  cauline  leaves,  the  radical  ones  never  cordate,
and  yellow  flowers  in  terminal  or  axillary  racemes  or  clusters.  In  one
species  the  flowers  are  whitish.

8.  Inula.  Heads  many-flowered,  heterogamous ;  ray-florets  in  one
row,  pistillate,  sometimes  sterile  by  abortion,  usually  ligulate,  rarely
somewhat  tubular  and  trifid  ;  disk-flowers  perfect,  tubular,  five-toothed.
Involucre  imbricated  in  several  rows.  Receptacle  flat,  or  somewhat  con-
cave, naked.  Anthers  with  two  setse  at  the  base.  Achenium  without  a
beak,  tapering  or  angled.  Pappus  uniform,  in  one  row,  composed  of
scabrous,  capillary  bristles. — Perennial  herbs  with  alternate  leaves  and
yellow  flowers.

TRIBE  IV. Senecionide^e. Groundsel.

Heads  radiate  or  discoid.  Branches  of  the  style  linear,  hairy,  or
hispid  at  the  apex,  which  is  either  truncated,  or  produced  into  a  conical
or  elongated  appendage. Leaves  opposite  or  alternate.

SUB-TRIBE  I. Senecionejs.
Pappus  soft  and  capillary. Anthers  not  caudate ;  receptacle  naked.
Heads  radiate  or  discoid.

9.  Arnica.  Heads  many-flowered,  radiate ;  ray-florets  pistillate  and
often  furnished  with  sterile  stamens ;  disk-florets  tubular,  perfect,  five-
toothed.  Scales  of  the  bell-shaped  involucre  lanceolate,  equal,  some-
what in  two  series.  Receptacle  flat,  fringed  or  hairy.  Corolla-tube
shaggy  ;  style  of  the  disk  with  long  pubescent  branches,  either  truncated
or  terminated  by  a  short  one.  Achenia  terete,  fusiform,  somewhat  ribbed
and  hairy.  Pappus  a  single  row  of  rather  rigid  barbellate,  or  strongly
scabrous  capillary  bristles.— Perennial  herbs,  chiefly  of  cold  regions°or
mountains,  with  simple  stems,  opposite  leaves,  and  yellow  flowers.


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  (37

10.  Silphium.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  ray-florets  numerous,  pistillate,
fertile,  their  broad  flat  ovaries  imbricated  in  two  or  three  rows  ;  disk-
florets  perfect,  but  sterile.  Involucre  campanulate  ;  scales  in  several
series,  imbricated,  leafy  and  spreading  at  the  summit,  except  the  inner-
most, which  are  small  and  resemble  the  linear  chaff  of  the  flat  receptacle.
Achenia  broad,  flat,  parallel  with  the  involucral  scales,  surrounded  by  a
wing  which  is  notched  at  the  top,  destitute  of  pappus,  or  with  two  teeth
confluent  with  the  winged  margin  ;  achenia  of  the  disk  sterile  and  stalk-
like.— Stout,  coarse,  and  tall  perennial  herbs,  with  a  copious  resinous
juice,  and  large  corymbose-panicled,  yellow-flowered  heads.

11.  Parthenium.  Heads  many-flowered ;  ray-florets  five,  somewhat
ligulate,  fertile  ;  disk-florets  tubular,  sterile.  Involucre  hemispherical  ;
scales  in  two  series,  outer  ones  ovate,  inner  orbicular.  Receptacle  coni-
cal, chaffy.  Achenia  five,  compressed,  cohering  with  two  contiguous
paleae. — American  perennial  herbs  with  alternate  leaves.

12.  Rudbeckia.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  ray-florets  neutral.  Scales
of  the  involucre  nearly  equal,  leafy,  in  two  rows  of  six  each,  spreading.
Disk-florets  perfect.  Receptacle  conical  or  columnar,  with  short,  un-
armed, concave  chaff.  Achenia  quadrangular,  smooth,  not  margined,
flat  at  the  top,  with  no  pappus,  or  a  minute  crown-like  border,  four-
toothed. — Chiefly  perennial  herbs,  with  alternate  leaves,  large  terminal
heads,  and  generally  drooping,  yellow  rays.

13.  Echinacea.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  ray-florets  very  long,  droop-
ing, pistillate,  but  sterile ;  disk-flowers  perfect,  fertile.  Scales  of  the  in-
volucre imbricated  in  two  rows,  lanceolate,  spreading.  Receptacle  coni-
cal ;  the  lanceolate  chaff  tipped  with  a  cartilaginous  point,  longer  than
the  disk-flowers.  Achenia  thick  and  short,  four-sided.  Pappus  a  small
crown-form  toothed  border. — Perennials  with  stout  and  nearly  simple
stems,  leaves  three  to  five-nerved,  chiefly  alternate ;  ray-flowers  rose-
purple,  pendulous,  rather  persistent ;  disk-flowers  purplish.

14.  Helianthus.  Heads  many-flowered;  ray-flowers  several  or  many,
neutral ;  disk-flowers  perfect,  fertile.  Scales  of  the  involucre  imbricated
in  several  series  ;  receptacle  flattish  or  convex,  the  chaff  persistent,  em-
bracing the  achenia.  Pappus  very  deciduous,  of  two  thin  chaffy-awned
scales  on  the  principal  angles  of  the  achenium,  and  often  two  or  more
little  intermediate  scales.  Achenia  compressed  laterally,  or  four-sided,
neither  winged  nor  margined. — Coarse  and  rough  herbs,  mostly  peren-
nial, often  exuding  a  resin,  with  opposite  leaves,  the  upper  often  alter-
nate, mostly  tripli-veined,  with  solitary  or  corymbed  heads  and  yellow
rays  ;  disk  yellow  or  purple. H.  Annuus  is  annual.


68  Natural  Orders of  Plants.

15.  Helenium.  Heads  many -flowered,  radiate  ;  ray-florets  in  a  sin-
gle series,  pistillate,  cuneiform,  ligulate,  three  to  five-cleft  at  summit,
with  scarcely  any  tube,  fertile  ;  disk-florets  with  a  short  tube,  and  an  in-
flated, cylindrical,  four  or  five-toothed  limb.  Scales  of  the  involucre  in  a
double  series  ;  the  outer  linear  or  subulate,  foliaceous,  spreading  or  re-
laxed ;  the  inner  few  and  shorter,  chaffy.  Receptacle  convex,  globose,
or  oblong,  naked  in  the  disk,  and  chaffy  in  the  ray  only.  Branches  of
the  style  a  little  dilated  and  obtuse  at  tip.  Achenia  obovate-turbinate  or
top-shaped,  striate  or  ribbed,  villous  on  the  ribs.  Pappus  of  five  to  eight
membranous,  apiculate,  or  awned  scales. — Plants  with  alternate,  decur-
rent  leaves,  minutely  punctate,  and  yellow  ray-flowers.

16.  Anthemis.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  florets  of  the  ray  in  one  row,
ligulate,  fertile,  rarely  none  or  somewhat  tubular;  disk-florets  perfect,
tubular,  five-toothed.  Scales  of  the  involucre  imbricated  in  a  few  series.
Receptacle  convex,  oblong,  or  conical ;  covered  with  membranous  chaff
between  the  flowers.  Branches  of  the  style  without  appendages  at  the
apex.  Achenia  terete,  or  obtusely  quadrangular,  striate,  smooth.  Pap-
pus either  wanting,  or  a  very  minute  entire  or  halved  membrane,  some-
times auriculate  at  the  inside.

17.  Maruta.  Heads  many-flowered;  ray-florets  ligulate,  neutral;
disk-florets  five-toothed,  perfect,  fertile.  Involucre  hemispherical,  shorter
than  the  disk ;  scales  imbricated  in  a  few  series.  Receptacle  conical  or
convex,  more  or  less  chaffy  between  the  flowers,  or  only  at  the  summit.
Tube  of  corolla  flat,  obcompressed,  two-winged,  without  appendage  at
the  base  ;  that  of  the  ray  continuous  with  the  sterile  ovary,  and  with  an
oblong  ray.  Style  of  the  disk  with  branches  destitute  of  appendages.
Achenia  obovoid  or  obpyramidal,  ribbed,  smooth,  bald,  with  a  small
epigynous  disk,  and  a  terminal  areola. — Annual  acrid  herbs,  with  a
strong  odor,  alternate  and  much  divided  leaves,  white  rays,  turned
down,  and  yellow  disk.

18.  Achillea.  Heads  many-flowered;  rays  few,  fertile.  Involucre
ovoid  ;  scales  unequal,  imbricated.  Receptacle  flat,  sometimes  elongated,
chaffy.  Achenia  oblong,  obcompressed,  margined,  destitute  of  pap-
pus. —  Perennial  herbs,  with  much  divided,  alternate  leaves  and  small
corymbose  heads.

19.  Anacyclus.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  ray-florets  pistillate,  sterile,
somewhat  ligulate,  rarely  tubular ;  disk-florets  perfect,  five-toothed.
Receptacle  conical  or  convex,  chaffy.  Involucre  in  few  rows,  subcampan-
ulate,  shorter  than  the  disk.  All  the  florets  with  an  obcompressed,  two-
winged,  exappendiculate  tube. Style  of  the  disk  with  exappendic'ulate


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  69

branches.  Achenia  flat,  obcompressed,  with  broad,  entire  wino-s.  Pap-
pus short,  irregular,  toothed,  somewhat  continuous  with  the  wings  on
the  inner  side. — A  small  genus  separated  from  Anthemis,  to  which  it  is
very  closely  allied.

20.  Leucanthemum.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  the  rays  numerous,  fer-
tile ;  disk-corollas  with  a  flattened  tube.  Scales  of  the  broad  and  flat
involucre  imbricated,  with  scarious  margins.  Receptacle  flattish,  naked.
Achenia  of  the  disk  and  ray  similar,  striate,  destitute  of  pappus. — Peren-
nial herbs,  with  alternate,  toothed  or  pinnatiiid  leaves,  and  large,  terminal
single  heads  ;  rays  white,  disk  yellow.

21.  Chrysanthemum.  Involucre  hemispherical,  imbricate ;  the  scales
with  membranous  margins.  Receptacle  naked  ;  pappus  none. — Chinese
ornamental  plants,  with  alternate,  lobed  leaves.

22.  Pyrethrum.  Involucre  hemispherical,  imbricate ;  scales  with
membranous  margins.  Receptacle  naked.  Pappus  a  membranous  mar-
gin crowning  the  achenia. — Chiefly  perennial  herbs  with  alternate  leaves.

23.  Bidens.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  either  homogamous  and  discoi-
dal,  or  more  frequently  both  the  one  and  the  other  in  the  same  species.
Ray-florets,  few  or  none,  pistillate,  ligulate,  neuter ;  disk-florets  perfect.
Involucral  scales  in  two  rows,  the  outer  commonly  large  and  foliaceous.
Receptacle  flattish  ;  the  concave  chaff  deciduous  with  the  fruit.  Branches
of  the  style  terminated  by  a  short  cone.  Achenia  flattened  parallel  with
the  scales  of  the  involucre  ;  or  slender  and  four-sided,  crowned  with  two
or  more  rigid  and  persistent  awns  which  are  barbed  downwardly. — An-
nuals or  perennials  with  opposite  various  leaves,  and  mostly  yellow
flowers.

24.  Senecio.  Heads  many-flowered,  discoid,  with  the  flowers  all
perfect  and  tubular,  or  mostly  radiate,  the  rays  pistillate.  Scales  of  the
involucre  in  a  single  row,  withered  at  the  points,  or  with  a  few  bractlets
at  the  base.  Receptacle  flat,  not  chaffy.  Pappus  of  numerous  very  soft
and  slender  capillary  bristles. — A  vast  genus,  embracing  600  species  of
herbs  and  shrubs,  with  alternate  leaves,  and  solitary  or  corymbed  heads.
Flowers  chiefly  yellow.

SUB- TRIBE  II. Gnaphalinejs.
Heads  all  discoid.

25.  Artemisia.  Heads  discoid,  few  or  many-flowered,  heterogamous,
with  the  central  flowers  perfect  and  five-toothed ;  and  the  marginal
pistillate  in  a  single  series  with  a  tubular, three-toothed  corolla  ; or


70  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

sometimes  homogamous,  with  the  flowers  all  perfect.  Involucral  scales
imbricated,  mostly  dry,  with  scarious  margins.  Receptacle  small,  with-
out paleae,  flattish  or  convex,  naked  or  fringed  with  hairs.  Achenia
obovoid,  bald,  with  a  minute  epigynous  disk,  and  destitute  of  pappus. —
Herbs  or  shrubby  plants,  bitter  and  aromatic,  with  alternate  leaves,  and
yellowish  or  purplish  flowers  in  small  spicate  or  racemosed  heads.

26.  Tanacetum.  Heads  discoid,  homogamous,  with  the  flowers  all
tubular  and  perfect,  or  heterogamous;  the  marginal  flowers  chiefly  pistil-
late, in  a  single  series,  usually  three  or  four-toothed,  forming  a  kind  of
ray.  Involucral  scales  minute,  dry,  imbricated  ;  involucre  hemispherical.
Corollas  of  the  disk  four  to  five-toothed.  Receptacle  naked,  convex.
Achenia  sessile,  angular  or  ribbed,  smooth,  with  a  large  epigynous  disk.
Pappus  either  wanting,  or  minute,  membranous,  entire  or  toothed,  often
unequal ;  coronet-shaped. — Bitter  and  acrid  strong-scented  plants,  with
alternate  and  much  divided  leaves,  and  solitary  or  corymbosed  heads  of
yellow  flowers.

27.  Gnaphalium.  Heads  discoid,  heterogamous  ;  the  flowers  all  tub-
ular ;  the  outer  pistillate  and  very  slender,  the  central  perfect.  Involu-
cral scales  dry  and  scarious,  white  or  colored,  imbricated  in  several
rows.  Receptacle  flat,  naked.  Pappus  a  single  row  of  rough,  capillary
bristles. — Woolly  herbs,  with  sessile  or  decurrent  leaves,  alternate,
entire,  and  clustered  or  corymbed  heads.

28.  Antennaria.  Heads  many-flowered,  dioecious  or  nearly  so;  the
flowers  all  tubular;  pistillate  corollas  filiform.  Involucral  scales  imbri-
cated, appressed,  scarious  and  dry,  white  or  colored.  Receptacle  sub-
convex  or  nearly  flat,  not  chaffy,  alveolate.  Achenia  somewhat  terete.
Pappus  a  single  row  of  bristles,  which  in  the  fertile  flowers  are  capil-
lary, and  in  the  sterile  thickened  and  club-shaped  or  barbellate  at  the
summit.— Perennial  tomentose  herbs,  with  alternate,  entire  leaves,  and
corymbose  heads  ;  corolla  yellowish.

29.  Erechthites.  Heads  many-flowered,  discoid,  the  flowers  all
tubular  and  fertile  ;  the  marginal  pistillate  with  a  slender  corolla.  Invo-
lucre cylindrical,  simple,  slightly  calculate ;  scales  in  a  single  row  linear
acute,  with  a  few  small  bractlets  at  the  base.  Receptacle  naked.  Achenia
oblong,  tapering  at  the  end.  Pappus  copious,  of  very  fine  and  white
soft  ha.rs.-Erect  and  coarse  annuals,  with  simple,  alternate  leaves  and
whitish  flowers  in  paniculate-corymbed  heads.

30.  Ambrosia. Heads  heterocephalous; sterile and fertile  fl
occupying  different  heads  on  the  same  plant;  ^f^ltZZ


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  71

together,  and  sessile  in  the  axil  of  the  leaves  or  bracts  at  the  base  of
the  racemes,  or  spikes  of  sterile  heads.  Sterile  involucres  flatfish  or  top-
shaped,  composed  of  seven  to  twelve  scales  united  into  a  cup,  containing
five  to  twenty  funnel-form  staminate  flowers ;  anthers  approximate,  but
distinct;  receptacle  naked.  Fertile  involucres  oblong  or  top-shaped,
closed,  pointed,  and  usually  with  four  to  eight  tubercles  or  horns  near
the  top  in  one  row,  inclosing  a  single  flower  which  is  composed  of  a
pistil  only  and  no  corolla  ;  styles  two;  branches  of  the  style  elongated.
Achenia  ovoid  ;  pappus  none. — Coarse  annual  weeds,  with  mostly  opposite
leaves,  or  alternate  and  lobed,  and  inconspicuous  greenish  or  whitish
flowers.

TRIBE  V. CtnarejE.

Heads  ovoid,  discoid,  rarely  radiate,  homogamous,  rarely  dioecious,
or  heterogamous,  with  the  marginal  flowers  in  a  single  series.  Style  in
the  perfect  flowers  often  tumid  near  the  summit ;  the  branches  distinct
or  concreted,  minutely  pubescent  externally  ;  the  stigmatic  lines  reach-
ing their  apex  and  there  confluent.

31.  Centaurea.  Heads  many -flowered,  discoid;  the  flowers  all
tubular,  the  marginal  mostly  falsely  radiate  and  larger,  sterile.  Recep-
tacle bristly.  Involucre  imbricated,  the  scales  margined  or  appendaged.
Achenia  compressed,  with  a  lateral  hilum  in  front.  Pappus  wanting,  or
composed  of  filiform  scabrous  bristles  in  several  rows,  the  inner  row
being  smaller  and  converging. — Herbs  with  alternate  leaves  and  single
heads.

32.  Calendula.  Heads  many-flowered,  radiate  ;  florets  of  the  ray
ligulate,  pistillate  ;  disk-florets  tubular  and  sterile ;  the  corolla  of  all
hispid  at  the  base.  Involucre  of  many  equal  leaves,  in  few  rows,  with
distinct  scales.  Receptacle  naked,  flat.  Anthers  caudate,  subulate,
short.  Style  ending  in  a  knotty  hispid  cone,  bifid  at  the  point  ;  that  of
the  ray  short,  with  two  long,  slender  stigmas,  smooth  below,  glandular
above.  Ovary  arcuate,  fertile.  Achenia  produced  by  the  ligulate
florets,  all  without  pappus,  usually  arranged  in  two  or  three  rows  ;  the
outer  more  or  less  rostrate  ;  the  intermediate  truncate  at  the  apex,
prickly  at  the  back,  more  or  less  curved,  with  their  sides  extended  into
an  entire  concave  or  flat  incised  membrane  ;  the  innermost  annular  or
incurved,  muricated  at  the  back,  all  fertile,  especially  the  innermost.
Aclienia  of  the  disk  membranous. — Annual  herbs  with  alternate  leaves.

33.  Cartiiamus.  Heads  discoid.  Involucre  dilated  at  base ;  scales
imbricated,  closely  applied  to  each  other  below,  but  separated  and  folia-
ceous above. Flowers all tubular and perfect. Filaments smooth.


72  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

Receptacle  silky  ; achenia  four-angled, destitute  of  a  pappus. — Herbs
with  alternate  leaves  and  yellow  flowers.

34.  Cnicus.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  the  ray -flowers  sterile,  slender,
nearly  equal  to  the  disk.  Involucre  ovoid,  ventricose  ;  scales  coriaceous,
appressed,  produced  into  a  long  and  rigid  pinnated  spinose  appendage.
Receptacle  densely  clothed  with  capillary  bristles.  Achenia  terete,
smooth,  strongly  striate,  with  a  large,  lateral  basilar  areola.  Pap>pus
triple,  the  outer  being  the  horny  crenated  margin  of  the  fruit;  the
middle  one  of  ten  long  stiff  hairs  ;  the  inner  of  the  same  number  of
short  bristles. — An  annual,  somewhat  woolly  herb,  with  clasping  leaves,
and  yellow  flowers  in  bracteate  heads.

35.  Cynara.  Heads  discoid,  homogamous.  Involucre  dilated,  imbri-
cate ;  scales  fleshy,  emarginate,  pointed.  Receptacle  setaceous.  Pappus
plumose  ;  achenia  not  beaked. — Exotics.

36.  Cirsium.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  the  flowers'  all  tubular,  perfect
and  similar,  or  rarely  imperfectly  dioecious.  Involucre  subglobose,  of
many  rows  of  spinose-pointed,  imbricated  scales.  Receptacle  clothed
with  soft  bristles  or  hairs  ;  style  scarcely  divided.  Achenia  oblong,
smooth,  flattish,  not  ribbed.  Pappus  of  numerous  bristles  united  into  a
ring  at  the  base,  plumose  to  the  middle. — Herbs  with  sessile,  alternate
leaves,  the  margins  and  teeth  prickly,  and  cyanic  flowers  in  large  ter-
minal heads.

37.  Lappa.  Heads  many-flowered  ;  flowers  all  perfect  and  similar.
Involucre  globose  ;  scales  imbricated,  coriaceous,  appressed  at  the  base,
then  subulate,  with  a  horny,  hooked,  inflexed  point.  Receptacle  rather
fleshy,  flat,  with  stiff,  subulate  fringes.  Corollas  five-cleft,  regular,  with
a  ten-nerved  tube.  Stamens  with  papillose  filaments  ;  the  anthers  ter-
minated by  filiform  appendages,  and  with  subulate  tails  at  the  base.
Stigmas  few  at  the  apex,  diverging,  curved  outward.  Fruit  or  ac/ienia
oblong,  laterally  compressed,  smooth,  transversely  wrinkled  ;  the  areola
at  their  base  hardly  oblique.  Pappus  short,  in  many  rows ;  the  hairs
deciduous,  filiform,  rough,  not  collected  into  a  ring. — Coarse  biennials,
with  large  cordate,  petiolate  and  alternate  leaves,  and  purple  flowers,
varying  to  white,  in  small,  solitary,  or  somewhat  corymbosed  heads.

SUB-ORDER II. Liguliflorjj. Succory.

Flowers  all  perfect,  ligulate,  in  a  radiatiform  or  radiant  head.  Pollen
scabrous  and  many-sided,  usually  dodecahedral.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  73

TRIBE VI. ClCHORACBiE.

Style  cylindraceous  above  ;  the  branches  uniformly  pubescent ;  stig-
matic  lines  terminating  below  or  near  the  middle  of  the  branches.
Plants  with  a  milky  juice. Leaves  alternate.

38.  Cichorium.  Heads  many-flowered.  Involucral  scales  in  two
rows,  the  outer  of  five  short,  leafy,  spreading  scales,  the  inner  of  about
eight  or  more,  linear,  equal,  converging  scales.  Receptacle  naked.
Achenia  beakless,  obscurely  five-sided,  turbinate,  striate.  Pappus  equal,
composed  of  numerous  very  small  chaffy  scales,  forming  a  short  crown. —
Branching  perennials,  with  the  root-leaves  toothed  or  pinnatifid  ;  flowers
showy,  bright  blue  in  sessile  axillary  and  terminal  heads.

39.  Lactuca.  Heads  few  to  several  flowered.  Involucre  cylindrical,
calyculate-imbiicated  with  two  or  more  series  of  scales  of  unequal
lengths,  membranous  at  the  margin.  Receptacle  naked.  Achenia  ob-
compressed,  parallel  to  the  scales  of  the  involucre,  wingless,  abruptly
contracted  into  a  long  thread-form  beak,  bearing  a  copious  and  fugacious
pappus  of  very  soft  and  white  capillary  bristles. — Caulescent  herbs,
with  entire  or  pinnatifid  leaves,  and  variable-colored  flowers  in  panicled
heads.

40.  Hieractum.  Heads  many-flowered.  Scales  of  involucre  imbri-
cated, or  only  in  twTo  series  ;  the  outer  short  and  somewhat  calyculate.
Receptacle  scrobiculate  or  somewhat  areolar,  fimbriate.  Achenia  oblong
or  columnar,  often  subclavate,  rarely  fusiform,  striate  or  ribbed,  not
rostrate.  Pappus  a  single  row  of  persistent,  tawny,  fragile,  capillary
bristles. — Perennial  herbs,  with  alternate,  entire  or  toothed  leaves,  and
mostly  yellow  flowers,  single  or  in  panicled  heads.

41.  Nabalus.  Heads  few  or  many-flowered.  Involucre  cylindrical,
of  five  to  fourteen  linear  scales  in  a  single  row,  calyculate,  with  a  few
short,  appressed  bractlets  at  base.  Receptacle  naked.  Achenia  linear-
oblong,  striate,  or  grooved,  smooth,  not  beaked.  Pappus  of  copious
straw-color  or  brownish,  persistent,  capillary,  roughish  bristles  in  two
rows. — Perennial  herbs  with  thick,  tuberous,  bitter  roots,  very  variable
leaves,  and  greenish-white  or  cream-colored  flowers,  often  tinged  with
purple,  in  racemose-panicled  niostty  nodding  heads.

42.  Taraxacum.  Heads  many-flowered.  Involucre  double,  the  outer
of  short  scales,  appressed,  the  upper  of  long  linear  scales,  erect  in  a
single  row.  Receptacle  naked.  Achenia  oblong,  ribbed  or  angled,
roughened  on  the  ribs,  the  apex  prolonged  into  a  very  slender  thread-
like beak,  bearing the pappus of  copious soft and white capillary


74.  Natural  Orders  of Plants.

bristles.— Perennial aeaulescent plants, with pinnatifid or runcmate
leaves,  and  yellow  flowers.

ORDER  LV1I.  Lobbliace^.  Lobelia.
Herbs  or  shrubs  often  with  milky  juice.  Leaves  alternate,  without
stipules.  Flowers  axillary  and  terminal.  Calyx  more  or  less  adherent
to  the  ovary ;  limb  five-lobed  or  entire.  Corolla  persistent,  irregularly
five-cleft,  usually  appearing  bilabiate,  cleft  on  one  side  nearly  or  quite
to  the  base,  the  tube  inserted  into  the  calyx.  Stamens  five,  alternate
with  the  corolla  lobes  ;  the  upper  part  of  the  filaments,  and  the  anthers
coherent  into  a  tube ;  pollen  ovoid.  Ovary  inferior  or  semi-superior,
supporting  a  single  style  with  a  fringed  stigma.  Fruit  capsular,  two  or
three,  rarely  one-celled,  usually  dehiscing  at  the  apex.  Seeds  numer-
ous, anatropous,  with  a  fleshy  albumen  and  straight  embryo.

1.  Lobelia.  Calyx  five-lobed,  with  a  short  ovoid  or  hemispherical
tube.  Corolla  with  a  straight  tube,  split  down  on  the  upper  side ;  the
limb  somewhat  bilabiate ;  the  upper  lip  of-  two  rather  erect  lobes,  the
lower  spreading  and  three-cleft.  Anthers  united,  all  bearded,  or  the  two
lower  only ;  stigma  two-lobed.  Pool  capsular,  two-celled,  many-seeded,
opening  at  the  top ;  seeds  minute. — Herbaceous  plants,  possessing  acrid,
emetic  and  relaxant  properties;  not  poisonous,  nor  properly  narcotic.
The  flowers  are  axillary  and  solitary,  or  in  terminal,  bracted  racemes.

ORDER  LVIII.  Ericaceae.  Heath.
Herbs  or  shrubs  with  simple,  alternate  or  opposite,  entire  or  toothed,
mostly  evergreen  leaves,  without  stipules.  Inflorescence  various.  Calyx
inferior  or  superior,  five-cleft,  seldom  four  or  six,  rarely  entire,  persist-
ent. Corolla  monopetalous,  lobed  like  the  calyx,  with  an  imbricated
sestivation.  Stamens  generally  distinct,  equal  in  number  to  the  lobes  of
the  corolla,  or  twice  as  many.  Anthers  two-celled,  generally  opening
by  pores,  often  appendaged.  Ovary  superior  or  inferior,  many-celled.
Style  solitary,  simple ;  stigma  simple,  toothed,  or  three-cleft.  Fruit
capsular  or  baccate,  four  to  many-celled.  Seeds  numerous,  small,  ana-
tropous. Embryo  straight  in  the  axis  of  a  fleshy  albumen.

SUB-ORDER  I. Vaccines.
Calyx-tube  adherent  to  the  ovary,  becoming  a  berry  or  berry-like  fruit,
crowned  with  the  calyx-teeth. Shrubs  with  scattered  leaves.

1.  Vaccinium.  Limb  of  calyx  four  or  five-toothed.  Corolla  urceo-
late,  campanulate,  or  cylindric ;  limb  four  or  five-cleft,  reflexed.  Sta-
mens eight  or  ten,  generally  included  ;  anthers  sometimes  two-awned  on
the  back;  the  cells  separate  and  prolonged  into  a  tube  above,  openino-


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  75

by  a  hole  at  the  apex.  Berry  four  or  five-celled,  globose,  many-
seeded,  surmounted  by  the  remains  of  the  calyx. — Shrubs  or  undershrubs
with  white  or  reddish,  solitary  or  racemose  flowers;  fruit  edible.

2.  Oxycoccus.  Calyx  superior,  four-cleft.  Corolla  four-parted,  with
sublinear,  revolute  segments.  Stamens  eight,  convergent;  anthers
tubular,  two-parted,  opening  by  oblique  pores.  Berry  globose,  many-
seeded. —  Slender,  prostrate  shrubs,  with  alternate,  coriaceous  leaves,
and  edible  fruit.

SUB-ORDER  II. Ericinejs.

Ovary  free  from  the  calyx.  Testa  conformed  to  the  nucleus  of  the
seed.  Fruit  capsular  or  baccate.  Leaves  often  evergreen.  Mostly
shrubs.

3.  Arctostaphylos.  Calyx  five-parted,  persistent.  Corolla,  ovate
and  urn-shaped,  with  a  short,  revolute,  five-toothed  limb.  Stamens  ten,
included ;  anthers  with  two  reflexed  awns  on  the  back  near  the  apex,
opening  by  terminal  pores.  Ovary  globose,  depressed,  surrounded  by
three  scales;  style  short;  stigma  obtuse.  Fruit  globose,  drupaceous,
five  to  ten-celled,  cells  one-seeded.  —  Trailing  shrubs  with  alternate
leaves,  and  scaly-bracted  nearly  white  flowers  in  terminal  racemes  or
clusters.

4.  Andromeda.  Calyx  minute,  five-parted,  persistent.  Corolla
ovoid-cylindric,  the  limb  five,  rarely  four-cleft,  reflexed.  Stamens  ten,
rarely  eight ;  anthers  awned  or  awnless,  short,  opening  by  terminal
pores  or  slits.  Capsule  five-celled,  five-valved,  the  dissepiments  pro-
duced from  the  middle  of  the  valves,  many-seeded. — Erect  or  prostrate
shrubs,  with  evergreen  or  deciduous  alternate  leaves,  and  mostly
racemed  or  clustered  flowers.

5.  Gaultheria.  Calyx  campanulate,  five-cleft,  with  two  bracts  at
the  base.  Corolla  ovoid-tubular ;  limb  with  five,  small,  revolute  lobes.
Stamens  ten,  included ;  filaments  hairy ;  anther-cells  each  two-awned  at
the  summit,  opening  by  a  terminal  pore.  Capsule  depressed,  five-lobed,
five-celled,  five-valved,  many-seeded,  inclosed  when  ripe  by  the  calyx
which  thickens  and  becomes  a  globular,  fleshy  red  berry.  —  Scarcely
shrubby  plants,  with  alternate,  evergreen  leaves,  and  axillary,  nearly
white  flowers  ;  pedicels  bibracteolate.

6.  Epig^ea.  Calyx  large,  five  parted,  with  three  bracts  at  base.
Corolla  hypocrateriform ;  tube  villous  within,  as  long  as  the  ovate-lance-
olate, pointed,  and  scale-like  nearly  distinct  sepals;  limb  five-parted,
spreading. Stamens  ten ;  filaments  filiform ; anthers oblong,  awnless,


76  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

opening-  lengthwise.  Capsule  depressed-globular,  five-lobed,  five-celled,
many-seeded. — Prostrate  or  trailing  scarcely  shrubby  plants,  bristly  with
rusty  hairs,  with  evergreen  and  reticulated  rounded  alternate  leaves,
and  rose-colored  flowers  in  small  axillary  clusters,  subtended  by  scaly
bracts.

7.  Kalmia.  Calyx  minute,  five-parted,  small,  equal,  herbaceous.
Corolla  between  rotate  and  campanulate,  five-lobed,  furnished  on  the
underside  with  ten  cornute  prominences  and  as  many  cavities,  in  which
the  anthers  are  concealed  until  they  begin  to  shed  their  pollen  ;  filaments
filiform,  elastic.  Capsule  globose,  five-celled,  many-seeded,  with  a  sep-
ticidal  dehiscence. — Mostly  smooth  evergreen  shrubs,  with  alternate  or
opposite  entire  coriaceous  leaves,  and  white  or  red  flowers  in  umbel-like
corymbs;  pedicels  bracted;  flowers  naked. Poisonous  to  some  animals.

8.  Rhododendron.  Calyx  deeply  five-parted,  persistent,  small,  equal,
herbaceous.  Corolla  campanulate,  or  sub-infundibuliform,  rather  un-
equal, five-cleft.  Stamens  ten,  rarely  fewer,  commonly  declinate  and
exserted;  anthers  without  appendages,  opening  by  two  terminal  pores.
Capsule  five-celled,  five-valved,  opening  at  the  summit;  dissepiments
introflexed  from  the  margin  of  the  valves. — Shrubs  with  evergreen  or
deciduous,  entire,  alternate  leaves  ;  flowers  variously  shaded  from  blue
through  purple  to  white,  and  mostly  in  terminal  corymbose  clusters.

9.  Ledum.  Calyx  minute,  five-toothed.  Corolla,  of  five  obovate  and
spreading  distinct  petals.  Stamens  five  to  ten,  exserted  ;  anthers  open-
ing by  two  terminal  pores.  Capsule  five-celled,  five-valved,  splitting
from  the  base  upward,  many-seeded.  —  Low  evergreen  shrubs  with
alternate,  evergreen,  entire,  ferruginous-tomentose  beneath,  and  coria-
ceous leaves,  the  margins  revolute,  and  slightly  fragrant  when  bruised.
Flowers  white,  in  terminal  corymbs.

SUB-ORDER  III. Ptrole^e.
Ovary  free  from  the  calyx. Petals  nearly  distinct. Fruit  a  capsule.
Mostly  herbaceous. (Pyrolacece  of  Lindlcy.)

10.  Pyrola.  Calyx  five-parted,  persistent.  Petals  five,  concave  and
more  or  less  converging,  deciduous.  Stamens  ten  ;  filaments  awl-shaped,
naked ;  anthers  large,  turned  outward  and  inverted  in  the  bud,  soon
erect,  opening  by  two  pores  at  the  scarcely,  if  at  all  two-horned  apex,
more  or  less  four-celled.  Style  long,  thick,  and  generally  turned  to  one
side  ;  stigmas  five,  either  projecting  or  confluent  with  the  rinff  which
surrounds  them.  Capsule  five-celled,  five-valved,  from  the  base  up-
ward, opening  at  the  angles,  many-seeded;  the  valves  woolly  on  the
edges. — Low  and  smooth  perennial  herbs, with  running  subterranean


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  77

shoots,  bearing  rounded  and  petioled  evergreen  root-leaves,  and  a  simple
raceme  of  nodding  flowers,  on  an  upright  scaly-bracted  scape.

11.  Ciiimaphila.  Calyx  five-parted.  Petals  five,  spreading.  Sta-
mens ten  ;  filaments  dilated  and  hairy  in  the  middle  ;  anthers  as  in
Pyrola.  Style  short,  inversely  conical,  immersed  in  the  depressed  sum-
mit of  the  globular  ovary;  stigma  broad  and  orbicular,  the  border  ob-
tusely five-toothed.  Capsule  five-celled,  opening  from  the  apex
downward  ;  valves  bearing  the  dissepiments  in  the  middle,  not  united
by  a  connecting  web,  and  not  woolly  on  the  edges. — Low,  nearly  herba-
ceous plants,  with  running  underground  shoots,  and  cauline,  serrate,
evergreen,  opposite  or  irregularly- whorled  leaves,  and  white  or  purplish,
fragrant  flowers,  terminal.

SUB-ORDER  IV. Monotrope^e.
Ovary  free  from  the  calyx. Leafless  herbs,  destitute  of  verdure.

12.  Monotropa.  Calyx  represented  by  one  to  four  scale-like  decidu-
ous bracts,  the  lowest  rather  distant  from  the  corolla.  Corolla  of  five
distinct,  erect,  fleshy  petals,  which  are  narrowed  below  and  have  a
small  nectariferous  pit  at  the  base.  Stamens  ten  ;  filaments  persistent,
alternating  with  ten  reflexed  appendages  of  the  torus ;  anthers  short  on
the  thickened  apex  of  the  hairy  filament,  two-celled,  opening  by  trans-
verse chinks.  Stigma  orbicular,  five-crenate,  beardless.  Capsule  five-
celled,  and  seeds  as  in  Pyrola. — A  singular  fleshy  and  scentless  herb,
white  throughout,  the  low  stems  rising  in  a  cluster  from  a  matted  mass
of  fibrous  roots,  with  scales  like  the  petals  in  place  of  leaves,  bearing  a
solitary  terminal  flower,  which  is  at  first  nodding,  but  becomes  upright
in  fruit.

13.  Pterospora.  Calyx  five-parted.  Corolla  ovate,  urn-shaped,
five-toothed,  reflexed,  and  persistent.  Stamens  ten;  anthers  peltate,
two-celled,  two-awned  on  the  back,  opening  lengthwise.  Style  short ;
stigma,  five-lobed.  Capsule  globose,  depressed,  five-lobed,  five-celled,
loculicidal.  Seeds  very  numerous,  ovoid,  minute,  tapering  to  each  end,
the  apex  expanded  into  a  broad  reticulated  wing,  many  times  larger  than
the  nucleus. — A  stout  and  simple  purplish-brown  clammy -pubescent,
perennial  herb;  leafless,  the  wand-like  stem  furnished  toward  the  base
with  scattered  lanceolate  scales  in  place  of  leaves,  bearing  above  many
nodding  white  floAvers,  like  those  of  Andromeda,  in  a  long  bracted
raceme.

ORDER  LIX. Aquifoliace^e. Holly.
Shrubs  or  trees  with  evergreen,  alternate  or  opposite,  simple,  coria-
ceous, exstipulate  leaves. Flowers  small,  white  or  greenish,  axillary,  soli-


78  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

tary  or  clustered,  sometimes  dioecious.  Se])als  four  to  six,  imbricate  in
aestivation.  Corolla  regular,  four  to  six-parted,  hypogynous,  imbricate  in
aestivation.  Stamens  inserted  into  the  tube  of  the  corolla,  and  alternate
with  its  segments ;  filaments  erect ;  anthers  adnate,  two-celled,  with  a
longitudinal  dehiscence.  Disk  none.  Ovary  fleshy,  superior,  a  little
truncated,  with  two  to  six  or  more  cells ;  ovules  solitary,  pendulous,
often  from  a  cup-shaped  funiculus ;  stigma  subsessile,  lobed.  Fruit  dru-
paceous, fleshy,  indehiscent,  with  from  two  to  six  or  more  stony  seeds.
Seeds  suspended  and  solitary  in  each  cell,  nearly  sessile,  anatropous,
with  a  minute  embryo  in  a  large  fleshy  albumen.

1.  Ilex.  Calyx  small,  four  or  five-toothed,  persistent.  Corolla
larger  than  the  calyx,  sub-rotate,  four  or  five-parted;  petals  oval,  or
obovate,  obtuse.  Stamens  four  or  five,  alternate  with  the  petals ;  fila-
ments awl-shaped,  shorter  than  the corolla;  anthers  small,  two-lobed.

Ovary  roundish,  four-celled,  each  with  one  ovule ;  style  none  ;  stigmas
four,  sessile,  obtuse,  permanent.  Fruit  a  berry,  globular,  four-celled  ;
seeds  solitary  in  each  cell,  oblong,  pointed,  angular  at  the  inside,  rounded
externally. — Shrubs  and  trees  with  alternate  and  spinose-dentate  leaves ;
flowers  often  dioecious  by  abortion.

2.  Prinos.  Flowers  often  dioecious  or  polygamous.  Calyx  mostly
six-cleft,  small,  persistent.  Corolla  deeply  six-cleft,  rotate.  Stamens
six ;  filaments  subulate,  erect,  shorter  than  the  corolla;  anthers  oblong,
obtuse.  Ovary  superior,  ovate,  bearing  a  single  style  with  an  obtuse
stigma.  Fruit  a  berry,  with  six  stones  or  bony  seeds,  which  are  convex
on  one  side,  and  angular  at  the  other. — Shrubs  with  alternate  leaves,  and
axillary  or  terminal  flowers.

ORDER  LX.  Ebenace^e.  Ebony.
Trees  or  shrubs  without  a  milky  juice,  and  with  a  heavy  wood.  Leaves
alternate,  exstipulate,  coriaceous,  entire.  Inflorescence  axillary.  Flowers
by  abortion  dioecious,  seldom  perfect.  Calyx  free,  monopetalous,  three
to  seven-lobed,  persistent.  Corolla  regular,  monopetalous,  three  to  seven-
lobed,  deciduous,  sericeous,  imbricate  in  aestivation.  Stamens  twice  to
four  times  as  many  as  the  lobes  of  the  corolla,  unequal ;  filaments  short;
anthers  free,  introrse,  two-celled,  dehiscing  longitudinally.  Ovary  free,
three  to  twelve-celled,  usually  hispid.  Styles  usually  with  as  many
divisions  as  cells  in  ovary.  Stigmas  small,  terminating  the  styles  or  the
divisions  of  the  style.  Fruit  a  fleshy,  oval,  or  globose  berry,  three  to
many-celled  and  seeded  ;  or,  by  abortion,  one-celled  and  seeded.  Seeds
usually  compressed  laterally,  with  a  smooth  coriaceous  testa,  anatro-
pous ;  the  embryo  shorter  than  the  hard  albumen.

1.  Diospyros.  Flowers  dioecious.  Calyx  four  to  six-cleft.  Corolla
tubular  or  campanulate,  four  to  six-cleft,  convolute  in  aestivation. Males '


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  79

stamens  eight  to  many,  mostly  sixteen,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the
corolla;  filaments  shorter  than  the  anthers,  sometimes  every  other  one
bearing  two  anthers  ;  anthers  subulate,  ffxed  by  the  base.  Ovary  abor-
tive ;  style  none.  Females;  stamens  mostly  eight,  without  anthers.
Style  two  to  four-parted  ;  stigmas  four  or  five.  Fruit  an  ovoid  or  globose
berry,  succulent,  four  to  twelve,  mostly  eight-celled  ;  cells  one-seeded  ;
seeds  compressed. — Fertile  flowers  axillary  and  solitary;  the  sterile
smaller  and  often  clustered.


ORDER  LXI. Styracace^e. Styrax.

Trees  or  shrubs  with  alternate,  simple,  exstipulate  leaves,  becom-
ing yellow  on  drying.  Flowers  or  racemes  solitary,  axillary,  bracteate.
Calyx  inferior  or  superior,  five-parted,  persistent.  Corolla  monopetalous,
often  differing  in  the  number  of  its  divisions  from  those  of  the  calyx;
imbricated  in  aestivation.  Stamens  unequal,  more  or  less  coherent  ;  an-
thers innate,  two-celled.  Ovary  superior,  or  adhering  to  the  calyx,  two
to  five-celled,  the  partitions  sometimes  hardly  reaching  the  center  ;  style
simple  ;  stigma  somewhat  capitate.  Fruit  drupaceous,  surmounted  by
or  inclosed  in  the  calyx,  with  one  to  five  cells,  and  seeds.

1.  Styrax.  Calyx  sub-campanulate,  nearly  entire  or  five-toothed.
Corolla  campanulate  at  the  base,  deeply  three  to  seven-cleft.  Stamens
six  to  sixteen,  exserted  ;  filaments  united  to  the  tube  of  the  corolla,  some-
times adhering  at  the  base  into  a  ring ;  anthers  linear,  two-celled,  open-
ing by  internal  longitudinal  slits.  Style  simple,  with  an  obtuse,  some-
what lobed  stigma.  Fruit  a  dry  drupe,  splitting  imperfectly  into  two  or
three  valves,  with  one  to  three  stones.  Seeds  solitary,  erect,  with  a
large,  leafy  thin  embryo  lying  in  the  midst  of  fleshy  albumen,  with  an
inferior  radicle. — Abounding  in  a  fragrant  juice.

ORDER  LXII. Sapotace^e. Gutta-Percha.

Trees  or  shrubs  often  abounding  in  a  milky  juice,  and  having  alter-
nate, or  sometimes  almost  verticillate  leaves,  entire,  coriaceous,  and  ex-
stipulate.  Calyx  regular,  persistent,  five  or  four  to  eight-lobed,  valvate
or  imbricate  in  aestivation.  Corolla  monopetalous,  hypogynous,  regular,
deciduous  ;  segments  usually  equal  in  number  to  those  of  the  calyx,
sometimes  twice  or  thrice  as  many  ;  imbricate  in  aestivation.  Stamens
arising  from  the  corolla,  definite,  distinct ;  fertile  ones  equal  in  number
to  segments  of  calyx  ;  anthers  usually  extrorse  ;  sterile  stamens  as  nu-
merous as,  and  alternate  with,  the  fertile.  Ovary  superior,  many-celled,
each  containing  a  single  ascending  or  pendulous  ovule  ;  style  one  ;  stigma
undivided,  or  sometimes  lobed.  Fruit  fleshy,  with  several  one-seeded
cells,  or  by  abortion  with  one  cell  only. Seeds  nut-like  ;  with  a  bony


°0  Natural  Orders  of Plants.

shining testa,  having  a  large  hilum  ;  embryo  erect,  large,  in  a  fleshy
albumen. (Isonandra  Gutta.)

ORDER  LXIII. Primulace^e. Primrose.

Herbaceous,  sometimes  suffruticose  plants,  annual  or  perennial.  Leaves
usually  radical,  otherwise  mostly  opposite,  exstipulated.  Flowers  on
the  scapes  and  in  umbels  or  variously  arranged  in  the  axils  of  the  leaves.
Calyx  free  from  the  ovary,  or  partly  coherent,  five,  rarely  four-cleft,
regular,  persistent.  Corolla  five,  rarely  four-cleft,  regular.  Stamens
inserted  on  the  tube  of  the  corolla,  as  many  as  its  lobes,  and  opposite  to
them.  Ovary  one-celled,  with  a  free  central  placenta.  Style  and  stigma
simple.  Fruit  a  one-celled,  many-seeded  capsule,  the  fleshy  placenta
attached  only  to  the  base  of  the  cell.  Seeds  with  a  small  embryo  in
fleshy  albumen,  amphitropous  and  fixed  by  the  middle,  except  in  Hot-
tonieee.

1.  Anagallis.  Calyx  in  five,  deep,  spreading,  acute,  keeled  seg-
ments, permanent.  Corolla  rotate,  "with  almost  no  tube ;  limb  nearly
flat,  in  five  deep,  roundish-ovate  segments,  contracted  at  their  base.
Stamens  five ;  filaments  erect,  slender,  shorter  than  the  corolla,  clothed
with  prominent  glandular  hairs,  more  especially  in  the  middle  ;  anthers
cordate,  introrse.  Style  thread-shaped;  stigma  capitate,  or  sometimes
simple.  Capsule  globose,  membranaceous,  circumscissile,  one-celled,
many-seeded.  Seeds  angular,  abrupt,  covering  a  large,  central,  orbicu-
lar, pitted,  unconnected  receptacle. — Small,  spreading  or  procumbent
herbs,  with  square  stems,  and  whorled  or  mostly  opposite  leaves  ;  flowers
solitary  on  axillary  peduncles.

ORDER  LXIV. Plantaginace^e. Plantain.

Herbaceous,  usually  acaulescent  plants,  with  mostly  rosulate  leaves,
and  flowers  in  spikes.  Calyx  four-cleft,  persistent.  Corolla  dry,  mem-
branaceous, veinless ;  the  limb  four-parted,  persistent.  Stamens  four,
inserted  into  the  corolla-tube,  alternate  with  its  segments  ;  anthers  ver-
satile. Ovary  two-celled,  sessile.  Style  single.  Fruit  a  pyxis,  mem-
branaceous, two-celled  ;  cells  one  to  several-seeded.

1.  Plantago.  Calyx  of  four,  rarely  three,  imbricated,  persistent
sepals,  with  dry,  membranaceous  margins.  Corolla  tubular,  marescent,
with  a  four-parted,  reflected  border.  Stamens  four,  generally  with  long
and  weak  filaments,  and  fugacious  anthers. Style  simple  ;  stigma  uni-

lateral. Capsule  ovoid,  two-cellorl «;™ • 1 r

*.,. ' °  ceJJed,  circumscissile,  few  or  many-seeded.

s7it«its;::i ■ radlcai- ribbed  ws-  -d  -*  •*»*


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  81

ORDER  LXV.  Plumbaginace^e.  Leadwort.
Herbaceous  or  suffruticose  plants,  variable  in  appearance.  Leaves
undivided,  alternate,  or  sometimes  all  radical,  and  the  flowers  on  a
scape.  Calyx,  tubular,  five-toothed,  plaited,  persistent.  Corolla,  regular,
hypocrateriform,  of  five  petals  united  at  base,  sometimes  nearly  distinct.
Stamens  five,  hypogynous,  and  opposite  the  petals,  or  inserted  on  their
claws.  Ovary  superior,  one-celled  ;  ovule  pendulous,  attached  to  the
apex  of  a  filiform  podosperm  which  rises  from  the  bottom  of  the  cell.
Styles  five,  seldom  three  or  four,  partially  united  or  distinct.  Fruit  an
utricle,  indehiscent;,  or  opening  by  valves ;  seed  inverted ;  testa  simple  ;
embryo  straight ;  radicle  superior.

1.  Statice.  Flowers  scattered  or  loosely  spiked  on  the  branches  of  a
compound  corymb,  one-sided,  two  or  three-bracted.  Calyx  funnel-form,
plaited,  dry  and  membranaceous,  persistent.  Corolla  of  five,  nearly
or  quite  distinct  petals,  with  long  claws,  the  five  stamens  attached  to  their
bases.  Styles  five,  separate ;  ovary  superior.  Fruit  membranous  and
indehiscent,  one-seeded,  in  the  bottom  of  the  calyx.  Embryo  straight
in  mealy  albumen. — Sea-side,  or  salt-marsh  perennials,  with  thick  and
stalked  leaves,  radical  or  cauline.

ORDER  LXVI. Orobanchace^e. Broom-rape.

Herbaceous  leafless  plants,  growing  parasitically  upon  the  roots  of
other  plants  ;  the  stems  furnished  with  scales,  and  bearing  solitary  or
spicate  flowers.  Calyx  four  or  five-toothed,  inferior,  persistent.  Corolla
monopetalous,  hypogynous,  persistent,  imbricate  in  aestivation  ;  more  or
less  bilabiate,  the  upper  lip  entire  or  bilobed,  the  lower  three-lobed.
Stamens  four,  didynamous,  inserted  on  the  tube  of  the  corolla ;  anthers
two-celled,  persistent,  the  cells  distinct,  parallel,  often  mucronate  or
bearded  at  base.  Ovary  superior,  one-celled,  seated  in  a  fleshy  disk,
with  two  or  four  parietal  polyspermous  placentae  ;  style  one  ;  stigma  two-
lobed.  Fruit  capsular,  inclosed  within  the  withered  corolla,  one-celled,
two-valved,  each  valve  bearing  one  or  two  placentae  in  the  middle.  Seeds
very  numerous  and  minute  ;  embryo  minute,  inverted,  at  the  apex  of  a
fleshy  albumen.

1.  Orobanche,  or  Conopholis.  Calyx  two  to  five-cleft,  the  segments
often  unequal.  Corolla  ringent,  withering;  limb  four  or  five-lobed;
upper  lip  concave,  notched,  the  lower  reflexed  in  three  unequal  wavy
lobes.  Ovary  seated  in  a  fleshy  disk.  Stamens  protruded  ;  anthers
sagittate,  with  the  lobes  pointed  at  the  base ;  filaments  almost  as  long  as
the  tube  of  the  corolla,  downy  and  glandular.  Capsule  ovoid,  acute,  one-
celled,  two-valved,  many-seeded,  with  four  parietal  parallel  placentae. —
6


82  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

Perennials  with  mostly  simple  stems ;  upper scales  forming  bracts  to
the  flowers.

2.  Epiphegus.  Perfect  flowers  sterile  ;  imperfect  fertile.  Calyx  short,
five-toothed.  Perfect  corolla  two-lipped  ;  the  upper  lip  emarginate,  the
lower  three-toothed  ;  imperfect  corolla  minute,  four-toothed,  deciduous.
Stamens  as  long  as  the  corolla  ;  filaments  smooth  ;  anthers  two-lobed,
acute  at  the  base,  valveless,  dehiscent  in  the  middle.  Stigma  capitate,
somewhat  emarginate.  Capsule  gibbous,  compressed,  half  two-valved,
with  four  diverging  placentae. — Perennials,  with  virgate,  simple  branches
which  arc  floriferous  their  whole  length.

ORDER LXVII. ScROPHULARIACE^E. FlGWORT.

Herbs  undershrubs,  or  rarely  shrubs,  scentless  or  fetid,  rarely  aroma-
tic, with  opposite,  verticillate,  or  alternate  leaves.  Flowers  axillary  or
racemose,  rarely  spiked.  Calyx,  sepals  four  or  five,  unequal,  more  or
less  united  at  base,  inferior,  persistent.  Corolla  bilabiate,  personate  or
otherwise  irregular,  the  lobes  imbricate  in  aestivation.  Stamens  four,
didynamous,  rarely  with  the  rudiment  of  the  fifth  ;  sometimes  two  only,
the  three  others  either  rudimentary  or  wholly  wanting.  Ovary  free,  two-
celled.  Style  simple  or  rarely  shortly  bifid  ;  stigma  generally  simple,
entire,  emarginate,  or  bifid.  Fruit  capsular,  two-celled,  two-valved,
with  central  placentae. Seeds  indefinite,  albuminous  ;  embryo  straight.

1.  Verbascum.  Calyx  five-parted.  Corolla  rotate,  five-lobed,  open
or  concave  ;  the  lobes  broad  and  rounded,  a  little  unequal.  Stamens
five,  declinate,  all  perfect ;  all  the  filaments ,  or  the  three  upper,  woolly.
Style  flattened  at  the  apex.  Capsule  ovoid-globose,  two-valved,  many-
seeded. — Tall  and  usually  woolly  biennial  herbs,  with  alternate  leaves,
those  of  the  stem  sessile  or  decurrent ;  flowers  in  terminal  racemes,
ephemeral.

2.  Scrophularia.  Calyx  in  five  acute,  nearly  equal  segments.
Corolla  subglobose,  with  a  short  five-lobed  limb,  the  segments  of  which
are  rounded,  and  the  uppermost  united  into  an  upper  lip.  Stamens
didynamous,  declinate,  with  transverse,  one-celled  anthers  ;  a  fifth  rudi-
mentary stamen  with  a  lamelliform  anther,  often  present.  Stigma
emarginate.  Capsule  roundish,  often  acuminate,  with  the  valves  entire
or  just  bifid. — Rank  hei-bs,  with  mostly  opposite  leaves,  and  small
greenish-purple  or  lurid  flowers  in  loose  cymes,  forming  a  terminal  nar-
row panicle.

3.  Chelone.  Calyx  deeply  five-parted,  with  three  bracts  at  base.
Corolla  inflated-tubular,  with  the  mouth  a  little  open  ;  the  upper-lip
broad  and  arched,  keeled  in  the  middle,  notched  at  the  apex  ;  the  lower


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  83

woolly-bearded  in  the  throat,  three-lobed  at  the  apex,  the  middle  lobe
smallest.  Stamens  four,  with  woolly  filaments,  and  very  woolly  heart-
shaped  anthers ;  and  a  fifth  sterile  filament,  smooth  above,  and  shorter
than  the  others.  Capsule  two-celled,  with  entire  valves.  Seeds  many,
broadly  membranaceous,  winged.  —  Smooth  perennials,  with  upright
branching  stems,  opposite  serrate  leaves,  and  large  white  or  purple-rose-
colored  flowers,  which  are  nearly  sessile  in  spikes  or  clusters,  and
closely  imbricated  with  round-ovate  concave  bracts  and  bractlets.

4.  Digitalis.  Calyx  five-parted,  sepals  rounded  or  acute,  perma-
nent, much  shorter  than  the  corolla  ;  the  uppermost  narrowest.  Corolla
campanulate,  ventricose,  contracted  at  the  base  with  an  oblique  limb  ;
upper  lip  emarginate,  lower  trifid  with  the  middle  lobe  the  largest.
Stamens  four,  didynamous,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  corolla  ;  anthers
acute,  naked.  Stigma  bilamellate.  Capsule  ovate,  two-celled,  two-
valved,  with  a  septicidal  dehiscence. — Herbs  or  shrubs,  exotic,  with
lower  leaves  crowded,  petiolate,  upper  alternate  ;  flowers  in  showy
racemes.

5.  Veronica.  Leptandra.  Calyx  five-parted.  Corolla  sub-rotate,
deeply  four-cleft,  lower  segments  mostly  narrow.  Stamens  two,  one
each  side  of  the  upper  lobe  of  the  corolla,  exserted  ;  anther-cells  confluent
at  the  apex.  Style  entire  ;  stigma  single.  Capsule  compressed,  usually
obtuse  or  notched  at  the  apex,  two-celled,  few  to  many-seeded. — Chiefly
herbs  with  various  foliage  ;  leaves  opposite  ;  blue,  flesh-color  or  white
flowers  in  axillary  or  terminal  racemes.

6.  Gerardia.  Calyx  campanulate,  five-cleft  or  toothed.  Corolla
campanulate-tubular,  swelling  above,  with  five  more  or  less  unequal
spreading  lobes,  the  two  upper  usually  rather  smaller  and  more  united.
Stamens  four,  strongly  didynamous,  included,  hairy  ;  anthers  approach-
ing by  pairs,  two-celled  ;  the  cells  parallel,  often  pointed  at  the  base.
Style  elongated,  mostly  enlarged  and  flattened  at  the  apex.  Capsule
ovate,  pointed,  many-seeded. — Erect  branching  herbs,  with  the  stem-
leaves  opposite,  the  upper  often  alternate ;  the  uppermost  reduced  to
bracts  and  subtending  one-flowered  peduncles,  which  often  form  a
raceme  or  spike  ;  flowers  showy,  purple  or  yellow.

7.  Dasystoma.  Calyx  campanulate,  half  five-cleft,  the  lobes  often
toothed,  imbricate  in  aestivation.  Corolla-tube  elongated,  dilated,  woolly
inside,  as  well  as  the  anthers  and  filaments.  Stamens  included,  didyna-
mous ;  anthers  all  equal,  awned  at  the  base.  Capsule  ovate,  acute,  two
valves  bearing  the  septum  in  the  middle  ;  seeds  numerous. — Erect  per-
ennial herbs,  with  large,  yellow  flowers,  and  leaves  similar  to  Gerardia,
pinnatifid  or  toothed.


84  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

8.  Euphrasia.  Calyx  tubular  or  campanulate,  four-cleft.  Upper  lip
of  the  corolla  scarcely  arched,  two-lobed,  the  lobes  broad  and  spread-
ing ;  lower  lip  spreading,  three-cleft,  the  lobes  obtuse  or  notched  ;  palate
not  plaited.  Stamens  four,  fertile,  under  the  upper  lip;  anther-cells
equal,  spurred  or  pointed  at  the  base.  Capsule  oblong-ovate,  compressed,
emarginate,  with  entire  valves  ;  seeds  few  or  numerous,  oblong,  grooved
lengthwise.— Herbs  with  branching  stems,  and  opposite  toothed  or  cut
leaves ;  flowers  small,  in  one-sided  terminal  spikes.

ORDER  XLVIII. Verbenacejs. Vervain.

Trees  and  shrubs,  sometimes  herbs,  with  usually  opposite,  simple  or
compound,  exstipulate  leaves.  Flowers  in  axillary  corymbs  or  dense
heads,  or  alternate-spicate.  Calyx  tubular,  four  or  five-toothed,  inferior,
persistent.  Corolla  tubular,  the  limb  bilabiate  or  irregularly  four  or  five-
cleft,  deciduous.  Stamens  four,  didynamous,  seldom  equal,  occasionally
only  two.  Ovary  two  or  four-celled  ;  ovules  erect  or  pendulous,  solitary
or  twin  ;  style  one  ;  stigma  bifid  or  undivided.  Fruit  drupaceous,  bac-
cate, or  dry,  dividing  into  two  or  four  one-seeded  portions.  Seeds  erect
or  pendulous,  exalbuminous,  with  an  erect  embryo.

1.  Verbena.  Calyx  five-toothed,  with  one  of  the  teeth  often  trun-
cate and  shorter  than  the  others.  Corolla  funnel-form,  often  curved,
salver-form,  the  limb  unequally  five-cleft.  Stamens  four,  included  ;  the
upper  pair  occasionally  without  anthers.  Style  slender ;  stigma  capi-
tate. Fruit  or  pericarp,  splitting  into  four  seed-like  nutlets,  thin,  evan-
escent.— Herbs  with  opposite  leaves ;  flowers  mostly  alternate-spicate,
sessile,  bracted.

ORDER  LXIX. Labiate  or  Lamiace^e. Mint.

Herbs  or  undershrubs  with  four-cornered  stems  and  opposite  branches.
Leaves  opposite,  without  stipules,  replete  with  receptacles  of  aromatic
oil.  Flowers  in  opposite,  nearly  sessile,  axillary  verticillasters,  some-
times as  if  in  whorls,  spikes  or  heads  ;  color  almost  always  of  the  cya-
nic series,  blue,  purple,  red,  white,  etc.  Calyx  tubular,  inferior,  per-
sistent, the  odd  tooth  being  next  to  the  axis  ;  regular  five  or  ten-toothed,
or  irregular  bilabiate,  or  three  to  ten-toothed.  Corolla  monopetalous,
hypogynous,  bilabiate  ;  the  upper  lip  bifid  or  entire,  overlapping  the
lower  which  is  larger  and  three-lobed.  Stamens  four,  didynamous,
inserted  on  the  corolla,  alternately  with  the  lobes  of  the  lower  lip,  the
two  upper  stamens  often  abortive  ;  anthers  mostly  two-celled.  Ovary
deeply  four-lobed,  seated  in  a  fleshy  hypogynous  disk,  each  lobe  with  a
single  erect  ovule;  style  one,  proceeding  from  the  base  of  the  lobes  of
the  ovary  ;  stigma  bifid,  usually  acute. Fruit  one  to  four  small  nuts  or


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  85

achenia  included  in  the  persistent  calyx.  Seeds  erect,  with  little  or  no
albumen  ;  embryo  erect ;  cotyledons  flat ;  radicle  at  the  base  of  the
fruit.

TRIBE  I. Ocimoidej*:.
Corolla  sub-bilabiate,  the  four  upper  lobes  nearly  equal,  the  lower  one
declinate,  flat  or  concave,  carinate  or  saccate. Stamens  four,  declined.

1.  Lavandula.  Calyx  tubular,  nearly  equal,  thirteen  or  rarely
fifteen-ribbed,  shortly  five-toothed,  with  the  four  lower  teeth  nearly
equal,  or  the  two  lower  narrower;  the  upper  either  but  little  broader
than  the  lateral  ones,  or  expanded  into  a  dilated  appendage.  Upper  lip
of  corolla  two-lob ed,  lower  three-lobed  ;  all  the  divisions  nearly  equal;
the  throat  somewhat  dilated.  Stamens  didynamous,  declining  ;  filaments
smooth,  distinct,  not  toothed  ;  anthers  reniform,  one-celled. — Odorifer-
ous, suffruticose  plants,  with  narrow  rigid  leaves,  and  small  whitish
flowers.

TRIBE  II. Menthoide^e.

Corolla  somewhat  campanulate  or  funnel-form  ;  tube  scarcely  exserted,
limb  subequally  four  or  five  lobed.  Stamens  four,  sometimes  two,
distant,  straight,  diverging.

2.  Mentha.  Calyx  campanulate  or  tubular,  five-toothed,  equal  or
somewhat  two-lipped,  with  the  throat  naked  inside,  or  villous.  Corolla
with  the  tube  inclosed,  the  limb  campanulate,  nearly  equal,  four-cleft ;
the  upper  segment  broader,  nearly  entire  or  emarginate.  Stamens  four,
equal,  erect,  distant ;  filaments  smooth,  naked  ;  anthers  with  two  parallel
cells.  Style  shortly  bifid,  with  the  lobes  bearing  stigmas  at  the  points.
Fruit  dry,  smooth. — Odoriferous  herbs,  with  small  whitish  or  pale-
purple  flowers  in  close  clusters.

3.  Lycopus.  Calyx  oblong-campanulate,  equal,  four  or  five-toothed,
with  the  throat  naked  inside.  Corolla  campanulate,  scarcely  longer  than
the  calyx,  nearly  equal  four-lobed  ;  upper  segment  broadest,  emargi-
nate. Stamens  two,  rather  projecting,  distant ;  the  upper  pair  either
sterile  rudiments  or  wanting  ;  anthers  two-celled,  with  nearly  parallel
distinct  cells.  Seeds  four,  smooth,  retuse. — Perennial  low  herbs,  with
sharply-toothed  or  pinnatifid  leaves,  and  mostly  white  flowers  in  dense
axillary  whorls.

TRIBE  III. Monarde^e.

Corolla  bilabiate;  tube  exserted.  Stamens  two,  fertile,  ascending,
the  upper  pair  abortive  ;  anthers  linear  with  the  two  cells  contiguous,  or
halved  with  the  two  cells  widely  separated  on  opposite  ends  of  a  long,
transverse  connectile.


86  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

8.  Monarda.  Calyx  tubular,  elongated,  fifteen-nerved,  nearly  equal-
ly five-toothed,  usually  hairy  in  the  throat.  Corolla  with  an  elongated
tube,  a  slightly  expanded  throat,  and  a  strongly  two-lipped  limb ;  the
lips  linear  or  oblong,  subequal;  the  upper  erect,  entire  or  slightly
notched  ;  the  lower  spreading,  three-lobed  at  the  apex,  the  lateral  lobes
ovate  and  obtuse,  the  middle  one  narrower  and  slightly  notched.  Sta-
mens two,  fertile,  elongated,  ascending,  exserted,  inserted  in  the  throat
of  the  corolla;  anthers  linear,  the  cells  divaricate  at  base,  connate  at
apex.  Style  one,  with  a  lateral  stigma. — Odoriferous  erect  perennial
herbs,  with  entire  or  toothed  leaves,  and  flowers  in  a  few  capitate  whorls,
closely  surrounded  with  bracts.

5.  Salvia.  Calyx  sub-campanulate,  striate,  bilabiate  ;  the  upper  lip
mostly  three-toothed,  the  lower  bifid.  Corolla  scarcely  longer  than  the
calyx,  deeply  two-lipped,  ringent ;  the  upper  lip  straight  or  scythe-
shaped,  entire  or  barely  notched  ;  the  lower  spreading  or  pendent,  three-
lobed,  the  middle  lobe  larger.  Stamens  two,  fertile,  on  short  filaments,
jointed  with  the  elongated  transverse  connective,  one  end  of  which
ascending  under  the  upper  lip,  bears  a  linear,  one-celled,  (half)  anther,
the  other  usually  descending  and  bearing  an  imperfect  or  deformed,
(half)  anther.  Achenia  four. — The  transverse  connectile  constitutes  the
essential  character  of  this  genus.  The  flowers  are  usually  large  and
showy,  in  spiked,  racemed,  or  panicled  whorls.

6.  Rosmarinus.  Calyx  ovate-campanulate,  two-lipped  ;  the  upper  one
entire,  the  lower  bifid.  Corolla  with  the  tube  smooth,  not  ringed  in  the
inside,  somewhat  inflated  in  the  throat;  limb  bilabiate;  lips  nearly  equal,
the  upper  one  erect  and  emarginate,  the  lower  spreading,  trifid,  with  the
lateral  lobes  erect,  but  somewhat  twisted ;  the  middle  one  large,  con-
cave, declining.  Stamens  two,  ascending,  inferior,  exserted  ;  no  rudi-
ments of  superior  stamens  ;  filaments  toothed  at  base ;  anthers  linear,
with  two  divaricating  confluent  cells.  Upper  lobe  of  the  style  very  short ;
stigmas  minute,  terminal. — Exotic.

TRIBE  IV. Satureine^:.
Calyx  five-toothed  and  equal,  or  bilabiate,  with  the  upper  lip  trifid,
and  the  lower  bifid. Corolla  sub-bilabiate,  upper  lip  erect,  flat,  entire
or  bifid  ;  lower  spreading,  tripid,  lobes  subequal  ;  tube  about  as  Ion  a-  as
the  calyx. Stamens  two  or  four,  distant,  straight,  diverging.

7.  Pycnanthemum.  Calyx  ovate-oblong,  or  tubular,  about  thirteen-
nerved,  equally  five-toothed,  or  the  three  upper  teeth  more  or  less
united,  naked  in  the  throat.  Corolla  with  a  short  tube,  and  a  some-
what two-lipped,  border ;  the  upper  lip  nearly  flat,  entire,  or  slightly
notched;  the  lower  three-cleft ;  middle  lobe  longest;  all  the  lobes  ovate


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  87

and  obtuse.  Stamens  four,  distant,  the  lower  pair  rather  longer;  anther-
cells  parallel. — Perennial  upright  herbs,  with  a  pungent  mint-like  flavor,
corymbosely  branched  above ;  the  floral  leaves  often  whitish  ;  corolla
whitish  or  flesh-color,  the  lower  lip  mostly  dotted  with  purple;  the
many-flowered  whorls  dense,  crowded  with  bracts,  and  usually  forming
terminal  heads  or  close  cymes.

8.  Origanum.  Calyx  ovate-tubular,  hairy  in  the  throat,  ten  to
thirteen-nerved,  nearly  equally  five-toothed ;  throat  villous  within.  Co-
rolla-tube about  the  length  of  the  calyx,  slightly  two-lipped  ;  the  upper
lip  rather  erect  and  slightly  notched  ;  the  lower  one  of  three  nearly
equal,  spreading  lobes.  Stamens  four,  exserted,  didynamous,  the  lower
ones  longer.  Style  bifid  at  the  point.  Achenia  dry,  somewhat  smooth. —
Herbs  with  nearly  entire  leaves,  and  purplish  flowers  crowded  in  cylin-
drical or  oblong  spikes,  which  are  imbricated  with  colored  bracts.

9.  Thymus.  Flowers  capitate  or  verticillate.  Calyx  sub-campanu-
late,  bilabiate,  thirteen-nerved,  hairy  in  the  throat ;  the  upper  lip  three-
toothed,  spreading  ;  the  lower  two-cleft,  with  the  awl-shaped  divisions
ciliate.  Corolla  short,  slightly  bilabiate  ;  the  upper  lip  straight  and
flattish,  notched  at  the  apex ;  the  lower  spreading,  equally  three-cleft,
or  the  middle  lobe  longest.  Stamens  four,  straight  and  distant,  usually
exserted. — Low,  mostly  prostrate  and  diffuse  perennials,  with  small  and
entire  veiny  leaves,  and  purplish  or  whitish  flowers.

10.  Satureja.  Calyx  tubular,  ten-ribbed.  Corolla  bilabiate  ;  seg-
ments nearly  equal. Stamens  diverging,  scarcely  exserted. — Perennials.

11.  Hyssopus.  Calyx  tubular,  fifteen-nerved,  equal  or  oblique,  with
five  equal  teeth  ;  naked  inside.  Corolla  with  the  tube  as  long  as  the
calyx  ;  the  upper  lip  flat,  erect,  emarginate  ;  the  lower  spreading  trifid,
and  the  middle  segment  the  largest.  Stamens  four,  didynamous,  ex-
serted, diverging  ;  anthers  with  linear  divaricating  cells. — Perennial.

12.  Collinsonia.  Calyx  ovate,  declined  in  fruit,  two-lipped;  upper
lip  truncate,  three-toothed,  the  lower  twro-toothed.  Corolla  elongated,
expanded  at  the  throat,  somewhat  two-lipped,  with  the  four  upper  lobes
nearly  equal,  but  the  lower  larger  and  longer,  pendent,  toothed  or  lace-
rated. Stamens  two,  rarely  three  or  four,  much  exserted,  diverging ;
anther-cells  divergent.  —  Strong-scented  perennials,  with  large  ovate
leaves,  and  yellowish  flowers  on  slender  pedicels,  in  loose  and  panicled
terminal  racemes.

13.  Cuntla.  Calyx  ovate-tubular,  ten-ribbed,  equally  five-toothed,
hairy  in  the  throat. Corolla  two-lipped  ;  upper  lip  erect,  flattish,  mostly


88  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

emarginate  ;  the  lower  spreading,  somewhat  equally  three-cleft.  Sta-
mens two,  erect,  exserted,  distant;  no  sterile  filaments.— Perennials
with  small  white,  or  purplish  flowers,  in  corymbed  cymes  or  close
clusters.

TRIBE  V. Melissine^e.

Calyx  bilabiate  ;  corolla  bilabiate  ;  upper  lip  straight,  lower  lip  spread-
ing, cleft  into  three  flat  lobes,  of  which  the  middle  one  is  often  broadest.
Stamens  four,  sometimes  two,  ascending.

14.  Hedeoma.  Calyx  ovoid  or  tubular,  gibbous  on  the  lower  side
near  the  base,  two-lipped,  thirteen-ribbed,  throat  hairy  ;  the  upper  lip
three-toothed,  the  lower  two-cleft.  Corolla  two-lipped;  the  upper  lip
erect,  flat,  notched  at  the  apex;  the  lower  spreading,  three-cleft,  the
lobes  nearly  equal.  Fertile  stamens  two,  ascending ;  the  two  upper  mere
sterile  filaments  or  wanting.— Low  odorous  plants  with  small  leaves,  and
loose  axillary  clusters  of  flowers,  somewhat  approximated  in  terminal
leafy  racemes.

15.  Melissa.  Calyx  slightly  gibbous  at  the  base,  thirteen-ribbed,
open,  more  or  less  hairy  in  the  throat ;  the  upper  lip  three-toothed,  the
lower  bifid.  Corolla  with  a  recurved-ascending  tube,  the  upper  lip
erect,  flattish,  lower  lip  spreading,  three-lobed,  the  middle  lobe  mostly
broadest. — Stamens  four,  ascending  ;  anther-cells  divergent. — Fragrant
plants,  with  loose,  one-sided,  few-flowered  clusters,  with  few  and  mostly
ovate  bracts,  resembling  the  leaves.

TRIBE  VI. Scutellarine^e.
Calyx bilabiate, upper lip truncate. Corolla bilabiate, upper lip
vaulted,  tube  ascending,  exserted. Stamens  four,  ascending  beneath  the
upper  lip  of  the  corolla.

16.  Scutellaria.  Calyx  campanulate,  gibbous,  bilabiate,  the  lips
entire  ;  upper  one  consisting  of  the  two  lateral  sepals,  deciduous  after
flowering,  when  the  calyx  is  closed  by  the  arched  and  separate  upper
sepal  applied  to  the  lower  lip  like  a  lid.  Corolla  with  an  elongated  tube,
dilated  at  the  throat ;  the  upper  lip  arched,  entire  or  nearly  so ;  the
middle  lobe  of  the  lower  dilated  and  spreading,  convex,  its  lateral  lobes
often  connected  with  the  upper  lip.  Stamens  four,  ascending  under  the
upper  lip  ;  anthers  approximate  in  pairs,  ciliate ;  those  of  the  lower  sta-
mens halved,  of  the  upper,  two-celled  and  heart-shaped. — Perennial
bitter  herbs,  not  aromatic,  with  axillary,  or  else  spiked  or  racemed
flowers ;  the  short  peduncles  chiefly  opposite,  one-flowered,  often  one-
sided.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  89

TRIBE  VII. Nepete^e.
Calyx  oblique,  upper  teeth  longer. Corolla  bilabiate,  upper  lip  vaulted,
lower  spreading,  throat  mostly  inflated. Stamens  ascending  or  diverg-
ing, the  upper  pair  longer.

17.  Nepeta.  Calyx  tubular,  often  incurved,  arid,  thirteen  to  fifteen-
nerved,  obliquely  five-toothed,  seldom  equal  at  the  orifice.  Corolla  with
the  tube  slender  at  the  base,  naked  and  dilated  in  the  throat;  the  upper
lip  erect,  rather  concave,  notched  or  two-cleft ;  the  lower  spreading,
three-cleft,  the  middle  lobe  largest,  and  crenate.  Stamens  four,  didyna-
mous,  ascending  under  the  upper  lip,  the  lower  pair  shorter;  anthers
usually  approximate  in  pairs,  the  cells  divergent  and  finally  divaricat-
ing.— Perennial  herbs.

TRIBE  VIII. Stachyde^e.

Calyx  oblique  or  rarely  sub-bilabiate,  three  to  ten-toothed.  Corolla
bilabiate,  upper  lip  galeate  or  flat,  lower  lip  unequally  three-lobed.  Sta-
mens ascending,  upper  pair  shorter.

18.  Leonurus.  Calyx  turbinate,  five-nerved,  the  mouth  truncated,
with  nearly  five  equal  teeth  which  are  awl-shaped,  and  when  old  rather
spiny  at  the  point  and  spreading.  Corolla  with  the  tube  inclosed,  naked,
or  obliquely  ringed  inside ;  upper  lip  oblong,  entire,  hairy,  somewhat
arched  ;  the  lower  spreading,  three-lobed;  the  middle  lobe  larger,  broad
and  inversely  heart-shaped ;  the  lateral  oblong.  Stamens  four,  didyna-
mous,  ascending  under  the  upper  lip;  anthers  approximate  in  pairs,  with
parallel  transverse  and  naked  valves,  sprinkled  with  shining  dots.
Achenia  truncate  at  the  apex. — Upright  herbs,  with  cut-lobed  leaves,
and  close  whorls  of  flowers  in  their  axils.

19.  Marrubium.  Calyx  tubular,  five  to  ten-nerved,  with  five  or  ten
subequal  acute  spiny  teeth.  Upper  lip  of  the  corolla  erect,  flattish  or
concave,  entire  or  bifid;  lower  lip  spreading,  trifid  ;  middle  lobe  broad-
est, and  generally  emarginate.  Stamens  four,  included  in  the  tube  of
the  corolla,  didynamous  ;  anther-cells  divergent  and  somewhat  confluent.
Achenia,  obtuse. — Whitish-woolly,  bitter-aromatic  perennials,  branched
at  the  base,  with  rugose  and  crenate  or  cut  leaves,  the  floral  nearly
similar,  and  exceeding  the  whorls.

20.  Ajuga.  Corolla  upper  lip  very  short,  and  two-toothed,  or  rarely
erect  and  vaulted,  lower  lip  longer.  Stamens  ascending,  much  exserted;
anthers  all  reniform,  one-celled. Achenia  reticulately  rugose.


90  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

ORDER  LXX.  Pedaliace^e.  Oil-Seed.
Herbs  mostly  strong-scented  and  glandular  hirsute.  Leaves  opposite
or  alternate,  undivided,  angular  or  lobed,  exstipulated.  Flowers  axil-
lary, solitary,  large,  each  with  two  bracts.  Calyx  five-cleft,  nearly
equal.  Corolla  monopetalous,  hypogynous,  irregular ;  the  throat  ven-
tricose,  the  limb  bilabiate,  the  lobes  somewhat  valvate  in  aestivation.
Disk  hypogynous,  fleshy,  sometimes  glandular.  Stamens  four,  with  the
rudiment  of  a  fifth,  didynamous,  included;  anthers  two-celled;  the  con-
nective articulated  with  the  filament,  a  little  prolonged  beyond  the  cells,
terminated  by  a  gland.  Ovary  seated  in  the  disk,  unilocular  or  bilocu-
lar,  sometimes  with  several  one  or  two-seeded  spurious  cells,  formed  by
the  splitting  of  two  placentas  and  the  divergence  of  their  lobes ;  ovules
either  erect  or  pendulous,  or  horizontal,  solitary  or  several ;  style  one,
stigma  divided.  Fruit  drupaceous  or  capsular,  valvular,  or  indehiscent,
with  from  two  to  eight  cells,  which,  when  numerous  are  usually  oligo-
spermous,  and  polyspermous,  when  only  two.  Seeds  few,  large,  wing-
less ; albumen  none  ;  embryo  straight.

1.  Sesamum.  Calyx  five-parted,  persistent,  upper  lobe  the  smallest.
Corolla  campanulate ;  tube  large ;  limb  plicate,  somewhat  bilabiate ;
upper  lobe  emarginate,  lower  the  longest,  slightly  trifid.  Anthers  ovate-
oblong;  stigma  lanceolate,  bilamellate.  Capsule  oblong,  obtusely  four-
angled,  four-grooved,  two-celled,  two-valved,  valves  recurved.  Seeds
numerous,  thick,  apterous. — Exotics  with  mucilaginous  leaves,  and  oily
seeds.

ORDER  LXXI.  Boraginace^:.  Borage.
Herbs,  shrubs,  or  trees,  with  round  stems  and  branches.  Leaves
alternate,  often  rough  with  stiff  hairs,  which  are  scale-like  and  indu-
rated at  base  ;  stipules  none.  Spikes,  racemes,  or  corymbs  generally
secund,  and  circinate  before  flowering,  evolving  as  the  flowers  expand.
Flowers  of  the  cyanic  series.  Calyx  persistent,  with  four  or  five  divi-
sions. Corolla  hypogynous,  generally  regular,  five,  rarely  four-cleft,
with  an  imbricate  aestivation.  Stamens  inserted  upon  the  petals,  equal
to  the  number  of  lobes  of  the  corolla,  and  alternate  with  them.  Ovary
four-parted,  four-seeded;  ovules  attached  to  the  lowest  point  of  the
cavity.  Style  simple,  arising  from  the  base  of  the  lobes  of  the  ovary;
stigma  simple  or  bifid.  Fruit  nuts  or  achenia,  four,  distinct,  one-seeded.
Seeds  separable  from  the  pericarp,  destitute  of  albumen  ;  embryo  with  a
superior  radicle ;  cotyledons  parallel  with  the  axis,  plano-convex,  some-
times four.

1.  Symphytum.  Calyx  five-parted.  Corolla  tubular-campanulate,
inflated  above,  five-toothed,  the  short  teeth  spreading  ;  the  throat  closed


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  91

with  five  linear  awl-shaped  scales,  converging  into  a  cone.  Stamens
included  ;  anthers  sagittate,  acute,  concealed  by  the  valves.  Style  fili-
form. Ackenia  smooth,  ovate,  fixed  by  a  large  excavated  (perforate)
base. — Coarse  perennial  herbs,  with  thickened  mucilaginous  roots,  and
one-sided  nodding  racemes,  either  single  or  in  pairs.

2.  Onosmodium.  Calyx  deeply  five-parted,  with  linear  segments.
Corolla longer than  the calyx,  subcampanulate,  having a  ventricose,

half  five-cleft  limb,  with  the  segments  converging  and  the  orifice  open
and  naked  ;  the  sinuses  minutely  hooded-inflexed.  Anthers  included,
almost  sessile,  sagittate,  apiculate.  Style  much  exserted,  smooth.
Achenia  ovoid,  smooth,  shining,  fixed  by  a  flat  base,  closed. — Perennial
herbs  with  oblong,  sessile,  nerved  leaves,  and  yellowish- white  flowers  in
terminal  and  one-sided,  at  length  elongated,  erect,  spiked  racemes,  leafy  -
bracted.

3.  Lithospermum.  Calyx  five-parted,  persistent,  smaller  than  the
corolla.  Corolla  funnel-form  or  salver-form;  the  throat  open,  mostly
furnished  with  five  small  folds  or  gibbous  projections;  lobes  rounded.
Stamens  included  ;  anthers  oblong,  almost  sessile;  stigma  obtuse,  bifid.
Achenia  ovate,  bony,  smooth  or  rugose,  fixed  by  a  small  truncate  base,
closed. — Herbs,  usually  with  thickish  roots  yielding  a  red-coloring  mat-
ter, more  or  less  ronghish-hairy  or  downy,  and  usually  sessile  leaves,
and  spiked  or  racemed  leafy-bracted  flowers.

4.  Mertensia.  Calyx  short,  five-cleft.  Corolla  trumpet-shaped,
much  longer  than  the  calyx,  five-cleft;  throat  naked,  or  oftener  with  five
small  folds  or  ridges  between  the  insertion  of  the  stamens.  Stamens
inserted  at  top  of  the  tube,  protruding  ;  anthers  subsagittate  ;  style  long
and  filiform.  Achenia  ovoid,  smooth  or  reticulated,  rather  fleshy,
obliquely  attached  by  the  prominent  internal  angle,  closed. — Perennials
usually  smooth,  with  pale  and  entire,  pellucid-punctate  leaves,  and  hand-
some purplish-blue,  rarely  white,  flowers  in  terminal  racemes,  bractlets
above,  but  one  or  two  leaves  at  base.  Radical  leaves  many-veined,
cauline  ones  sessile.

5.  Cvnoglossum.  Calyx  five-parted.  Corolla  funnel-form,  about  as
long  as  the  calyx,  vaulted  ;  the  throat  closed  by  five  converging,  convex,
obtuse  scales ;  the  lobes  rounded.  Stamens  included.  Achenia
depressed  or  convex,  fixed  laterally  to  the  base  of  the  style,  covered
with  short  hooked  prickles. — Coarse  herbs,  with  a  strong,  unpleasant
scent,  and  mostly  panicled  racemes  which  are  naked  above  but  usually
bracted  at  the  base  ;  lower  leaves  petioled.  Flowers  blue,  purple  or
white.


92  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

ORDER  LXXII.  Polemoniace^e.  Greek  Valerian.
Herbs  with  opposite,  occasionally  alternate,  compound,  or  simple
leaves;  stem  occasionally  climbing.  Calyx  five  united  sepals,  inferior,
persistent,  sometimes  irregular.  Corolla  five  united  petals,  regular,
the  lobes  imbricate  or  twisted  in  aestivation.  Stamens  five,  inserted  into
the  middle  of  the  corolla  tube,  and  alternate  with  its  lobes.  Ovary  free,
three-celled,  with  few  or  many  ovules  ;  styles  united  into  one  ;  stigma
trifid ;  ovules  ascending  or  peltate.  Capsule  three-celled,  three-valved,
few  or  many-seeded,  with  a  loculicidal  or  septicidal  dehiscence  ;  the
valves  separating  from  the  axis.  Seeds  angular  or  oval,  or  winged,
often  enveloped  in  mucus,  ascending  ;  albumen  horny  ;  embryo  straight ;
cotyledons  elliptical,  foliaceous.

1.  Polemonium.  Calyx  campanulate,  five-cleft.  Corolla  rotate-campan-
ulate;  limb  five-lobed,  erect ;  tube  short,  closed  at  the  base  by  five  stameni-
ferous  valves.  Stamens  equally  inserted  at  the  summit  of  the  very  short
corolla-tube ;  filaments  slender,  declined,  hairy-appendaged  at  the  base.
Capsule  few  to  many-seeded. — Low  branching  herbs,  with  alternate,  pin-
nate leaves,  the  upper  leaflets  sometimes  confluent ;  the  blue  or  white,
terminal,  corymbose  flowers  nearly  bractless.

ORDER  LXXIII. Convulvulace^e. Bindweed.

Herbs  or  shrubs,  mostly  twining,  sometimes  erect,  smooth  or  with  a
simple  pubescence,  with  a  milky  juice.  Leaves  alternate,  undivided  or
lobed,  seldom  pinnatifid,  without  stipules.  Flowers  showy,  axillary  or
terminal.  Calyx  of  five  sepals,  usually  united  at  base,  much  imbri-
cated, as  if  in  more  whorls  than  one,  often  very  unequal,  persistent.
Corolla  hypogynous,  regular,  deciduous  ;  the  limb  five-lobed  or  entire,
plaited,  twisted  in  aestivation.  Stamens  five,  inserted  into  the  base  of
the  corolla,  and  alternate  with  its  lobes.  Ovary  simple,  with  two  or
four  cells,  seldom  one  ;  the  ovules  definite  and  erect,  when  more  than
one  collateral.  Styles  united  into  one  ;  stigmas  obtuse  or  acute.  Dish
annular,  hypogynous.  Fruit  a  capsule,  one  to  four-celled,  valves  with
septifragal  dehiscence.  Seeds  few,  large,  with  thin  mucilaginous  albu-
men ;  embryo  curved  ;  cotyledons  shriveled ;  radicle  inferior.

1.  Convolvulus.  Calyx  five-parted,  naked  or  with  two  small  bracts
near  the  base.  Corolla  campanulate  or  funnel-form,  with  a  spreading
nearly  entire  or  five-lobed  border.  Stamens  shorter  than  the  corolla-
limb,  rarely  a  little  longer,  included.  Style  simple  ;  stigmas  two,  linear-
cylindrical,  often  revolute.  Capsule  valvate,  two  to  four-celled,  four  to
six-seeded. —  Chiefly  twining  or  trailing  plants,  with  the  axillary
peduncles  one  or  many-flowered.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  93

£.  Ipom^a.  Sepals  five.  Corolla  campanulate.  Stamens  included.
Style  one.  Stigma  capitate,  often  bilobate.  Ovary  bilocular;  ce//swith
two  ovules. Capsule  two-celled.

ORDER  LXXIV. Solanace^e. Nightshade.

Herbaceous  plants  or  shrubs,  with  a  colorless  juice,  and  alternate,
undivided  or  lobed,  sometimes  collateral  leaves;  the  floral  ones  some-
times double,  and  placed  near  each  other.  Inflorescence  often  supra-
axillary  ;  pedicels  bractless.  Calyx  five,  seldom  four-parted,  more  or
less  united,  mostly  persistent.  Corolla  regular,  hypogynous  ;  the  limb
five-cleft,  seldom  four,  deciduous,  plaited  in  aestivation,  sometimes  imbri-
cated. Stamens  four  or  five,  sometimes  one  abortive,  inserted  on  the
corolla,  as  many  as  the  segments  of  the  limb,  and  alternate  with  them  ;
anthers  bursting  longitudinally,  rarely  by  pores  at  the  apex.  Ovary
superior,  two-celled,  rarely  four  or  many-celled,  with  the  placenta  in  the
axis ;  styles  and  stigmas  united  into  one.  Fruit  a  capsule  with  a  double
dissepiment  parallel  with  the  valves,  or  a  berry  with  the  placentae  adher-
ing to  the  dissepiment.  Seeds  numerous,  sessile ;  embryo  straight  or
curved,  often  out  of  the  center,  lying  in  a  fleshy  albumen  ;  radicle  next
the  hilum.

1.  Nicotiana.  Calyx  tubular-campanulate,  five-cleft.  Corolla  fun-
nel-form, usually  with  a  long  tube,  regular,  the  plaited  border  five-
lobed.  Stamens  five,  declinate.  Stigma  capitate,  emarginate.  Cap-
sule two-celled,  two  or  four-valved  from  the  apex,  opening  by  four
points.  —  Rank  acrid-narcotic  herbs,  mostly  clammy-pubescent,  with
large,  entire  leaves,  and  lurid,  racemed  or  panicled  flowers,  white,
tinged  with  green  or  purple.

2.  Datura.  Calyx  large,  tubular,  ventricose,  five-angled,  five-
toothed,  separating  transversely  above  the  persistent,  orbicular,  peltate
base  in  fruit.  Corolla  funnel-form,  with  a  large  and  spreading  five-
toothed  plaited  border.  Stamens  five,  equal ;  stigma  thick,  obtuse,  bi-
lamellar.  Capsule  globular,  smooth  or  prickly,  four-valved,  two-celled,
with  two  thick  placentae  projected  from  the  axis  into  the  middle  of  the
cells,  thence  connected  with  the  walls  by  an  imperfect  false  partition,  so
that  the  pod  is  four-celled  except  near  the  top,  with  the  placentae  seem-
ingly borne  on  the  middle  of  the  alternate  partitions.  Seeds  numerous,
black,  rather  large. — Rank  narcotic  annual  weeds,  with  an  unpleasant
odor  when  bruised,  bearing  ovate,  angular-toothed  leaves,  and  large
bluish-white  or  purple,  solitary,  axillary  flowers,  on  short  peduncles.

3.  Hyoscyamus.  Calyx  campanulate  or  urceolate,  five-lobed,  per-
sistent. Corolla  funnel-form  ;  limb  spreading,  oblique,  five-lobed,  une-


94  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

qual,  one  of  the  lobes  larger.  Stamens  five,  declinate  ;  stigma  capitate.
Capsule  ovate,  compressed,  two-celled,  covered  by  the  persistent  calyx,
furrowed  on  each  side ;  opening  transversely  all  round  near  the  apex
which  falls  off  like  a  lid.— Coarse,  clammy-pubescent,  rank,  narcotic
herbs,  with  lurid  flowers  in  the  axils  of  angled  or  toothed  leaves.

4.  Physalis.  Calyx  five-cleft,  persistent,  reticulated  and  enlarging
after  flowering,  at  length  much  inflated  and  inclosing  the  berry.  Corolla
rotate-campanuiate  ;  tube  very  short,  marked  with  five  concave  spots  at
the  base  ;  limb  plaited,  obscurely  five-lobed.  Stamens  five,  connivent;
anthers  opening  longitudinally.  Stigma  capitate.  Berry  globular,
smooth,  two-celled,  covered  with  the  five-angular,  membranous,  inflated,
colored  calyx. — Herbs,  rarely  shrubs,  with  axillary  or  supra-axillary
flowers.

5.  Capsicum.  Calyx  erect,  five-cleft,  persistent.  Corolla  rotate  ;  tube
very  short;  limb  plaited,  five-lobed.  Stamens  five,  with  converging
anthers,  which  are  two-celled,  dehiscing  by  fissures,  longitudinally.
Fruit  a  dry,  coriaceous  berry,  two  to  four-celled,  inflated,  many-seeded.
Seeds  flat,  naked,  very  acrid. — A  large  genus  of  herbaceous  or  shrubby
plants,  pervaded  by  a  heating,  acrid  principle ;  leaves  often  in  pairs ;
peduncles  axillary,  solitary.

6.  Solanum.  Calyx  chiefly  five-parted,  sometimes  ten,  spreading,
persistent.  Corolla  rotate,  subcampanulate ;  tube  veiy  short ;  limb
plicate,  five  to  ten-lobed.  Stamens  exserted,  converging  around  the
style ;  filaments  very  short ;  anthers  erect,  slightly  cohering  or  conni-
vent, opening  at  the  apex  by  two  pores.  Berry  subglobose  or  depressed,
often  torose,  two  to  six-celled,  many-seeded. — Herbs  or  shrubs,  unarmed
or  prickly.  Leaves  sometimes  geminate,  pinnatifid  or  undivided.
Peduncles  solitary  or  several,  one  or  many-flowered.

7.  Atropa.  Calyx  campanulate,  five-cleft,  persistent,  nearly  equal.
Corolla  campanulate,  twice  as  long  as  the  calyx  ;  tube  short ;  limb  with
five  shallow  nearly  equal  segments.  Stamens  five,  distant ;  filaments,
filiform,  incurved,  nearly  as  long  as  the  tube  of  the  corolla;  anthers
cordate,  four-lobed.  Stigma  capitate.  Berry  two-celled,  globular,
many-seeded,  subtended  by  the  enlarged  calyx.  —  Narcotic  herbs,
shrubs  or  trees. Exotics.

LXXV. Gentianace^e. Gentians.
Herbs  rarely  shrubs,  generally  smooth,  sometimes twining,  with  a
watery  juice. Leaves  opposite,  entire,  smooth,  exstipulated,  sessile,  or
having  their  petioles  confluent  in  a  little  sheath,  in  most  cases  three  to


Natural  Orders of  Plants.  95

five-ribbed  ;  very  rarely  brown,  scale-like,  or  alternate.  Flowers  con-
spicuous, terminal  or  axillary,  regular,  or  sometimes  irregular.  Calyx
monophyllous,  four  to.  ten-cleft,  united  at  base,  persistent.  Corolla
usually  regular  and  persistent,  hypogynous;  the  limb  divided  info  as
many  lobes  as  there  are  sepals,  with  an  imbricated  twisted  aestivation.
Stamens  inserted  on  the  tube  of  the  corolla,  alternate  with  its  segments,
and  equal  in  number  to  them  ;  some  of  them  occasionally  abortive.
Pollen  three-lobed  or  triple.  Ovary  single,  one-celled,  sometimes
rendered  apparently  two-celled  by  the  introflexed  placentse.  Style  one,
continuous  or  none  ;  stigmas  one  or  two.  Capsule  or  berry  many-
seeded,  with  one  or  two  cells,  usually  two-valved ;  the  margins  of  the
valves  turned  inward,  and  in  the  genera  with  one  cell,  bearing  the
seeds  ;  in  the  two-celled  genera  inserted  into  a  central  placenta.  Seeds
small ;  testa  single  ;  embryo  minute,  straight  in  the  axis  of  soft  fleshy
albumen  ;  radicle  next  the  hilum.

SUB-ORDER  I. Gentiane^e. Gentian.
Corolla  imbricate  from  right  to  left  in  aestivation. Testa  of  the  seed
membranaceous. Leaves  opposite.

1.  Sabbatia.  Calyx  five  to  twelve-parted,  rarely  five-cleft,  the  divi-
sions slender.  Corolla  rotate,  regular,  five  to  twelve-parted,  withering
on  the  capsule.  Stamens  five  to  twelve,  inserted  in  the  throat  of  the
tube ;  anthers  erect,  at  length  recurved,  two-celled,  spirally  twisted  after
shedding  the  pollen.  Ovary  superior,  ovate;  style  distinct,  declining,
bifid  ;  stigmas  capitate,  ascending,  with  two  arms  which  become  spirally
twisted.  Capsule  bivalve,  septicidal,  somewhat  two-celled  ;  valves  a
little  introflexed ;  seeds  numerous,  small. — Biennials  with  slender  stems,
and  cymose-panicled,  white  or  rose-purple  flowers.

2.  Gentiana.  Calyx  four  or  five-cleft  or  parted.  Corolla  marescent,
funnel-shaped,  or  campanulate,  tubular  at  base ;  limb  four  or  five  or  six
to  eight-parted,  regular,  usually  with  intermediate  plaited  folds  which
bear  appendages  at  the  sinuses  ;  segments  either  spreading,  erect,  or
convergent,  entire  or  ciliated.  Stamens  five,  inserted  on  the  corolla
tube  ;  filaments  equal  at  the  base ;  anthers  sometimes  connate.  Style
short,  two-parted,  or  wanting  ;  stigmas  two  persistent,  revolute  or  erect.
Capsule  oblong,  two-valved,  one-celled,  many-seeded ;  placentae  united
with  the  endocarp,  and  overspreading  the  valves  of  the  capsule. — Herbs
of  various  habit,  with  opposite  leaves,  and  terminal  or  cymose  flowers.

3.  Frasera.  Flowers  mostly  tetramerous.  Calyx  deeply  four-
parted  ;  segments  connected  at  base,  persistent.  Corolla  deciduous,
rotate,  deeply  four-.parted ;  segments  elliptical,  each  with  a  bearded  and


96  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

orbicular  gland  or  pit  on  the  upper  side.  Stamens  four ;  filaments  awl-
shaped,  usually  somewhat  connected  at  base ;  anthers  oblong,  versatile.
Ovary  one-celled,  with  a  single,  persistent  style,  .and  two,  short,  distinct
stigmas.  Capsule  oval,  compressed,  bivalved,  one-celled,  partly  mar-
gined ;  seeds  few,  large,  flat,  imbricated,  elliptical,  with  a  membranous
margin. — Biennials  or  perennials,  tall  and  showy,  with  opposite  or
verticillate  leaves,  and  numerous  peduncled  flowers  in  open  cymes.

SUB-ORDER  II. Menyanthe^e. Buckbean.
^Estivation of  the corolla induplicate. Aquatic or marsh herbs.
Sheaths  of  the  leaves  alternate.

4.  Menyanthes.  Calyx  five-parted,  tubular  below.  Corolla  short
funnel-form,  fleshy,  deciduous,  the  whole  upper  surface  white-bearded;
limb  spreading,  five-lobed,  equal.  Stamens  five,  inserted  on  the  corolla;
filaments  distinct ;  anthers  erect.  Ovary  surrounded  by  five  hypogynous
glands;  style  filiform,  persistent;  stigma  capitate  bifid.  Capsule  one-
celled,  somewhat  one-valved,  many-seeded,  bursting  somewhat  irregu-
larly; testa  hard,  smooth,  and  shining.  —  Perennial,  with  a  thickish,
creeping  rootstock,  sheathed  by  the  membranous  bases  of  the  long
petioles,  which  bear  three  oval  or  oblong  leaflets  at  the  summit;  flowers
white  or  slightly  reddish,  racemed  on  the  naked  scape.

ORDER  LXXVI.  Apocynace^e.  Dogbane.
Trees,  shrubs,  and  herbs,  usually  with  a  milky  juice.  Leaves  oppo-
site, sometimes  whorled,  seldom  scattered,  quite  entire,  often  having
cilise  or  glands  upon  the  petioles,  but  without  stipules.  Calyx  free,  per-
sistent, five-parted.  Corolla  hypogynous,  regular,  five-lobed,  often  with
scales  at  the  mouth,  deciduous;  aestivation  twisted.  Stamens  five,
arising  from  the  corolla  and  alternate  with  its  segments ;  filaments  dis-
tinct ;  anthers  three-celled,  opening  lengthwise,  sometimes  slightly  con-
nected. Pollen  granular,  globose,  or  three-lobed,  immediately  applied
to  the  stigma.  Ovaries  two,  distinct  or  rarely  united;  styles  two  or
united ;  stigmas  united  into  one  which  is  common  to  both  styles.  Fruit
a  follicle,  capsule,  drupe,  or  berry,  double  or  single.  Seeds  numerous,
pendulous,  with  fleshy  or  cartilaginous  albumen;  embryo  foliaceous;
plumule  inconspicuous ;  radicle  turned  toward  the  hilum.

1.  Apocynum.  Calyx  five-parted,  lobes  acute.  Corolla  campanulate,
short,  with  five  revolute  lobes,  furnished  at  base  with  five  glandular
teeth  alternating  with  the  stamens.  Stamens  inserted  at  the  base  of  the
corolla  ;  filaments  ligulate ;  anthers  sagittate,  connivent,  longer  than  the
filaments,  and  slightly  cohering  by  their  inner  face  to  the  stierna-  their
postenor  lobes  destitute  of  pollen.  Hypogynous  scales  five  6varies
two ;  stigma  sessde,  dilated,  with  a  conical  and  bilobiate  apex Foil'  I


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  97

long,  slender,  distinct.  Seeds  provided  with  a  long  tuft  of  silky  down
at  the  apex,  [comose). — Perennial  herbs,  not  climbing,  with  mucronate-
pointed,  opposite  leaves,  a  tough  fibrous  bark,  and  small  and  pale
cymose  flowers  on  short  pedicels.

2.  Strychnos.  Some  authors  place  this  in  order,  Loganiaceae,  and
sub-order,  Strychnete.  Calyx  four  or  five-parted.  Corolla  tubular,  with
a  spreading,  four  or  five-parted  limb,  and  a  valvate  aestivation.  Stamens
four  or  five,  inserted  on  the  throat  of  the  corolla,  which  is  either  naked
or  bearded.  Ovary  two-celled;  style  single;  stigma  capitate;  ovules
indefinite,  attached  to  a  central  placenta.  Berry  corticated,  one-celled,
many-seeded,  or  by  abortion  one-seeded.  Seeds  nidulant,  discoidal ;
albumen  large,  cartilaginous,  almost  divided  into  two  plates.  Embryo
with  leafy  cotyledons. — Exotic.

3.  Gelseminum.  Calyx  very  small,  five-sepalled.  Corolla  funnel-
form  ;  limb  spreading,  five-lobed,  nearly  equal.  Capsule  compressed,
fiat,  two-partible,  two-celled ;  seeds  flat,  attached  to  the  margins  of  the
valves. — Southern  perennial  twining  herbs,  with  smooth  stems,  opposite,
entire,  lanceolate  leaves,  and  short  petioles.  It  is  nearly  allied  to  Big-
nonia,  and  probably  should  be  placed  in  Bignoniaceae.

ORDER  LXXVII.  Asclepiadace^e.  Milk-weed.
Herbs  or  shrubs,  with  a  milky  juice,  and  often  twining.  Leaves
entire,  mostly  opposite,  exstipulate,  rarely  alternate  or  whorled,  having
cilise  between  their  petioles.  Flowers  sub-umbelled,  fascicled,  or  race-
mose, proceeding  from  between  the  petioles.  Calyx  five-divided,  per-
sistent. Corolla  hypogynous,  five-lobed,  regular,  deciduous,  generally
with  imbricate  aestivation.  Stamens  five,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the
corolla,  and  alternate  with  its  segments ;  filaments  usually  connate ;
anthers  two-celled,  sometimes  almost  four-celled  in  consequence  of  their
dissepiments  being  nearly  complete.  Pollen  at  the  period  of  the  dehis-
cence of  the  anther  cohering  in  masses  equal  in  number  to  the  cells,  or
occasionally  cohering  in  pairs  and  sticking  to  the  five  processes  of  the
stigma,  either  by  twos,  by  fours,  or  singly.  Ovaries  two;  styles  two,
approximate,  often  short;  stigma  common  to  both  styles,  dilated,  five-
angled,  with  corpusculiferous  corners.  Follicles  two,  one  often  abortive.
Placenta  attached  to  the  suture,  but  finally  separating.  Seeds  nume-
rous, pendulous,  imbricated,  almost  always  comose  at  the  hilum.  Albu-
men thin ;  embryo  straight ;  cotyledons  foliaceous ;  radicle  superior ;  plumule
inconspicuous.

1.  Asclepias.  Calyx  five-parted,  persistent,  the  divisions  small,  spread-
ing. Corolla  rotate,  deeply  five-cleft,  valvate  in  the  bud,  finally  reflexed,
deciduous. Staminal  crown  of  five-lobes,  seated  on  the  tube  of  stamens ;

7


98  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

leaflets  cucullate,  fleshy,  erect,  opposite  the  anthers,  with  an  averted,
horn-like  process  from  the  base,  curved  toward  the  stigma.  Filaments
united  in  a  tube  (gynostegium)  which  incloses  the  pistil ;  anthcndmm
(connate  mass  of  anthers)  five-angled,  truncate,  opening  by  five  longi-
tudinal fissures.  Pollinia  (masses  of  pollen)  five  distinct  pairs,  fixed  by
the  attenuated  apex,  pendulous.  Follicles  two,  one  often  abortive,  soft,
ovate  or  lanceolate  ;  seeds  comose. — Perennial  upright  herbs  with  thick
and  deep  roots  ;  leaves  opposite,  verticillate,  rarely  alternate,  usually
transversely  veiny ;  umbels  between  the  petioles.

2.  Hemidesmus.  Calyx  five-parted.  Corolla  rotate,  with  coriaceous
segments,  and  five  rounded,  thick  scales  in  the  throat  of  the  tube  below
the  sinuses.  Filaments  connate  at  base,  inserted  in  the  tube,  dis-
tinct above  ;  anthers  cohering  separate  from  the  stigma,  beardless,  simple
at  the  point.  Pollen-masses  twenty,  granular,  attached  in  fours  to  a
solitary  reniform  appendage  of  each  corpuscle.  Stigma  flatfish,  point-
less, pentagonal,  stellate.  Follicles  cylindrical,  very  much  divaricating,
smooth. Seeds  comose. — Exotic  twining  plants.

ORDER  LXXVIII.  Oleace^:.  Olives.
Trees  and  shrubs,  with  branches  usually  dichotomous,  and  ending
abruptly  by  a  conspicuous  bud.  Leaves  opposite,  simple,  sometimes
pinnate.  Flowers  perfect,  sometimes  dioecious,  in  terminal  or  axillary
racemes  or  panicles  ;  the  pedicels  opposite,  with  single  bracts.  Calyx
inferior,  generally  divided  into  four  parts,  persistent.  Corolla  monope-
talous,  hypogynous,  four-cleft,  sometimes  distinct  but  connected  in  pairs
by  the  filaments,  occasionally  apetalous,  valvate  in  aestivation.  Stamens
two,  alternate  with  the  petals  or  segments  ;  anthers  two-celled,  opening
longitudinally.  Ovary  simple,  without  any  hypogynous  disk,  two-celled ;
cells  two-seeded  ;  ovules  in  pairs,  pendulous,  collateral  ;  style  one  or
wanting  ;  stigma  entire  or  bifid.  Fruit  drupaceous,  berried  or  capsular,
often  one-seeded  by  abortion.  Seeds  with  dense,  fleshy,  abundant  albu-
men ;  embryo  about  half  its  length,  straight ;  cotyledons  foliaceous,  partly
asunder  ;  radicle  superior  ;  plumule  inconspicuous.

1.  Ligustrum.  Calyx  short,  tubular,  minutely  four-toothed,  decidu-
ous. Corolla,  funnel-form,  four-lobed,  the  lobes  ovate,  obtuse  ;  tube
short.  Stamens  two,  on  the  tube  of  the  corolla,  included.  Style  very
short ;  stigma  two-cleft.  Berry  spherical,  two-celled,  two  to  four-seeded ;
seeds  convex  on  one  side,  angular  on  the  other. — Shrubs  with  entire
leaves  on  short  petioles,  and  small  white  flowers  in  terminal  thyrsoid
panicles.

2.  Olea.  Calyx  short,  four-toothed.  Corolla  short,  rotate  or  hypo-
crateriform,  with  a  flat  four-parted  limb. Stamens  two,  rather  projecting


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  99

Ovary  bilocular  ;  style  very  short ;  stigma  bifid,  with  emarginate  seg-
ments. Drupe  baccate,  oleo-carneous,  two-celled,  one  of  the  cells
usually  abortive.

3.  Ornus.  Calyx  very  small,  four-cleft.  Corolla  divided  to  the  base
into  linear  segments. Pericarp  a  winged  key  not  dehiscing.

4.  Fraxinus.  Flowers  polygamous  or  dioecious.  Calyx  small  and
four-cleft,  or  wanting.  Petals  four,  slightly  cohering  in  pairs  at  the
base,  or  only  two,  oblong  or  linear,  or  wanting.  Stamens  two,  some-
times three,  rarely  four.  Style  single  ;  stigma  bifid.  Fruit  a  one  or
two-celled  samara,  or  key,  orbicular,  compressed,  winged  at  the  apex,
one  or  two-seeded,  not  dehiscing ;  cotyledons  elliptical ;  radicle  slender. —
Light  timber  trees,  with  petioled  unequally  pinnate  leaves,  and  small
flowers  in  crowded  panicles  or  racemes,  from  the  axils  of  the  last  year's
leaves.

SUB- CLASS  III. Apetalous  Plants.
Corolla  none  ;  the  floral  envelopes  consisting  of  a  single series of
organs  (calyx)  only ;  or  sometimes  wholly  wanting.

ORDER  LXXIX.  Aristolochiace^:.  Birthwort.
Herbaceous  or  shrubby  plants,  the  latter  often  climbing ;  wood  with-
out concentric  layers.  Leaves  alternate,  simple,  petiolate,  often  with  a
stipule  opposite  the  leaf,  or  exstipulate.  Flowers  perfect,  axillary,  soli-
tary, brown,  or  of  some  dull  color.  Calyx  superior,  tubular,  segments
three,  valvate  in  aestivation,  sometimes  regular,  sometimes  very  unequal.
Corolla  wanting.  Stamens  six  to  twelve,  epigynous,  distinct  or  adher-
ing to  the  style  and  stigmas.  Ovary  inferior,  three  or  six-celled;  ovules
numerous,  horizontally  attached  to  the  axis;  style  simple  ;  stigmas  radi-
ating, as  numerous  as  the  cells  of  the  ovary.  Fruit  capsule  or  berry,
three  or  six-celled,  many-seeded.  Seeds  with  a  very  minute  embryo
placed  in  the  base  of  fleshy  albumen,  anatropous.

1.  Asarum.  Calyx  campanulate,  coriaceous,  colored,  permanent;
limb  in  three  rather  deep,  upright  segments,  with  incurved  points.  Sta-
mens twelve,  inserted  on  the  ovary  ;  filaments  awl-shaped,  half  the
length  of  the  calyx  ;  anthers  short,  each  of  two  round,  separated  cells,
adnate  to  the  middle  of  the  filaments  on  the  inner  side.  Ovary  tur-
binate ;  styles  columnar,  furrowed,  nearly  as  long  as  the  stamens ;  stigma
in  six  deep,  stellate,  recurved  segments.  Capsule  coriaceous,  globular,
six-celled,  crowned  with  the  calyx  ;  seeds  several  in  each  cell,  obovate,
with  a  pale  longitudinal  crest. — Stemless  herbs,  with  aromatic-pungent,
creeping,  matted  rootstocks,  bearing  a  terminal  nodding  flower  close  to
the  ground,  between  the  long  petioles  of  a  pair  of  cordate-reniform,  and
veiny,  deciduous  leaves.


100  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

2.  Aristolochia.  Calyx  superior,  tubular,  colored,  permanent ;
tumid  and  nearly  globose,  at  the  base  ;  limb  dilated ;  either  lobed  and
equally  spreading,  or  unilateral  and  undivided.  Stamens  six ;  filaments
consolidated  into  a  notched  cup,  crowning  the  ovary  within  the  calyx  ;
anthers  six,  sessile  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  cup,  each  of  two  oblong,
separated,  parallel,  bivalve  cells.  Ovary  inferior,  oblong,  angular.
Style  scarcely  any.  Stigma  nearly  globular,  with  six  deep  lobes  ;  the
summit  concave.  Capsule  with  six  angles,  six  cells,  and  six  valves,
with  double  partitions  from  their  indexed  margins.  Seeds  numerous  in
each  cell,  depressed,  horizontal,  lying  over  each  other,  triangular,  with
a  dilated  or  thickened  winged  margin. — Twining,  climbing,  or  erect
perennial  herbs  or  shrubs,  with  alternate  leaves,  and  lateral  or  axillary
greenish  or  lurid -purple  flowers.

ORDER  LXXX. Chenopodiace^e. Goosefoot.

Herbs  or  undershrubs,  with  alternate,  occasionally  opposite  leaves,
without  stipules.  Flowers  small,  perfect,  often  dioecious  or  polygamous.
Calyx  deeply  divided,  sometimes  tubular  at  base,  persistent,  imbricate
in  aestivation.  Stamens  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  calyx,  opposite  its
segments,  and  equal  to  them  in  number,  or  fewer.  Ovary  single,  supe-
rior, or  occasionally  adhering  to  the  tube  of  the  calyx,  with  one  ovule
attached  to  the  base  of  the  cavity ;  style  in  two  or  four  divisions,  rarely
simple  ;  stigmas  undivided.  Fruit  a  utricle.  Embryo  curved  round
farinaceous  albumen,  or  spiral,  or  doubled  together  without  albumen ;
radicle  next  the  hilum  ;  plumide  inconspicuous.

1.  Chenopodium.  Flowers  perfect,  all  bractless.  Calyx  five-parted,
obtusely  five-angled  ;  segments  ovate,  concave,  persistent,  membranous
at  the  edges  ;  not  appendaged  or  becoming  succulent,  more  or  less  en-
veloping the  depressed  fruit.  Stamens  five,  opposite  the  calyx-lobes  ;  fila-
ments subulate  ;  anthers  of  two  round  lobes.  Ovary  orbicular,  depressed  ;
styles  two,  rarely  three,  short ;  stigmas  obtuse.  Seed  solitary,  lenticular,
horizontal,  crustaceous,  enveloped  in  a  very  thin,  membranous,  close
utricle,  and  covered  by  the  permanent  calyx. — Smooth  weeds,  mostly  an-
nual, and  more  or  less  covered  with  a  white  mealiness  ;  the  leaves  alter-
nate, petioled,  triangular  or  rhombic,  toothed  or  entire.  Flowers  sessile
in  small  clusters  collected  in  spiked  panicles.

ORDER  LXXXI. Amaranthace^e. Amaranth.

Herbs  or  shrubs  with  opposite  or  alternate,  exstipulate,  leaves.  Flowers
in  heads  or  spikes,  usually  colored,  generally  perfect.  Pubescence  sim-
ple, the  hairs  divided  by  internal  partitions.  Calyx  three  or  6ve-leaved,
hypogynous,  scarious,  persistent,  occasionally  with  two  bractlets  at  the


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  101

base,  and  generally  immersed  in  dry  colored  bracts.  Stamens  hypogyn-
ous,  either  five,  or  some  multiple  of  that  number,  distinct  or  monadel-
phous,  occasionally  abortive  ;  anthers  two  or  one-celled.  Ovary  superior,
single,  one  or  few-seeded  ;  the  ovules  hanging  from  a  free  central  fu-
niculus ;  style  one  or  none ;  stigma  simple  or  compound.  Fruit  a
membranous  utricle.  Seeds  lentiform,  pendulous  ;  testa  crustaceous  ;
albumen  central,  farinaceous ;  embryo  curved  round  the  circumference ;
radicle  next  the  hilum  ;  plumule  inconspicuous.

1.  Amaranthus.  Flowers  monoecious  or  polygamous,  rarely  dioe-
cious, three-bracted.  Calyx  deeply  three  to  five-parted,  mostly  colored,
persistent ;  segments  lanceolate,  acute.  Stamens  three  to  five,  separate  ;
anthers  two-celled.  Styles  or  stigmas  two  or  three,  occasionally  four,
thread-like.  Utricle  one-celled,  one-seeded,  circumscissile  or  inde-
hiscent. — Chiefly  annual  herbs,  with  alternate  and  entire,  petioled  leaves,
and  minute  spiked-clustered  flowers,  axillary  and  terminal ;  bracts  and
calyx  green  or  purple.

ORDER  LXXXIL Polygonace^e. Buckwheat.

Herbs  rarely  shrubs,  with  alternate  leaves.  Stipules  of  that  remark-
able kind  called  Ochrese,  cohering  round  the  stem  in  the  form  of  a  sheath
above  the  base  of  the  leaf-stalks  ;  occasionally  wanting.  Flowers  mostly
perfect,  and  in  racemes.  Calyx  inferior,  divided;  sepals  united  at  base,
imbricate  in  sestivation.  Stamens  definite,  inserted  on  the  calyx  near
the  base ;  anthers  dehiscing  longitudinally.  Ovary  superior,  with  a
single  erect  ovule  ;  styles  or  stigmas  several.  Fruit  an  achenium,  usually
triangular,  naked,  or  protected  by  the  calyx.  Seed  solitary,  erect,  ortho-
Iropous  ;  embryo  curved  or  straightish,  on  the  outside  of  the  albumen,
or  rarely  in  its  center  ;  radicle  pointing  from  the  hilum  and  toward  the
apex  of  the  dry  seed-like  fruit;  plumule  inconspicuous.

1.  Rheum.  Calyx  petaloid,  six-parted,  marescent.  Stamens  about
nine,  inserted  on  the  base  of  the  calyx.  Styles  three,  reflexed.  Stigmas
peltate,  entire.  Fruit  a  triangular,  winged  achenium,  with  the  withered
calyx  at  the  base.  Embryo  in  the  center  of  the  albumen. — Perennials,
with  flowers  fasciculate,  in  racemose  panicles.

2.  Polygonum.  Calyx  turbinate,  colored,  with  five  deep,  ovate,
obtuse,  persistent  segments.  Stamens  four  to  nine,  very  short,  subulate  ;
anthers  roundish,  incumbent.  Ovary  roundish,  either  triangular  or  com-
pressed ;  styles  usually  three  ;  in  those  with  a  compressed  ovary  only
two,  filiform,  short,  in  some  species  partly  combined  ;  stigmas  simple.
Nut  or  achenium  solitary,  triangular  or  compressed,  pointed.  Embryo
placed  in  a  groove  on  the  outside  of  the  albumen,  and  curved  half-way


102  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

around  it;  radicle  and  usually  the  cotyledons  slender. — Herbs,  with  joint-
ed stems  and  pedicels  ;  flowers  in  axillary  and  terminal  fascicles,  and
spikes  or  paniculate  racemes.

3.  Rumex.  Calyx  of  three,  obtuse,  spreading,  persistent,  external
sepals,  more  or  less  combined  at  the  bottom,  and  of  three  ovate,  larger,
internal  ones,  similar  in  color,  but  thinner  in  texture,  and  more  veiny  ;
subsequently  enlarged,  converging  round  the  fruit,  and  permanent,  bear-
ing, in  some  species,  a  dorsal  grain  or  tubercle.  Stamens  six  ;  filaments
capillary,  very  short ;  anthers  erect,  oblong,  of  two-lobes.  Ovary  tri-
angular, rather  turbinate  ;  sometimes  in  a  separate  flower.  Styles  capil-
lary, spreading,  protruding  between  the  petals.  Stigmas  large,  in  many
fine  tufted  segments.  Nut  inclosed  within  the  interior,  enlarged,  closed
sepals,  triangular,  polished,  with  three  sharp  edges.  Embryo  slightly
curved,  lying  along  one  side  of  the  albumen,  slender. — Coarse  herbs
with  small  homely  (mostly  green)  flowers,  commonly  whorled  in  pan-
icled  racemes  ;  petioles  somewhat  sheathing  at  the  base.

ORDER LXXXIII. Phytolaccace^e. Pokeweed.

Herbs  or  undershrubs,  with  alternate,  entire,  exstipulate  leaves,  often
with  pellucid  dots.  Flowers  racemose,  perfect.  Calyx  of  four  or  five
petaloid  leaves,  imbricated.  Stamens  four  or  five,  and  alternate  with
the  sepals,  or  indefinite ;  anthers  two-celled  with  a  longitudinal  dehiscence.
Ovary  one  or  several-celled,  each  cell  containing  one  ascending  ovule,
either  amphitropal  or  campylotropal ;  styles  and  stigmas  equal  in  num-
ber to  the  cells.  Fruit  baccate  or  dry,  entire  or  deeply-lobed,  one  or
many-celled,  indehiscent.  Seeds  solitary,  ascending,  with  a  cylindrical
embryo,  curved  round  mealy  albumen  ;  radicle  next  the  hilum.

1.  Phytolacca.  Calyx  of  five-rounded,  petaloid  sepals.  Stamens
five  to  thirty,  usually  ten.  Ovary  of  five  to  twelve  cells  or  carpels,
united  in  a  ring,  with  as  many  short  separate  styles  ;  in  fruit  forming  a
depressed,  globose,  furrowed,  five  to  twelve-celled  berry,  covered  with
a  succulent  pulp,  and  with  a  single  vertical  seed  in  each  cell.  Embryo
curved  in  a  ring  round  the  albumen. — Tall  and  stout  perennial  herbs,
with  large  petioled  leaves,  and  flowers  in  racemes  which,  by  the  axillary
prolongation  of  the  stem,  become  lateral  and  opposite  the  leaves.

ORDER  LXXXIV.  Lauracejs.  Laurels.
Trees  and  shrubs  with  alternate,  exstipulate,  seldom  opposite,  entire,
or  very  rarely  lobed  leaves  ;  flowers  umbelled  or  panicled.  Calyx  four
to  six-cleft,  with  imbricated  aestivation,  the  limb  sometimes  wantino-.
Stamens  definite,  perigynous,  opposite  the  segments  of  the  calyx,  and
generally  twice  as  numerous  ;  the  three  innermost  sterile  or  wanting ;


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  103

the  six  outermost  scarcely  ever  abortive  ;  anthers  adnate,  two  to  four-
celled  ;  the  cells  bursting  by  a  longitudinal  persistent  valve  from  the  base
to  the  apex  ;  the  outer  anthers  valved  inward ;  the  inner  valved  either
outward  or  inward.  Glands  usually  present  at  the  base  of  the  inner
filaments.  Ovary  single,  superior,  with  one  or  two  single  pendulous
ovules ;  style  simple  ;  stigma  obtuse,  two  or  three-lobed.  Fruit  berry
or  drupe,  naked  or  covered,  often  on  a  thickened  pedicel.  Seeds  exal-
buminous ;  embryo  inverted  ;  cotyledons  large,  plano-convex,  peltate  near
the  base ;  radicle  very  short,  included,  superior ;  plumule  conspicuous,
two-leaved.

1.  Benzoin.  Floivers  polygamous,  involucrated.  Males;  calyx  six-
parted,  with  equal,  permanent  segments.  Stamens  nine,  in  three  rows,
fertile  ;  anthers  ovate,  two-celled,  introrse.  Glands  six  to  nine  in  two  or
three  rows,  with  a  reniform,  compressed  head,  alternate  either  with  the
stamens  of  the  second  and  third  row,  or  with  those  of  the  first  and
second  row,  added  obliquely  to  the  third  row.  Females ;  Jlowers
smaller  than  the  male,  with  twelve  to  eighteen  sterile  stamens,  among
which  spathulate  bodies  are  dispersed.  Style  short  and  thick.  Drupe
obovoid,  succulent,  one-seeded,  seated  on  the  permanent  six-cleft  calyx,
the  pedicel  not  thickened. — Shrubs  with  entire,  deciduous  leaves,  and
honey-yellow  flowers  in  almost  sessile,  lateral,  umbel-like  clusters,
appearing  before  the  leaves ;  the  clusters  composed  of  smaller  clusters
or  umbels  of  four  or  six  flowers,  surrounded  by  an  involucre  of  decidu-
ous scales.

2.  Sassafras.  Flowers  dioecious.  Calyx  six-parted,  membranous ;
segments  equal,  permanent  at  the  base.  Males  ;  stamens  nine,  fertile,
inserted  on  the  base  of  the  calyx  in  three  rows,  the  three  inner  with
double-stalked  distinct  glands  at  the  base  of  each  ;  anthers  linear,  four-
celled,  four-valved,  cells  looking  inward.  Females  ;  with  as  many  sta-
mens as  the  male,  or  fewer,  sterile  ;  the  inner  often  confluent.  Style
filiform.  Drupe  superior,  ovoid,  succulent,  one-seeded,  supported  on  a
club-shaped,  fleshy  pedicel. — Trees  with  spicy-aromatic  bark,  very  mu-
cilaginous twigs  and  foliage,  the  latter  deciduous  and  often  lobed.
Flowers  greenish-yellow,  in  clustered  and  peduncled  corymbed  racemes,
appearing  with  the  leaves.

3.  Laurus.  Flowers  dioecious,  or  perfect,  involucrated.  Calyx  four-
parted  ;  segments  equal,  deciduous.  Males  ;  stamens  fertile,  twelve  in
three  rows  ;  the  outermost  alternate  with  the  segments  of  the  calyx ;
all  with  two  glands  in  the  middle  or  above  it  ;  anthers  oblong,  two-celled,
all  looking  inward.  Females  ;  with  two  to  four  sterile  stamens  around
the  ovary  ;  stigma  capitate. Fruit  succulent,  seated  in  the  irregular


104  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

base  of  the  calyx.— Evergreen shrubs  with  axillary,  stalked  umbels  ;
leaf-buds  with  valvate  papery  scales.

4.  Camphora.  Flowers  perfect,  panicled,.  naked.  Calyx  six-cleft,
papery,  with  a  deciduous  limb.  Fertile  stamens  nine,  in  three  rows ;
the  inner  with  two-stalked,  compressed  glands  at  base  ;  anthers  four-
celled  ;  the  outer  introrse,  the  inner  extrorse.  Sterile  stamens  three,
shaped  like  the  first,  placed  in  a  whorl,  and  alternating  with  the  sta-
mens of  the  second  row  ;  three  others,  stalked,  with  an  ovate-glandular
head.  Fruit  placed  on  the  obconical  base  of  the  calyx. — Large  trees
with  triple-nerved  leaves,  having  glands  in  the  axils  of  the  principal
veins  ;  leaf-buds  scaly.

5.  Cinnamomum.  Flowers  perfect  or  polygamous,  panicled  or  fas-
cicled, naked.  Calyx  six-cleft ;  the  limb  deciduous.  Fertile  stamens
nine,  in  three  rows ;  the  three  inner  with  two  sessile  glands  at  the  base ;
anthers  four-celled,  the  three  inner  extrorse.  Three  capitate  abortive
stamens  next  the  center.  Fruit  seated  in  a  cup-like  calyx. — Plants
having  strongly-ribbed  leaves  ;  leaf-buds  not  scaly.

6.  Nectandra.  Flowers  perfect.  Calyx  six-parted,  rotate  ;  segments
deciduous,  the  three  outer  rather  the  broadest.  Anthers  nine,  ovate,
nearly  sessile,  with  four  cells  arranged  in  a  curve,  and  distinct  from  the
tip  of  the  anther ;  cells  of  the  interior  anthers  inverted.  Glands  in
pairs,  globose,  sessile,  at  the  base  of  the  three  interior  stamens  next
their  back.  Sterile  stamens  either  tooth-shaped  and  biglandular  at  the
base,  or  eglandular  and  then  with  a  small  oval  head.  Fruit  succulent,
more  or  less  immersed  in  the  tube  of  the  calyx  changed  into  a  trun-
cated cup. — Flowers  panicled  or  corymbose,  axillary,  lax,  pretty  ample.

ORDER LXXXV. Thtmelace^e. Mezereum.

Shrubs  with  a  very  tenacious  bark,  and  entire,  opposite  or  alternate,
exstipulate  leaves.  Flowers  perfect,  capitate  or  spiked,  terminal  or  axil-
lary, occasionally  solitary.  Calyx  tubular,  colored  ;  the  limb  four,  sel-
dom five-cleft,  with  an  imbricated  aestivation.  Corolla  none,  or  some-
times scale-like  petals  in  the  orifice  of  the  calyx.  Stamens  definite,
inserted  in  the  tube,  generally  eight,  sometimes  four,  rarely  two  ;  when
equal  in  number  to  the  segments  of  the  calyx  or  fewer,  opposite  to
them  ;  anthers  two-celled,  dehiscing  lengthwise  in  the  middle.  Ovary
solitary,  with  one  pendulous  ovule  ;  style  one  ;  stigma  undivided.  Fruit
hard,  dry,  and  nut-like,  or  drupaceous.  Albumen  none,  or  thin  and
fleshy  ;  embryo  straight ;  cotyledons  plano-convex  ;  radicle  short,  superior;
plumule  inconspicuous.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  105

1.  Dirca.  Calyx  petaloid,  tubular-funnel-shaped,  truncate,  the
border  wavy,  or  obscurely  about  four-toothed.  Stamens  eight,  unequal,
inserted  on  the  calyx  above  the  middle,  exserted  ;  filaments  capillary,
the  alternate  ones  longer.  Style  filiform,  incurved  at  the  apex  ;  stigma
capitate.  Drupe  oval,  reddish,  one-seeded. — A  much  branched  bush,
with  jointed  branchlets,  oval-obovate,  alternate  leaves,  at  length  smooth,
deciduous,  on  very  short  petioles,  the  bases  of  which  conceal  the  buds
of  the  next  season.  Flowers  light-yellow,  preceding  the  leaves,  three
in  a  cluster  from  a  dark-hairy  bud,  from  which  soon  after  proceeds  a
leafy  branch.

2.  Daphne.  Calyx  tubular,  marescent ;  tube  cylindrical,  coriaceous,
longer  than  the  limb,  imperforate  at  the  base,  containing  the  stamens  ;
limb  in  four  deep,  ovate,  spreading,  colored  segments.  Stamens  eight ;
filaments  short,  in  two  rows,  inserted  on  the  calyx-tube  about  the
middle;  anthers  roundish,  oblong,  two-celled,  simple,  included.  Ovary
ovate  ;  style  short,  terminal  ;  stigma  capitate,  depressed,  entire.  Berry
oval,  one-celled,  one-seeded  ;  seed  suspended,  large,  oval,  with  a  thin,
brittle  skin. — Mostly  evergreen  shrubs,  with  leaves  generally  from  the
terminal  buds,  and  flowers  from  the  lateral. Exotic.

ORDER  LXXXVI. Ulmaceji. Elm.

Trees  and  shrubs,  with  scabrous,  alternate,  simple,  deciduous  leaves,
and  two  deciduous  stipules  at  the  base  of  each  leaf.  Flowers  some-
times by  abortion,  dioecious,  in  loose  clusters,  never  in  catkins.  Calyx
inferior,  campanulate,  four  or  five-cleft,  irregular,  imbricate  in  aestiva-
tion. Stamens  definite,  inserted  on  the  base  of  the  calyx,  as  many  as
its  lobes  and  opposite  to  them  ;  erect  in  aestivation.  Ovary  superior,  one
or  two-celled,  with  a  single  suspended  ovule  ;  stigmas  two,  distinct.
Fruit  one-celled  and  one-seeded,  either  a  samara  or  a  drupe,  indehis-
cent.  Seed  solitary,  pendulous  ;  albumen  none,  or  in  very  small  quan-
tity ;  embryo  straight  or  curved,  with  foliaceous  cotyledons  ;  radicle
superior.

1.  Ulmus.  Flowers  perfect.  Calyx  campanulate,  shriveled,  persist-
ent, four  to  nine-cleft,  segments  colored  on  the  inner  side.  Stamens  four
to  nine  ;  filaments  twice  as  long  as  the  segments  of  the  calyx,  slender,
inserted  into  the  tube  opposite  each  segment ;  anthers  erect,  short,  with
four  furrows,  and  two  cells,  bursting  lengthwise  externally.  Ovary
flat,  two-celled,  with  a  single  anatropous  ovule  suspended  from  the  sum-
mit of  each  cell ;  styles  two,  short ;  stigmas  two,  terminal,  spreading,
downy,  shorter  than  the  calyx,  finally  inflexed.  Fruit  (by  obliteration)
a  one-celled,  one-seeded  membranaceous  samara,  compressed,  and
winged  all  around. Seeds  roundish,  slightly  compressed. — Trees,  rarely


106  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

shrubs,  with  flowers,  sometimes  polygamous,  purplish  or  yellowish,  in
lateral  clusters,  preceding  the  leaves,  which  are  strongly  straight-veined,
short-petioled,  and  oblique,  or  unequally  cordate  at  the  base.

ORDER  LXXXVII.  Euphorbiace^e.  Spurge.
Trees,  shrubs,  or  herbs,  often  abounding  in  an  acrid  milky  juice.
Leaves  opposite  or  alternate,  simple,  rarely  compound,  usually  with
stipules.  Flowers  monoecious,  or  dioecious  axillary  or  terminal,
usually  with  bracts,  and  sometimes  inclosed  within  an  involucre.
Calyx  lobed,  inferior,  with  various  glandular,  or  scaly  internal  appendages;
sometimes  wanting.  Corolla  either  consisting  of  petals  or  scales  equal
in  number  to,  or  more  than  the  sepals,  or  monopetalous,  or  wanting.
Males ;  stamens  definite  or  indefinite,  distinct  or  monadelphous  ;  anthers
two-celled,  sometimes  opening  by  pores.  Females  ;  ovary  free,  of
two  to  nine  more  or  less  united  carpels,  usually  stalked  ;  ovules  solitary
or  twin,  suspended  from  the  inner  angle  of  the  cell  ;  styles  as  many  as
carpels,  distinct,  cohering  or  wanting,  often  two-cleft ;  stigma  compound,
or  single  with  many  lobes.  Fruit  usually  tricoccous,  of  three  carpels,
usually  opening  elastically  by  one  or  both  sutures,  sometimes  fleshy  and
indehiscent.  Seeds  solitary  or  twin,  suspended,  with  an  aril ;  embryo
large,  inclosed  in  fleshy  albumen  ;  cotyledons  flat ;  radicle  superior.

1.  Euphorbia.  Flowers  in  monoecious  clusters,  surrounded  by  a
cup-shaped  involucrum,  consisting  of  one  leaf  with  four  or  five  divisions,
resembling  a  calyx  or  corolla,  usually  bearing  large  and  thick  glands
externally  at  its  sinuses.  Sterile  flowers,  naked,  twelve  or  more,  and
lining  the  base  of  the  involucre,  each  from  the  axil  of  a  little  bract,  and
consisting  merely  of  a  single  stamen  jointed  on  a  pedicel  like  the  filament;
anther-cells  globular,  separate.  Fertile  flower  solitary,  naked,  in  the
middle  of  the  involucre,  soon  protruded  on  a  long  pedicel,  consisting  of
a  three-lobed,  three-celled  ovary,  with  no  calyx  or  a  mere  vestige.
Styles  three,  but  two-cleft  ;  stigmas  six.  Fruit  hanging  out  of  the  invo-
lucrum, three-lobed,  three-celled,  bursting  at  the  back  with  elasticity,
and  each  cell  containing  one  suspended  seed,  which  is  often  caruncled. —
Herbs  with  a  milky  juice,  shrubs  or  trees  abroad  ;  the  uppermost  leaves
often  in  whorls  or  pairs.  Peduncles  lateral  or  terminal,  often  umbel-
late-clustered.

2.  Ricinus.  Flowers  monoecious.  Calyx  three  to  five-parted,
valvate.  Sterile  ;  stamens  numerous,  unequally  polyadelphous  ;  anther-
cells  distinct,  below  the  apex  of  the  filament.  Fertile  ;  style  short ;
stigmas  three,  deeply  bipartite,  oblong,  feathery,  colored.  Ovary
globose,  three-celled,  with  an  ovule  in  each  cell.  Fruit  mostly  aculeate,
capsular,  tricoccous.— Trees,  shrubs,  or  herbs,  with  alternate,  stipulate]


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  107

palmate,  peltate  leaves,  with  glands  at  the  apex  of  the  petiole.  Flowers
in  terminal  panicles,  the  lower  male,  the  upper  female ;  all  articulate
with  their  peduncles,  and  sometimes  augmented  by  biglandular  bracts.

3.  Croton.  Flowers  monoecious,  rarely  dioecious.  Calyx  cylindri-
cal, five-parted.  Corolla  of  five  petals  or  none.  Sterile  ;  petals  five.
Stamens  ten  or  more,  distinct.  Fertile  ;  petals  wanting.  Styles  three
or  six,  divided  into  two  or  more  divisions.  Capsule  tricoccous. — Tropi-
cal plants  with  stipulate,  alternate,  rarely  opposite  leaves,  with  a  stellate
pubescence.

4.  Buxus.  Flowers  monoecious,  clustered  or  racemose.  Sepals  four,
bracteate.  Sterile  ;  stamens  four,  with  the  rudiment  of  an  ovary.  Petals
two  or  wanting.  Fertile  ;  sepals  four ;  petals  three  ;  styles  and  stigmas
three.  Capsule  with  three  beaks,  three-cells  ;  cells  two-seeded  each. —
Evergreen  shrubs  or  trees,  with  opposite  leaves.

5.  Jatropha.  Flowers  monoecious.  Calyx  five-parted  or  lobed.
Corolla  five-parted  or  none.  Sterile  ;  stamens  eight  or  ten,  with  unequal
monadelphous  filaments.  Fertile  ;  styles  two,  bifid  or  dichotomous.
Capsule  tricoccous. — Exotic.

6.  Janipha.  Flowers  monoecious.  Calyx  campanulate,  five-parted.
Petals  none.  Sterile  ;  stamens  ten  ;  filaments  unequal,  distinct,  arranged
around  a  disk.  Fertile  ;  style  one  ;  stigmas  three,  consolidated  into  a
rugose  mass. Capsule  tricoccous. — Exotic.

7.  Hevea.  Flowers  monoecious.  Calyx  five-cleft  or  parted.  Petals
none.  Sterile;  stamens  five  to  ten,  columnar,  with  the  anthers  below
the  apex.  Fertile  ;  stigmas  three,  two-lobed.  Fruit  somewhat  fleshy,
tricoccous. — Exotic.

ORDER  LXXXVIII.  Juglandace.e.  Walnut.
Trees  with  alternate  and  unequally  pinnate  leaves,  without  pellucid
dots  or  stipules.  Flowers  green,  inconspicuous,  usually  monoecious  ;
sterile  in  aments ;  fertile  in  small  clusters.  Sterile  flowers;  calyx  with
membranous,  oblique,  and  irregular  bracts.  Stamens  indefinite,  (three
to  thirty-six)  hypogynous  ;  filaments  very  short,  distinct;  anthers  thick,
two-celled,  innate,  bursting  longitudinally.  Fertile  flowers ;  calyx
superior,  limb  three  to  five-parted,  which  are  sometimes  permanent  and
leafy.  Corolla  occasionally  present,  and  three  to  five-parted,  petals
arising  from  between  the  calyx  and  the  styles,  and  cohering  at  the  base.
Ovary  inferior,  one-celled,  partially  tw.o  to  four-celled  ;  ovule  erect,
solitary  ;  styles  one  or  two, and very  short, or none ;  stigmas much


108  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

dilated,  either  two  and  lacerated,  or  discoid  and  four-lobed.  Fruit  drupa-
ceous, one-celled,  with  four  imperfect  partitions  ;  endocarp  bony.  Seed
two  to  four-lobed,  oily,  exalbuminous  ;  embryo  shaped  like  the  seed;
cotyledons  fleshy,  two-lobed,  wrinkled  ;  radicle  short,  superior.

1.  Juglans.  Flowers  monoecious.  Sterile  in  long  and  simple  lateral
catkins,  imbricated.  Calyx  adherent  to  the  entire  bracts  or  scales,  une-
qually three  to  six-cleft.  Stamens  eighteen  to  thirty-six  ;  filaments  very
short ;  anthers  with  a  broad  connective,  opening  longitudinally.  Fertile
flowers  solitary,  or  several  together  on  a  peduncle  at  the  end  of  the
branches,  with  a  four-toothed  calyx,  bearing  four  small  ■petals  at  the
sinuses.  Styles  two,  very  short;  stigmas  two,  somewhat  club-shaped
and  fringed.  Fruit  a  drupe,  inferior,  with  a  fibrous-fleshy  indehiscent
epicarp,  and  a  rough  irregularly-furrowed  endocarp  or  nut-shell.  Seed
erect,  with  deeply  corrugated  cotyledons. — Trees  with  strong-scented  or
resinous-aromatic  bark,  naked  buds,  and  odd-pinnate  leaves  of  many
serrate  leaflets. Pith  in  plates.

ORDER  LXXXIX. Cupulifer.e,  or  Corylace^e. Oak  or  Mast.

Trees  and  shrubs,  with  alternate,  stipulate,  simple  leaves,  often  with
the  veins  proceeding  straight  from  the  midrib  to  the  margin.  Flowers
generally  monoecious.  Sterile  flowers  in  aments,  with  a  scale-like,  or
regular  and  membranaceous  calyx,  and  from  one  to  three  times  as  many
stamens  as  sepals,  inserted  into  their  bases,  generally  distinct.  Fertile
flowers  solitary,  or  two  or  three  together,  or  in  fascicles.  Ovaries
crowned  by  the  rudiments  of  the  adherent  calyx,  seated  within  a  coria-
ceous involucre  (cupule),  two  to  seven-celled,  with  one  or  two  pendulous
anatropous  ovules  in  each  cell ;  all  the  cells  and  ovules,  except  one,  dis-
appearing in  the  fruit,  by  abortion.  Stigmas  several,  subsessile,  distinct.
Fruit  a  bony  or  coriaceous  one-celled  nut,  more  or  less  inclosed  in  the
involucre.  Seeds  solitary,  or  one,  two,  or  three,  pendulous,  exalbumi-
nous; embryo  large;  cotyledons  fleshy,  plano-convex;  radicle  minute,
superior.

1.  Quercus.  Flowers  monoecious.  Sterile  flowers  in  aments,  lax,
deciduous.  Bracts,  four,  five,  or  more  cleft.  Stamens  five  to  ten ;  flla-
ments  short,  awl-shaped  ;  anthers  two-celled.  Fertile  flowers ;  involucre
hemispherical,  imbricated,  coriaceous,  one-flowered,  entire,  much  en-
larged in  the  fruit,  and  externally  scaly  or  tuberculated.  Calyx  in  six
minute,  deep,  sharp,  downy  segments,  closely  surrounding  the  base  of
the  style.  Ovary  globose,  three-celled,  with  two  ovules  in  each,  two  of
the  cells  abortive;  style  solitary,  short,  and  conical;  stigmas  three,
obtuse,  recurved.  Xut  (acorn)  solitary,  oval,  coriaceous,  indehiscent,
one-celled,  one-seeded,  surrounded  at  the  base  by  the  enlarged,  cup-


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  109

shaped,  scaly  cupule.  —  Trees,  rarely  shrubs,  with  evergreen  or  decidu-
ous leaves,  entire  or  sinuately  lobed ;  aments  axillary,  pendulous,
filiform ;  flowers  distinct.

2.  Carpinus.  Sterile  floioers  in  drooping  cylindrical  aments,  consist-
ing of  about  twelve  stamens  in  the  axil  of  a  simple  and  entire  scale-like
bract,  destitute  of  a  proper  calyx ;  filaments  very  short ;  anthers  one-
celled,  slightly  bearded  at  the  apex.  Fertile  floioers  several,  spiked  in
a  sort  of  loose  terminal  ament,  with  small  deciduous  bracts,  each  sub-
tending a  pair  of  flowers,  consisting  of  a  two-celled,  two-ovuled  ovary
terminated  by  two  thread-like  stigmas.  Nut  small,  ovoid,  ribbed,
stalked,  each  with  a  simple,  one-sided,  enlarged,  open  and  leaf-like
involucre.  —  Trees  with  a  smooth  gray  bark,  and  slender  buds;  leaves
appearing  later  than  the  flowers. Not  bitter.

3.  Ostrta.  Sterile  flowers  nearly  as  in  Carpinus ;  filaments  irregularly
somewhat  united ;  anthers  conspicuously  bearded  at  the  summit.  Fer-
tile flowers  numerous,  in  a  short  terminal  ament,  with  small  deciduous
bracts;  each  inclosed  in  a  membranous  sac-like  involucre  which  enlarges
and  forms  a  bladdery  closed  bag  in  fruit,  these  imbricated  to  form  a  sort
of  strobile,  appearing  like  that  of  the  Hop.  Ovary  two-celled,  two-
ovuled,  crowned  with  the  entire  and  bearded  border  of  the  calyx,  form-
ing a  small  and  seed-like  smooth  nut.  —  Slender  trees  with  brownish
finely- furrowed  bark;  leaves  appearing  with  the  flowers. Bitter.

ORDER  XC. Piperace^e. Pepper.

Shrubs  or  herbs  with  articulated  stems,  and  opposite,  verticillate
leaves  or  alternate  in  consequence  of  the  abortion  of  one  pair;  stipules
none,  or  in  pairs,  or  single  and  opposite  the  leaf.  Flowers  naked,  per-
fect, with  a  bract  on  the  outside ;  usually  sessile,  sometimes  pedicellate,
in  spikes  which  are  either  terminal  or  axillary,  or  opposite  the  leaves.
Stamens  two  or  more,  arranged  on  one  side  of,  or  all  round  the  ovary,
to  which  they  adhere  more  or  less ;  anthers  one  or  two-celled,  with  or
without  a  fleshy  connective ;  pollen  smooth,  roundish.  Ovary  superior,
simple,  one-celled,  with  a  solitary,  erect,  orthotropal  ovule ;  stigma  ses-
sile, simple,  rather  oblique.  Fruit  superior,  somewhat  fleshy,  indehis-
cent,  one-celled,  one-seeded.  Seed  erect,  with  the  embryo  lying  in  a
fleshy  sac  placed  at  the  end  of  the  seed  which  is  opposite  the  hilum,
on  the  outside  of  the  albumen.

1.  Piper.  Spike  wholly  covered  with  flowers.  Flowers  perfect,
rarely  dioecious,  each  supported  by  a  bracteole.  Stamens  varying  from
one  to  ten.  Ovary  with  a  single,  erect  ovule.  Stigma  punctiform,
obtuse,  or  cleft. Berry  one-seeded ;  embryo  inverted.


110  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

ORDER XCI. BeTULACE.E OR AMENTACEiE. BlRCH.

Trees  or  shrubs  with  alternate,  simple  leaves,  the  veinlets  often
running  straight  from  the  midrib  to  the  margin;  stipules  deciduous
Flowers  monoecious,  amentaceous,  mostly  achlamydeous,  ternate  in  the
middle  of  a  three-lobed  bract.  Perianth  wanting,  or  of  several  small
scales,  sometimes  resembling  a  real  calyx.  Sterile  flowers;  stamens
distinct,  scarcely  ever  monadelphous ;  anthers  two-celled.  Fertile  flowers  ;
ovary  superior,  two-celled ;  ovules  two,  pendulous ;  style  one,  or  none  ;
stigmas  two.  Fruit  membranous,  indehiscent,  by  abortion  one-celled
and  one-seeded.  Seeds  pendulous,  naked,  exalbuminous ;  embryo
straight;  radicle  superior;  cotyledons  flattish,  oblong.

1.  Betula.  Sterile  flowers;  aments  cylindrical,  lax,  imbricated  all
round,  with  ternate,  concave  scales;  the  middle  one  largest,  ovate.
Stamens  ten  or  twelve ;  filaments  shorter  than  the  middle  scale  to  which
they  are  attached ;  anthers  one-celled.  Fertile  flowers  ;  aments  similar,
but  more  dense ;  scales  horizontal,  peltate,  dilated  outward,  three-lobed,
three-flowered.  Ovary  compressed,  bordered,  of  two  cells ;  styles  two,
awl-shaped,  downy ;  stigma  simple.  Nut  oblong,  compressed,  decidu-
ous, winged  on  each  side,  of  one  cell,  with  a  solitary  seed.— Trees  and
shrubs,  mostly  with  the  outer  bark  laminated  and  horizontally  fibrous,
that  of  the  branchlets  dotted. Leaves  ovate,  serrate  and  alternate.

2.  Alnus.  Sterile  catkins  elongated  and  drooping,  with  five  bractlets,
and  one  to  three  flowers  under  each  scale,  each  flower  usually  with  a
four-parted  tubular  calyx  and  four  stamens ;  filaments  four,  opposite  the
lobes  of  the  calyx ;  anthers  two-celled.  Fertile  catkins  ovoid  or  oblong,
composed  of  two-flowered,  simple  scales,  with  a  calyx  of  four  little  scales
coherent  with  the  scales  or  bracts  of  the  catkin,  which  are  thick  and
woody  in  fruit,  all  coherent  below,  and  persistent.  Ovary  two-celled,
with  two,  parallel,  tapering,  deciduous  styles.  Nut  ovate,  bony,  angu-
lar, not  winged,  two-celled,  two-seeded. — Shrubs  or  small  trees  arising
from  large  and  strong  roots ;  buds  pedunculate ;  leaves  plicate  in
vernation,  alternate,  simple,  deciduous.

ORDER  XCII. Myricace.e. Sweet-gale.

Shrubs  covered  with  resinous  glands  or  dots,  the  leaves  alternate,  sim-
ple, with  or  without  stipules.  Flowers  monoecious  or  dioecious,  amen-
taceous, each  axillary  to  a  bract.  Males ;  stamens  two  to  six,  rarely
eight,  somewhat  monadelphous ;  anthers  two  or  four-celled,  opening
lengthwise.  Females  ;  ovary  one-celled,  surrounded  by  several  hypo-
gynous  scales  ;  ovule  solitary,  erect,  with  a  foramen  in  its  apex  ;  stigmas
two,  subulate,  or  dilated  and  petaloid. Fruit  drupaceous,  often  covered


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  Ill

with  waxv  secretions,  and,  with  the  hypogynous  scales  of  the  ovary,  be-
come fleshy  and  adherent ;  or  dry  and  dehiscent,  with  the  scales  distinct.
Seed  solitary,  erect,  exalbuminous  ;  cotyledons  two,  plano-convex  ;  radi-
cle short,  superior.

1.  Myrica.  Flowers  dioecious.  Sterile  amenls  oblong  or  cylindrical,
consisting  of  bracts  loosely  imbi'icated  in  every  direction.  Calyx  one  or
two  subulate  scales.  Bracts  ovate,  bluntish,  concave,  each  containing
four,  rarely  more,  short,  capillary,  erect  filaments,  somewhat  united  be-
low ;  anthers  vertical,  large,  two-lobed,  four-valved.  Fertile  aments  in
ovoid  catkins,  closely  imbricated.  Sepals  two,  ovate,  acute,  scale-like.
Ovary  ovate,  flattish,  superior  ;  stigmas  two,  filiform,  spreading,  longer
than  the  sepals.  Fruit  baccate,  one-celled,  various  in  substance,  studded
with  resinous  grains  or  wax.  Seed  one,  erect. — Aromatic  shrubs  and
small  trees,  with  stipules  very  fugacious,  or  none.

2.  Comptonia.  Flowers  monoecious.  Sterile  flowers  in  cylindrical,
loosely-imbricated  aments,  with  deciduous,  one-flowered,  cordate-reni-
form,  pointed  scale-like  bracts  ;  sepals  two.  Stamens  six,  adhering  in
pairs.  Fertile  flowers  in  globular,  burr-like,  densely-imbricated  aments,
with  one-flowered  bracts.  Ovary  surrounded  by  five  or  six  linear,  awl-
shaped  scales  or  sepals,  longer  than  the  bracts  ;  styles  two,  capillary.
Nut  ovoid-oblong,  smooth,  one-celled.  —  Low  shrubs,  with  lon:>-  and
narrow  leaves,  pinnatifid-lobed,  with  small  stipules.

ORDER  XCIII. Salicacej*. Willow.

Trees  or  shrubs  with  alternate,  simple  leaves,  with  deliquescent  pri-
mary veins,  and  frequently  with  glands,  and  deciduous  or  persistent
stipules.  Flowers  dioecious,  amentaceous,  achlamydeous,  axillary  to
one-flowered  bracts.  Sterile  ;  stamens  two  to  several,  distinct  or  mona-
delphous  ;  anthers  two-celled.  Fertile;  ovary  superior,  one  or  two-
celled  ;  ovides  numerous,  erect,  at  the  base  of  the  cell,  or  adhering  to
the  lower  part  of  the  sides ;  styles  or  stigmas  two.  Fruit  coriaceous,
one  or  two-celled,  two-valvcd,  or  to  the  base  of  the  cell,  comose  ;  seeds
numerous,  ascending,  covered  with  long,  silky  hairs,  exalbuminous  ;  em-
bryo erect;  radicle  inferior  ;  cotyledons  flattened.

1.  Salix.  Flowers  dioecious;  rarely  monoecious,  amentaceous,  each
with  a  single  flexible  bract;  a  nectariferous  gland  around  the  stamens
or  ovary.  Male ;  stamens  two  to  six,  rarely  single  ;  filaments  longer  than
the  bract ;  in  some  partly  combined ;  anthers  two-lobed,  with  a  longitu-
dinal dehiscence.  Female  ;  ovary  ovate,  one-celled,  many-seeded  ;  style
terminal,  permanent ;  stigmas  two,  notched  and  obtuse,  or  cloven  and
acute,  spreading.  Capsule  ovate,  one-celled,  with  two  revolute,  concave
calves. Seeds  numerous,  minute,  oval,  tufted  with  soft,  simple,  upright


112  Natural  Okders  of  Plants.

hairs.— Leaves  usually  narrow  and  elongated,  each  with  two  conspicu-
ous stipules ;  aments  terminal  or  lateral,  appearing  before  or  with  the
leaves.

2.  Populus.  Male;  ament  oblong,  cylindrical,  loosely  imbricated,
many-flowered.  Bract  single-flowered,  wedge-shaped,  flat,  lacerately
fringed  at  the  summit.  Calyx  turbinate  and  tubular  below;  dilated,
undivided,  and  obliquely  cup-shaped  in  the  border.  Stamens  eight  or
more  ;  filaments  very  short,  capillary,  distinct ;  anthers  drooping,  large,
quadrangular.  Female  ;  catkin  as  in  the  male  but  generally  shorter ;
bract  and  calyx  as  in  the  male.  Ovary  ovate,  pointed  ;  stigmas  four  or
eight,  subulate.  Capsule  ovate,  one-celled,  with  two  concave  valves.
Seeds  numerous,  small,  ovate,  each  crowned  with  a  tuft  of  fine  hairs. —
Leaves  broad  ovate,  or  cordate  ;  petioles  long,  often  compressed  ver-
tically, and  glandular. Aments  lateral,  preceding  the  leaves.

ORDER  XCIV. Altingiace.e  or  Balsamace^e. Liquidambar.

Trees  yielding  balsam,  with  alternate,  simple  or  lobed  leaves,  having
glandular  serratures,  and  deciduous  stipules.  Aments  monoecious,  round-
ish, with  achlamydeous  flowers  ;  female  aments  on  longer  peduncles
than  the  males,  and  below  them.  Male  ;  anthers  numerous,  oblong,
subsessile,  destitute  of  calyx,  but  intermixed  with  a  few  minute  scales
and  covering  the  common  receptacle.  Female  ;  ovaries  two- celled,  col-
lected into  a  globe,  each  surrounded  by  a  few  scales  ;  styles  two,  long ;
ovules  indefinite,  attached  to  the  dissepiment,  amphitropal.  Fruit  a  kind
of  strobile,  composed  of  indurated,  connected  scales,  in  the  cavities  of
which  lie  obconical,  two-lobed,  two-celled  capsules.  Seeds  numerous,
or  solitary  by  abortion,  compressed,  membranous,  winged,  attached  in-
ternally to  the  middle  of  the  dissepiments  in  a  peltate  manner.  Embryo
inverted  in  the  midst  of  fleshy  albumen  ;  radicle  short,  superior.

1.  Liquidambar.  Aments  of  distinct  sexes,  monoecious,  having  a
common  four-leaved  deciduous  involucre.  Sterile  catkins  conical  or  glo-
bose, composed  of  extremely  numerous  subsessile  anthers.  Fertile  cat-
kins globose,  composed  of  small  scales,  which  surround  the  ovaries,
grow  together,  and  gradually  enlarge.  Styles  two,  subulate.  Capsules
oblong,  two-lobed,  immersed  in  sockets  formed  by  the  scales,  two-celled,
opening  at  the  apex  between  the  styles,  many-seeded.  Seeds,  same  as
above. — Tall  trees.

ORDER  XCV. Urticace^e. Nettle.
Trees  and  shrubs  with  a  milky  juice,  or  herbs  with  a  watery  juice.
Leaves  alternate  or  opposite,  rough  or  covered  with  stinging  hairs,  with
membranous  stipules,  which  are  deciduous  or  convolute  in  vernation.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  U3

Floivers  monoecious,  dioecious,  or  polygamous,  scattered  or  clustered,  or
in  catkins,  or  close  heads.  Calyx  membranous,  lobed,  persistent.  Sta-
mens definite,  distinct,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  calyx,  and  opposite
its  lobes  ;  anthers  curved  inward  in  eestivation,  turned  backward  elas-
tically  when  bursting  at  maturity.  Ovary  superior,  simple  ;  ovule  soli-
tary, erect,  or  suspended  ;  stigma  simple,  fringed.  Fruit  a  simple  in-
dehiscent  nut,  surrounded  by  the  membranous  or  fleshy  calyx  ;  or  a
fleshy  receptacle,  either  covered  by  numerous  nuts,  lying  along  the
persistent  fleshy  calyxes,  or  inclosing  them  within  its  cavity  ;  occasion-
ally consisting  of  a  single  nut,  covered  by  a  succulent  involucre.  Embryo
straight,  curved  or  spiral,  with  or  without  albumen ;  cotyledons  flat ;
radicle  always  pointing  to  the  hilum.

SUB-ORDER I. More,e. Mulberry.

Shrubs  or  trees  with  a  milky  juice.  Fruit  fleshy,  composed  of  the
fleshy  calyx  or  receptacle.

I.  Morus.  Flowers  monoecious  or  dioecious  ;  the  two  kinds  in  sepa-
rate axillary  catkin-like  spikes.  Calyx  four-parted,  spreading,  membra-
nous, the  sepals  ovate.  Male  ;  stamens  four,  longer  than  the  calyx,
with  the  rudiment  of  an  ovary  between  their  bases  ;  filaments  expanding
elastically.  Female  ;  sepals  four,  scale-like,  imbricating  each  other ;
two  being  opposite  and  external  to  the  other  two.  Stigmas  two,  linear,
glandular  ;  ovule  solitary,  suspended.  Fruit  consisting  of  the  female
flowers  becoming  fleshy  and  grown  together,  each  inclosing  a  dry,  mem-
branous pericarp.  Seed  pendulous  ;  embryo  curved  like  a  horse-shoe,
among  fleshy  albumen,  with  the  radicle  directed  to  the  hilum. — Trees
with  alternate,  generally  lobed  leaves,  with  large,  deciduous  stipules  ;
flowers  inconspicuous.

2.  Ficus.  Flowers  monoecious,  placed  all  over  the  inside  of  a  large
fleshy  hollow  receptacle,  which  is  closed  up  with  a  few  scales.  Male
flowers  irregular,  of  several  unequal  membranous  segments.  Stamens
one  to  five.  Fertile  flowers  ;  calyx  five-parted,  membranous,  converging
over  a  simple  car-pel,  containing  one  suspended  ovule,  and  terminated  by
a  subulate  style  and  bifid  stigma.  Ackenium  lenticular,  hard,  dry.
Embryo  curved,  in  the  middle  of  fleshy  albumen.

3.  Dorstenia.  Monoecious  ;  floivers  on  a  fleshy  receptacle,  usually
flat  and  expanded,  and  extremely  variable  in  form.  Sterile;  on  the  sur-
face of  the  receptacle,  two-lobed,  fleshy,  diandrous.  Fertile;  immersed
in  the  receptacle,  mostly  two-lobed.  Ovary  one  or  two-celled,  with  a
single,  suspended  ovule  in  each  cell  ;  style  one  ;  stigma  two-lobed.
Achenia  lenticular,  imbedded  in  the  fleshy  receptacle  ;  from  which  they


11*  Natural  Orders  ok  Plants.

are  projected elastically, when ripe. — Dwarf  herbaceous  plants  with
scaly  rhizomata.

SUB-ORDER  II. Urtice^e. Nettle.
Herbs,  in  cool  climates,  with  a  watery  juice. Flowers  spicate  or  pan-
iculate, with  a  membranaceous  calyx.

4.  Urtica.  Flowers  monoecious  or  dioecious.  Sterile  ;  calyx  of  four
roundish,  concave,  obtuse,  equal  sepals.  Stamens  four,  awl-shaped,
spreading-,  opposite  the  sepals,  and  about  as  long  ;  surrounding  the  rudi-
ment of  an  ovary.  Fertile  ;  calyx  of  two,  equal,  roundish,  concave
sepals.  Ovary  superior,  ovate  ;  stigma  sessile,  downy.  Achcnia  ovate
or  oblong,  flattish,  polished,  embraced  by  the  permanent  calyx. — Herbs
often  with  stinging  hairs ;  leaves  accompanied  with  stipules  ;  flowers
green,  in  axillary  or  subterminal  clusters  ;  bark  yielding  strong  fibers
like  hemp.

SUB-ORDER III. Cannabine^e. Hemp.
Herbs  erect  or  twining,  with  a  watery  juice. Staminate  flowers  race-
mose or  paniculate  ;  pistillate  in  a  cone-like  ament. Albumen  none.

5.  Cannabis.  Flowers  dioecious.  Male  flowers  racemose.  Calyx
five-parted,  imbricated.  Stamens  five  ;  anthers  large,  pendulous.
Female  flowers  in  spikes.  Bract  or  calyx  entire,  oblong-acuminate,
rolled  round  the  ovary.  Ovary  roundish,  with  one  pendulous  ovule,  and
two  long  filiform  glandular  stigmas.  Achenia  ovate,  one-seeded  ;  embryo
doubled  up,  with  the  radicle  parallel  with  the  plano-convex  cotyledons,
and  separated  from  them  by  a  small  quantity  of  albumen. — A  tall
roughish  annual,  with  digitate  leaves  of  five  to  seven  linear-lanceolate
coarsely-toothed  leaflets,  the  upper  alternate  ;  the  inner  bark  of  very
tough  fibers.

6.  Humulus.  Flowers  dioecious  ;  males  with  five  oblong,  concave,
obtuse  sepals  ;  stamens  five  ;  filaments  capillary,  very  short  ;  anthers  ver-
tical, oblong,  of  two  cells,  opening  by  two  lateral  slits.  Female  flowers
in  short  axillary  and  solitary  catkins,  composed  of  numerous,  membra-
nous, imbricated,  foliaceous,  concave  bracts,  one  to  each  floret.  Calyx
none,  except  a  bractlct  which  embraces  the  ovary  and  grows  with  it
after  flowering.  Stigmas  two,  subulate,  spreading,  downy.  Achenium
attached  to  the  base  of  each  enlarged,  membranous,  dry  scale  of  the
catkin,  roundish  ;  pericarp  hard,  brittle,  covered  by  roundish  aromatic
superficial  glands,  or  lupulin.— A  rough  perennial  herb,  twining  with
the  sun  ;  leaves  opposite,  cordate,  three  to  five-lobed,  with  persistent,
ovate  stipules  between  the  petioles;  flowers  in  axillary  panicles,  and
Btrobile-like  aments.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  \\§

CLASS II. Gymnosperms.
Ovules  not  inclosed  in  an  ovary,  fertilized  by  the  pollen  without  the
intervention  of  a  pistil,  and  becoming  truly  naked  seeds,  the  carpel  being
represented  by  a  flat  open  scale,  or  entirely  wanting. Embryo  with  two
opposite,  or  several  whorled  cotyledons.

ORDER  XCVI.  Conifers  or  Pinace^e.  Fir.
Trees  or  evergreen  shrubs  with  branching  trunks,  abounding  in  a
resinous  juice.  Leaves  scattered  or  fascicled,  linear,  acerose,  or  lanceo-
late, parallel-veined,  rigid.  Flowers  monoecious  or  dioecious,  destitute
of  calyx  or  corolla.  Sterile  flowers  monandrous  or  monadelphous  ;  each
floret  consisting  of  a  single  stamen,  or  of  a  few  united,  and  collected  in  a
deciduous  ament  around  a  common  rachis  ;  anthers  two,  or  many-lobed,
with  a  longitudinal  dehiscence,  often  tipped  by  a  crest,  which  is  an
unconverted  portion  of  the  scale  out  of  which  each  stamen  is  formed ;
pollen  large,  usually  compound.  Female  flowers  in  cones.  Ovary
spread  open,  and  having  the  appearance  of  a  flat  scale  destitute  of  style
or  stigmas,  and  arising  from  the  axil  of  a  membranous  bract.  Ovule
naked  ;  in  pairs  on  the  face  of  the  ovary,  having  an  inverted  position,
and  consisting  of  one  or  two  membranes  open  at  the  apex,  and  of  a
nucleus.  Fruit  consisting  of  a  strobile  or  cone  formed  of  the  scale-
shaped  ovaries,  becomes  enlarged  and  indurated,  and  occasionally  of
the  bracts  also,  which  are  sometimes  obliterated,  and  sometimes  extend
beyond  the  scales  in  the  form  of  a  lobed  appendage.  Seed  with  a  hard
crustaceous  integument;  embryo  in  the  midst  of  fleshy,  oily  albumen,
with  two  or  many  opposite  cotyledons  ;  the  radicle  next  the  apex  of  the
seed,  and  having  an  organic  connection  with  the  albumen.

SUB-ORDER  I. Abietine^e. Pine.

Sterile  aments  numerous,  deciduous.  Scales  peltate,  each  bearing
two  sessile,  one-celled  anthers ;  pollen  oval-curved.  Fertile  aments
formed  of  carpellary  scales  closely  imbricated,  each  bearing  a  pair  of
ovules  adhering  to  the  base  inside,  and  subtended  by  a  bract  outside.
Strobile  ovoid  ;  seeds  winged  ;  integument  of  seed  coriaceous  and
woody  ;  more  or  less  adherent  to  the  scale.  Embryo  in  the  axis  of
fleshy  and  oily  albumen,  with  two  to  fifteen  cotyledons.

1 .  Pinus.  Flowers  monoecious.  Sterile  catkins  racemose,  consisting
of  numerous  stamens  inserted  on  the  axis,  with  very  short fllaments,  and
a  scale-like  connective  ;  anthers  two-celled,  opening  longitudinally  or
irregularly  in  a  transverse  direction.  Pollen  of  three  united  grains.
Fertile  catkins  terminal,  solitary,  or  clustered,  consisting  of  imbricated,
carpellary  scales,  each  in  the  axil  of  a  deciduous  bract,  bearing  a  pair


116  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

of  collateral  inverted  ovules  at  the  base,  their  points  lacerated  and
directed  downward.  Fruit  a  cone  consisting  of  hard,  woody,  truncated
scales,  imbricated,  and  usually  thickened  at  the  apex,  persistent,  spread-
ing- when  ripe  and  dry  ;  excavated  at  the  base  for  the  reception  of  the
seeds.  Seeds  extended  at  the  base  into  a  membranous  wing.  Cotyle-
dons three  to  twelve,  linear.— Trees  often  very  lofty,  with  evergreen,
acerose  leaves,  in  fascicles  of  two  to  five,  each  being  invested  with  a
membranous,  tubular  sheath  at  base.

2.  Abies.  Characters  the  same  as  Pinus,  except  that  the  leaves  are
solitary  and  distinct  at  base,  never  sheathed  ;  and  the  scales  of  the  cones
are  attenuated  to  a  thin,  even  edge,  and  usually  coriaceous  or  membra-
nous.— Leaves  all  scattered,  short,  frequently  two-ranked.

3.  Larix.  Catkins  lateral  and  scattered,  bud-like.  Sterile-flowers
nearly  as  in  Pinus,  but  the  pollen  of  simple,  spherical  grains.  Cones
ovoid,  erect ;  the  bracts  and  scales  persistent ;  otherwise  as  in  Abies. —
Leaves  soft,  deciduous,  very  many  in  a  fascicle  developed  in  early  spring
from  lateral,  scaly,  and  globular  buds,  which  produce  (the  same  or  the
second  year)  growing  shoots  on  which  the  leaves  are  scattered.  Fertile
catkins  crimson  or  red  in  flower.

SUB-ORDER  II. Cupressine^e. Cypress.
Carpellary  scales  not  bracteate,  each  with one  to  eight  erect  ovules
at  base  inside,  becoming  concreted  and  fleshy  in a drupe-like fruit.
Anthers  of  several  cells.

4.  Thuja.  Flowers  monoecious  on  different  branches,  in  very  small,
terminal,  ovoid  catkins.  Stamens  with  a  scale-like  filament  or  connective,
bearing  four  anther-cells.  Fertile- catkins  of  few,  imbricated  scales,  fixed
by  the  base,  each  bearing  two  erect  ovules,  dry  and  spreading  at  matu-
rity. Seed  winged  ;  integument  membranous  ;  cotyledons  two  or  more. —
Small  evergreen  trees,  with  very  flat,  two-ranked  spray,  on  which  the
minute  and  appressed,  scale-like  and  persistent  leaves  are  very  closely
imbricated.

5.  Juniperus.  Flowers  dioecious,  occasionally  monoecious,  upon
different  branches.  Sterile  catkins  axillary  or  subterminal,  globose,  very
small  ;  anthers  three  to  six  cells,  attached  to  the  lower  edge  of  the
shield-shaped  scale.  Fertile  catkins  axillary,  ovate,  imbricated,  with
bracts  at  the  base.  Scales  three  to  six,  united  at  the  base,  and  contain-
ing one  to  three  ovules,  which  are  erect,  perforated  at  the  apex,  and
bottle-shaped.  Fruit  a  sort  of  drupe  or  berry,  consisting  of  the  enlarged,
fleshy  scales ;  scaly-bracted underneath. Seeds one to three,  bony.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  117

Cotyledons  two. — Evergreen  trees  or  shrubs,  with  awl-shaped  or  scale-
like, rigid  leaves,  opposite  or  in  whorls  of  three.

SUBDIVISION  II.

Endogens  or  Monocotyledonous  Plants.
Stem  not  distinguishable  into  bark,  pith,  and  concentric  zones  or  layers
of  wood.  Growth  by  irregular,  internal  accretions,  consisting  of  bundles
of  woody  fiber  and  vessels,  successively  descending  from  the  leaves
above,  through  the  cellular  tissue  already  formed.  Leaves  mostly  with
simple,  parallel  veins,  alternate,  entire,  frequently  sheathing  at  base,  and
seldom  falling  off  by  an  articulation.  Sepals  and  petals  when  present,
commonly  in  threes.  Ovules  produced  within  an  ovary.  Embryo  with
one  cotyledon,  rarely  with  two,  the  second  being  much  smaller  than,
and  alternate  with,  the  first.

CLASS  III. Aglumaceous  Endogens.
Flowers  without  glumes. Organs  developed  on  the  usual  and  normal
plan,  consisting  of  stamens  and  pistils,  either  or  both,  surrounded  by
verticillate,  floral envelopes;  or  the  latter  are  wanting,  and  the  stamens
and  pistils  are  achlamydeous.

ORDER  XCVII.  Zingiberace^e  or  Scitamine^e.  Ginger.
Aromatic,  tropical,  herbaceous  plants,  with  a  creeping  rhizoma,  often
jointed.  Stem  formed  of  the  cohering  bases  of  the  leaves,  never
branching.  Leaves  simple,  sheathing,  their  lamina  often  separated  from
the  sheath  by  a  taper  neck,  and  having  a  single  midrib,  from  which  very
numerous,  simple,  crowded  veins  diverge  at  an  acute  angle.  Lnflo-
rescence  either  a  dense  spike,  or  a  raceme,  or  a  sort  of  panicle,  terminal  or
radical.  Flowers  arising  from  among  spathaceous,  membranous  bracts,
in  which  they  usually  lie  in  pairs.  Calyx  superior,  tubular,  three-
lobed,  short.  Corolla  tubular,  irregular  with  six  segments  in  two  whorls ;
the  outer  three-parted,  nearly  equal,  or  with  the  odd  segment,  some-
times differently  shaped  ;  the  inner  (sterile  stamens)  three-parted,  with
the  intermediate  segment  (labellum)  larger  than  the  rest,  and  often
three-lobed,  the  lateral  segments  sometimes  imperfectly  abortive.  Sta-
mens three,  distinct,  of  which  the  two  lateral  are  abortive,  and  the  inter-
mediate one  fertile ;  this  is  placed  opposite  the  labellum,  and  arises  from
the  base  of  the  middle  segment  of  the  true,  or  outer  series  of  the
corolla.  Filament  often  projecting  beyond  the  anther  in  the  shape  of  a
lobed  or  not  entire  appendage,  not  petaloid.  Anther  two-celled  opening
longitudinally,  its  lobes  often  embracing  the  upper  part  of  the  style.
Pollen  globose,  smooth.  Ovaries  three-celled,  sometimes  imperfectly
so;  ovules  several,  anatropal,  attached  to  a  placenta  in  the  axis;  style
filiform;  stigma  dilated,  hollow. Fruit  generally  capsular,  three-celled,


118  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

many-seeded,  sometimes  berried  ;  sometimes  by  abortion  one-celled.
Seeds  roundish  or  angular,  with  or  without  an  arillus  ;  albumen  mealy ;
embryo  in  a  vitellus.

1.  Zingiber.  Corolla  with  the  outer  limb  three-parted,  inner  one-
lipped.  Filament  projecting  beyond  the  anther  in  a  simple,  incurved
beak.  Capsule  three-celled,  three-valved.  Seeds  numerous,  with  arils. —
Tropical  plants.

2.  Curcuma.  Tube  of  the  corolla  gradually  enlarged  upward  ;  limb
two-lipped,  each  three-parted.  Filament  broad  ;  anther  incumbent,  with
two  spurs  at  base.  Style  capillary.  Capsule  three-celled.  Seeds
numerous,  arillate. — Stemless  plants,  with  palmated  tuberous  roots,  and
bifarious,  sheathing  leaves  ;  scape  simple,  lateral  or  central,  with  dull
yellow  flowers.

3.  Amomum.  Inner  limb  of  the  corolla  one-lipped.  Filament  dilated
beyond  the  anther,  with  an  entire  or  lobed  crest.  Capsule  often  berried,
three-celled,  three-valved.  Seeds  numerous,  arillate.  —  Herbaceous
perennials,  tropical,  with  leaves  in  two  rows,  and  having  articulated,
creeping  rhizomes.

4.  Elettaria.  Characters  similar  to  those  of  Amomum,  except  that
the  lube  of  the  corolla  is  filiform,  and  the  anther  naked.

5.  Alpinia.  Corolla-tube  short ;  inner  limb  one-lipped,  either  tooth-
less, or  with  a  small  tooth  at  base  on  each  side.  Filament  linear,  scarce-
ly prolonged  beyond  the  emarginate  anther.  Capsule  berried,  three-
seeded.  Seeds  few  or  numerous  arilled. — Plants  with  thick,  tuberous,
horizontal  roots,  producing  many,  perennial  stems ;  leaves,  bifarious
lanceolate,  having  a  slit,  ligulate  sheath.  Inflorescence  panicled,  or  in
loose  racemes  or  spikes,  terminal. Tropicals.

ORDER  XCVIII.  Arace^e.  Arum.
Herbs  or  tropical  shrubs,  with  a  fleshy  rhizoma  or  cormus;  stemless
or  arborescent,  or  climbing  by  means  of  aerial  roots.  Leaves  sheathing
at  base,  convolute  in  the  bud,  either  with  parallel  or  branching  veins ;
sometimes  compound;  often  cordate.  Spadix  generally  inclosed  in  a
spaihe.  Flowers  mostly  monoecious  and  achlamydeous,  arranged  upon
a  naked  or  spathaceous  spadix.  Perianth  wanting,  or  when  present,
consisting  of  four  to  six  parts.  Males;  stamens  definite  or  indefinite,
bypogynous,  very  short;  anthers  one,  two,  or  many-celled,  ovate,
extrorse.  Females;  ovary  free,  one-celled,  seldom  three-celled,  and
many-seeded;  ovules  erect,  or  pendulous,  or  parietal;  stigma  sessile.
Fruit  berry  succulent  or  dry. Seeds  solitary  or  several,  pulpy ;  embryo


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  119

in  the  axis  of  fleshy  or  mealy  albumen,  straight,  taper,  with  a  cleft  in
one  side,  in  which  the  plumule  lies;  radicle  obtuse,  usually  next  the
hilum,  occasionally  at  the  opposite  extremity.  Albumen  sometimes
wanting. — An  acrid,  volatile  principle  pervades  the  order,  which  is,  in
some  instances,  so  concentrated  as  to  become  poisonous ;  the  conns  and
rhizomas  abound  also  in  starch,  which  in  some  cases,  when  the  volatile
acridity  is  expelled  in  drying  or  cooking  is  edible  and  nutritious.

1.  Arum.  Flowers  monoecious,  the  upper  sterile  and  the  lower  fertile;
or  sometimes  polygamo-dicecious,  on  the  base  of  an  elongated  spadix
which  is  naked  above,  interruptedly  unisexual  at  the  bottom,  and  sur-
rounded by  a  spathe  which  is  convolute  below.  Floral  envelopes  none.
Rudimentary  organs  beneath,  and  occasionally  above  the  stamens.
Anthers  crowded  and  somewhat  whorled  on  the  spadix,  distinct  or  vari-
ously consolidated,  almost  sessile,  with  two  to  four  lateral  cells  opening
by  a  partial  slit.  Ovaries  free,  one-celled,  with  two  to  six  orthotropoua
ovules  attached  to  the  inner-lining;  stigmas  sessile,  obtuse.  Berries  dis-
tinct, one  to  several-seeded.  Embryo  in  the  axis  of  the  albumen. —
Low  perennial  herbs,  with  a  tuberous  rootstock  or  corm,  sending  up  a
simple  scape  sheathed  with  the  petioles  of  the  simple  or  compound  veiny
leaves,  as  if  caulescent.

2.  ARiSiEMA.  SpatJie  convolute  at  base.  Spadix  naked  at  the  point,
unisexual  or  dioecious  below ;  rudimentary  organs  placed  above  the  fer-
tile flowers,  or  altogether  absent.  Anthers  on  distinct  filaments,  whorled,
with  the  cells  either  disjointed  or  approximated,  opening  by  a  pore  or
transverse  cleft.  Ovaries  distinct,  one-celled ;  ovules  two  to  six,  seldom
more,  at  the  base,  erect;  styles  absent  or  short;  stigmas  undivided.
Berry  one  or  few-seeded;  seeds  albuminous.

3.  Acorus.  In  Acoraceee  of  some  authors.  Spadix  naked,  lateral,
sessile,  emerging  from  the  side  of  a  scape  which  resembles  the  leaves,
densely  covered  with  perfect  flowers.  Sepals  or  scales  six,  concave.
Stamens  six;  filaments  linear;  anthers  reniform,  one-celled,  opening
across.  Ovary  two  or  three-celled,  with  about  six  suspended  orthotro-
pous  ovules  in  each  cell ;  stigma  minute.  Fruit  at  length  dry,  gelatinous
inside,  one  or  few-seeded.  Embryo  in  the  axis  of  the  albumen. — Pun-
gent aromatic  plants,  especially  the  thick,  creeping,  perennial  rootstocks,
which  send  up  two-edged  sword-like  leaves,  and  scapes  similar  to  them,
bearing  the  spadix  on  one  edge ;  the  upper  and  more  foliaceous  prolon-
gation sometimes  considered  as  an  open  spathe. Flowers  yellow.

4.  Svmplocarpus.  Spathe  hooded-shell  form,  pointed,  fleshy,  decay-
ing in  fruit.  Spadix  on  a  short  peduncle,  entirely  covered  with  perfect
flowers,  which  are  thickly  crowded; Sepals  four, hooded. Stamens


120  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

four,  opposite  the  sepals ;  filaments  short ;  anthers  extrorse,  two-celled,
opening-  lengthwise.  Ovaries  one-celled,  or  abortively  two-celled,  im-
mersed in  the  fleshy  receptacle.  Style  four-angled;  stigma  minute.
Ovule  solitary,  orthotropous,  suspended.  Fruit  a  large  globular  or  oval
mass,  composed  of  the  enlarged  and  spongy  spadix,  inclosing  the  sphe-
rical seeds  just  beneath  the  surface,  which  is  roughened  with  the  per-
sistent and  fleshy  sepals,  and  pyramidal  styles.  Seed  filled  by  the  large,
globular,  and  fleshy  corm-like  embryo,  which  bears  one  or  several
plumules  at  the  end  next  the  base  of  the  ovary,  exalbuminous. — Peren-
nial, aquatic,  acaulescent  herbs,  with  a  strong  unpleasant  alliaceous
odor,  a  thick  descending  rootstock  bearing  coarse  fibrous  roots,  and  a
cluster  of  very  large  and  entire,  veiny  leaves,  preceded  by  the  nearly
sessile  spathes.

ORDER  XC1X.  Typhace^e.  Cat-tail.
Herbs  growing  in  marshes  or  ditches.  Stems  without  joints;  leaves
rigid,  ensiform,  with  parallel  veins.  Flowers  monoecious,  arranged  upon
a  spadix  without  a  spathe.  Sepals  three  or  more,  sometimes  a  mere
bundle  of  hairs.  Petals  wanting.  Males ;  stamens  three  or  six ;  fila-
ments long  and  slender ;  anthers  cuneiform,  erect.  Females  ;  ovary  single,
superior,  one-celled ;  ovule,  solitary,  pendulous ;  style  short ;  stigmas  one
or  two,  linear.  Fruit  a  dry,  indehiscent  utricle,  one-celled,  one-seeded.
Embryo  in  the  center  of  the  albumen,  straight,  taper,  with  a  cleft  in  one
side  in  which  the  plumule  lies ;  radicle  next  the  hilum.

1.  Typi-ia.  Floioers  in  a  long  and  very  dense  cylindrical  spike  ter-
minating the  stem;  the  upper  or  sterile  part  consisting  of  stamens  only,
about  three  together,  united  into  a  common  filament,  intermixed  with
simple  hairs,  and  inserted  directly  on  the  axis.  The  lower  or  fertile
part  consisting  of  pedicellate  ovaries,  surrounded  at  base  by  club-shaped
bristles,  which  form  the  copious  down  of  the  fruit.  Nutlets  minute,  very
long-stalked.  Rootstocks  creeping,  perennial.  Spathes  very  deciduous
bracts  or  none.  Leaves  sheathing  the  base  of  the  simple,  jointless
stems,  erect,  thickish.

ORDER  C.  Alismace,e.  Water-Plantain.
Aquatic  herbs,  with  parallel-veined  leaves.  Flowers  racemose  or
paniculate;  perfect  or  monoecious,  regular,  not  on  a  spadix.  Perianth
of  three,  green,  herbaceous  sepals.  Corolla  of  three,  colored  petals.
Stamens  definite  or  indefinite,  hypogynous ;  anthers  extrorse,  two-celled.
Ovaries  superior,  several,  one-celled;  ovules  erect  or  ascending,  solitary,
or  two  attached  to  the  suture  at  a  distance  from  each  other.  Styles  and
stigmas  of  the  same  number  as  the  ovaries.  Fruit  dry,  indehiscent,  one
or  two-seeded.  Seeds  straight  or  curved,  exalbuminous;  embryo  undi-
vided, horseshoe-shape,  with  the  same  directions  as  the  seeds.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  121

1.  Altsma.  Flowers  perfect.  Petals  involute  in  the  bud.  Stamens
six.  Ovaries  find  styles  man)',  in  a  simple  circle  on  a  flattened  recep-
tacle, forming  flattened  coriaceous  achenia  in  fruit.  —  Caulescent  peren-
nials with  fibrous  roots;  leaves  radical,  several-ribbed,  with  connected
veinlets;  scape  with  whorled  panicled  branches.  Flowers  small,  white,
or  pale  rose -color.

ORDER  CI.  Marantace^e.  Arrow-root.
Tropical  herbs  with  creeping  rhizoma  abounding  in  nutritive  fecula ;
stem  often  branching;  leaves,  inflorescence,  and  flowers,  same  as  in  Zingibe-
racese.  Calyx  superior,  three-sepalled,  short.  Corolla  tubular,  irregular,
with  the  segments  in  two  whorls;  the  outer  three-parted,  nearly  equal;
the  inner  very  irregular ;  one  of  the  lateral  segments  usually  colored,
and  formed  differently  from  the  rest;  sometimes  by  abortion  fewer  than
three.  Stamens  three,  petaloid,  distinct,  only  one  lateral,  one  fertile  ;
filament  petaloid,  entire  or  two-lobed,  one  of  the  lobes  bearing  the
anther  on  its  edge ;  anther  one-celled,  opening  longitudinally.  Pollen
round.  Ovary  one  to  three-celled ;  ovules  solitary,  erect  and  campylo-
tropal,  or  numerous  and  anatropal;  style  petaloid  or  swollen;  stigma
either  the  mere  naked  end  of  the  style,  or  hollow,  cucullate,  and  in-
curved. Fruit  capsular.  Seeds  round,  without  aril;  albumen  hard,
somewhat  floury;  embryo  naked,  straight,  its  radicle  lying  against  the
hilum.

1.  Maranta.  Corolla  unequal,  one  of  the  inner  segments  in  the  form
of  a  lip.  Stamens  petaloid,  one  fertile,  with  an  anther  on  its  edge.
Style  hooded,  adhering  to  the  edge  of  a  sterile  filament.  Ovary  three-
celled,  smooth;  ovules  solitary.  Fruit  even,  dry,  one-seeded.  —  Cau-
lescent plants  with  fleshy  rhizomata  or  tubers  ;  stems  branched,  often
dichotomous ;  inflorescence  terminal,  panicled,  jointed,  with  glumaceous
deciduous  bracts.

2.  Canna.  Corolla  unequal,  variable  in  the  number  of  its  parts,
scarcely  lip-shaped  in  any  segment.  Stamens  petaloid,  one  with  half  an
anther  on  its  edge.  Style  flat,  straight,  nearly  free.  Ovary  three-celled,
with  many  ovules,  granular.  Fruit  membranous,  three-valved,  with  a
deciduous  granular  surface.  Seeds  round,  smooth. — Rhizomas  creeping,
tuberous,  or  wanting;  stems  erect,  with  distant  sheathing  leaves;  inflo-
rescence terminal  spiked  or  racemose ;  flowers  invested  with  gluma-
ceous bracts.

ORDER  CII. Orchtdace^e. Orchis.
Perennial  herbs,  often  acaulesent,  with  fleshy  corms,  or  tuberous  fas-
ciculated roots. Leaves  simple,  parallel- veined,  entire,  often  articulated
with the stem. Flowers in terminal or radical racemes, spikes or


122  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

panicles  rarely  solitary  ;  very  irregular,  with  an  adherent,  ringent
perianth  of  six  parts.  Calyx  of  three  sepals,  usually  colored,  the  odd
one  usually  uppermost  in  consequence  of  the  twisting  ot  the  ovary.
Corolla  of  three  petals,  or  two,  and  sometimes  absent ;  usually  colored,
of  which  two  are  uppermost  in  consequence  of  the  twisting  of  the  ovary,
and  one,  called  the  lip,  undermost;  this  latter  is  frequently  lobed,  of  a
different  form  from  the  others,  and  very  often  spurred  at  the  base.
Stamens  three,  united  in  a  central  column,  the  two  lateral  abortive,
the  central  perfect,  or  the  central  abortive,  and  the  two  lateral  perfect ;
anther  persistent  or  deciduous,  two,  four,  or  eight-celled.  Pollen
powdery,  or  else  cohering  in  waxy  or  mealy  masses  which  are  free,  or
connected  to  the  anther  by  a  caudicle.  Ovary  adherent,  one-celled,  of
six  carpels;  style  forming  part  of  the  column  of  the  stamens,  rarely
distinct ;  stigmas  usually  confluent  in  a  mucous  disk  ;  impregnation  being
effected  by  absorption  from  the  pollen  masses  through  the  gland  into
the  stigmatic  canal.  Capsule  inferior,  rarely  fleshy,  indehiscent,  pod-
shaped,  separating  into  six  dry,  rigid  valves,  with  horizontal  cells  three
of  which  only  contain  seeds.  Seeds  parietal,  very  numerous,  minute  ;
testa  loose,  reticulated,  contracted  at  each  end  ;  albumen  none  ;  embryo
a  solid,  undivided,  fleshy  mass.

1.  Goodyera.  Perianth  ringent.  Lateral  sepals  not  oblique  at  the
base  ;  upper  sepal  vaulted,  the  two  lower  ones  beneath  the  lip.  Lip
saccate  at  base,  sessile,  without  callosities,  contracted  at  the  apex  into  a
pointed  and  channeled  recurved  termination.  Column  free,  small,
straight.  Pollen-masses  two,  consisting  of  angular  grains  loosely  cohering
by  a  manifest  web.  Stigma  prominent,  roundish. — Root  of  thick  fibers
from  a  fleshy,  somewhat  creeping  rootstock,  bearing  a  tuft  of  thickish
petioled  leaves  next  the  ground.  Scape  and  spike  with  the  greenish-
white  small  flowers,  usually  glandular-downy.

2.  Cypripedium.  Sepals  spreading ;  the  two  anterior  distinct,  or
commonly  united  into  one  under  the  lip.  Petals  similar,  but  usually
narrower,  spreading.  Lip  a  large,  inflated  sac,  somewhat  slipper-
shaped.  Column  short,  three-lobed,  the  lateral  lobes  bearing  a  two-
celled  anther  under  each  of  them  ;  the  middle  lobe  (sterile  stamen)
dilated  and  petaloid,  thickish,  incurved.  Pollen  pulpy-granular.  Stigma
terminal. — Root  of  many  tufted  fibers  ;  leaves  large,  many-nerved  and
plaited,  sheathing  at  the  base. Flowers  solitary  or  few,  large  and  showy.

ORDER  CIII. Vanillace^e. Vanilla.

Herbs  with broad  leaves, sessile, and  often strongly  veined  ;  stem

mostly  climbing ;  flowers  large  and  succulent. Perianth  articulated  with

the  ovary, sometimes  with  an  external  calycine  cup. Sepals three.

Petals  three,  of  which  one  is  unlike  the  others,  and  forms  a  lip. Stamen


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  123

one,  consolidated  with  the  style  into  a  column  ;  anther  terminal,  opercu-
lar ;  pollen  granular.  Ovary  one-celled,  with  three  parietal  placentae.
Fruit  succulent,  indehiscent,  one-celled.  Seeds  either  with  a  smooth
testa  tightly  adhering  to  them,  or  with  a  thin  membranous  wing  sur-
rounding a  firm  nucleus.

1.  Vanilla.  Sepals  spreading  or  erect,  distinct.  Petals  of  a  similar
form  and  texture.  Lubellum  connate  with  the  columna,  crested,  mem-
branous, convolute,  undivided.  Anther  terminal,  opercular.  Pollen
granular.  Fruit  a  fleshy  cylindrical  silique.  Seeds  round,  destitute  of
a  loose  tunic— Climbing  plants  with  a  slender  stem,  emitting  numerous
simple  roots.

ORDER  CIV.  Amaryllidace^e.  Narcissus.
Perennial  herbs,  with  bulbous  roots,  sometimes  fibrous,  and  occasion-
ally with  a  tall,  cylindrical,  woody  stem.  Leaves  ensiform,  with  parallel
veins.  Flowers  usually  with  spathaceous  bracts,  and  often  on  scapes,
almost  always  either  yellow  or  white.  Perianth  mostly  regular,  adherent
to  the  ovary,  colored,  consisting  of  three  sepals,  and  three  petals.
Stamens  six,  arising  from  the  perianth  segments,  sometimes  cohering  by
their  dilated  bases  into  a  kind  of  cup  ;  sometimes  an  additional  series  of
barren  stamens  is  present,  often  forming  a  cup  which  surmounts  the
tube  of  the  perianth  ;  anthers  bursting  inwardly.  Ovary  three-celled,
the  cells  one  or  many-ovuled ;  style  one  ;  stigma  three-lobed.  Fruit  a
three-celled,  three-valved  capsule,  with  loculicidal  dehiscence,  or  a
berry,  one  to  three-seeded.  Seeds  with  either  a  thin  and  membranous,
or  a  brittle  and  black,  or  a  thick  and  fleshy  testa  ;  albumen  fleshy  or
corneous ;  embryo  nearly  straight,  with  its  radicle  turned  toward  the
hilum.

1.  Agave.  Perianth  tubular-funnel-  form,  persistent,  six-parted  ;  the
divisions  nearly  equal,  narrow.  Stamens  six,  soon  exserted  ;  anthers
linear,  versatile.  Capsule  ovate,  coriaceous,  alternate  at  each  end,
obtusely  triangular,  three-celled,  many-seeded.  Seeds  flattened. — Root
sometimes  ligneous  ;  stem  herbaceous :  leaves  mostly  radical,  rigid,
channeled,  fleshy,  often  spiny;  panicle  large,  pyramidal.

ORDER  CV.  Liliace^.  Lily.
Herbs  with  fibrous  or  fasciculate  roots  ;  stem  none,  except  a  bulb  ;  or
tuberous,  or  creeping,  or  erect,  or  arborescent.  Leaves  with  parallel
veins,  membranous,  not  articulated  with  the  stem  ;  either  sessile,  or
with  a  narrow  leafy  petiole.  Flowers  hermaphrodite.  Calyx  and
corolla  colored  alike,  regular  or  nearly  so,  sometimes  cohering  in  a  tube.
Stumens  six,  inserted  into  the  sepals  and  petals  ;  anthers  introrse.  Ovary
superior,  three-celled,  many-seeded  ;  style  one;  stigma  simple,  or  three-


124  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

lobed  ;  ovules  anatropal  pr  amphitropal.  Fruit  succulent,  or  dry  and
capsular ;  three-celled.  Seeds  imbricated  in  one  or  two  rows  ;  embryo
with  the  same  direction  as  the  seed,  in  the  axis  of  the  fleshy  albumen ;
or  uncertain  in  direction  and  position.

TRIBE  I. Tdlipace^;.
Bulbous. Sepals  and  petals  scarcely  adhering  in a  tube. Integu-
ments of  the  seed  soft  and  pale.

1.  Lilium.  Perianth  campanulate,  or  funnel-form,  colored,  of  six
distinct  sepals,  spreading  or  recurved  above,  with  a  honey-bearing  fur-
row at  the  base,  deciduous  ;  the  six  stamens  somewhat  adhering  to  their
bases,  shorter  than  the  style  ;  anthers  linear,  versatile.  Style  elongated,
somewhat  club-shaped  ;  stigma  three-lobed.  Capsule  oblong,  sub-trian-
gular,  the  valves  connected  with  latticed  hairs,  containing  numerous,
flat,  soft-coated  seeds,  densely  packed  in  two  rows  in  each  cell. — Peren-
nial herbs  with  scaly  bulbs,  producing  simple  stems,  with  numerous,
alternate-scattered,  or  whorled,  short,  and  sessile  leaves,  and  one  to
several  large,  terminal  flowers.

2.  Erythronium.  Perianth  lily-like,  of  six  distinct,  lanceolate  sepals,
recurved  or  spreading  above,  deciduous,  the  three  inner  usually  with  a
callous  tooth  on  each  side  of  the  erect  base,  and  a  groove  in  the  middle.
Stamens  six,  inserted  in  the  base  of  the  perianth,  shorter  than  the  pistil;
filaments  subulate  ;  anthers  oblong-linear.  Style  furrowed,  three-cor-
nered, elongated  ;  stigma  either  triangular,  or  consisting  of  three
spreading,  channeled  plates.  Capsule  turbinate-globose,  erect,  con-
tracted at  the  base,  three-valved,  with  the  valves  bearing  the  placentas.
Seeds  rather  numerous,  ovoid,  with  a  loose  membranaceous  tip. — Per-
ennial, nearly  stemless  herbs,  with  two  smooth  and  shining  flat  leaves
tapering  into  petioles,  and  sheathing  the  base  of  the  one-flowered  scape,
rising  from  a  deep  solid-scaly  bulb. Flowers  nodding,  vernal.

TRIBE II. SciLLEiE.

Bulbous.  Flowers  usually  small.  Integument  of  the  seed  black  and
brittle.

3.  Allium.  Flowers  in  a  dense  umbel,  with  a  membranous,  two-
leaved  spathe.  Perianth  of  six  entirely  colored  sepals,  which  are  dis-
tinct or  united  at  the  very  base,  one-nerved,  equal,  becoming  dry  and
more  or  less  persistent.  Stamens  inserted  on  the  base  of  the  perianth ;
filaments  either  all  alike,  or  the  alternate  ones  tricuspidate  ;  anthers
incumbent.  Ovary  angular,  three-celled  ;  style  subulate  ;  stigma  acute,
simple.  Capsule  usually  obtusely  three-cornered  or  three-lobed,
depressed,  three-celled,  bursting  into  three  valves  through  the  dissepi-


Natural  Orders of  Plants.  125

ments,  and  containing  one  or  two  ovoid-kidney-shaped,  campylotropous
black  seeds  in  each  cell,  affixed  to  the  base.  Embryo  falcate,  not  in  the
axis. — Strong-scented  and  pungent  stemless  herbs  ;  the  leaves  and  scape
from  a  coated  bulb ;  flowers  in  a  simple  umbel,  some  of  them  frequently
changed  to  bulblets ;  spathe  one  or  two-valved.

4.  Squilla,  or  Scilla.  Sepals  three,  colored,  blue  or  purple,  spread-
ing. Petals  similar,  a  little  broader.  Stamens  six,  shorter  than  the
perianth  ;  filaments  smooth,  somewhat  dilated  at  the  base,  acuminate,
entire.  Ovary  three-parted,  glandular,  and  melliferous  at  the  apex  ;
style  smooth,  simple  ;  stigma  obscurely  three-lobed,  papillose.  Capsule
rounded,  three-cornered,  three-celled.  Seeds  numerous,  in  two  rows,
flattened,  with  a  membranous  testa. — Bulbous-rooted  plants,  abounding
in  an  acrid  emetic  principle.

TRIBE III. CONVALLARINE^E.

Stem  arising  from  a  horizontal  rhizoma  or  tuber.

5.  Convallaria,  or  Smilacina.  Perianth  four  to  six-parted,  spread-
ing, deciduous,  white,  with  as  many  stamens  inserted  at  the  base  of  the
divisions.  Filaments  slender ;  anthers  short.  Ovary  two  or  three-
celled,  with  two  orthotropous  ovules  in  each  cell  ;  style  short  and  thick  ;
stigma  obscurely  two  or  three-lobed.  Fruit  a  globular,  one  or  two-
seeded  berry. — Perennial  herbs,  with  simple  stems  from  creeping  or
thickish  rootstocks  ;  alternate,  nerved  leaves  ;  and  white,  often  fragrant
flowers  in  a  terminal,  simple  or  compound  raceme.

6.  Uvclaria.  This  is  placed  by  some  authors  in  order  Melanthacece.
Perianth  nearly  campanulate,  lily-like  ;  the  six  sepals  spatulate-lanceo-
late,  with  a  nectariferous  cavity  at  the  erect  contracted  base,  much
longer  than  the  stamens,  which  barely  adhere  to  their  base.  Filaments
very  short ;  anthers  long,  linear,  and  adnate.  Style  deeply  three-cleft;
the  divisions  stigmatic  along  the  inner  side.  Capsule  triangular,  or
three-lobed,  three-celled,  three-valved  from  the  top.  Seeds  few  in  each
cell,  obovoid,  with  a  tumid  or  fungous  raphe. — Rootstock  creeping  ;
leaves  alternate ;  flowers  pale-yellow,  nodding,  solitary,  or  in  pairs,  on
terminal  and  axillary  peduncles.

7.  Polygonatum.  Perianth  tubular,  cylindrical,  six-lobed  at  the
summit;  stamens  six,  inserted  near  the  summit  of  the  tube,  included.
Ovary  three-celled,  with  two  to  six  orthotropous  ovules  in  each  cell ;

style  slender ;  stigm,a  capitate  or  triangular.  Berry  globular,  black  or
blue,  three-celled;  cells  one  or  two-seeded.  —  Perennial  herbs,  with
simple,  erect  or  curving  stems  from  creeping,  thick  and  knotted  root-


126  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

stocks,  chiefly  alternate  and  sessile,  or  half-clasping  nerved  leaves,  and
axillary,  nodding,  greenish  flowers.

TRIBE  IV. Asparage^e.
Stem  usually  fully  developed,  or  if  not,  the  leaves  are  coriaceous  and
permanent.

8.  Asparagus.  Perianth  six-parted,  spreading  above  ;  the  six  sta-
mens at  their  base,  erect.  Ovary  turbinate  ;  style  very  short ;  stigma
three-lobed.  Berry  spherical,  three-celled  ;  cells  two-seeded. — Perenni-
als, with  much  branched  stems  from  thick  and  matted  rootstocks,  nar-
row leaves  in  clusters,  and  small,  greenish-yellow  axillary  flowers.

TRIBE  V. Aloinje.
Stem usually fully developed, sometimes arborescent. Leaves
succulent.

9.  Aloe.  Perianth  tubular,  six-cleft,  nectariferous  at  the  base ;
sepals  resembling  the  petals,  and  closely  covering  them  in  an  imbricate
manner.  Stamens  hypogynous,  as  long  as  the  perianth,  or  sometimes
longer.  Capsule  membranous,  scarious,  three-cornered,  three-celled,
three-valved,  with  a  loculicidal  dehiscence.  Seeds  numerous,  in  two
rows,  roundish  or  angular. — Succulent,  mostly  herbaceous  plants,  natives
of  warm  climates.

ORDER  CVI.  H^emodorace>e.  Bloodwort.
Herbs  with  fibrous,  perennial  roots,  and  perfect  flowers.  Leaves  per-
manent, ensiform,  equitant,  usually  in  two  ranks.  Perianth  more  or  less
woolly,  adherent,  the  sepals  and  petals  often  indistinguishable,  and
united  into  a  cylindrical  tube.  Stamens  inserted  on  the  tube,  either
three,  and  opposite  the  petals,  or  six ;  anthers  dehiscing  inwardly.
Ovary  one  or  three-celled  ;  cells  one  or  two,  or  many-ovuled,  with  a
placenta  at  one  point  of  the  axis  ;  style  simple ;  stigma  undivided ;  ovules
amphitropal.  Fruit  capsular,  covered  with  the  withered  perianth,  val-
vular, seldom  indehiscent.  Seeds  definite,  or  indefinite,  fixed  by  the
base  or  peltate,  winged  or  wrinkled,  and  angular;  embryo  short,  straight,
in  cartilaginous  albumen.

1.  Aletris.  Perianth  semi-inferior,  tubular,  with  a  six-cleft  spread-
ing limb;  obscurely  hexagonal,  not  woolly,  but  wrinkled  and  roughened
externally  by  thickly-set  frosted  points,  which  look  like  scurfy  mealiness.
Stamens  six,  inserted  at  the  base  of  the  segments  ;  filaments  flat ;  an-
thers somewhat  sagittate.  Ovary  three-lobed,  pyramidal ;  style  awl-
shaped,  composed  of  three  connate  bristles;  stigma  simple,  minutely  two-
lobed.  Capsule  inclosed  in  the  perianth,  pyramidal,  tricoccous,  opening
at  the  apex  in  three  directions. Seeds  numerous,  very  minute,  striated.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  127

Perennial  and  smooth  stemless  herbs,  very  bitter,  with  fibrous  roots,  and
a  spreading  cluster  of  thin  and  flat  lanceolate  leaves  ;  the  small  flowers
in  a  wand-like  spiked  raceme,  terminating  a  long  and  naked  slender
scape. Bracts  awl-shaped,  minute. Placed  by  some  authors  in  Liliaceoc.

ORDER  CVII.  Iridace^e.  Cornflag.
Perennial  herbs,  rarely  undershrubs,  usually  smooth,  arising  from
bulbs,  corms,  or  rhizomas,  rarely  from  fibrous  roots.  Leaves  equitant,
mostly  distichous.  Flowers  with  spathaceous  bracts.  Calyx  and  corolla
adherent,  colored  ;  their  divisions  either  partially  cohering,  or  entirely
separate,  sometimes  irregular,  the  three  petals  being  occasionally  very
short.  Stamens  three,  inserted  at  the  base  of  the  sepals  ;  filaments  dis-
tinct or  connate  ;  anthers  fixed  by  their  base,  two-celled,  with  an  exter-
nal longitudinal  dehiscence.  Ovary  three-celled,  cells  many-ovuled  ;
ovules  anatropal ;  style  one  ;  stigmas  three,  often  petaloid,  sometimes
two-lipped.  Capsule  three-celled,  three-valved,  with  a  locuiicidal  de-
hiscence. Seeds  numerous,  spheroidal,  angular,  oblong  or  winged,
attached  to  the  inner  angle  of  the  cell,  sometimes  to  a  central  column,
becoming  loose;  albumen  horny  or  densely  fleshy;  embryo  straight,  in-
closed in  it.

1 .  Iris.  Perianth  tubular,  with  a  petaloid  membranous  limb  ;  se-
paloid  segments  revolute,  often  bearded  ;  the  'petaloid  erect  and  converg-
ing. Stamens  three,  distinct,  placed  before  the  outer  divisions  of  the
perianth,  and  concealed  by  the  lobes  of  the  style.  Style  three-parted
near  the  upper  end,  with  petaloid  segments  covering  the  anthers,  and
having  a  two-lipped  transverse  stigma  below  their  apices.  Capsule
three-celled,  three-valved,  with  a  locuiicidal  dehiscence,  coriaceous,
with  numerous  flat  or  round  and  fleshy  seeds. — Perennials  with  creep-
ing, often  tuberous  (acrid)  rootstocks,  ensiform  leaves,  and  large  showy
flowers.

2.  Crocus.  Perianth  funnel- form,  colored,  tube  slender,  twice  as  long
as  the  limb,  expanding  only  in  the  sunshine ;  limb  six-parted,  segments
equal,  erect.  Stamens  three,  inserted  on  the  tube  ;  anthers  sagittate.
Stigmas  three,  thick,  long,  usually  crested  ;  style  filiform.  Capsule
at  first  subterranean,  but  by  the  gradual  prolongation  of  the  pedun-
cle finally  emerging,  three-celled,  many -seeded ;  seeds  roundish. —
Bulbous-rooted  plants,  with  a  radicle  spathe,  one  or  two-leaved,  thin,
transparent.  Flower-tube  nearly  or  quite  sessile  upon  the  bulb.  After
flowering,  the  ovary  arises  from  the  ground  by  the  growth  of  the  scape,
to  ripen  its  seeds  in  the  sun.

ORDER  CVIII. Dioscoreacejs. Yam.
Twining  shrubs, usually with alternate, reticulately-veined leaves,
sometimes  opposite. Flowers  small,  spiked,  with  from one  to  three


128  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

bracts  each,  dioecious.  Calyx  and  corolla  alike,  herbaceous.  Males;
stamens  six,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  sepals  and  petals  ;  anthers  in-
trorse  with  a  longitudinal  dehiscence.  Females;  ovary  adherent,  three-
celled  ;  cells  with  one  or  two  suspended,  anatropal  ovules ;  style  deeply
trifid;  stigmas  undivided.  Fruit  leafy,  compressed,  with  two  of  the
cells  sometimes  abortive ;  occasionally  succulent.  Seeds  one  or  two  in
each  cell,  compressed,  winged,  or  wingless  ;  embryo  small,  near  the  hilum,
lying  in  a  large  cavity  of  cartilaginous  albumen.

1.  Dioscorea.  Floivcrs  very  small,  in  axillary  panicles  or  racemes.
Stamens  six,  at  the  base  of  the  divisions  of  the  six-parted  perianth.
Styles  of  the  fertile  flowers  three.  Capsules  three-celled,  three-winged,
loculicidally  three-valved  by  splitting  through  the  winged  angles.  Seeds
one  or  two  in  each  cell,  flat,  with  a  membranaceous  wing. — Slender,
shrubby  climbers,  twining  with  the  sun ;  leaves  simple  and  palmately
veined,  or  palmately  divided.  Flowers  green,  inconspicuous,  in  axillary
spikes  or  panicles.

ORDER  CIX.  Smilace^e.  Sarsaparilla.
Herbs  or  undershrubs,  with  a  tendency  to  climb.  Stems  woody.
Leaves  reticulately-veined.  Flowers  dioecious  or  perfect.  Calyx  and
corolla  very  similar,  inferior,  six-parted.  Stamens  six,  inserted  on  the
perianth  near  the  base,  seldom  hypogynous  ;  anthers  introrse.  Ovary
three-celled  ;  cells  one  or  many-ovuled  ;  style  usually  trifid  ;  stigmas
three ;  ovules  orthotropal.  Fruit  a  roundish-berry.  Seeds  few  or
many  ;  albumen  between  fleshy  and  cartilaginous  ;  embryo  very  small,
distant  from  the  hilum.

1.  Smilax.  Flowers  dioecious.  Perianth  six-parted,  nearly  equal,
spreading.  Males  ;  stamens  six  ;  filaments  short ;  anthers  erect,  linear,
fixed  by  the  base.  Females  ;  perianth  permanent.  Ovary  three-celled,
the  cells  one-seeded  ;  style  very  short ;  stigmas  three,  thick  and  spread-
ing, almost  sessile.  Berry  globular,  one  to  three-celled,  one  to  three-
seeded.  Seeds  globular,  orthotropous,  suspended. — Shrubs,  or  rarely
perennial  herbs,  often  evergreen  and  prickly,  climbing  by  tendrils  on
the  petioles,  with  yellowish-green  stems,  cordate  or  ovate  leaves,  and
small  flowers  in  axillary  peduncled  umbels.

ORDER  CX.  Melanthace^e.  Colchicum.
Perennial  herbs,  with  bulbs,  rhizomas,  corms,  or  fasciculated  roots.
Stem  simple,  often  scapiform.  Leaves  sheathing  at  the  base  with  parallel
veins.  Flowers  either  arising  from  under  the  surface  of  the  ground,  or
arranged  upon  tall  leafy  stems  in  large  panicles,  or  disposed  in  spikes
or  racemes  upon  a  naked  scape ;  perfect,  or  by  abortion,  polygamous.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  129

Calyx  and  corolla  alike,  inferior,  petaloid,  in  six  segments,  or  from
cohesion  tubular;  usually  involute  in  aestivation.  Stamens  sis.;  anthers
mostly  extrorse.  Ovary  three-celled,  many-seeded  ;  style  three-parted  ;
stigmus  undivided.  Capsule  usually  separable  into  three  pieces ;  some-
times with  a  loculicidal  dehiscence.  Seeds  with  a  membranous  testa;
albumen  dense,  fleshy,  or  cartilaginous  ;  embryo  very  minute.

1.  Asagr/EA.  Flowers  polygamous,  naked.  Perianth  six-parted ;
segments  linear,  veinless,  almost  equal,  with  a  nectariferous  pit  at  base,
equal  to  the  stamens.  Stamens  alternately  longer ;  anthers  cordate,
after  dehiscence  scutiform.  Ovaries  three,  simple,  tapering  into  an
obscure  s'igma.  Fruit  three  follicles,  acuminate,  chartaceous.  Seeds
scimetar-shaped,  wrinkled,  winged.

2.  Veratrum.  Flowers  polygamous.  Perianth  six-parted  ;  segments
broad,  concave,  imbricating,  nearly  equal,  striated,  without  a  pit  at  the
base,  spreading,  sessile.  Stamens  six,  equal,  inserted  at  the  base  of  the
segments  ;  Jiluments  subulate  ;  anthers  reniform,  with  confluent  cells.
Ovary  with  three  divaricating  stigmas.  Capsule  three-horned,  separat-
ing into  three,  many-seeded  follicles.  Seeds  compressed,  winged  at  the
apex. — Somewhat  pubescent  perennials,  with  simple  stems  from  a  thick-
ened base  producing  coarse  fibrous  roots,  plaited  three-ranked  leaves,
and  raceme-panicled  flowers.

3.  Helonias.  Flowers  perfect.  Perianth  of  six  spatulate-oblong
sepals,  rather  unequal,  obtuse,  not  striated  or  herbaceous,  nor  imbricat-
ing, persistent,  and  shorter  than  the  filaments.  Stamens  six,  inserted  at
the  base  of  the  segments,  unequal ;  filaments  subulate  ;  anthers  reni-
form, with  confluent  cells,  blue.  Styles  revolute,  stigmatic  down  the
inner  side.  Capsules  separating  into  three  many-celled  follicles.  Seeds
linear,  compressed,  winged  at  the  apex,  or  wingless. — A  smooth  peren-
nial, with  many  inversely  lanceolate,  or  oblong-spatulate  flat  leaves,
from  a  tuberous  rootstock,  producing  in  early  spring  a  hollow  naked
escape,  sheathed  with  broad  bracts  at  the  base,  and  terminated  by  a  sim-
ple and  short  dense  raceme.

4.  Colchicum.  Perianth  colored,  funnel-shaped,  with  a  very  long
subterranean  slender  tube,  and  a  somewhat  campanulate,  six-parted
limb.  Stamens  six,  inserted  on  the  throat  of  the  tube.  Ovary  three-
celled;  ovules  numerous,  in  two  or  four  rows;  styles  three,  filiform,
long;  stigmas  somewhat  clavate.  Capsule  three-celled,  partible  in  three,
opening  inwardly. Seeds  numerous,  roundish,  with  a  corrugated  testa.

9


130  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

ORDER  CXI.  Trilliace^e.  Trillium.
Herbs  with  simple  stems,  tuberous  roots,  and  verticillate,  net-veined
leaves.  Flowers  large,  terminal,  solitary,  perfect,  trimerous,  rarely
tetramerous.  Sepals  and  petals  three,  herbaceous,  the  latter  longest.
Stamens  six  to  ten;  filaments  subulate;  anthers  linear,  with  cells  on
their  edges,  and  the  connectile  extended.  Ovary  free,  three  to  five-
celled  ;  style  distinct;  stigmas  small  ;  ovules  many,  in  two  rows,  ascend-
ing. Fruit  succulent,  three  to  five-celled.  Seeds  numerous ;  embryo
minute,  in  fleshy  albumen.

1.  Trillium.  Flowers  perfect;  sepals  three,  lanceolate,  spreading,
herbaceous,  persistent.  Petals  three,  larger,  colored,  withering  in  age.
Stamens  six ;  anthers  linear,  adnate,  on  short  filaments.  Styles  (or
rather  stigmas)  three,  awl-shaped  or  slender,  spreading  or  recurved
above,  persistent,  stigmatic  down  the  inner  side.  Berry  three-sided,
ovate,  three-celled,  purple;  seeds  horizontal,  several  in  each  cell. — Low
perennial  herbs,  with  a  stout  simple  stem  rising  from  a  short  and  abrupt
tuberous  rootstock,  bearing  at  the  summit  a  whorl  of  three  ample,
broadly  ovate  leaves,  and  a  large,  terminal  flower.

ORDER  CXII.  Palmace^.  Palm.
Plants  with  arborescent,  simple  stems,  sometimes  shrubby,  and  occa-
sionally branched.  Leaves  clustered,  terminal,  very  large,  pinnate  or
flabelliform,  plaited  in  vernation.  Spadix  terminal,  often  branched,
inclosed  in  a  one  or  many-valved  spatha.  Flowers  small,  hermaphro-
dite, frequently  polygamous,  supported  by  scaly  bracts.  Perianth  six-
parted,  in  two  series,  persistent ;  the  three  outer  segments  (sepals)
colorless,  fleshy  or  leathery  ;  the  inner  (petals)  sometimes  deeply  connate.
Stamens  inserted  on  the  base  of  the  perianth,  usually  definite,  opposite
the  segments,  to  which  they  are  equal  in  number,  seldom  three  ;  some-
times indefinite.  Ovary  free,  one  to  three-celled,  or  deeply  ihree-lobed,
the  lobes  or  cells  one  or  two-ovuled ;  ovules  erect,  orthotropal,  or  ana-
tropal.  Styles  continuous  with  the  carpels.  Fruit  drupaceous,  or  nut-
like, or  berried,  often  with  a  fibrous  rind.  Seed  filling  the  cavity,  often
reticulated.  Albumen  cartilaginous,  often  ruminated,  frequently  with  a
central  or  ventral  cavity  ;  embryo  lodged  in  a  particular  cavity  of  the
albumen,  usually  at  a  distance  from  the  hilum,  dorsal  and  indicated  by
a  little  nipple,  taper  or  pulley-shaped  ;  plumule  included,  scarcely  visible ;
the  cotyledonous  extremity  becoming  thickened  in  germination,  and
either  tilling  up  a  pre-existing  cavity,  or  one  formed  by  the  liquefaction
.of  the  albumen  in  the  center.

1.  Areca.  Flowers  monoecious.  Males;  calyx  three-parted ;  corolla
three-petaled. Females; calyx three-leaved; corolla three-petaled.


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  13J.

Nectary  six-toothed.  Ovary  superior,  one-celled,  one-seeded.  Drupe
coriaceous,  containing  a  single  seed,  with  a  ruminated  albumen,  with  the
embryo  at  the  base.


2.  Sagus.  Flowers  monoecious.  Sterile ;  calyx  three-toothed  ;
petals  three.  Stamens  six  to  twelve ;  filaments  distinct,  compressed.
Fertile;  calyx  three-toothed.  Corolla  campanulate,  trifid.  Cup  of  sta-
mens six-toothed,  with  abortive,  sagittate  anthers.  Ovary  three-celled.
Stigmas  three,  subulate,  connate.  Fruit  one-seeded,  coated  with
reversed  scales.  Albumen  ruminated.  Embryo  dorsal,  on  an  umbilical
pit. — Leaves  pinnated.

CLASS  IV. Glumaceous  Endogens.

Flowers  with  glumes ;  or  floral  organs  inclosed  in  imbricated  bracts,
and  arranged  in  spikelets,  having  no  proper  perianth  (calyx  or  corolla).
Ovary  with  one  cell  containing  a  solitary  ovule  and  becoming  a  one-
seeded  fruit  (achenium  or  caryopsis).

ORDER  CXIIT. Graminace^e. Grasses.

Perennial  herbs  with  fibrous  or  bulbous  rhizomas,  often  annual  or
biennial.  Stems  (culms)  cylindrical,  fistular,  closed  at  the  joints  or
nodes,  covered  with  a  coat  of  silex,  often  solid.  Leaves  narrow  and
undivided,  parallel-veined,  alternate,  with  a  sheath  split  down  to  the
nodes,  and  a  membranous  ligula  or  stipule  at  the  juncture  of  the  blade
and  sheath.  Inflorescence  arranged  in  spikes,  racemes,  or  panicles.
Flowers  generally  perfect,  in  little  spikelets  (locustce)  composed  of  bracts
imbricated  in  two  rows,  of  which  the  most  exterior  are  called  glumes,  the
interior  immediately  inclosing  the  stamens  palew,  and  the  innermost  at
the  base  of  the  ovarium  scales.  Glumes  mostly  two,  alternate,  some-
times single,  usually  unequal.  Falece  two,  alternate  ;  the  lower  or  exte-
rior simple,  the  upper  or  interior  composed  of  two  united  by  their  conti-
guous margins,  and  generally  with  two  keels,  forming  a  kind  of
dislocated  calyx.  Scales  two  or  three,  sometimes  none;  if  two,  collat-
eral, alternate  with  the  palese,  and  next  the  lower  of  them ;  either  dis-
tinct or  united,  Stamens  hypogynous,  one  to  six,  or  more,  one  of  which
alternates  with  the  two  hypogynous  scales,  and  is,  therefore,  next  the
lower  paleas;  anthers  versatile.  Ovary  simple  ;  styles  two,  rarely  one  or
three  ;  stigmas  feathery  or  hairy  ;  ovule  ascending,  anatropal.  Pericarp
usually  indistinguishable  from  the  seed,  membranous.  Albumen  farina-
ceous ;  embryo  lying  on  one  side  of  the  albumen  at  the  base,  lenticular,
with  a  broad  cotyledon  and  a  developed  plumula ;  and  occasionally  with
a  second  cotyledon  on  the  outside  of  the  plumula,  and  alternate  with
the  usual  cotyledon.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.


TRIBE I. Phalare^e.

Inflorescence  in  a  contracted  panicle.  Spikelets  solitary,  with  one
perfect  flower,  and  one  or  two  imperfect  ones.  Lower  palea  awned  or
mucronate,  upper  with  two  keels.

1.  Hierochloa.  Spikelets  plainly  three-flowered,  panicled  ;  the
flowers  all  with  two  palese ;  the  two  lateral  flowers  staminate  only,  tri-
androus,  sessile,  often  awned;  the  uppermost  (central)  one  perfect,  short-
pedicelled,  scarcely  as  long  as  the  others,  diandrous,  awnless.  Glumes
two,  scarious. — Leaves  linear,  or  lanceolate,  flat.

TRIBE  II. Avene^e.

Inflorescence  paniculate.  Spikelets  solitary,  few-flowered.  Glumes
and  paleae  of  similar  texture.  Upper  flowers  generally  pedicellate,  with
awn-like  processes,  or  abortive  rudiments  between  the  upper  and  the
lower  ones. Upper  palea  with  two  keels.

2.  Avena.  Spikelets  two  to  five-flowered,  panicled,  commonly  large ;
the  flowers  herbaceo-chartaceous,  or  becoming  harder,  of  firmer  texture
than  the  large  and  mostly  unequal  glumes ;  the  uppermost  imperfect.
Lower  palea  rounded  on  the  back  or  keeled,  seven  to  eleven-nerved,
bearing  a  long,  usually  bent  or  twisted  awn  on  the  back,  or  below  the
two-cleft  tip,  proceeding  from  the  mid-nerve  only.  Stamens  three.
Grain  oblong-linear,  grooved  on  one  side,  usually  hairy,  free,  but  mostly
invested  by  the  upper  palea.

TRIBE III. Oryzeje.

Spikelets  one-flowered;  the  flowers  often  monoecious,  in  branched
panicles.  Glumes  frequently  wanting.  Inner  palea  three-nerved.
Squamulae  two. Stamens  one  to  six.

3.  Oryza.  Glumes  two,  one-flowered.  Palece  two,  subequal,  adher-
ing to  the  ovary. Stamens  six. Styles  two.

4.  Zea.  By  some  authors  this  is  placed  in  order  Phalarece,  and  by
others  in  Olyrece.  Flowers  monoecious ;  sterile  ones  in  terminal,  panicu-
late racemes;  spikelets  two-flowered;  glumes  two,  herbaceous,  obtuse,
6ubequal ;  palece  membranaceous,  awnless,  obtuse.  Fertile  flowers  late-
ral, axillary,  on  a  spadix  inclosed  in  a  spathe  of  numerous  bracts;
spikelets  two-flowered,  one  flower  abortive;  glumes  two,  very  obtuse;
palea  awnless;  style  one,  filiform,  very  long,  pendulous;  caryopsis  com-
pressed; seeds  immersed  in  an  oblong  receptacle.


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  133

TRIBE  IV. Tritice^e  or  Horded.
Inflorescence  spiked. Spikelets  solitary,  in  pairs,  or  several  together,
one,  few,  or  many-flowered. Glumes  mostly  two,  equal  and  opposite,
rarely  unequal  and  alternate. Lower  palea  awned  or  awnless,  upper
one  with  two  keels.

5.  Triticum.  Spikelets  three,  many-flowered  ;  the  fructiferous  rachis
generally  articulated  ;  flowers  distichous.  Glumes  two,  nearly  opposite,
almost  equal,  awnless  or  awned.  Paleai  two,  herbaceous;  the  lower
awnless,  mucronate  or  aristate  at  the  tip;  the  upper  bicarinate ;  the  keels
more  or  less  ciliated  with  aculei.  Stamens  three.  Ovary  pyriform,
hairy  at  the  point.  Stigmas  two,  terminal,  subsessile,  feathery ;  with
long,  simple  finely-toothed  hairs.  Scales  two,  usually  entire  and  ciliated.
Caryopsis  externally  convex,  internally  concave,  and  marked  by  a  deep
furrow,  distinct,  or  adhering  to  the  paleae.

6.  Hordeum.  Sjjikelets  three  together,  the  lateral  ones  usually
withered,  two-flowered,  with  an  intermediate  floret  reduced  to  a  subulate
rudiment.  Glumes  two,  lanceolate-linear,  with  subulate  awns,  flattish,
unequal-sided,  at  right  angles  with  the  palea?,  almost  on  one  side,  and
that  the  outer  side,  herbaceous,  rigid.  Palece  two,  herbaceous;  the
lower  one  concave,  ending  in  an  awn  ;  the  upper  bicarinate.  Stamens
three.  Ovary  hairy  at  the  apex.  Stigmas  two,  sessile,  somewhat  ter-
minal, feathery.  Scales  two,  entire,  or  furnished  with  a  lateral  lobe,
usually  hairy  or  ciliated.  Caryopsis  hairy  at  apex,  oblong,  furrowed  on
the  inside,  adhering  to  the  paleae,  rarely  naked.

7.  Secale.  Spikelets  two-flowered.  Florets  sessile,  distichous,  with
a  rudiment  of  a  terminal  one.  Glumes  two,  herbaceous,  carinated,
almost  opposite,  awnless  or  awned.  Palece  two,  herbaceous ;  the  lower
one  awned  at  the  point,  keeled,  and  unequal-sided,  broadest  and  thick-
est on  the  outer  side ;  the  upper  shorter  and  bicarinate.  Stamens  three.
Ovary  pyriform,  pilose. Stigmas  two,  subsessile, terminal, feathery,

with long, simple,  finely-toothed hairs. Scales  two, entire, ciliated.
Caryopsis  hairy  at  the  point  and  loose.

TRIBE  V. Sacchare^e.
Fertile  paleae  membranaceous  or  scarious,  always  of  thinner  and  more
delicate  texture  than the (often  indurated)  glumes,  frequently  awned
from  the  tip. Spikelets  usually  in  pairs  or  threes,  panicled,  or  spiked,
some  of  them  entirely  sterile  (heterogamous).

8.  Saccharum. Placed  by  some  botanists  in  Tribe  Rottboelle. Spike-
lels  all  fertile,  in  pairs,  the  one  sessile,  the  other  stalked,  articulated  at


134  Katural  Orders  of  Plants.

the  base,  two-flowered;  the  lower  floret  neuter,  with  one  palea;  the
upper  fertile  floret  with  two  palece.  Glumes  two,  membranous.  Palece
transparent,  awnless.  Stamens  three.  Ovary  smooth.  Styles  two,  long;
stigmas  feathered,  with  simple,  denticulated  hairs.  Scales  two,  obscurely
two  or  three-lobed  at  the  tip,  distinct. Caryopsis  smooth  ?  loose  ?


CRYPTOGAMIA,

Or Flowerless Plants,


Are  plants  chiefly  composed  of  cellular  tissue,  without  spiral  vessels,
destitute  of  true  flowers,  and  producing  spores  instead  of  seeds.

CLASS  V.  Acrogens.
Flowerless  plants  with  a  proper  stem  or  axis,  often  with  a  vascular
system  composed  chiefly  of  annular  ducts,  usually  furnished  with  leaves.
Growth  by  the  extension  of  the  apex,  without  subsequent  increase  in
diameter.  Spores  with  a  proper  integument,  and  contained  in  a  vessel
analogous  to  an  ovary,  called  Theca  or  Sporangium.

ORDER  CXIV.  Equisetace^e.  Horsetail.
Leafless  plants,  with  simple  or  verticillate  branches;  stems  striate-
sulcate,  jointed,  fistular  between  the  joints  and  separable  at  them.
Sheaths  dentate,  crowning  the  summit  of  each  internode.  Inflorescence
(by  analogy)  a  dense,  cylindric,  terminal  spike  or  strobile.  Scales  of  the
strobile  peltate,  hexagonal,  subverticillate.  Thecce  four  to  seven,  attached
to  the  under  surface  of  the  scales,  with  lateral  dehiscence.  Spores
numerous,  globose,  surrounded  by  minute  granules.  Elaters,  bodies  of
Unknown  use,  consisting  of  four  elastic,  clavate  filaments  involving  the
6pores  in  a  spiral  manner.

1.  Equisetum.  Character  the  same  as  that  of  the  order. — Stems
striate-grooved,  rigid,  the  hard  cuticle  abounding  in  grains  of  silex,
hollow,  and  also  with  an  outer  circle  of  smaller  air-cavities  corresponding
with  the  grooves  ;  the  joints  closed  and  solid,  each  bearing  instead  of
leaves  a  sheath,  which  surrounds  the  base  of  the  internode  above,  and
is  split  into  teeth  corresponding  in  number  and  position  with  the  prin-
cipal ridges  of  the  stem ;  the  stomata  always  occupying  the  principal
grooves.

ORDER  CXV. Filices. Ferns.
Ferns,  usually  with a  creeping  rhizome;  sometimes  with an  erect,
arborescent  stem. The  leaves  (fronds)  variously  divided,  rarely  entire,
with  forked  veins,  mostly  circinate  in  vernation. Inflorescence  occupying


Natural  Orders  of  Plants.  135

the  back  or  margin  of  the  fronds  arising  from  the  veins.  Thecce  or
sporangia  of  one  kind  only  in  the  same  plant,  one-celled,  dehiscing  irre-
gularly, containing  innumerable  spores.  Sori  somewhat  regular  collec-
tions or  clusters  of  thecae  ;  or  the  thecae  are  isolated  and  scattered.
Indusium  a  scale  investing  each  sorus  ;  or  the  sori  are  covered  with  the
revolute  margin  of  the  frond.

TRIBE I. Polypodiace^e.
Thecaa  furnished  with  a  vertical,  jointed,  elastic,  and  usually  incom-
plete ring,  and  bursting  transversely  and  irregularly.

1.  Polypodium.  Sori  roundish,  naked,  variously  or  irregularly  scattered
over  the  back  of  the  flat  and  expanded  leaf-like  frond.  Indusium  none.
Veins  simple,  forked  or  pinnate,  free,  not  connected  by  cross-branches
or  anastomosing. — Rootstocks  creeping,  often  covered  with  wool-like
chaff,  and  with  tufted  branches.

2.  Aspidium.  Sori  roundish  or  elliptical,  scattered  ;  indusium  orbicu-
lar and  umbilicate,  fastened  at  the  center  and  opening  all  around,  or
reniform,  fastened  on  one  side  and  opening  on  the  other. — Frond
pinnate  or  bipinnate.

3.  Nephrodium.  Thecce  placed  in  the  middle  of  a  vein,  forming
roundish  sori  placed  in  two  rows.  Indusium  reniform,  fixed  by  the
sinus.

4.  Asplenium.  Sori  linear  or  oblong,  oblique,  or  somewhat  trans-
verse, separate,  not  in  pairs,  all  attached  lengthwise  to  the  upper  side
of  the  simple,  forked  or  pinnate,  free  veins.  Indusium  arising  from  the
lateral  veins,  and  opening  longitudinally,  usually  toward  the  midvein.

5.  Pteris.  Sori  linear,  confluent  laterally  in  a  line  which  borders
the  divisions  of  the  frond,  the  continuous  indusium  fixed  at  the  very
margin,  the  inner  edge  free.  Veins  forked  and  free,  bearing  the
sporangia  at  their  apex. — Fronds  one  to  three  pinnate  or  decompound,
rather  coriaceous.

6.  Adiantum.  Sori  roundish  or  crescent-shaped,  occupying  the  edge
of  the  lobes  of  the  frond,  the  indusium  appearing  as  a  reflexed  edge  of
it,  and  bearing  the  sporangia  on  its  under  side  on  the  free  ends  of  seve-
ral simply  forking  veins.  Midrib  none,  or  lateral. — Stalk  and  rachis
purplish-black,  polished.

TRIBE  II. Osmundiace^e.
Thecse  destitute  of  a  ring,  reticulated,  striated  with  rays  at  the  apex,
opening  lengthwise,  and  usually  externally.


136  Natural  Orders of  Plants.

7.  Osmunda.  Sporangia  globose,  short-pedicellcd,  naked,  entirely
covering  the  fertile  fronds  or  pinnae  (which  are  contracted  to  the  mere
facing),  thin  and  reticulated,  not  striate-rayed  at  the  apex,  opening  by  a
slit  into  two  valves  across  the  apparent  top  (opposite  the  pedicel).
Spores  green.  Fronds  tall  and  upright,  from  thickened  rootstocks,  one
or  two  pinnate  ;  the  veins  forking  and  free.

CLASS VI. Anophytes.
Cryptogamous acrogenous plants,  growing upward by  an  axis  or
stem, and  usually  furnished with  distinct  leaves composed of cellular
tissue  alone ;  sometimes  the  stem  and  foliage  confluent  into  a  frond.

ORDER  CXVI.  Musci  or  Bryace^e.  Moss.
Erect  or  creeping,  terrestrial  or  aquatic,  cellular  plants,  having  a
distinct  axis  of  growth,  destitute  of  a  vascular  system  and  covered  with
minute,  sessile,  imbricated,  entire,  or  serrated  leaves,  producing  spore-
cases  which  open  by  a  terminal  lid,  and  contain  simple  spores  alone.
Reproductive  organs  of  two  kinds:  1.  The  sterile  Jlower  consisting  of
from  four  to  twenty  or  more  minute  cylindrical  or  fusiform  stalked  sacs,
(anlheridia)  which  discharge  from  their  apex,  upon  the  application  of
■water,  a  mucous  fluid  filled  with  oval  particles,  and  then  perish.  2.
The  fertile  flower  composed  of  from  four  to  twenty  or  more  flask-like
bodies  (pistillidia),  each  having  a  membranous  covering  (calyptra)  ter-
minated by  a  long  cylindrical  funnel-mouthed  tube  [style).  The  ripened
pisti/lidium  (seldom  more  than  one  in  a  flower  maturing)  becomes  the
capsule,  which  is  rarely  indehiscent,  or  splitting  by  four  longitudinal
slits,  but  usually  opens  by  a  lid  (operculum)  ;  beneath  the  operculum
and  arising  from  the  mouth  of  the  capsule,  are  commonally  either  one
or  two  rows  of  rigid  processes  (collectively,  the  peristome),  which  are
always  some  multiple  of  four  ;  those  of  the  outer  row  are  called  teeth,  of
the  inner  cilia.  An  elastic  ring  of  cells  (annulus)  lies  between  the  rim
of  the  capsule  and  operculum.  The  powdery  particles  filling  the  capsule
are  spores.  The  thread-like  stalk  (pedicel)  supporting  the  capsule  is
inserted  into  the  elongated  torus  (vaginula)  of  the  flower.  I  The  pedicel
continued  through  the  capsule,  (or  hollow  urn-like  case)  forms  the
columella  ;  enlarged  under  the  capsule  it  sometimes  forms  an  apophysis.
The  calyptra  separating  early  at  its  base  is  carried  up  on  the  apex  of  the
capsule  ;  if  it  splits  on  one  side  it  is  hoodshaped  or  cuculliform,  if  not,  it
is  mitre-shaped  or  mitriform.  Intermixed  with  the  reproductive  organs
are  cellular  jointed  filaments  (paraphyses).  The  leaves  surrounding  the
antheridia  are  called  the  perigonial  leaves,  those  around  the  pisiillidia
or  pedicel  the  perichajtial  leaves.

Polytriciium.  Calyptra  densely  hairy.  Capsule  four  to  six-sided,
■with  a  discoidal  apophysis. Peristome  single,  of  sixty-four  teeth,  ad-


Natural  Orders  of Plants.  137

herentby  their  summits  to  the  membranous-dilated  apex  of  the  columella.
Lid  beaked. Inflorescence  dioecious  ;  sterile  flowers  terminal,  cup-shaped.

ORDER CXVII. Algace^e  or  Ceramiace^e. Sea-weed.

Sea-weeds,  usually  of  a  rose  or  purplish  color.  Cells  long  and  tubular,
or  round  and  short,  or  polygonal,  sometimes  arranged  in  a  single  row  ;
sometimes  disposed  in  several  parallel  rows,  forming  an  articulated  frond,
or  if  of  unequal  lengths,  forming  a  cellular  frond.  Their  propaga-
tion is  by  spores  (sphaerospores  and  tetraspores)  collected  in  fours  or
threes  within  a  transparent  perispore,  in  bodies  of  different  forms  and
structure.

1.  Fucus.  Frond  plane  compressed  or  cylindrical,  linear,  dichoto-
mous,  coriaceous.  Air-vessels  when  present,  innate  in  the  frond,  simple,
large.  Receptacles  terminal,  turgid,  containing  tubercles  imbedded  in
mucus,  and  discharging  their  spores  (sporangia)  by  conspicuous  spores.

2.  Chondrus.  Frond  cartilaginous,  dilating  upward  into  a  flat,
nerveless,  dichotomously  divided  frond,  of  a  purplish,  or  livid-red  color.
Fructification,  subspherical  capsules  in  the  substance  of  the  frond,  (rarely
supported  on  little  stalks)  and  containing  a  mass  of  minute  free  seeds.

3.  Gigartina.  Frond  horny  or  cartilaginous,  filiform,  cylindrical,
irregularly  branched.  Fructification  uniform  ;  spherical  sessile  capsules
containing  a  globose  mass  of  seeds.

ORDER  CXVIII. Lichenace.e. Lichen.

Perennial  plants,  often  spreading  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  on
rocks  or  trees  in  dry  places,  in  the  form  of  a  lobed  and  foliaceous,  or
hard  and  crustaceous,  or  leprous  substance  called  a  thallus.  This
thallus  is  formed  of  a  cortical  and  medullary  layer,  of  which  the  former
is  simply  cellular,  the  latter  both  cellular  and  filamentous  ;  in  the  crus-
taceous species  the  cortical  and  medullary  layer  differ  chiefly  in  texture,
and  in  the  former  being  colored,  the  latter  colorless  ;  but  in  the  fruticu-
lose  or  foliaceous  species,  the  medulla  is  distinctly  floccose,  in  the  latter
occupying  the  lower  half  of  the  thallus,  in  the  former  inclosed  all  round
by  the  corfical  layer.  Reproductive  matter  of  two  kinds:  1,  sporules
lying  in  membranous  tubes  (thecce)  immersed  in  nuclei  of  the  medullary
substance,  which  burst  through  the  cortical  layer,  and  color  and  harden
by  exposure  to  the  air  in  the  form  of  little  disks  called  shields  ;  2,  the
separated  cellules  of  the  medullary  layer  of  the  thallus.

1.  Cetraria.  Thallus  foliaceous,  cartilagino-membranaceous,  ascend-
ing and  spreading,  lobed  and  laciniated,  smooth  and  naked  on  each  side.


138  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

Shields  orbicular,  obliquely  adnate  with  the  margin  of  the  thallus,  the
lower  portion  being-  free,  (not  united  with  the  thallus);  the  disk  colored,
plano-concave,  with  a  border  formed  of  the  thallus  and  inflexed.

ORDER  CXIX.  Fungace^e.  Mushroom.
Plants  consisting-  of  a  congeries  of  cellules,  among  which  filaments
are  occasionally  intermixed,  increasing  in  size  by  addition  to  their  in-
side, their  outside  undergoing  no  change  after  its  first  formation,  chiefly
growing  upon  decayed  substances,  frequently  ephemeral,  and  variously
colored.  Sporules  lying  either  loose  among  the  tissue,  or  inclosed  in
membranous  cases  called  sporidia.

Agaricus,  Boletus,  and  Spermcedia,  belong  to  this  order.


SEXUAL  OR ARTIFICIAL  SYSTEM OF LINNMJS.

As  the  Sexual  System  of  Linneeus  is  still  followed  by  many,  and  espe-
cially by  those  who  are  commencing  the  study  of  Botany,  the  following
brief  sketch  of  it  is  here  introduced,  as  an  aid  to  the  Physician  in
the  eleventh,  eighteenth,  and  twenty-third  classes  of  the  following  table,
have  usually  been  omitted,  and  distributed  among  the  other  classes.

CLASSES.
Based  upon  the  number  or  variations  and  modifications  of  the  Stamens.

1.  Monandria  ;  one  stamen  to  each  flower.

2.  Diandria  ;  two  stamens  do.

3.  Triandria  ;  three  stamens  do.

4.  Tetrandria  ;  four  stamens  do.

5.  Pentandria  ;  five  stamens  do.

6.  Hexandria  ;  six  stamens  do.

7.  Heptandria  ;  seven  stamens  do.

8.  Octandria  ;  eight  stamens  do.

9.  Enneandria  ;  nine  stamens  do.

10.  Decandria  ;  ten  stamens  do.

11.  Dodecandria  ;  twelve  to  nineteen  stamens  to  each  flower.

12.  Icosandria  ;  more  than  ten  stamens  on  the  calyx,  (perigynous).

13.  Polyandria  ;  more  than  ten  stamens  on  the  receptacle,  (hypogy-

nous).

14.  Didynamia  ;  four  stamens,  of  which  two  are  long  and  two  short;

usually  labiate  flowers.

15.  Tetradynamia  ; six  stamens, of which four are long  and  two

short;  usually  cruciform  flowers.


Natural Orders  of Plants.  139

16.  Monadelphia  ;  filaments  united  into  a  single  set,  tube,  or  column.

17.  Diadelphia  ; filaments united  into  two  sets  ; usually  papiliona-

ceous flowers.
IB.  Polyadelphia  ;  filaments  united  in  more  than  three  sets.

19.  Syngenesia;  stamens  united  by  their  anthers  into  a  ring  or  tube  ;

usually  compound  flowers.

20.  Gynandria  ;  stamens  consolidated  with  the  pistil  or  style.

21.  Monoecia  ; stamens  and  pistils  in  separate flowers, but  on  the

same  plant.

22.  Dioecia  ;  stamens  and  pistils  in  separate  flowers,  and  on  different

plants.

23.  Polygamia  ;  stamens  and  pistils,  in  the  same  or  separate  flowers,

and  on  the  same  or  on  different  plants ;  varying.

24.  Cryptogamia  ;  stamens  and  pistils  wanting  or  invisible.

ORDERS.

Founded  upon  the  modifications  of  various  parts  of  the  flowers,  as  the
Styles,  or  where  these  are  wanting,  the  Stigmas,  also  the  Seeds,
Pods,  etc.  %

1.  Monogynia  ;  includes  all  the  genera  of  plants  in  either  of  the  first

thirteen  classes,  with  one  style  or  stigma  to  the  flower.

2.  Digynia  ;  do. with  two  styles  or  stigmas.

3.  Trigynia  ; do.  with  three  styles do.

4.  Tetragynia  ;  do.  with  four  styles do.

5.  Pentagynia  ;  do.  with  five  styles do.

6.  Hexagynia  ; do.  with  six  styles  do.

7.  Heptagynia  ;  do.  with  seven  styles do.

8.  Octagynia  ; do.  with  eight  styles do.

9.  Enneagynia;  do.  with  nine  styles do.

10.  Decagynia  ; do. with  ten  styles do.

11.  Dodecagynia  ;  do.  with  eleven  or  twelve  styles  do.

12.  Polygynia; do.  with  more  than  twelve  styles  do.

The  fourteenth  class  has  two  orders,  viz  :
Gymnospermia  ;  with  seeds  naked,  or  apparently  so.
Angiospermia  ;  wich  seeds  in  a  seed-vessel,  or  pericarp.

The  fifteenth  class  has  also  two  orders,  viz  :
Siliculosa  ;  the  fruit  a  silicle  or  short  pod.
Siliquosa  ;  the  fruit  a  silique  or  long  pod.

The  sixteenth,  seventeenth,  eighteenth,  twentieth,  twenty-first,  and
twrenty-second  classes,  have  their  orders  founded  on  the  number  of  sta-
mens to  the  flower,  the  order  bearing  the  name  of  the  first  thirteen
classes;  thus  the  sixteenth  class  flower  with  three  stamens  would  be  named
Monadelphia  Triandria,  etc.


140  Natural  Orders  of  Plants.

The  nineteenth  class  has  its  orders  founded  upon  the  character  of  its
flowers,  thus  :

Polygamia  ^qualis  ;  flowers  in  heads,  and  all  perfect.

Polygamia  superflua  ;  florets  of  the  rays,  or  margin  of  the  head

pistillate  ;  the  rest  perfect.
Polygamia frustranea  ; florets of  the margin neutral, the rest

perfect.
Polygamia  necessaria  ;  florets  of  the margin pistillate and  fertile,

the  rest  or  disk-flowers  staminate  and  sterile.
Polygamia  segregata  ;  each  flower  having  its  own  proper  calyx  or

involucre.
Monogamia  ;  flowers  solitary,  but  with  united  anthers.

The  twenty-third  class  has  its  orders  founded  on  the  characters  of  the
two  preceding  classes,  thus  ; —

Monoscia  ;  where  both  separated  and  perfect  flowers  are  found  on  the

same  plant.
Dioscia  ;  where  the  different  flowers  are  found  on  different  plants.
Trkecia  ;  where  perfect  flowers  are  found  on  one  plant,  staminate  on

another,  and  pistillate  on  still  another.
The  twenty-fourth  class  has  its  orders,  based  upon  the  natural  cha-
racter of  the  plants  ;  they  are  : —
Filices  ;  ferns.
Musci  ;  Mosses.
Hepatic^e  ;  liverworts.
Alg/e  ;  seaweeds.
Lichenes  ;  lichens.
Fungi  ;  mushrooms  or  toad-stools.


PART II.


MATERIA MEDIC  A.


ABELMOSCHUS  ESCULENTUS.
Okra.

Nat. Ord. — Malvaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Monadelphia  Polyandria.

FRUIT.

Description.  This  is  an  Annual  plant,  known  also  by  the  name  of
Gombo,  and  is  the  Hibiscus  Esculentus  of  some  authors.  The  stems  are
somewhat  woody  toward  the  base,  erect,  branched,  round,  from  three  to
six  feet  in  bight,  and  three  or  four  inches  in  diameter.  The  herbaceous
part  is  covered  with  sharp  bristles,  and  often  bears  purplish  spots.  The
leaves  are  alternate,  petioled;  the  lower  ones  being  angular,  the  central
ones  palmate,  and  the  upper  ones  subdigitate,  the  divisions  being  lan-
ceolate-oblong ;  all  are  serrate  and  somewhat  bristly.  The  petioles  are
round,  bristly,  and  as  long  as  the  leaves.  The  flowers  are  very  large,
axillary,  solitary,  on  short  peduncles,  of  a  pale-yellow  color,  with  a  dark-
crimson  bottom.  Involucre  one,  from  six  to  twelve-leaved  ;  leaflets  linear,
bristly,  deciduous.  The  calyx  spathiform,  of  a  very  soft  texture,  burst-
ing lengthwise  on  one  side  ;  stigmas  equal  to  the  cells  in  the  capsule.
Capsule  six  to  twelve  inches  in  length,  about  one  inch  in  diameter,  some-
what bristly,  especially  the  ridges,  equal  in  number  to  the  cells  and
valves,  with  a  single  row  of  round,  smooth  seeds  in  each  cell.

History.  This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  West  Indies,  and  is  also  culti-
vated in  the  Southern  States,  where  the  capsule  is  much  employed  in
soups,  and  for  pickles.  The  capsule  is  the  part  employed,  and  abounds
in  mucilage.  The  Hibiscus  Abelmoschus,  or  Abelmoschus  moschatus,  a
foreign  evergreen  shrub,  grows  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  in  Egypt,
the  East  and  West  Indies,  etc.,  and  affords  the  seeds  known  under  the
names  of  Semen  Abelmoschi,  alceae  ^Egypticse,  and  grana  moschata.
These  are  about  the  size  of  flaxseed,  reniform,  striated,  of  a  grayish-
CHI)


142  Materia  Medica.

brown  color,  a  musk  odor,  and  a  warm  rather  spicy  taste,  and  are  used
by  the  Arabs  to  flavor  their  coffee.

Properties  and  Uses.— OVrz  is  mucilaginous,  and  may  be  employed
wherever  emollients  and  demulcents  are  indicated  ;  the  leaves  are  occa-
sionally employed  for  preparing  emollient  poultices.  The  seeds  of  the
foreign  plant  were  formerly  considered  stimulant  and  antispasmodic  ;  but
are  at  present  only  used  in  perfumery.

ABIES  BALSAMEA.

Balm  of  Gilead.

Nat.  Ord.— Pinaceas. Sex.  Syst.—Monosc'm  Monadelphia.

JUICE,  OE RESINOUS EXUDATION.

Description.— This  is  an  elegant  tree,  rising  from  twenty  to  forty  feet
in  hight,  and  of  a  pyramidal  form.  It  is  also  known  by  the  name  of
American  Silver  Fir.  The  leaves  are  from  six  to  eight  lines  in  length,
solitary,  flat,  either  acute  or  emarginate,  entire,  glaucous,  silvery-white
beneath,  and  on  their  upper  surface,  glaucous,  shining,  dark-green  ;
somewhat  pectinate,  suberect  above,  sometimes  curved  to  one  side,  and
spreading  more  or  less  perfectly  in  two  rows  on  the  sides  and  tops  of
the  branches.  The  male  flowers  are  yellow,  numerous,  axillary,  solitary,
and  about  as  long  as  the  leaves  ;  the  female  catkins  are  lateral,  cylin-
drical, erect,  and  green  ;  the  bracts  abbreviate,  obovate,  mucronate,  and
subserrulate.  The  cones  are  large,  cylindrical,  erect,  of  a  purplish
color,  and  covered  with  a  resinous  exudation,  which  gives  them  a  glossy,
rich  and  elegant  appearance.

History. — This  tree  inhabits  Canada,  Nova-Scotia,  Maine,  and  moun-
tainous regions  further  to  the  South.  It  furnishes  the  Canada  Balsam,
also  called  Balsam  of  Fir,  or  Canada  Turpentine.  The  vesicles  which
naturally  form  upon  the  trunk  and  branches  are  broken,  and  their  liquid
contents  received  into  a  bottle.

Canada  Balsam  is  a  transparent  fluid,  or  nearly  so,  colorless,  or  of  a
pale-yellow  tint,  tenacious,  of  the  consistence  of  thin  honey,  of  a  strong,
agreeable,  terebinthine  odor,  of  a  slightly  bitter  and  not  very  acrid  taste,
and  very  slow  to  consolidate.  On  exposure  to  the  air,  it  gradually
becomes  concrete,  owing  partly  to  the  escape  of  volatile  oil,  and  partly
to  its  conversion  into  resin.  A  moderate  heat  renders  it  completely
liquid;  a  higher  heat  gives  off  volatile  oil,  leaving  behind  resin  some-
what empyreumatised.  The  same  result  takes  place  when  boiled  with
water,  and  the  remaining  unevaporated  water  holds  a  little  succinic  acid
in  solution.  It  is  readily  inflammable,  burning  with  a  dense  reddish
flame,  and  much  black  smoke.  It  is  partially  soluble  in  alcohol  ;  and  a
part  of  its  resin  forms  a  soluble  soap  with  solution  of  potassa. It  has  not


Abies  Canadensis.  143

been  satisfactorily  analyzed.  Bonastre  obtained  from  100  parts,  18.6  of
volatile  oil,  40.0  of  resin  soluble  in  alcohol,  33.4  of  sub-resin,  nearly
insoluble  in  alcohol,  4.0  of  caoutchouc,  4.9  of  bitter  extractive  and  salts,
and  traces  of  acetic  acid.  Its  therapeutical  influence  upon  the  system  is
owing  to  its  essential  oil.  The  name  balsam  is  improperly  applied  to  it,
as  it  consists  chiefly  of  resin  and  essential  oil,  and  contains  no  cinnamic
acid,  nor  benzoin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Canada  Balsam  is  stimulant,  diuretic,  anthel-
mintic, and  in  large  doses,  cathartic  ;  it  acts  more  especially  on  the
mucous  tissues  of  the  system,  and  if  its  use  be  continued  too  long,  or  in
too  large  doses,  it  will  irritate  these  tissues  more  or  less,  especially  those
of  the  urinary  organs,  producing  strangury ;  if,  however,  it  should  act
as  a  laxative,  this  irritation  is  not  apt  to  follow.  It  has  been  advanta-
geously employed  internally  in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  leucorrhea,  piles,  chronic
urinary  difficulties,  chronic  inflammations  or  ulcerations  of  the  bowels,
chronic  catarrhal  affections,  and  rheumatism.  In  gonorrhea,  where  the
use  of  copaiba  is  not  desirable,  I  have  found  the  Canada  Balsam  an
excellent  substitute  in  the  following  combination,  viz:  Take  of  Canada
Balsam  two  fluidounces,  Oil  of  Turpentine  four  fluidrachms,  Spirits  of
Nitric  Ether  eight  fluidounces,  Pulverized  Camphor,  two  drachms  ;  mix
these  together.  The  dose  is  a  fluidrachm  three  times  a  day.  In  cases
where  the  inflammatory  symptoms  have  been  subdued,  pulverized  Kino,
two  drachms,  may  also  be  added.

Externally,  Canada  Balsam  acts  as  a  rubefacient,  and  is  frequently
employed  as  a  stimulant  to  wounds  and  ulcers  ;  it  likewise  enters  into  the
composition  of  several  salves  and  irritating  plasters.  Dose,  from  ten  to
twenty  grains  two  or  three  times  a  day,  in  pills  or  in  emulsion.


ABIES  CANADENSIS.

Hemlock  Spruce.

Nat.  Orel. — Pinaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Moncecia  Monadelphia.

THE  PREPARED  CONCRETE  JUICE,  CANADA  PITCH,  GUM  HEMLOCK.

Description. — This  tree  sometimes  attains  the  night  of  eighty  feet,  with
a  trunk  two  or  three  feet  in  diameter.  The  leaves  are  very  numerous,
about  half  an  inch  in  length,  linear,  flat,  obtuse,  denticulate,  and  irregu-
larly arranged  in  two  rows.  The  cones  or  strobiles,  are  oval,  of  few
scales,  pendulous,  about  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long,  and  terminal  or
at  the  ends  of  the  branches.

History. — The  foliage  of  this  tree  is  delicate,  bright  green  above,  and
silvery- white  underneath.  Hemlock  Spruce  is  abundant  in  Canada,  Nova
Scotia,  and  the  elevated  and  mountainous  regions  of  New  England  and  the
Middle  States. Its  timber  is  very  coarse-grained,  and  its  bark  contains  an


144  Materia  Medica.

astringent  principle,  and  is  much  used  for  tanning  purposes.  The  pitch  or
juice  exudes  spontaneously,  and  hardens  upon  the  bark,  from  which  it
is  obtained  by  boiling  fragments  of  the  bark  thus  incrusted,  in  water,
and  skimming  off  the  pitch  which  rises  to  the  surface.  A  second
boiling  still  further  purifies  it.

Canada  Pitch  is  hard,  brittle,  quite  opake,  of  a  dark  yellowish
brown  color,  which  becomes  still  darker  by  exposure  to  the  air;  of  a
weak,  peculiar  odor,  and  scarcely  any  taste.  It  softens  and  becomes
adhesive  with  a  moderate  heat,  and  melts  at  198°  F.  It  consists  of
resin,  and  a  small  portion  of  essential  oil.

Properties  and  Uses. — Gum  Hemlock  is  a  gentle  rubefacient,  and  is
sometimes  employed  for  the  same  purposes  as  Burgundy  pitch,  which  it
resembles  in  its  properties.  The  tincture  of  the  hemlock  pitch  is
diuretic  and  stimulant.  The  volatile  oil,  oil  of  hemlock,  has  been  used
to  produce  abortion,  but  it  is  dangerous.  As  a  liniment,  this  oil  has
been  used  in  croup,  rheumatism,  and  other  affections  requiring  a  stimu-
lating local  application.  The  essence  of  hemlock  is  diuretic  and  stimu-
lant; Dr.  W.  K.  Everson  states  it  to  be  a  superior  remedy  in  gastric
irritation,  to  allay  vomiting  in  cholera-morbus,  etc.;  the  dose  is  five  or
ten  drops  in  water,  every  ten  or  twenty  minutes,  until  relief  is  afforded.
I  have  found  the  following  preparation  very  beneficial  as  an  internal
agent,  in  rheumatism,  colic,  flatulency,  acid-stomach,  pains  or  soreness
of  the  chest  or  stomach,  languor,  depression  of  spirits,  hysterics,  pyro-
sis, and  many  other  chronic  and  painful  affections.  Take  of  Balsam
Tolu,  Gum  Guaiacum,  Gum  Hemlock,  Gum  Myrrh,  of  each,  coarsely
powdered,  two  ounces,  Oil  of  Hemlock  three  ounces,  Oil  of  Wintergreen
two  ounces,  Alcohol  one  gallon.  Mix  and  allow  them  to  macerate  for
two  weeks,  frequently  agitating.  The  dose  is  a  iluidrachm  in  half  a  wine-
glass of  sweetened  water ;  or  in  severe  cases,  it  may  be  increased  to
half  an  ounce.  I  have  employed  this  preparation  for  several  years,  and
can  confidently  recommend  it  to  the  profession  as  an  effectual  agent  in
the  above  disorders.  A  strong  decoction  of  the  bark  of  this  tree  is
beneficial  in  leucorrhea,  prolapsus-uteri,  diarrhea,  etc.,  administered  in-
ternally, and  used  in  enema;  it  is  likewise  of  service,  as  a  local  applica-
tion, in  p'anjrrene.


ABIES  EXCELSA.

Norway  Pine.

Nat. Ord.— Pinaceas. Sex.  Syst.—MoncBcia.  Monadelphia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE. BURGUNDY PITCH.

Description. — This  tree,  also  called  Norway  Spruce  Fir,  has  a  trunk
from  three  to  five  feet  in  diameter,  and  sometimes  attains  the  hiffht  of


Abies Excelsa.  145

one  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  The  leaves  are  short,  obscurely  four-cornered,
often  curved,  of  a  dusky  green  color,  shining  on  the  upper  surface,  and
stand  thickly  upon  the  branches.  The  male  catkins  are  purple,  axil-
lary, and  solitary,  scales  staminiferous  at  the  apex  ;  the  female  catkins  are
usually  purple,  terminal,  and  simple;  ovaries  two;  stigmas  glandular;
cones,  with  imbricated  scales,  which  are  thin  at  the  apex,  and  rounded,
pendent  and  purple.

History. — The  Norway  Pine  is  a  native  of  Europe  and  Northern  Asia;
and,  as  well  as  the  Abies  Picea,  or  European  silver  fir-tree,  furnishes
the  Burgundy  pitch  of  commerce.  The  pitch  is  obtained  by  allowing
the  turpentine,  which  flows  from  incisions,  to  harden  on  the  bark,  and
then  purifying  it  by  melting  it  in  water,  and  passing  it  through  a  cloth.

Pure  Burgundy  pitch  is  hard,  brittle,  quite  opake,  of  a  yellowish  or
brownish  color,  and  a  sweet,  perfumed,  weak,  terebinthinate  taste,
without  bitterness,  and  a  strong,  peculiar,  balsamic  odor.  It  is  very
fusible,  and  at  the  heat  of  the  body  softens  and  becomes  adhesive.  It
contains  a  minute  proportion  of  essential  oil.  As  brought  to  this  country,
it  is  generally  mixed  with  impurities  ;  the  true  pitch  is  seldom  met  with,
spurious  sorts  being  substituted,  made  by  melting  together  pitch,  resin,
and  turpentine,  and  agitating  the  mixture  with  water.  The  spurious
kind  may  be  known  by  their  different  odor,  their  bright  yellow  color,
their  numerous  vesicles,  and  by  the  aqueous  vapor  they  yield  when
heated.

The  resinous  exudation  from  this  tree,  in  the  form  of  concrete  tears,  is
the  Thus  or  Frankincense  of  commerce,  or  Abietis  Resina.

Frankincense  is  in  solid,  brittle  tears,  externally  brownish-yellow,  paler
internally,  and  emitting  an  agreeable  odor  when  burned  ;  at  the  temper-
ature of  the  body,  it  softens  and  becomes  adhesive.  It  is  used  only  as
an  ingredient  in  plasters.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  gentle  rubefacient,  similar  to  the  Canada
pitch.  It  is  applied  externally  in  form  of  a  plaster,  and  produces  a
slight  degree  of  inflammation  and  serous  effusion,  without  separating
the  cuticle.  Sometimes  it  excites  a  papillary  or  vesicular  eruption,  and
has  been  known  to  create  excessive  pain,  tumefaction,  and  redness,  fol-
lowed by  vesication  and  even  ulceration.  Used  chiefly  in  chronic  rheu-
matic pains,  and  chronic  affections  of  the  chest  or  abdominal  viscera.
It  enters  into  several  salves  and  plasters.

Off.  Prep. — Emplastrum  Picis  Compositum  ;  Emplast.  Resinae  Corn-
posit.;  Linimentum  Olei  Composit.;  Liniment.  Cajuputi  Composit.;  Lini-
ment. Camphor.  Composit.
10


146  Materia Medica.

ABIES  LARIX.

Larch.

Nat. Ord.— Pinaeea*. Sex.  %tf.— Moncecia  Monadelphia.

resinous  exudation. Venice  turpentine. (See  Oleum  Terebinthince .)

Description. — The  Larch  is  a  tree  of  straight  and  lofty  growth,  with
wide-spreading  branches,  whose  extremities  droop  in  the  most  graceful
manner.  The  buds  are  alternate,  perennial,  cup-shaped,  scaly,  pro-
ducing annually  a  pencil-like  tuft  of  very  numerous,  spreading,  linear,
bluntish,  entire,  smooth,  tender,  bright-green,  deciduous  leaves,  about
an  inch  lono-.  Male  flowers,  drooping,  about  half  an  inch  long,  yellow;
female  catkins,  erect,  larger  than  the  male  flowers,  and  variegated  with
green  and  pink  ;  cones,  erect,  ovate,  about  an  inch  long,  purple  when
young,  reddish-brown  when  ripe,  their  scales  spreading,  orbicular,
slightly  reflexed,  and  cracked  at  the  margin.  It  is  a  native  of  the
mountainous  regions  of  the  north  and  middle  of  Europe.

History. — The  trunk  of  the  tree  furnishes  Venice  Turpentine ;  and  a
peculiar  saccharine  substance  exudes  from  the  branches,  called  Manna
of  Briancon.  When  the  larch  forests  in  Russia  take  fire,  a  gum  issues
from  the  trees  during  their  combustion,  which  is  termed  "Gum  Orenberg,"
and  which  is  wholly  soluble  in  water  like  Gum  Arabic.

Genuine  Venice  Turpentine  is  a  viscid  liquid,  of  the  consistence  of
honey,  of  a  yellowish  or  slightly-greenish  color,  and  imperfectly  trans-
parent ;  it  flows  with  difficulty,  has  a  strong,  not  disagreeable  odor,  and
a  warm,  bitterish,  and  very  acrid  taste.  It  is  wholly  soluble  in  alcohol.
The  factitious  Venice  turpentine  is  of  a  brownish  color,  and  is  made  by
dissolving  resin  in  oil  of  turpentine.

Properties  and Uses. — (See  Oil  of  Turpentine.)

Off.  Prep. — Unguentum  Stramonii  Compositum.


ABIES  NIGRA.

Black  Spruce. Double  Spruce.

Nat. Ord- — Pinacere. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

DECOCTION OF BRANCHES. ESSENCE OF SPRUCE.

Description. — This  tree  grows  in  the  northern  parts  of  this  continent,
and  in  elevated  situations  in  the  Middle  States.  It  attains  the  bight  of
from  forty  to  seventy  feet,  having  very  dark-green  leaves,  short,  erect,
rigid,  and  the  cones  one  or  two  inches  long,  reddish-brown,  ovate  and
their  scales  wavy  and  toothed  at  the  apex.


Abies Nigra  —  Abies Picea.  147

Properties. — The  extract  or  Essence  of  Spruce  is  made  from  the  young
branches,  by  boiling  them  in  water,  straining  and  evaporating.  From
this  Spruce  Beer  is  made  ;  an  agreeable  and  not  unwholesome  summer
drink.  It  is  made  as  follows  :  Take  of  essence  of  spruce  half  a  pint,
bruised  ginger,  pimento,  and  hops,  of  each,  four  ounces,  water  three  gal-
lons. Boil  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  then  strain,  add  of  warm  water,
eleven  gallons,  molasses,  six  pints,  and  yeast,  a  pint ;  mix,  and  allow  the
mixture  to  ferment  for  twenty-four  hours.


ABIES  PICEA.

Silver  Pine.

Nat. Ord. — Pinaceaa. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

STRASBURGH TURPENTINE.

Description. — This  tree,  also  known  as  Silver  Fir,  grows  in  the  moun-
tains of  south  and  central  Europe,  and  resembles  the  Abies  Balsamea,
but  differs  in  not  having  its  bracts  so  sharp  pointed,  its  cones  less  acute
at  each  end,  and  the  crest  of  its  anthers  pointed.  It  affords  the  "Stras-
burgh  Turpentine."

Properties  and  Uses. — (See  Oil  of  Turpentine.)


ACACIA  ARABICA. (Acacia Vera.)

Acacia.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabaceae,  or  Leguminosas.  Tribe. — Mimoseas.  Sex.  Syst. — Poly-
gamia  Moncecia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE. GUM ARABIC.

Description. — Acacia  Arabica,  also  known  by  the  name  of  Egyptian
Thorn,  or  Egyptian  Gum  Arabic  is  a  small  tree  or  shrub,  but  which
sometimes  attains  the  hight  of  forty  feet,  with  a  trunk  from  twelve  to
sixteen  inches  in  diameter.  The  leaves  are  alternate  and  doubly  pinnate,
with  four  or  six  pairs  of  pinnae,  each  being  composed  of  from  ten  to
twenty  pairs  of  minute,  smooth,  oblong,  linear  leaflets,  with  a  gland  on
the  common  petiole,  below  the  first,  and  generally  one  between  the  last
pair  of  pinnce.  Spines  straight  and  in  pairs.  Flowers  yellow,  in  globose,
pedunculated,  axillary,  subternate  heads. The  Legume  is  moniliform.

Acacia  Vera  is  a  tree  of  middling  size,  with  a  crooked  stem  covered
with  a  smooth  gray  bark,  numerous  scattered  branches  covered  with  a
yellowish-green  or  purplish  bark. The  leaves  are  alternate,  bipinnate,


148  Materia Mkdica.

and  composed  of  two  pairs  of  opposite  pinnae,  with  numerous,  small,
oblong,  linear,  and  smooth  leaflets,  supported  on  very  short  footstalks  ;
on  the  common  petiole,  and  between  each  pair  of  pinnae,  is  a  gland.
The  flowers  are  bright  yellow,  inodorous,  small,  and  collected  in  globular
heads  about  two  together,  and  supported  on  slender,  axillary  peduncles,
and  furnished  with  two  small  bracts.  The  branches  and  petioles  are
glabrous  ;  the  spines  are  in  pairs,  sharp,  and  from  three  to  six  lines  long,
and  are  situated  at  the  insertion  of  each  leaf,  being  united  at  their  base.
The  legume  is  four  or  five  inches  long,  moniliform,  smooth,  fiat,  of  a  pale-
brown  color,  and  divided  into  several  orbicular  portions,  in  each  of
which  is  contained  a  single,  flattish  seed.  The  best  quality  of  Gum
Arabic  is  obtained  from  this  tree.

History. — These  trees  grow  in  upper  and  lower  Egypt,  Senegal,  and
other  parts  of  Africa,  also  flourish  in  Arabia,  and  in  Hindostan,  where
their  gum  is  used  for  food  by  the  natives.  The  A.  Arabica  is  the  most
widely  diffused  of  the  gum-bearing  trees.  Gum  Arabic  is  likewise
obtained  from  several  other  species  of  Acacia,  but  not  so  largely  as  from
the  two  above-named.  The  gum  of  the  Acacias  exudes  spontaneously
from  the  bark  of  the  trunk  and  branches,  and  hardens  on  exposure  ;  but
incisions  are  sometimes  made  in  order  to  facilitate  the  exudation.  It
exudes  from  the  trees  in  the  form  of  a  thick  and  somewhat  frothy  juice,
soon  after  the  rainy  season  has  softened  their  bark,  and  rendered  it  apt
to  split  during  the  hot  weather  that  succeeds.  It  is  secreted  in  greatest
abundance  by  old  stunted  trees,  and  in  dry,  hot  seasons,  and  is  thought
by  some  to  be  the  result  of  disease.

The  best  quality  of  Gum  Arabic  has  a  very  pale,  straw  color,  breaks
with  a  vitreous  fracture,  is  transparent,  inodorous,  insipid,  and  feels
quite  viscid  in  the  mouth.  It  is  generally  in  small,  round,  irregular
lumps,  of  easy  fracture.  Its  colored  varieties  are  bleached  by  exposure
to  the  light  of  the  sun.  Its  specific  gravity  varies  from  1.3  to  1.4.  In
powder  it  is  always  white.

Gum  Arabic  is  soluble  in  cold  or  hot  water,  forming  a  viscid  solu-
tion called  mucilage,  which,  when  evaporated,  yields  the  gum  unchanged.
It  is  insoluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  and  the  oils,  and  is  precipitated  from  its
aqueous  solution  by  alcohol.  Concentrated  acids  decompose  it.  A
solution  of  borax  coagulates  it.  It  unites  with  sugar  in  solution,  which
when  evaporated  yields  an  uncrystalhzable,  transparent,  solid  substance.
It  is  also  soluble  in  dilute  acids,  solutions  of  the  pure  alkalies,  and  lime-
water.

A  concentrated  aqueous  solution  of  Gum  Arabic  may  be  kept  a  long
while,  unless  the  weather  be  very  hot,  in  which  event  it  will  ferment.
A  weak  solution  ferments  speedily,  and  acetous  acid  is  developed.
Nitric  acid  changes  pure  gum  into  mucic  or  saccho-lactic  acid.  Analysis
shows  it  to  contain  bi-malate,  and  muriate  of  lime,  muriate  and  acetate
of  potassa,  and  some  other  matters.


Acacia  Catechu.  149

Properties  and  Uses. — Nutritive  and  demulcent.  Used  in  irritations
or  inflammations  of  mucous  surfaces  ;  as,  hoarseness,  sore-throat,  cough,
gonorrhea,  catarrh  of  the  urinary  bladder,  dysentery,  diarrhea,  stran-
gury, and  tenesmus.  It  may  be  given,  ad  libitum,  in  the  form  of  solution
or  lozenge;  as  an  article  of  diet  in  cases  requiring  a  rigid  regimen,  as  in
fevers,  it  is  superior  to  any  other  substance  ;  it  may  be  used  for  this
purpose  by  dissolving  the  gum  in  powder,  half  an  ounce,  in  five  ounces
of  water,  and  sweetening  with  loaf-sugar,  of  which  a  tablespoonful  may
be  given  every  two  or  three  hours  ;  in  low  stages  of  fever,  in  typhoid
fever,  and  wherever  a  mild  stimulant  is  required,  one  ounce  of  a  satu-
rated solution  of  camphor  in  sulphuric  ether  may  be  added  to  the  above,
and  administered  in  the  same  way  ;  it  is  diuretic,  promotes  the  action  of
the  absorbents,  and  does  not  materially  increase  arterial  action.  Equal
parts  of  pulverized  alum  and  Gum  Arabic  form  a  good  preparation  to
check  hemorrhages  from  small  cuts,  wounds,  etc.

Externally,  the  application  of  its  solution  to  burns  and  scalds  has
proved  serviceable,  repeating  it  until  a  complete  coating  is  secured.  It
is  likewise  much  used  for  compounding  pills,  lozenges,  mixtures  and
emulsions  ;  also  for  administering  insoluble  substances  in  water,  as  oils,
resins,  balsams,  camphor,  musk,  etc.

Mucilage  of  Gum  Arabic. — To  four  ounces  of  finely  pulverized
Gum  Arabic,  add,  very  gradually,  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  and  rub  the
whole  until  perfectly  blended.  Dose,  ad  libitum.  When  Gum  Arabic
is  adulterated  with  cherry  gum,  it  is  not  easy  to  form  a  good  mucilage  ;
the  cerasin  of  the  cherry  gum  will  cause  it  to  be  ropy.


ACACIA  CATECHU.

Catechu. (Cuich. Gambeer. Terra  Japonica.)

Nat.  Orel. — Fabacere,  or  Leguminosa?.  Tribe. — Mimoseas.  Sex.  Syst. — Poly-
gamia  Monoecia.

EXTRACT OF THE WOOD.

Description. — The  Acacia  Catechu  is  a  small  tree,  seldom  more  than
twelve  feet  high,  and  with  a  trunk  one  foot  in  diameter.  The  bark  of
the  tree  is  thick,  scabrous,  ferruginous,  red  within,  very  astringent  and
somewhat  bitter.  The  branches  are  spreading  and  irregular,  and  when
young,  pubescent ;  the  older  ones  have  many  stipular  prickles,  in  pairs
and  recurved.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  and  consist  of  ten  to  thirty
pairs  of  pinnae  about  two  inches  long,  each  having  many  small,  linear
leaflets,  covered  with  short  hairs,  and  of  a  pale-green  color.  At  the  base
of  each  pair  of  pinnae  is  a  small  gland  upon  the  common  petiole,  and
attached  to  the  stem  at  the  base  of  each  leaf,  are  two  short,  recurved
spines. The  /lowers  are  numerous,  axillary,  in  slender  cylindrical  spikes,


150  Materia Medica.

about  four  or  five  inches  long,  and  of  a  pale-yellow  color.  The  calyx
tubular,  hairy,  and  five-toothed.  The  corolla  is  composed  of  five  petals,
united  into  a  tube  at  the  base,  and  is  longer  than  the  calyx.  Stamens
numerous,  distinct,  with  roundish  anthers.  The  ovary  is  green,  oval,
glabrous,  supporting  a  slender  style,  and  terminated  by  a  simple  stigma.
The  legume  is  lanceolate,  flat,  straight,  smooth,  and  brown,  with  an
undulated  thin  margin,  containing  six  or  eight  roundish,  flattened  seeds,
which  emit  a  nauseous  odor  when  chewed.

History. — This  species  of  Acacia  is  a  native  of  the  East  Indies,  grow-
ing abundantly  in  Hindostan  and  in  the  Burman  empire.  The  officinal
catechu  is  prepared  by  boiling  the  leaves  or  wood  in  water,  then  evapo-
rating to  the  proper  consistence,  and  pouring  into  quadrangular  earthen
molds.  Catechu  is  likewise  obtained  from  the  Areca  Catechu  and  Uhca-
ria  Gambir.  There  are  several  kinds  of  it  met  with  in  commerce,  but  the
best  is  that  which  possesses  the  most  astringency,  and  which  can  be
determined  by  the  taste.

Catechu  varies  in  its  color  and  appearance,  being  from  pale  to  a  dark-
brown,  in  square,  round,  and  irregular  pieces,  friable,  specific  gravity
1.2  to  1.3,  inodorous,  astringent,  and  succeeded  by  an  agreeable  sweet
taste.  That  which  is  preferred  is  of  a  dark  color,  easily  broken  into
small  angular  fragments,  with  a  smooth,  glossy  surface,  bearing  some
resemblance  to  Kino.  It  is  soluble  in  hot  water,  which  deposits  a  red-
dish matter  on  cooling.  Cold  water  partially  dissolves  it.  Alcohol  or
proof  spirit  dissolves  it  readily.  It  contains  tannin,  extractive,  and  mu-
cilage. Ether  dissolves  its  tannin  and  catechuic  acids.  The  dark-
colored  catechu  is  the  most  astringent.

It  is  incompatible  with  solutions  of  the  pure  earths,  with  sulphuric  acid
or  muriatic  acids,  salts  of  alumina,  lead,  copper,  and  of  the  sesquioxide
of  iron,  also  with  gelatin,  opium,  cinchona,  and  those  salts  of  the  veget-
able alkaloids,  which  form  insoluble  salts  with  tannin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Catechu  is  a  pure  and  powerful  astringent,  and
slightly  tonic.  It  is  used  for  arresting  mucous  discharges  when  exces-
sive, for  removing  relaxation  or  congestion  of  mucous  membranes,  and
for  checking  hemorrhages.  In  chronic  diarrhea,  chronic  catarrh,  colli-
quative diarrhea,  and  chronic  dysentery,  it  has  proved  beneficial  espe-
cially when  combined  with  opium.  As  a  local  application  it  is  a  valuable
agent  for  removing  cynanche  tonsillaris,  aphthous  ulcerations  of  the
mouth,  elongation  of  the  uvula,  and  relaxation  and  congestion  of  the
mucous  membrane  of  the  fauces,  especially  of  the  kind  to  which  public
singers  are  subject ;  it  is  also  useful  in  congestion,  tenderness  and  spongi-
ness  of  the  gums,  particularly  when  the  result  of  mercurial  ptyalism.
The  tincture  of  catechu  is  often  useful  in  fissure  of  the  nipples,  when
applied  twice  a  day  with  a  fine  hair  pencil.  Catechu  is  likewise  benefi-
cial as  a  topical  application  to  ulcers  of  a  phagedenic  character,  and  to
indolent  ulcers. An  infusion  of  catechu  may  be  used  as  an  injection  in


Acacia Catechu  —  Acetum.  151

obstinate  gonorrhea,  gleet,  and  leucorrhea ;  and  thrown  up  the  nostrils
is  beneficial  in  epistaxis.  The  dose  of  powdered  catechu  is  from  ten  to
thirty  grains,  frequently  repeated,  and  is  best  given  with  sugar,  gum
arabic,  and  water  ;  dose  of  the  tincture  from  one  drachm  to  half  a  fluid-
ounce.


ACETUM.

Vinegar.

IMPURE  DILUTE  ACETIC  ACID,  PREPARED  BY  FERMENTATION  OF  CIDER,
MALT,  OR WINE.

Acetum  Britannicum. — Common  British  made  Vinegar,  from  infusion
of  malt. Density,  1006  to  1019.

Acetum  Destillatum. — Distilled  Vinegar.

Acetum  Gallicum. — French  Vinegar  ;  density,  1014  to  1022.

Acetum  Vini. — Wine  Vinegar. — Impure  Dilute  Acetic  Acid.

History. — Sugar  and  water,  and  all  saccharine  vegetable  juices,  infu-
sion of  malt,  wine,  cider,  and  all  liquors  susceptible  of  vinous  fermenta-
tion, may  be  converted  into  vinegar,  by  being  exposed  to  a  temperature
between  75°  and  90°  F.  with  access  of  air,  in  which  they  undergo  an
action  called  acetous  fermentation,  and  which  is  developed  under  a  mi-
croscopic fungus  influence,  termed  torula  aceti.  The  several  changes
which  occur  during  this  fermentation,  are  included  in  the  term  acetifica-
tion ;  during  the  progress  of  which,  heat  is  disengaged,  the  liquid
becomes  turbid,  and  filaments  are  formed,  which  move  in  numerous
directions,  and  finally,  the  liquid  becomes  transparent,  with  a  pultaceous
deposit  of  the  filaments,  its  alcohol  has  disappeared,  and  vinegar  now
occupies  its  place.

This  change  is  supposed  to  take  place,  in  consequence  of  the  forma-
tion of  a  new  substance  called  Aldehyd,  the  result  of  the  loss  of  a  part
of  the  oxygen  of  the  alcohol.  Alcohol  consists  of  four  equivalents  of
carbon,  six  of  hydrogen,  and  two  of  oxygen,  through  the  action  of  the
atmosphere,  it  loses  two  equivalents  of  hydrogen,  and  becomes  aldehyd.
This,  absorbing  two  equivalents  of  oxygen,  becomes  hydrated  acetic
acid,  consisting  of  four  equivalents  each  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxy-
gen. Aldehyd  is  an  ethereal  fluid,  very  inflammable,  colorless,  with  a
pungent  taste  and  smell ;  its  density  is  0.79.  It  absorbs  oxygen  with
avidity.  Its  name  has  reference  to  its  character,  alcohol  dehydroge-
nated.  Aldehyd  resin,  a  soft,  light-brown  mass,  giving  a  nauseous  soapy
smell  when  heated  to  212°,  and  is  formed  by  decomposing  the  aqueous
solution  of  aldehyd  by  eaustic  potassa.


152  Materia Medica.

Different  liquors  are  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  vinegar,  in  dif-
ferent countries  ;  in  wine  countries,  wine  is  used;  in  Britain,  infusion  of
malt  ;  in  the  United  States,  cider  is  principally  used.  The  cider  is
placed  in  barrels  with  their  bung-holes  open,  and  which  are  then  exposed
to  the  heat  of  the  sun,  during  summer,  and  the  acetification  is  perfected
in  about  two  years.  This  fermentation  must  be  watched  during  its  pro-
gress, and  as  soon  as  the  vinegar  is  formed,  it  must  be  racked  off  into
clean  barrels,  otherwise  it  will  become  spoiled  by  running  into  the  putre-
factive fermentation.

Vinegar  is  also  made  by  various  other  methods,  many  of  which  require
a  comparatively  short  time  for  its  formation.  A  tumbler  full  of  boil-
ing milk  added  to  fifty  gallons  of  vinegar,  and  stirred  into  it,  will
clarify  it,  without  injuring  its  aroma,  and  will  also  render  red  vinegar
pale.

Good  vinegar  is  of  an  agreeable,  penetrating  odor,  and  pleasant  acid
taste ;  its  color  varies  from  pale-yellow  to  red,  and  when  long  kept,  it
becomes  turbid  and  ropy,  putrefies,  becomes  fetid,  and  loses  its  acidity,
more  especially  if  exposed  to  the  air.  Malt  vinegar  is  usually  of  a  yel-
lowish red  color  ;  containing  from  4  to  5  per  cent,  of  acetic  acid  ;  wine
vinegar  is  white  or  red,  according  to  the  wine  it  is  prepared  from,  and  is
about  one-sixth  stronger  than  malt  vinegar.  White  wine  vinegar  is  pre-
ferred to  the  red,  which  last  may  be  rendered  pale  by  passing  it  through
animal  charcoal.

Vinegar  may  contain  sulphuric  acid,  copper,  and  lead,  which  are  its
most  dangerous  impurities.  The  want  of  action  of  acetate  of  lead
proves  it  free  from  the  first ;  the  second  may  be  detected  by  the  addition
of  ammonia  in  excess,  which  renders  the  acid  blue,  if  copper  be  pre-
sent ;  and  iodide  of  potassium  will  detect  lead  by  throwing  down  the
yellow  iodide  of  lead.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Refrigerant,  diuretic,  astringent,  and  tonic.
Useful  in  febrile  and  inflammatory  complaints,  especially  when  the
tongue  is  coated  dark  or  brown  ;  also  in  typhus  and  scurvy,  as  an  anti-
septic. In  urinary  affections,  attended  with  a  white  sediment,  consisting
mainly  of  phosphate  of  lime,  and  ammoniaco-magnesian  phosphate,  it
has  been  recommended.  In  dysentery  and  scarlatina,  vinegar  saturated
with  common  house  salt,  has  been  very  beneficial.  A  large  tablespoon-
ful  of  the  mixture  must  be  added  to  four  of  hot  water,  of  which  a  table-
spoonful  is  to  be  taken,  as  hot  as  may  be,  every  two  or  three  minutes,
till  the  whole  is  consumed.  A  similar  preparation  was  found  very  effec-
tual in  the  treatment  of  Asiatic  cholera,  in  Cincinnati,  during  1849-50,
and  is  also  asserted  to  have  proved  a  useful  local  application  in  external
inflammations,  sprains,  bruises,  swellings,  etc.  The  vapor  of  vinegar
inhaled  into  the  lungs,  is  useful  in  diseases  of  these  organs,  dryness  and
irritation  of  the  pulmonary  tubes  during  measles  and  other  exanthema-
tous  and  febrile  diseases,  also  in  sore-throat;  and  diffused  through  the


Achillea Millefolium.  153

rooms  of  the  sick,  it  is  both  agreeable  and  wholesome  to  the  patient  and
attendants.

Vinegar  has  been  used  as  a  gargle,  or  its  vapor  inhaled,  in  putrid  sore-
throat,  ulceration  of  the  fauces,  hoarseness,  etc. ;  it  has  also  been  applied
locally  in  some  cases  of  ophthalmia,  in  epistaxis,  several  cutaneous  dis-
eases, and,  diluted  with  water,  has  been  used  as  an  injection  into  the
rectum  in  hemorrhoidal  affections,  and  into  the  uterus  in  cases  of  uterine
hemorrhage.  It  forms  a  valuable  adjuvant  to  cooling  lotions.  The  dose
internally  is  from  one  to  four  fiuidrachms  ;  as  an  injection,  one  or  two
fluidounces  diluted  with  twice  or  thrice  its  bulk  of  water.

Distilled  Vinegar  is  used  for  the  same  purposes  as  above,  and  is  the
solvent  to  be  employed  in  making  the  various  medicated  vinegars  of
opium,  squill,  colchicum,  etc.  Care  must  be  taken,  when  using  vinegar
medicinally,  not  to  obtain  the  spurious  and  adulterated  articles,  contain-
ing sulphuric  acid,  muriatic  acid,  nitric  acid,  copper,  lead,  etc.  One
part  of  acetic  acid  to  five  of  distilled  water,  forms  a  very  good  vinegar,
for  culinary  and  medicinal  purposes.

Off.  Prep. — Acetum  Emeticum;  Acetum  Lobelias;  Acetum  Sangui-
narite ;  Acetum  Scillae ;  Tinctura  Opii  Acetata ;  Tinctura  Sanguinariee
Acetata ;  Lotio  Refrigerans ;  Lotio  Lobelias  Compositum.


ACHILLEA  MILLEFOLIUM.

Yarrow.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteracea?. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE HERB.

Description. — Yarrow,  also  called  Milfoil,  is  from  twelve  to  eighteen
inches  high,  with  simple  stems,, branching  at  top.  The  leaves  are  doubly
pinnate,  crowded,  alternate,  with  linear,  dentate,  mucronate  segments.
The  flowers  are  white  or  rose-colored,  and  are  arranged  in  a  dense,  flat-
topped,  compound  corymb ;  involucre  oblong  and  imbricated.  Rays  four
or  five,  short ;  receptacle  chaffy,  small,  flattish.  Achenium  oblong,  flat-
tened, margined.

History. — Yarrow  is  a  perennial  herb,  common  to  Europe  and  North
America,  growing  in  fields,  woods,  pastures,  etc.,  and  flowering  nearly
the  whole  summer.  The  American  plant  is  the  most  active.  The
flowers  and  leaves  have  an  agreeable,  but  feeble  aromatic  odor,  and  a
bitter,  astringent,  pungent  taste.  It  contains  a  volatile  oil,  bitter  extrac-
tive, tannin,  and  achilleic  acid.  The  active  principles  are  extracted
both  by  water  and  alcohol.

According  to  M.  Zanon,  the  active  principle  of  this  plant,  Achilleine,
has  been  used  as  a  substitute  for  sulphate  of  quinia  in  intermittent


154  Materia  Medica.

fevers,  in  the  south  of  Europe.  It  is  prepared  by  boiling  five  pounds
of  the  dried  plant  with  sixteen  pounds  of  rain-water  for  about  two
hours.  The  residue  is  again  boiled  twice  with  smaller  quantities  of
water,  the  decoctions  are  then  filtered  and  mixed.  These  are  then
clarified  with  white  of  egg,  and  evaporated  at  a  gentle  heat  until  a
whitish  pellicle  is  formed  on  the  surface.  After  twenty-four  hours  the
cold  liquid  deposits  a  mass  consisting  for  the  most  part  of  vegetable
fiber,  green  coloring  substance,  with  some  coagulated  albumen,  extractive
matter  insoluble  in  alcohol,  lime-salts,  and  traces  of  silica.  The  bitter
and  acid  liquid  is  filtered,  and  then  treated  with  an  excess  of  hydrate
of  lime,  which  produces  a  white  precipitate;  upon  this  the  liquid  is
treated  with  acetate  of  lead  as  long  as  any  precipitate  is  formed.  This
precipitate  is  collected  on  a  filter,  and  the  solution  saturated  with  sul-
phureted  hydrogen,  after  which  it  still  possesses  a  yellowish  color  and
a  very  bitter  taste.  On  evaporation  it  yields  nearly  half  a  pound  of  dry
extract,  which,  as  well  as  the  previously-filtered  sulphuret  of  lead,  are
exhausted  with  alcohol.  The  two,  mixed  and  evaporated,  yield  about
seven  ounces  of  achilleine.

The  achilleine  obtained  in  this  manner,  contains  some  acetate  of  lime,
resin,  etc.,  but  which  may  be  avoided  by  treating  the  neutralized  decoc-
tion (above,  by  hydrate  of  lime)  with  animal  charcoal,  then  evaporating
to  dryness,  and  finally  extracting  with  boiling  absolute  alcohol.

The  color  of  achilleine  is  instantly  destroyed  by  chlorine ;  it  is  not
precipitated  by  tincture  of  galls  nor  acetate  of  lead,  but  it  is  thrown
down  by  basic  acetate  of  lead ;  it  is  soluble  in  ammonia,  and  the  solu-
tion, when  exposed  to  the  air  until  the  ammoniacal  odor  has  disappeared,
deposits  brown  flakes,  which  are  less  soluble  than  achilleine ;  the  slight
trace  of  resin  in  achilleine  may  be  removed  by  solution  in  water.

Achilleic  acid  is  obtained  by  treating  the  decoction  of  Yarrow  with
acetate  of  lead  as  long  as  any  precipitate  is  formed,  this  is  suspended  in
water,  and  decomposed  with  sulphureted  hydrogen.  The  liquid
obtained  will  be  very  acid,  and  contain  some  lime  and  green  coloring
substance ;  to  precipitate  the  lime,  supersaturate  it  with  carbonate  of
potassa,  and  then  treat  it  with  animal  charcoal.  The  potassa-salt  may
be  precipitated  with  acetate  of  lead,  and  the  precipitate  decomposed
with  sulphureted  hydrogen.

Achilleic  acid  is  not  volatile  at  212°  F. ;  its  solution  can  therefore  be
concentrated  by  evaporation  in  the  water-bath.  The  greatest  concentra-
tion to  which  it  can  be  brought  is  1.014825.  In  this  state  it  is  perfectly
colorless,  but  on  further  evaporation  it  becomes  straw-colored.  Exposed
to  the  air  in  a  glass  or  porcelain  dish,  it  crystallizes  in  perfectly  colorless
quadrilateral  prisms.  The  crystallized  acid  requires  at  56°  F.  two  parts
of  cold  water  for  solution ;  the  solution  is  very  acid,  makes  the  teeth
rough,  has  no  odor,  and  strongly  reddens  litmus  paper.  Added  by
drops  to  a  clear  solution  of  acetate  of  lead,  it  does  not  render  it  in  the


Acidum Aceticum.  155

least  turbid ;  but  in  a  solution  of  basic  acetate  of  lead  it  immediately
produces  a  white  precipitate,  which  is  very  slightly  soluble.

Achilleic  acid  forms  salts  with  carbonates  of  potassa  and  soda,  am-
monia, lime,  magnesia,  and  quinia,  which  may  become  useful  thera-
peutical agents.  The  achilleate  of  quinia  is  very  soluble,  and  may  be
found  superior  to  the  sulphate  of  quinia;  it  may  be  made  by  dissolving
quinia  in  very  slightly-diluted  acid,  allowing  the  substances  to  act  on
each  other  for  several  days,  stirring  them  frequently,  until  the  liquid  no
longer  reddens  litmus  paper.  Then  filter,  and  add  some  alcohol;  heat
it  nearly  to  boiling,  and  allow  it  to  cool,  when  nearly  the  whole  liquid  is
converted  into  very  beautiful  radiate-grouped  prismatic  crystals,  which
are  very  bitter,  and  readily  soluble  in  water  or  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Yarrow  is  a  tonic,  astringent,  and  alterative.
It  has  been  used  in  intermittent  fever,  hemoptysis,  hematuria,  incon-
tinence of  urine,  diabetes,  hemorrhoids,  and  dysentery  ;  also  in  leucorrhea,
amenorrhea,  flatulent  colic,  and  some  nervous  affections.  In  monorrha-
gia, half  a  fluidounce  of  the  saturated  tincture,  repeated  three  or  four
times  daily,  has  been  found  advantageous  ;  a  few  drops  of  oil  of  anise
will  cover  its  unpleasant  taste.  The  late  Prof.  T.  V.  Morrow  made  much
use  of  an  infusion  of  this  herb  in  dysentery.  Dose  of  the  infusion,  from
four  to  six  fluid  ounces,  three  or  four  times  daily  ;  of  the  volatile  oil,
from  ten  to  thirty  drops.

Achillea  Ptarmica  or Sneezewort,  grows  in  hedges  and  thickets,  and
in  moist  places  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  It  is  about  two  feet  in
hight,  with  the  leaves  sessile,  linear  or  slightly  lanceolate,  acuminate,
equally  and  sharply  serrate,  with  appressed  teeth,  and  smooth.  The
flowers  are  white,  and  arranged  at  the  top  of  the  plant  in  a  diffuse  corymb.
The  leaves  are  remarkably  distinct  from  the  Yarrow.  The  whole  plant
is  pungent,  exciting  an  increased  flow  of  saliva.  The  powder  of  the
dried  leaves  when  snuffed  into  the  nostrils,  produces  sneezing,  which  is
supposed  to  be  owing  to  their  small,  sharp,  and  marginal  teeth.


ACIDUM  ACETICUM.
Acetic  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  acetate  of  soda,  in  powder,  a  pound;  sulphuric
acid  half  a  pound.  Pour  the  sulphuric  acid  into  a  glass  retort,  and
gradually  add  the  acetate  of  soda  ;  then,  by  means  of  a  sand-bath,  distil
the  acetic  acid  with  a  gentle  heat,  till  the  residuum  becomes  dry.  The
specific  gravity  of  this  acid  is  1.0634;  and  one  hundred  grains  of  it
saturate  83.5  grains  of  crystallized  bicarbonate  of  potassa.

Chemical  Properties. — The  acetic  acid  of  the  pharmacopoeias  is  a
limpid  and  colorless  liquid,  possessing  a  very  sour  and  acrid  taste,  and  a


156  Materia Medica.

fragrant,  pungent  smell.  It  unites  in  all  proportions  with  water,  and
dissolves  to  a  certain  extent  in  alcohol.  It  possesses  the  property  of  dis-
solving a  number  of  substances,  such  as  the  volatile  oils,  camphor,
gluten,  resins  and  gum  resins,  fibrin,  albumen,  etc.  It  is  incompatible
with  the  alkalies  and  alkaline  earths,  both  pure  and  carbonated,  with
metallic  oxides,  and  most  substances  acted  on  by  other  acids.  When
well  prepared,  it  should  not  form  a  precipitate  with  the  soluble  salts  of
baryta,  and  should  evaporate  completely  in  a  glass  or  platinum  capsule,
without  leaving  any  residue.

The  concentrated  acid,  or  radical  vinegar,  protohydrated  acetic  acid,
is  a  colorless,  volatile  liquid  at  the  temperature  of  60°,  with  a  strong
acid  and  corrosive  taste,  and  an  acid,  pungent,  and  refreshing  smell.  Its
specific  gravity  is  1.063.  It  volatilizes  without  decomposition,  and  burns
with  a  blue  flame  when  boiled  in  open  vessels  ;  it  attracts  humidity  from
the  atmosphere,  and  should  be  kept  in  well-stopped  vessels.

Properties  and  Uses. — Acetic  Acid  is  stimulant,  rubefacient,  vesicant,
and  escharotic  ;  and  is  considerably  employed  to  produce  counter-irrita-
tion in  croup,  sore-throat,  and  other  cases  of  internal  inflammation.  It
may  be  used  by  moistening  blotting  paper  or  cambric  with  it,  and  apply-
ing it  to  the  parts  to  be  vesicated.  It  frequently  destroys  warts  and
corns  when  applied  to  them,  and  has  been  found  effectual  as  an  appli-
cation to  scald-head.  In  syncope,  asphyxia,  and  headache,  its  vapor  is
frequently  applied  to  the  nostrils  as  an  excitant.  It  is  only  used  as  an
external  agent.  M.  Ricord  speaks  highly  of  this  acid  as  a  local  appli-
cation to  venereal  ulcers  in  the  primary  stage,  to  be  applied  as  freely  as
any  other  caustic,  and  repeated  as  often  as  the  condition  of  the  chancres
may  require.  Under  its  influence  the  ulcer  speedily  assumes  a  healthy
aspect  and  promptly  heals.  He  believes  that  it  neutralizes  the  venereal
poison,  and  thus  obviates  all  danger  of  constitutional  symptoms.  We
believe  the  same  may  be  truly  said  of  other  acids,  as  the  nitric,  muriatic,
tincture  of  chloride,  iron,  etc.  Haifa  pint  of  acetic  acid,  added  to  five
pints  of  distilled  water  ;  is  a  valuable  substitute  for  distilled  vinegar,  in
all  formulae  requiring  nicety.

Off.  Prep. — Linimentum  Terebinthinee.


ACIDUM  ACETICUM  EMPYREUMATICUM. ACIDUM
PYROLIGNEUM.

Pyroligneous  Acid.

IMPURE ACETIC ACID, OBTAINED FROM WOOD BT DISTILLATION.

History. — Pyroligneous  acid  is  a  brown,  transparent  liquid,  having  a
strong,  smoky  smell. It  consists  of  acetic  acid,  with  more  or  less  water,


Acidum Benzoicum.  X57

and  holding  in  solution  tar  and  empyreumatic  oil.  It  may  be  purified
by  repeated  distillation,  and  then  neutralizing  it  with  lime  or  carbonate
of  soda.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  and  antiseptic.  Used  as  a  local
application  for  arresting  or  preventing  sloughing,  for  cleansing  old  sores,
abscesses,  and  burns,  scalds,  ringworm,  tinea  capitis,  excoriated  nipples,
etc.,  and  as  a  gargle  in  inflamed  and  ulcerated  throat,  and  scarlatina
maligna.  Internally,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  thirty  drops,  it  is  useful  in
all  cases  where  an  antiseptic  is  indicated.  The  pyroligneous  tar  forms  a
valuable  irritating  plaster.  Hams  or  beef,  salted,  and  dipped  into  the
crude  pyroligneous  acid,  and  then  dried,  have  the  smoky  flavor  imparted
to  them,  as  perfectly  as  if  they  were  smoked  by  the  ordinary  process,
and  are  likewise  preserved  from  "skippers."

Off.  Prep. — Linimentum  Terebinthinae.


ACIDUM  BENZOICUM.

Benzoic  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Benzoin,  any  quantity.
Put  the  benzoin,  previously  well  mixed  with  an  equal  weight  of  fine  sand,
into  a  glass  vessel,  placed  in  a  sand-bath,  and  with  a  heat  of  300°  gra-
dually increased,  sublime  until  nothing  more  ascends.  Wrap  the
sublimed  matter  in  bibulous  paper,  and  press  it,  that  it  may  be  separated
from  the  oily  part ;  then  again  sublime,  with  a  heat  not  exceeding  400°.

Chemical  History. — Benzoic  acid  is  in  soft,  white,  feathery  crystals,  of
a  silky  luster,  and  not  pulverulent.  When  pure,  it  is  inodorous,  but
when  prepared  by  sublimation,  it  has  a  peculiar  agreeable  aromatic  odor,
which  is  owing  to  the  presence  of  an  oil.  It  has  a  warm,  acrid  and
acidulous  taste  ;  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  concentrated  nitric  and  sulphuric
acids,  solution  of  potassa,  and  fixed  oils.  It  is  a  characteristic  consti-
tuent of  the  balsams.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  and  perhaps  expectorant.  Said  by
Dr.  Ure  to  convert  the  uric  acid,  when  in  excess,  into  hippuric  acid.
Used  in  the  phosphatic  form  of  gravel ;  also  in  gout  and  rheumatism,
combined  with  carbonate  of  potassa.  Used  externally  in  some  cutaneous
diseases,  and  enters  into  some  cosmetic  washes. Dose,  10  to  30  grains.

Off.  Prep.  —  Tinctura  Opii  Camphorata.  Unguentum  Sulphuris
Compositum.


158  Materia Medica.

ACIDUM  CHROMICUM.

Chromic  Acid.

Preparation. — To  one  volume  of  a  cold  saturated  solution  of  bichro-
mate of  potassa  add  one  volume  and  a  half  of  pure  sulphuric  acid,  and
allow  the  mixture  to  cool  in  a  covered  capsule,  or  in  a  flask,  when  it  de-
posits beautiful  deep-red  needles  of  chromic  acid.  The  liquid  being
drained  off,  these  are  laid  on  a  porous  brick  to  dry,  covered  with  a  glass
bell-jar. They  must  be  preserved  in  very  tightly-stoppered  vials.

Chemical  Properties. — Chromic  Acid  is  a  strong  acid,  isomorphous
with  sulphuric,  selenic,  and  manganic  acids.  It  is  very  soluble  in  water,
and  is  highly  deliquescent  in  the  air.  It  destroys  the  color  of  indigo,
and  of  most  vegetable  and  animal  coloring  matters.  It  is  a  powerful
oxidizing  agent,  yielding  half  its  oxygen  readily  to  oxidizable  bodies,
and  being  reduced  to  sesquioxide.

Properties  and  Uses. — Recommended  in  the  treatment  of  piles ;  the
acid  is  to  be  applied  freely  over  the  whole  of  the  diseased  surface,  and
It  occasions  uneasiness  for  some  hours,  and  sometimes  acute  burning
pain — a  slough  passes  away,  and  the  tumor  shrinks  and  becomes  in-
sensible. As  soon  as  its  erosive  operation  is  finished,  the  acid  passes
into  a  state  of  inert  pulverulent  sesquioxide.  It  may  likewise  be  found
advantageous  in  cancer,  malignant  tumors,  ulcers,  etc.

The  Bichromate  of  Potassa  in  saturated  solution  has  been  recommend-
ed as  a  local  application  to  warts,  excrescences,  and  tubercular  eleva-
tions ;  it  causes  but  little  pain,  and  often  removes  these  growths  by
absorption  without  any  slough ;  or  if  a  slough  has  formed,  it  serves  to
expedite  the  cure,  and  is  not  followed  by  deep,  unmanageable  ulcers.

When  this  salt  is  applied  in  solution  to  the  skin,  habitually,  it  first
produces  an  eruption  of  papulae,  which  become  pustular,  and,  provided
the  exposure  be  continued,  form  deep  sloughs  under  the  pustules,  of  a
peculiarly  penetrating  character.

A  green  ink  may  be  made  by  dissolving  180  grains  of  bichromate  of
potassa  in  one  fluidounce  of  water ;  add  to  the  solution  while  warm,
half  a  fluidounce  of  spirit  of  wine,  then  decompose  the  mixture  with
strong  sulphuric  acid  until  it  assumes  a  brown  color.  Evaporate  the
liquor  to  one-half,  let  it  cool,  dilute  it  with  two  fluidounces  of  distilled
water  and  filter  it,  then  add  half  a  fluidounce  of  spirit  of  wine,  and  a
few  drops  of  strong  sulphuric  acid,  and  let  it  stand.  After  some  time
the  ink  assumes  a  beautiful  green  color,  and  is  rendered  fit  for  use  by
the  addition  of  a  small  quantity  of  Gum  Arabic.

A  very  cheap  ink,  costing  about  two  or  three  cents  a  gallon,  may  be
made  by  neutralizing  a  solution  of  bichromate  of  potassa  with  salt  of


Acidum  Citricum  —  Acidum  Gallicum.  159

tartar,  (or  until  effervescence  ceases).  Then  add  a  sufficient  quantity
of  this  to  an  infusion  of  logwood,  to  give  it  the  desired  color.  This  ink,
however,  is  apt  to  fade,  and  precipitates  from  the  slightest  causes ;  the
smallest  proportion  of  common  black  ink  will  cause  a  precipitate.  To
render  the  above  ink  perfectly  permanent,  and  of  a  more  intense  black
color,  add  to  it  a  few  drops  of  a  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate.


ACIDUM  CITRICUM.

Citric  Acid.

Preparation. — Citric  Acid  is  present  in  the  juices  of  many  fruits,  but
it  is  principally  obtained  from  lemon  or  lime-juice,  which  is  saturated
with  prepared  chalk,  the  precipitated  citrate  of  lime  is  repeatedly  washed,
and  then  decomposed  with  a  slight  excess  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid  ;  then
strained,  carefully  concentrated  by  boiling,  and  crystallized.

Chemical  Properties. — Citric  acid  is  a  white  crystallized  solid,  often  in
large  crystals,  having  the  form  of  rhomboidal  prisms  with  dihedral  sum-
mits. It  is  permanent  in  dry  air.  Specific  gravity,  1.6.  Its  taste  is
strongly  acid,  and  almost  caustic.  It  dissolves  in  three-fourths  of  its
weight  of  cold,  and  half  its  weight  of  boiling  water.  A  weak  solution
has  an  agreeable  taste,  but  soon  undergoes  spontaneous  decomposition.
It  is  also  soluble  in  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Citric  acid  is  refrigerant  and  antiscorbutic.  It
may  be  used  in  fevers,  in  the  form  of  lemonade,  made  by  dissolving  the
acid  in  water,  sweetening  sufficiently,  and  adding  a  few  drops  of  essence
of  lemon  ;  it  is  likewise  beneficial  in  scurvy,  acidity  of  the  stomach,  and
some  peculiar  forms  of  sick-headache.  A  mixture  for  making  good
lemonade,  and  which  will  keep  for  years  if  preserved  dry,  is  to  combine
together,  one  and  a  half  ounces  of  powdered  citric  acid,  one  pound  of
powdered  white  sugar,  and  five  drops  of  oil  of  lemon.  A  teaspoonful
of  this  to  a  pint  of  water,  forms  an  agreeable  and  beneficial  draught  for
patients  with  febrile  diseases,  especially  when  the  tongue  is  coated  brown
or  black.


ACIDUM  GALLICUM.
Gallic  Acid.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Galls  in  powder,  three  pounds ;  distilled
water,  purified  animal  charcoal,  of  each  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix
the  galls  with  sufficient  distilled  water  to  form  a  thin  paste,  and  expose
the  mixture  to  the air,  in  a  shallow  glass  or  porcelain  vessel,  in  a  warm


160  Materia Medica.

place,  for  a  month,  occasionally  stirring  it  with  a  glass  rod,  and  adding
from  time  to  time  sufficient  distilled  water  to  preserve  the  semi-fluid
consistence.  Then  submit  the  paste  to  expression,  and  rejecting  the
expressed  liquor,  boil  the  residue  in  a  gallon  of  distilled  water  for  a  few
minutes,  and  filter  while  hot  through  animal  charcoal.  Set  the  hot
liquor  aside  that  crystals  may  form,  which  may  be  dried  on  bibulous
paper.  If  the  crystals  be  not  sufficiently  free  from  color,  they  may  be
purified  by  dissolving  them  in  boiling  distilled  water,  filtering  through
a  fresh  portion  of  animal  charcoal,  and  crystallizing.

This  is  the  process  recommended  by  the  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeia,  and
is  based  upon  the  fact,  that  galls  in  decoction  or  moistened,  and  exposed
to  the  air,  gradually  have  their  tannic  acid  converted  into  gallic  acid,
oxyo-en  being  absorbed,  with  the  escape  of  an  equivalent  amount  of
carbonic  acid.  The  smallest  quantity  of  sesquioxide  of  iron,  will  pre-
vent the  bleaching  of  the  acid,  so  that  the  animal  charcoal  should  be
purified,  and  the  filtering-paper  examined.  As  the  first  crop  of  crystals
obtained  by  the  above  method,  retains  a  large  quantity  of  wTater,  they
should  be  subjected  to  strong  expression  between  two  folds  of  bibulous
paper.

Mr.  C.  Wetherill,  upon  the  belief  that  gallic  acid  differs  from  tannic,
wholly  in  containing  water,  endeavored  to  prepare  the  former  from  the
latter,  by  the  fixation  of  the  water,  and  succeeded  by  means  of  sulphuric
acid.  He  mixed  thirteen  drachms  of  tannic  acid  with  twenty-two  fluid
ounces  of  sulphuric  acid  and  four  times  that  bulk  of  water,  and  heated
the  mixture  to  the  boiling  point,  and  then  allowed  it  to  stand.  In  a
few  days  an  abundant  precipitate  of  white  gallic  acid  took  place,  amount-
ing to  87.4  per  cent,  of  the  tannic  acid.

History. — Gallic  acid  is  in  delicate,  silky,  acicular  crystals,  slightly
brownish,  but  colorless  when  pure.  It  is  inodorous,  and  of  a  sourish
astringent  taste.  It  is  soluble  in  100  parts  of  cold  water,  and  3  of  boil-
ing water,  very  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  only  slightly  so  in  ether.  On
exposure  to  the  air  it  undergoes  spontaneous  decomposition.  Heated  to
420°,  it  gives  out  carbonic  acid,  and  is  converted  into  i>yro-gallic  acid;
thrown  on  red-hot  iron,  it  is  entirely  dissipated.  It  does  not  precipitate
gelatin  like  tannic  acid,  nor  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  protoxide  of  iron,
but  occasions  a  deep  bluish-black  precipitate  with  a  solution  of  the  salts
of  sesquioxide  of  iron.  Its  formula  is  C7  H3  05,  and  its  combining
number  85.

Properties  and  Uses. — Gallic  acid  is  a  valuable  astringent,  and  is  used
principally  as  an  internal  astringent.  As  such  it  has  been  found  benefi-
cial in  hemorrhages  from  the  kidneys,  uterus,  and  lungs.  Menorrhagia
has  promptly  ceased  under  its  use.  It  is  also  useful  in  chronic  mucous
discharges  from  the  bowels  or  bladder,  and  has  some  reputation  in
arresting  the  excretion  of  albumen  in  Bright's  disease  of  the  Kidney.


Acidum  HrDRiomcuM  —  Acidum  Hydrochloricum.  161

It  is  believed  to  be  more  efficient  than  tannic  acid,  in  cases  of  hemor-
rhage, where  the  bleeding  vessels  must  be  reached  through  the  circula-
tion, as  its  chemical  affinities  do  not  afford  the  same  impediment  to  its
absorption  as  those  of  the  tannic  acid.  It  is  said  not  Lo  constipate.
Dose  of  gallic  acid,  is  from  five  to  fifteen  grains,  three  or  four  limes  a
day,  in  the  form  of  pill  or  powder.

Off.  Prep. — Liquor  Potassee  Citratis  ;  Ferri  et  Quiniae  Citras ;  Ferri
Citras ;  Quiuiae  Citras.


ACIDUM  HYDRIODICUM.

Hydriodic  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  iodide  of  potassium  330  grains,  tartaric  acid
264  grains.  Dissolve  these  salts,  separately,  each  in  a  fluidounce  and  a
half  of  distilled  water,  and  mix  the  solutions.  Filter  the  liquor,  in  order
to  separate  the  bitartrate  of  potassa  which  precipitates,  and  add  to  it
sufficient  distilled  water  to  make  the  whole  measure  fifty  rluidrachms.

History. — This  solution  is  sufficient^'  pure  for  medicinal  use,  although
it  contains  a  little  cream  of  tartar ;  each  fluidrachm  of  it  contains  five
grains  of  iodine.  At  first  it  is  limpid,  or  has  only  a  slight  yellow  tinge,
but  becomes  a  wine-yellow  on  keeping,  and  finally  a  beautiful  red,  in
consequence  of  the  disengagement  of  iodine.

Properties  and  Uses. — Hydriodic  Acid  is  supposed  to  possess  all  the
virtues  of  iodine,  without  any  of  its  irritant  properties,  and  may  be  em-
ployed in  all  cases  where  iodine  is  indicated.  The  dose  is  five  drops
gradually  increased  to  a  fluidrachm,  and  repeated  two  or  three  times  a
day.  It  should  be  sufficiently  diluted  with  water,  when  given,  to  reduce
it  to  an  agreeable  acidity.  Hydriodic  acid  has  been  combined  with
several  of  the  new  organic  alkalies,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  new
medicinal  aeents.


ACIDUM  HYDROCHLORICUM.

Muriatic  Acid. Spirit  of  Sea  Salt.

Preparation. — Hydrochloric  Acid  is  prepared  from  muriate  of  soda,  by
the  decomposing  power  of  sulphuric  acid,  which  liberates  the  acid  in  the
form  of  gas  ;  and  this  passing  into  vessels  containing  water,  is  readily
absorbed  by  that  fluid.

Chemical  Properties. — When  pure,  hydrochloric  acid  is  a  transparent,

colorless  liquid,  of  a  corrosive  taste  and  suffocating  odor. The  yellow

tinge  often  seen  in  the  medicinal  acid  is  owing  to  the  presence  of  iron,

or  some  organic  matter. Its  specific  gravity  is  1.21  ;  that  of  the  medi-

11


162  Materia  Me-dica.

cinal  acid  is  1.16.  It  is  incompatible  with  alkalies  and  mosl  earths,  with
oxides  and  their  carbonates,  and  with  sulphuret  of  potassium,  tartrate
of  potassa,  tartar  emetic,  tartarized  iron,  nitrate  of  silver,  and  solution
of  subacetate  of  lead.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diluted  hydrochloric  acid  is  tonic,  refrigerant,
and  antiseptic.  Used  in  fevers,  some  forms  of  syphilis,  and  to  counter-
act phosphatic  deposits  in  urine.  It  has  also  been  beneficial  in  malignant
cases  of  typhus  and  scarlatina,  given  in  a  strong'  infusion  of  quassia.
Likewise  said  to  prevent  the  formation  of  worms.  It  is  also  valuable  as
a  gargle  in  various  ulcers  of  the  mouth  and  throat,  and  elongated  uvula.
The  dose  is  five  to  twenty  drops,  in  a  wineglassful  of  water;  it  ought  to
be  sucked  through  a  quill  or  glass  tube,  to  prevent  its  injuring  the  teeth.
The  dilute  acid  is  made  by  adding  four  ounces  of  pure  acid  to  twelve
ounces  of  water.

It  is  sometimes  used,  in  the  concentrated  form,  as  an  application  to
cancrum  oris,  some  obstinate  ulcers  of  the  tongue,  in  certain  syphilitic
and  mercurio-syphilitic  diseases,  and  in  phagedenic  ulceration  ;  also,  in
chilblains  or  frost-bites.

When  swallowed  internally,  in  its  pure  state,  magnesia,  chalk,  or  soap
dissolved  in  water,  are  the  antidotes,  together  with  the  free  use  of  bland
and  mucilaginous  drinks.

Off.  Prep. — Acidum  Nitro-muriaticum  ;  Acidum  Muriaticum  Dilutum;
Calcii  Chloridum  ;  Morphia  Murias  ;  Quiniee  Murias ;  Tinctura  Ferri
Chloridi ;  Unguentum  Acidi  Muriatici ;  Potassii  Cyanuretum.


ACIDUM  HYDROCYANICUM.

Hydrocyanic  Acid. Prussic  Acid. Cyano-hydric  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  sulphuric  acid,  one  and  a  half  ounces;  water
four  fluidounc.es;  mix,  and  when  cool,  put  them  into  a  tubulated  glass
retort,  and  add  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium,  two  ounces,  dissolved  in
distilled  water,  ten  fluidounces.  Pour  eight  fluidounces  of  distilled  water
into  a  cooled  receiver,  and  having  attached  this  to  the  retort,  distil  six
fluidounces  with  a  gentle  heat.  Lastly,  add  to  this  product  five  fluid-
ounces  of  distilled  water,  or  a  sufficient  quantity,  so,  that  12.7  grs.  of
nitrate  of  silver,  dissolved  in  water,  may  be  accurately  saturated  by  100
grs.  of  the  acid,  indicating  two  per  cent,  of  real  acid.

Hydrocyanic  Acid,  when  wanted  for  immediate  use,  may  be  prepared
as  follows  :  Add  together  one  fluidounce  of  distilled  water,  forty-one
grs.  of  muriatic  acid,  and  fifty  and  a  half  grs.  of  cyanuret  of  silver  ;
shake  the  mixture  in  a  stopped  vial,  and  when  the  precipitate  has  sub-
sided, pour  off  the  clear  liquid.  The  acid  should  always  be  kept  in  a
cool,  dark  place,  and  in  closely  stopped  vials.


Acidtjm  Lacticum.  Ig3

Chemical  History. — The  dilute,  or  medicinal  hydrocyanic  acid,  is  a
transparent,  colorless,  volatile  liquid,  possessing  a  taste  at  first  cooling,
afterward  somewhat  irritating,  and  a  peculiar  smell.  By  exposure  to
light,  it  undergoes  decomposition,  and  the  bottles  containing  it  should  be
covered  with  black  paint  or  dark  paper.  Its  constituents  are  carbon,
nitrogen  and  hydrogen.

Properties  and  Uses. — Hydrocyanic  acid  is  the  most  deadly  poison
known,  but  is  employed  in  medicine  as  a  sedative  and  antispasmodic.
It  has  been  recommended  in  asthma,  pertussis,  spasmodic  coughs,
hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  neuralgia  of  stomach  and  bowels,  and  dys-
pepsia, connected  with  morbid  irritability  of  the  stomach.  Locally,  it
has  been  used  in  some  cutaneous  diseases,  to  allay  the  itching.  Dose,
half,  to  one  drop,  in  gum-water  or  syrup.  Much  care  must  be  used  in
its  administration.  Five  drops  have  been  safely  given,  by  carefully  and
gradually  increasing  the  dose.

In  cases  where  large  doses  do  not  prove  immediately  fatal,  the  anti-
dotes most  to  be  relied  upon,  are  chlorine,  diluted  ammonia,  cold  affu-
sion, and  artificial  respiration.


ACIDUM  LACTICUM.
Lactic  Acid.

Preparation. — To  six  pints  of  milk,  add  eight  ounces  of  bicarbonate
of  soda.  Expose  it  to  the  air  for  some  days,  till  it  becomes  sour,  and
saturate  it  with  more  soda.  Repeat  this  as  often  as  it  becomes  acid.
Boil,  filter,  and  evaporate  to  the  consistence  of  syrup,  and  digest  with
alcohol.  Filter  the  solution,  and  add  sulphuric  acid  as  long  as  it  occa-
sions a  precipitate.  Again  filter,  and  concentrate  the  clear  solution  by
evaporation,  till  its  density  is  1.215.

Another  mode  of  preparing  this  acid  is,  according  to  A.  Beusch,  to
dissolve  cane-sugar  six  pounds,  and  tartaric  acid  half  an  ounce,  in  boil-
ing water  twenty-six  pounds,  and  set  it  aside  for  some  days  ;  upon
this,  old  stinking  cheese  eight  ounces,  well  diffused  in  curdled  acid  milk
from  which  the  cream  has  been  removed,  are  to  be  added  to  the  above
mixture  along  with  finely-powdered  chalk  three  pounds,  the  whole  to  be
kept  in  a  warm  place,  so  that  the  temperature  of  the  liquor  shall  be  from
86°  to  95°.  It  must  be  well  stirred  several  times  every  day  ;  in  the
course  of  from  eight  to  ten  days  the  entire  mass  will  solidify  to  a  stiff
paste  of  lactate  of  lime  ;  to  this  paste  are  to  be  added,  boiling  water
twenty  pounds,  and  caustic  lime  half  an  ounce,  then  boil  for  half  an
hour,  and  filter  through  a  linen  bag.  The  liquid  is  then  to  be  evapo-
rated to  the  consistency  of  a  syrup,  and  set  aside  for  four  days,  in  which
time  the  lactate  of  lime  will  separate  in  a  granular  crystalline  form  ;  it


164  Materia Medica.

must  then  be  expressed,  agitated  with  one-tenth  its  weight  of  cold  water,
again  submitted  to  pressure,  and  this  operation  to  be  repeated  two  or
three  times.

The  lactate  of  lime,  after  being  expressed  as  well  as  possible,  is  dis-
solved in  twice  its  weight  of  boiling  water  ;  and  for  every  pound  of  ex-
pressed lactate  of  lime,  three  and  a  half  ounces  of  sulphuric  acid  previ-
ously diluted  with  its  weight  of  water,  must  be  added  to  the  solution.
The  hot  liquid  is  to  be  immediately  filtered  from  the  precipitated
gypsum,  through  a  conical  bag,  and  then  boiled  with  carbonate  of  zinc
one  and  three-eighth  pounds  for  every  pound  of  sulphuric  acid  which
has  been  used  ;  it  must  not  be  boiled  longer  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
if  over  this  time,  a  very  insoluble  basic  salt  is  formed.  The  solution,
filtered  boiling  hot,  soon  deposits  perfectly  colorless  lactate  of  zinc  in
crystalline  crusts,  which  may  be  obtained  perfectly  free  from  sulphuric
acid  by  rinsing  with  cold  water.  The  mother-ley  is  to  be  again  boiled
with  any  of  the  salt  which  may  have  remained  on  the  strainer,  or  con-
centrated by  evaporation.  It  yields  nearly  to  the  last  drop,  perfectly
white  lactate  of  zinc.

To  separate  the  lactic  acid  from  this  salt,  dissolve  it  in  seven  and  one-
half  parts  of  boiling  water,  pass  a  current  of  sulphureted  hydrogen
into  the  hot  liquid  until  it  has  become  cold  and  no  further  separation  of
sulphuret  of  zinc  can  be  perceived.  The  liquid  filtered  from  the  sul-
phuret  of  zinc  is  to  be  boiled  to  expel  the  excess  of  sulphureted  hydro-
gen, and  then  evaporated  in  a  water-bath  to  the  consistence  of  a  syrup.
Eight  parts  of  lactate  of  zinc  yield,  in  this  manner,  five  parts  of  perfectly
pure  lactic  acid.

The  separation  of  the  lactic  acid  may  likewise  be  accomplished  by
adding  barytic  water,  which  produces  lactate  of  baryta,  and  precipitates
the  oxide  of  zinc  ;  the  addition  of  sulphuric  acid  removes  the  baryta,
and  the  filtered  liquid  is  pure  diluted  lactic  acid,  which  must  be  concen-
trated by  evaporation,  in  vacuo.

The  acid  of  sour  crout  is  lactic  acid,  and  by  boiling  it  with  carbonate
of  zinc,  lactate  of  zinc  may  be  obtained.

Ghemical  Properties. — Hydrated  lactic  acid  is  a  syrupy  liquid,  of  a
very  strong  but  pleasant  acid  taste;  its  specific  gravity  is  1.215.  At
482°  the  hydrate  is  decomposed  and  yields  a  solid  crystalline  sublimate
called  anhydrous,  or  sublimed  lactic  acid,  lactide,  which  readily  dis-
solves in  hot  water,  and  if  the  solution  be  evaporated  yields  the  original
hydrate.  The  hydrated  acid  is  inodorous,  attracts  moisture  when  ex-
posed to  the  air,  and  is  dissolved  in  all  proportions  by  water  or  alcohol.
It  quickly  dissolves  oxalate  of  lime,  and  phosphate  of  lime,  especially
that  which  is  contained  in  the  bones,  and  hence  has  been  recommended
in  oxalic  and  phosphatic  urinary  deposits.  It  is  not  employed  in  medi-
cine in  its  uucombined  stale,  but  is  used  in  the  preparation  of  Lactate  of


Acidum  Nitricum.  165

Iron,  and  Lactate  of  Quinia.  Albumen  is  coagulated  by  it.  The  for-
mula of  the  hydrated  acid  is  G6  Hr,  O5+  HC.  Magendie  has  proposed
it  as  a  remedy  in  certain  forms  of  dyspepsia,  and  for  the  removal  of
phosphatic  deposits  in  the  urine.  It  may  be  taken  in  doses  of  from  one
to  three  drachms  in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  is  best  given  in  solution,
sweetened  with  sugar.


ACIDUM  NITRICUM.

Nitric  Acid. Aqua  Fortis.

Preparation. — Nitric  Acid  is  made  from  nitrate  of  potassa,  by  the
agency  of  sulphuric  acid — sulphate  of  potassa  being  formed,  and  nitric
acid  liberated  in  the  form  of  gas.  The  acid  gas  is  passed  into  a  vessel
of  water,  which  absorbs  it,  and  acquires  acid  properties.

Chemical  History. — The  pure  acid  is  transparent  and  colorless,  and
emits  gray  fumes  of  an  irritating,  peculiar  odor,  and  has  an  intensely
acid,  corrosive  taste.  It  stains  the  skin  yellow,  and  corrodes  and  dis-
solves all  soft  animal  textures.  The  strongest  acid  has  a  specific  gra-
vity of  1.5  ;  the  ordinary  acid  of  commerce,  1.3.  It  changes  morphia
to  a  red  or  yellow  color,  and  is  itself  changed  to  a  blood-red  by  the
addition  of  brucia.  Exposure  of  the  acid  to  light,  changes  it  more  or
less ;  and  when  left  open  to  the  air,  it  absorbs  moisture  and  becomes
weakened.

When  the  acid  is  of  a  straw  color,  it  is  owing  to  the  presence  of
nitrous  acid.  Most  animal  and  vegetable  bodies  are  converted  into
malic,  carbonic,  or  oxalic  acids,  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  diluted.
This  acid,  acidifies  sulphur  and  phosphorus,  and  oxidizes  all  metals,
except  gold,  platinum,  iridium,  chromium,  osmium,  rhodium,  cerium,
columbium,  and  titanium;  but  when  mixed  with  muriatic  acid,  a  mutual
decomposition  takes  place,  and  aqua  regia  or  nitro-muriatic  acid  is
formed,  which  is  capable  of  dissolving  gold.

Nitric  acid  is  often  rendered  impure  by  the  presence  of  sulphuric  acid,
or  chlorine  ;  a  few  drops  of  the  solution  of  chloride  of  barium  to  the
nitric  acid,  diluted  with  three  or  four  parts  of  distilled  water,  will  pro-
duce a  cloud,  if  sulphuric  acid  be  present ;  and  a  similar  application  of
a  few  drops  of  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver,  will  produce  a  cloud  if
chlorine  be  present.  The  acid  of  commerce  sometimes  contains  iodine,
which  may  be  detected  by  saturating  the  suspected  acid  with  a  carbon-
ated alkali,  then  pouring  in  a  little  clear  solution  of  starch,  and  finally,
adding  a  few  drops  of  sulphuric  acid.  If  iodine  be  present,  the  sulphu-
ric acid  will  set  it  free,  and  the  starch  solution  will  become  blue.

When  nitric  acid  is  added  to  a  solution  of  glue,  it  prevents  it  from
forming  a  jelly,  and  makes  what  is  called  a  "  liquid  glue,"  which  is  very


166  Materia Medica.

convenient  for  cabinet-makers,  joiners,  pasteboard-workers,  toy-makers,
etc.,  inasmuch  as  it  is  applied  cold.  This  liquid  glue  is  made  by  taking
two  and  one-fifth  pounds  of  good  glue,  and  dissolving  it  in  two  and  one-
ninth  pints  of  water,  in  a  glazed  pot  over  a  gentle  fire,  or  still  better,  in
the  water-bath,  stirring  it  from  time  to  time.  When  all  the  glue  is
melted,  pour  in,  in  small  quantities  at  a  time,  of  nitric  acid  specific
gravity  1.32,  seven  ounces  avoirdupois.  This  addition  produces  an  effer-
vescence, owing  to  the  disengagement  of  hypo-nitrous  acid.  When  all
the  acid  is  added,  remove  the  vessel  from  the  fire,  and  allow  it  to  cool.
This  preparation  preserves  nearly  all  the  primitive  qualities  of  the  glue,
may  be  kept  in  an  open  vessel  for  years,  without  undergoing  any  change,
and  will  be  found  very  convenient  in  chemical  operations  ;  gases  may
be  preserved  by  it,  by  covering  strips  of  linen  with  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — Escharotic,  epispastic,  tonic,  refrigerant,  expec-
torant, antiseptic,  and  syphilitic.  Largely  diluted  with  water,  it  forms  a
good  acid  drink  in  febrile  diseases,  especially  where  there  is  a  disposi-
tion to  prostration  or  putrescency.  It  has  also  been  serviceable  in  some
forms  of  syphilis  and  chronic  hepatitis.  Externally  it  has  been  applied,
in  a  dilute  form,  say  twelve  or  fifteen  minims  to  the  pint  of  water,  to
ulcers  of  an  indolent  or  phagedenic  character,  and  in  various  chronic
eruptions,  porrigo  of  the  scalp,  etc.  ;  and  has  likewise  been  used  for
destroying  warts,  and  cauterizing  poisoned  wounds.

In  the  treatment  of  piles,  nitric  acid,  is  said  to  be  very  efficacious  ;
the  small  tumors  may  be  destroyed  by  a  single  application  of  it,  while
the  larger  may  require  two  or  three  applications.  If  the  tumors  cannot
be  extruded  from  the  anus,  a  speculum  must  be  used.  The  acid  maybe
applied  by  a  bit  of  sponge  not  larger  than  a  grain  of  wheat,  attached  to
a  gold  or  glass  probe.  The  severe  pain  which  usually  follows  may  be
relieved  by  morphine  exhibited  internally,  and  lard,  or  opiate  supposito-
ries applied  locally.  If  too  much  acid  has  been  applied,  extending  to
contiguous  parts,  and  causing  unnecessary  pain,  it  may  be  neutralized
by  applying  a  piece  of  sponge  or  cotton,  saturated  with  soda  or  potassa.
Dr.  Dixon  expresses  a  hope,  grounded  on  the  successful  results  of  its
application,  that  all  cases  of  piles  may  thus  be  cured,  with  greater  cer-
tainty than  by  excision  or  ligation.

For  several  years  past  I  have  used  nitric  acid  as  a  local  application  to
chancre  in  hundreds  of  instances,  and  have  not  yet  heard  of  any  return
of  the  disease,  either  in  a  secondary  or  tertiary  form.  It  must  be
applied  while  the  chancre  is  in  the  pustular  form,  and  unbroken,  and
before  the  virus  is  acted  upon  by  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere,  and
consequently,  previous  to  its  absorption  in  the  system.  As  soon  as  the
pustule  is  discovered,  the  physician  will  open  it,  and  apply  several  drops
of  imdiluted  nitric  acid  to  it,  thus  destroying  the  virus  at  once,  and
curing  the  disease  in  a  few  minutes. The  pain  occasioned  is  hardly


AdDUM NlTROHrDROCHLORICUM.  1Q7

noticed  by  some  patients.  Sometimes,  I  subsequently  wash  the  ulcer
with  the  muriated  tincture  of  iron,  which  is  one  of  the  best  local  appli-
cations to  a  chancre  with  which  I  am  acquainted.  No  other  treatment
is  required,  unless  for  the  purpose  of  allaying  the  patient's  fears.  Since
having  introduced  this  employment  of  the  acid  to  the  profession,  many
have  employed  it,  and  uniformly  with  successful  results.

The  dose  of  nitric  acid  is  from  five  to  twenty  minims,  given  two  or
three  times  a  day;  the  diluted  acid,  which  is  the  most  convenient  for
prescription,  may  be  made  by  adding  one  fluidounce  of  nitric  acid  to
nine  fluidounces  of  distilled  water.  The  dose  of  which  is  from  twenty
to  forty  drops,  in  two  or  three  fluidounces  of  water.

When  swallowed  internally,  without  dilution,  nitric  acid  almost  always
proves  fatal ;  the  same  means  may  be  employed  to  counteract  its  effects
as  named  for  hydrochloric  acid.

Off.  Prep. — Acidum  Nitro-muriaticum  ;  Acidum  Nitricum  Dilutum  ;
Spiritus  JEtheris  Nitrici ;  Unguentum  Acidi  Nitrici.


ACIDUM  NITROHYDROCHLORICUM.

Nitrohydrochloric  Acid.

NITROMURIATIC ACID. AQUA REGIA.

Preparation.  —  The  usual  form  for  preparing  this  acid  is  to  combine
one  part,  by  measure,  of  nitric  acid,  with  two  parts  of  hydrochloric  acid;
but  as  I  introduce  it  here  merely  because  it  enters  into  the  formula  for
the  White  Liquid  Physic,  given  below,  I  will  state  that  in  this  instance  it
should  be  made  of  equal  parts  of  nitric  and  muriatic  acids.

This  acid  promptly  dissolves  gold,  and  as  it  readily  parts  with  its
chlorine,  it,  together  with  its  preparations,  should  always  be  preserved
in  close  bottles.

Properties  and  Uses. — Similar  to  the  above  mineral  acids.  Bathing
with  a  dilute  solution  of  this  acid,  say  one  part  of  acid  to  six  of  water,
is  asserted  to  have  cured  several  cases  of  obstinate  constipation.  Dose,
three  or  four  drops,  sufficiently  diluted.

A  preparation  has  been  highly  recommended,  called  White  Liquid
Physic,  or  Dow's  Physic.  It  is  made  as  follows :  Take  sulphate  of  soda,
half  a  pound;  water,  one  and  a  half  pints;  dissolve,  and  then  add,
nitromuriatic  acid,  two  fluidounces,  powdered  alum,  one  drachm  and
eight  grains.

This  preparation  is  used  as  a  cooling  purgative,  also  to  allay  nausea
and  vomiting — for  colic,  hepatic  diseases,  diarrhea,  etc.  Given  by  some
as  a  substitute  for  mercury.  In  intermittent  fever,  given  in  laxative
doses,  it  has  proved  highly  beneficial,  especially  when  occurring  in


168  Materia  Medica.

broken-down  constitutions,  and  has  cured  the  most  obstinate  cases  of
dysentery.  Dose,  one  tablespoonful  in  a  gill  of  water,  three  t'mes  a
day — or,  in  dysentery,  given  every  hour,  until  it  slightly  operates  on  the
bowels,  after  which,  every  three  or  four  hours.  The  above  is  the  origi-
nal recipe,  and  the  additions  of  sanguinaria,  etc.,  are  uncalled  for.

A  preparation  which  is  highly  recommended  for  the  cure  of  corns,
warts,  cancers,  etc.,  Dr.  Bleeker's  remedy,  is  said  to  be  a  compound  of
nitro-muriatic  acid  and  cobalt.


ACIDUM OXALICUM.

Oxalic  Acid.

History. — Oxalic  Acid  is  found  in  animals  and  in  vegetables;  it  is
formed  sometimes  during  abnormal  conditions  of  the  kidneys,  and  is
deposited  in  the  bladder  as  oxalate  of  lime,  giving  rise  to  the  mulberry
calculus.  It  is  also  found  combined  with  potassa  in  the  common  sorrel,
and  wood-sorrel,  and  united  with  lime  in  the  roots  of  rhubarb,  valerian,
and  other  plants.

Preparation. — It  is  usually  obtained  by  the  decomposition  of  sugar
with  nitric  acid.  Four  parts  of  sugar  are  acted  upon  by  twenty-four
parts  of  nitric  acid  of  specific  gravity  1.22,  and  the  mixture  is  heated
so  long  as  any  nitric  oxide  is  disengaged.  A  part  of  the  carbon  of  the
sugar  is  converted  into  carbonic  acid,  by  oxygen  derived  from  the  nitric
acid,  which  is  thereby  partially  converted  into  nitric  oxide.  The  unde-
composed  nitric  acid,  reacting  on  the  remaining  elements  of  the  sugar,
generates  oxalic  and  malic  acids,  the  former  of  which  crystallizes  as  the
materials  cool,  while  the  latter  remains  in  solution.  The  crystals  beino-
removed,  a  fresh  crop  may  be  obtained  by  further  evaporation.  The
thick  mother-water  which  now  remains  is  a  mixture  of  malic,  nitric,  and
oxalic  acids;  and  by  treatment  with  six  times  its  weight  of  nitric  acid,
the  greater  part  of  the  malic  acid  will  be  converted  into  oxalic  acid.
The  new  crop  of  crystals,  however,  will  have  a  yellow  color,  and  contain
a  portion  of  nitric  acid,  the  greater  part  of  which  may  be  got  rid  of  by
allowing  them  to  effloresce  in  a  warm  place.

Many  substances  beside  sugar  yield  oxalic,  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  ;
as  for  example,  starch,  gum,  wool,  hair,  silk,  and  many  vegetable  acids.
In  every  case  in  which  it  is  thus  generated,  the  proportional  excess  of
oxygen  which  it  contains,  compared  with  every  other  organic  compound,
is  furnished  by  the  nitric  acid.  Organic  substances  yield  oxalic  acid  also,
when  heated  with  potassa.  Thus  shavings  of  wood,  if  mixed  with  a
solution  of  caustic  potassa,  and  exposed  to  a  heat  considerably  higher
than  212°,  will  be  partially  decomposed  and  converted  into  oxalic  acid,
which  then  combines  with  the  alkali.  This  process  constitutes,  perhaps,
the  cheapest  method  of  obtaining  oxalic  acid.


AciDusi  Phosphoricum  Dilutum.  169

Chemical  Properties.  —  Oxalic  acid  is  a  colorless  crystallized  solid,
possessing  considerable  volatility,  and  a  strong  sour  taste.  Its  crystals
have  the  shape  of  slender,  flattened,  four  or  six-sided  prisms,  with  two-
sided  summits;  and,  when  exposed  to  a  very  dry  atmosphere,  undergo
a  slight  efflorescence.  It  dissolves  in  about  nine  times  its  weight  of  cold,
and  in  about  its  own  weight  of  boiling  water.  The  solution  of  the
crystals  takes  place  with  slight  crepitation.  It  dissolves  also,  but  not  to
the  same  extent,  in  alcohol.  The  presence  of  nitric  acid  renders  it  more
soluble  in  water.  It  combines  with  salifiable  bases,  and  forms  salts
called  oxalates.  The  most  interesting  of  these  are  the  three  oxalates
of  potassa,  severally  called  oxalate,  binoxalate,  and  quadroxalate,  and
the  oxalate  of  lime.  The  binoxalate  of  potassa  or  salt  of  sorrel,  some-
times improperly  called  the  essential  salt  of  lemons,  is  employed  for
removing  iron-molds  from  linen,  and  acts  by  its  excess  of  acid  which
forms  a  soluble  salt  with  the  sesquioxide  of  iron  constituting  the
stain.  Oxalic  acid  is  used  for  removing  ink  stains  and  iron-molds,
for  cleaning  the  leather  of  boot-tops,  and  for  discharging  colors  in
calico-printing.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  article  is  a  poison,  and  an  unfit  agent  for
internal  administration.  Externally,  a  saturated  aqueous  solution  of  it
is  useful  in  cutaneous  cancer,  acne,  and  several  forms  of  cutaneous  dis-
ease. The  saturated  solution  neutralized  by  caustic  potassa,  forms  an
excellent  application  to  discuss  indolent  tumors.

In  cases,  where  this  article  has  been  taken  internally,  it  has  produced
death  in  a  short  time.  The  antidotes  are  chalk  or  magnesia,  mixed  with
water,  and  followed  by  emetics.


ACIDUM  PHOSPHORICUM  DILUTUM.
Diluted Phosphoric  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  Phosphorus,  an  ounce  ;  Nitric  acid  four  fluid-
ounces ;  Distilled  Water  ten  fluidounces,  (imperial  measure).  Add  the
phosphorus  to  the  nitric  acid,  mixed  with  the  water  in  a  glass  retort
placed  in  a  sand-bath;  then  apply  heat  until  eight  fluidounces  are
distilled.  Put  these  again  into  the  retort,  that  eight  fluidounces  may
distil,  which  are  to  be  rejected.  Evaporate  the  remaining  liquor  in  a
platinum  capsule  until  only  two  ounces  and  six  drachms  remain.  Lastly,
add  to  the  acid,  when  it  is  cold,  as  much  distilled  water  as  may  be  suf-
ficient to  make  it  accurately  measure  twenty-eight  fluidounces.  The
specific  gravity  of  this  acid  is  1.064.  One  hundred  grains  of  it  saturate
forty-two  grains  of  carbonate  of  soda.

Chemical  Properties. — Diluted  Phosphoric  Acid  is  a  colorless,  inodor-
ous, sour  liquid,  acting  strongly  on  litmus  and  possessing  powerful  acid


170  Materia  Medica.

properties.  If  it  be  saturated  by  ammonia,  nitrate  of  silver  occasions  a
yellow  precipitate  of  phosphate  of  silver.  Arsenious  acid  is  the  only
acid  similarly  acted  on  ;  and  it  may  be  determined  from  phosphoric  acid
by  the  action  of  sulphureted  hydrogen,  which  causes  a  yellow  precipi-
tate with  the  arsenious  acid,  while  it  has  no  effect  at  all  upon  the  phos-
phoric. When  concentrated  till  the  temperature  attains  3U0°,  diluted
phosphoric  acid  acquires  its  greatest  state  of  concentration,  and  presents
the  appearance  of  a  brown  oily  liquid,  which  consists  of  one  equivalent
of  acid,  and  three  of  water.  Although  evaporated  so  as  to  become
dense,  it  does  not  act  upon  animal  and  vegetable  matter  like  sulphuric
acid.  The  acid  may  be  obtained  in  crystals,  by  evaporating  the  brown
oily  liquid,  mentioned  above,  in  vacuo.  From  its  saturating  power,
diluted  phosphoric  acid  is  shown  to  contain  10.5  per  cent,  of  real  phos-
phoric acid.  If  the  brown  oily  liquid  be  deprived  of  its  water  by  a  long
continued  heat  of  415°,  one  equivalent  of  its  water  is  disengaged,  and
the  acid  acquires  new  properties,  and  a  yellow  precipitate  will  no  longer
be  occasioned  by  nitrate  of  silver.  When  the  diluted  acid  is  evaporated
to  dryness,  and  heated  to  redness,  it  becomes  a  transparent,  white,
brittle,  fusible  solid,  formerly  named  Glacial  Phosphoric  Acid,  but  now
termed  Metaphosphoric  Acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diluted  phosphoric  acid  is  tonic  and  refriger-
ant, and  is  asserted  to  prevent  the  morbid  secretion  of  bony  matter,  cor-
rect urinary  phosphatic  deposits  and  to  allay  pain  and  spasm.  It  has
likewise  been  recommended  in  hysteria,  diabetes,  and  leucorrhea.  It
is  very  useful  in  cases  of  impotency  from  masturbation,  to  improve  the
condition  of  the  sexual  ogans.  Externally,  it  has  been  applied  to  tedious
and  obstinate  ulcers.  Dose,  from  ten  to  thirty  drops,  two  or  three  times
a  day,  diluted  with  a  few  ounces  of  water.

Off.  Prep. — Ammoniee  Phosphas  ;  Ferri  Phosphas ;  Sodae  Phosphas.


ACIDUM  SULPHURICUM  AROMATICUM.

Aromatic  Sulphuric  Acid. Elixir  of  Vitriol.

Preparation. — Take  of  sulphuric  acid,  three  fluidounces  and  a  half;
ginger,  bruised,  an  ounce;  cinnamon,  bruised,  an  ounce  and  a  half;
drop  the  acid  gradually  into  the  alcohol,  and  digest  in  a  close  vessel
for  three  days ;  then  add  the  ginger  and  cinnamon,  and  macerate  for  a
week  ;  lastly,  filter  through  paper.

History. — This  is  a  reddish-brown  liquid,  of  a  peculiar  aromatic  odor,
and  when  sufficiently  diluted,  of  a  grateful  acid  taste.  It  consists  of
sulphuric  acid  diluted  with  alcohol,  and  containing  the  essential  oils  of
Cinnamon  and  Ging-er.


AciDUM SULPHURICUM DlLUTUM.  171

Properties  and  Uses. — It  possesses  the  same  properties  as  sulphuric  acid,
for  which  it  is  generally  substituted  in  this  country.  The  dose  is  from
ten  to  thirty  drops  in  sweetened  water  ;  care  must  be  taken  that  it  does
not  injure  the  teeth.


ACIDUM  SULPHURICUM  DlLUTUM.

Diluted  Sulphuric  Acid. Oil  of  Vitriol.

Preparation. — Take  of  sulphuric  acid,  one  fluidounce;  distilled  water,
thirteen  fiuidounces.  Gradually  add  the  acid  to  the  water,  in  a  glass
vessel,  and  mix  them. The  specific  gravity  of  this  acid  is  1.09.

History. — Sulphuric  Acid  is  obtained  by  burning  sulphur,  mixed  with
one-eighth  its  weight  of  nitre,  over  a  stratum  of  water,  contained  in  a
chamber  lined  with  sheet-lead.  It  is  a  dense,  colorless,  inodorous  liquid,
of  an  oleaginous  appearance,  and  possessing  strong  corrosive  qualities.
When  pure  its  sp.  gr.  is  1.845.  It  acts  powerfully  on  organic  bodies,
whether  animal  or  vegetable,  depriving  them  of  the  elements  of  water,
developing  charcoal,  and  turning  them  black.  On  the  living  fiber  it  acts
as  a  powerful  caustic.  The  density  of  the  commercial  acid  varies  be-
tween 1.835  and  1.840  or  upward.  If  greater  than  1.845,  it  indicates
an  unusual  amount  of  impurity.  It  freezes  about  36°  below  zero,  and
boils  a  little  above  600°.  It  has  a  powerful  affinity  for  water,  so  as  to
attract  it  quickly  from  the  atmosphere,  and  also  from  many  other  bodies
through  the  medium  of  the  atmosphere,  if  confined  together  in  a  cir-
condensation  of  volume,  and  the  evolution  of  much  heat,  which  is
apt  to  crack  glass  vessels,  which  may  be  avoided  by  adding  the  acid
gradually.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diluted  Sulphuric  Acid  is  tonic,  refrigerant,
and  astringent.  It  has  been  used  in  low  typhoid  fevers,  and  in  conva-
lescence from  protracted  fevers,  as  a  tonic.  As  an  astringent,  it  has  been
employed  in  colliquative  sweats,  passive  hemorrhages,  and  diarrhea.
Likewise  used  in  phosphatic  calculous  affections.  Externally,  employed
in  gargles  for  ulcerated  sore-throat,  to  check  excessive  ptyalism,  and  as
a  wash  for  cutaneous  eruptions,  and  ill-conditioned  ulcers.  Dose,  from
ten  to  thirty  drops,  three  times  a  day,  in  a  wineglassful  of  plain  or
sweetened  water.  To  preserve  the  teeth,  it  were  better  to  suck  it
through  a  quill  or  glass  tube.

Off.  Prep. — Acidum  Sulphuricum  Aromaticum  ;  Acidum  Sulphuricum
Dilutum ;  Ferri  Sulphas;  Linimentum  Nigrum;  Morphiae  Sulphas;
Quinise  Sulphas ;  Unguentum  Acidi  Sulphurici ;  Zinci  Sulphas.


172  Materia Medica.

ACIDUM  TANNICUM.
Tannic  Acid. Tannin.

Preparation. — Cause  sulphuric  ether  to  percolate  through  any  quan-
tity of  powdered  galls,  in  a  glass  adapter,  having  the  lower  end  loosely
closed  with  carded  cotton.  The  liquor  obtained  in  the  receiver  separates
into  two  parts,  and  the  ether  must  be  allowed  to  percolate  through  the
galls  until  the  lower  stratum  of  liquid  in  the  receiver  no  longer  increases.
Pour  off  the  upper  layer,  and  evaporate  the  lower  portion  with  a  moder-
ate heat,  to  dryness.

M.  Sandrock  states  that  a  much  larger  quantity  of  Tannic  Acid  may
be  obtained  by  employing  a  mixture  of  sixteen  parts  of  ether  and  one
part  of  alcohol.  The  percolated  liquid  separates  into  two  layers.  The
lower  one  contains  the  tannic  acid,  which  may  be  obtained  perfectly
pure  on  evaporation ;  the  upper  layer  contains  the  gallic  acid,  coloring
matter,  and  some  tannic  acid.  The  tannic  acid  in  the  upper  layer  may
be  had  by  evaporating  the  liquid  to  dryness,  treating  the  residue  with
pure  ether,  until  the  lower  of  the  two  layers  into  which  the  liquid  sepa-
rates, no  longer  presents  a  green  color  ;  and  then  separating  it,  adding
if  necessary  a  little  alcohol,  and  evaporating.

Chemical  Properties. — Pure  Tannic  Acid  is  solid,  uncrystallizable,
white,  or  very  slightly  yellowish,  inodorous,  strongly  astringent  to
the  taste,  without  bitterness,  very  soluble  in  water,  much  less  soluble
in  alcohol  and  ether,  especially  when  anhydrous,  and  insoluble  in
the  fixed  and  volatile  oils.  It  may  be  kept  unchanged  in  the  solid
state.  Exposed  to  heat,  it  partly  melts,  swells  up,  blackens,  takes
fire,  and  burns  with  a  brilliant  flame.  The  aqueous  solution,  when
exposed  to  the  air,  gradually  becomes  turbid,  and  deposits  a  crystal-
line matte^  consisting  chiefly  of  gallic  acid.  During  the  change,
oxygen  is  absorbed,  and  an  equal  volume  of  carbonic  acid  disen-
gaged. Tannic  acid  has  an  affinity  for  acids,  and  when  in  solution
affords  precipitates  with  the  sulphuric,  nitric,  muriatic,  phosphoric,  and
arsenic  acids,  but  not  with  the  oxalic,  tartaric,  lactic,  acetic,  or  citric.
The  precipitates  are  compounds  of  tannic  acid  with  the  respective  acids,
and  are  soluble  in  pure  water,  but  insoluble  in  water  with  an  excess  of
acid.  Hence,  in  order  to  insure  precipitation,  it  is  necessary  to  add  the
acid  in  excess  to  the  solution  of  tannic  acid.  This  principle  also  unites
with  most  of  the  salifiable  bases.  With  potassa,  it  forms  a  compound
but  slightly  soluble,  and  is  therefore  precipitated  by  this  alkali,  or  its
carbonates,  from  a  solution  which  is  not  too  dilute,  though  a  certain  ex-
cess of  alkali  will  cause  the  precipitate  to  be  re-dissolved.  Its  combin-
ation with  soda  is  much  more  soluble,  and  this  alkali  affords  no  precipi-
tate, unless  with  a  very  concentrated  solution  of  tannic  acid.  With
ammonia,  its  relations  are  similar  to  those  with  potassa. Many  of  the


Acidum Tannicum.  173

metallic  salts  are  precipitated  by  tannic  acid  even  in  the  uncombined  state,
especially  those  of  lead,  copper,  silver,  uranium,  chromium,  mercury,
and  tlm  protosalts  of  tin.  With  the  sesquisalts  of  iron  it  forms  a  black
precipitate,  which  is  a  compound  of  tannic  acid  and  the  sesquioxide  of
iron,  and  is  the  basis  of  ink.  It  does  not  disturb  the  solutions  of  the
pure  protosalts  of  iron.  Several  of  the  alkaline  salts  precipitate  tannic
acid  from  its  aqueous  solution,  either  by  the  formation  of  insoluble  com-
pounds, or  by  simply  extracting  the  solvent.  Tannic  acid  unites  with
all  the  vegetable  alkalies,  forming  compounds  which  are  for  the  most
part  of  a  whitish  color,  and  but  very  slightly  soluble  in  water,  though
they  are  soluble  in  the  vegetable  acids  and  in  alcohol,  and  in  this  latter
respect  differ  from  most  of  the  compounds  which  tannic  acid  forms  with
other  vegetable  principles.  On  account  of  this  property  of  tannic  acid,
it  has  been  employed  as  a  test  of  the  vegetable  alkalies;  and  it  is  so
delicate  that  it  will  throw  down  a  precipitate  from  their  solution  even
when  they  are  too  feeble  to  be  disturbed  by  ammonia.  It  precipitates
also  solutions  of  starch,  albumen,  and  gluten,  and  forms  with  gelatin  an
insoluble  compound,  which  is  the  basis  of  leather.  Its  ultimate  con-
stituents are  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen. —  U.  S.  Disp.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  pure  astringent.  Used  in  chronic  dysentery
and  diarrhea,  and  in  uterine  and  other  passive  hemorrhages,  and  as  a
wash  or  injection  to  remove  chronic  mucous  discharges,  as  in  bronchial
catarrh,  gonorrhea,  gleet,  leucorrhea,  etc.  It  has  likewise  been  recom-
mended in  diabetes,  combined  with  opium,  and  to  arrest  excessive  per-
spiration  —  also  in  conjunction  with  morphia,  in  Asiatic  Cholera.  Ex-
ternally, it  has  been  successfully  used  in  excoriation,  prolapsus  ani,  piles,
fissure  of  the  anus  or  rectum,  sore  nipples,  phagedenic  ulcers,  aphthous
ulceration  of  the  mouth,  sore-throat,  severe  salivation,  and  in  tooth-
aches, in  solution  with  ether.  It  may  be  employed  in  form  of  a  wash,  by
adding  hve  grains  to  a  fluidounce  of  water;  or  in  ointment,  one  part  of
the  acid  to  fifteen  of  lard.  It  is  a  valuable  remedy,  the  only  disadvan-
tage being  its  tendency  to  produce  constipation,  which  may  be  avoided
by  the  addition  of  a  small  quantity  of  podophyllin,  in  cases  where  this
resin  is  not  contra-indicated.

Tannic  acid  should  not  be  given  during  the  presence  of  active  inflamma-
tion. Several  cases  of  cholera  in  the  collapsed  stage,  have  been  cured
by  Prof.  R.  S.  Newton,  by  doses  of  ten  or  fifteen  grains  of  Tannic  Acid,
repeated  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  until  the  discharges  ceased  ;  and
continuing  it  afterward  at  longer  intervals,  wish  other  appropriate  treat-
ment. The  Geraniin  is  now  usually  preferred  by  Eclectic  practitioners
to  the  Tannic  acid,  as  it  does  not  leave  the  tissues  upon  which  it  acts  so
harsh  and  dry,  as  is  the  case  with  the  latter  agent.  Dose  of  Tannic  acid,
from  half  a  grain  to  five  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Ferri  Tannas  ;  Quiniae  Tannas.


174  Materia  Medica.

ACIDUM  TARTARICUM.

Tartaric  Acid.

Preparation.— Saturate  the  excess  of  acid  in  bitartrate  of  potassa  with
carbonate  of  lime  ;  decompose  the  resulting  insoluble  tartrate  of  lime  by
sulphuric  acid ;  then  decompose  the  remaining  neutral  tartrate  of  potassa
by  chloride  of  calcium  in  excess  ;  finally,  decompose  the  resulting  tar-
trate of  lime  by  sulphuric  acid,  as  at  first ;  then  strain  off  the  liquid,
and  crystallize  by  evaporation.

Chemical  Properties. — Tartaric  Acid  is  a  white,  crystallized  solid,  in
the  form  of  irregular  six-sided  prisms.  Sometimes  two  opposite  sides
of  the  prism  become  very  much  enlarged,  so  as  to  cause  the  crystals  to
present  the  appearance  of  tables.  It  is  unalterable  in  the  air,  and  pos-
sesses a  strong  acid  taste,  which  becomes  agreeable  when  the  acid  is
sufficiently  diluted  with  water.  It  is  soluble  in  five  or  six  times  its
weight  of  cold,  and  twice  its  weight  of  boiling  water.  It  is  also  soluble
in  alcohol.  A  weak  solution  undergoes  spontaneous  decomposition  by
keeping,  becoming  covered  with  a  moldy  pellicle.  In  the  form  of  crys-
tals it  always  contains  combined  water,  from  which  it  cannot  be  separated
without  previous  combination  with  a  base.  Its  most  usual  impurity  is
sulphuric  acid,  which  may  be  detected  by  the  solution  affording,  with
acetate  of  lead,  a  precipitate  only  partially  soluble  in  nitric  acid.

Tartaric  acid  is  incompatible  with  salifiable  bases  and  their  carbonates,
with  salts  of  potassa,  and  with  the  salts  of  lime,  and  of  lead.  It  consists,
when  dry,  of  two  equivalents  of  hydrogen  2,  four  equivalents  of  carbon
24.48,  and  five  equivalents  of  oxygen  40=66.48;  and  when  crystal-
lyzed,  of  one  equivalent  of  dry  acid  66.48,  and  one  equivalent  of  water
9=75.48.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tartaric  acid  is  refrigerant,  antiseptic,  and  anti-
scorbutic. It  is  used  as  a  drink  in  febrile  and  inflammatory  diseases  ;  being
cheaper  than  citric  acid,  it  forms,  when  dissolved  in  water  and  sweetened,
a  good  substitute  for  lemonade.  It  is  very  much  used  in  medicine,  to
form  acid  refrigerant  drinks  and  effervescing  draughts.  What  are  called
Soda  powders  consist  of  twenty-five  grains  of  tartaric  acid,  and  half  a
drachm  of  bicarbonate  of  soda,  put  up  in  separate  papers.  When  used,
the  acid  and  salt  are  dissolved  in  separate  portions  of  water,  and  the
solutions  mixed  and  drank  in  a  state  of  effervescence.  These  powders
furnish  a  good  substitute  for  soda  water.  Tartaric  acid  is  also  a  consti-
tuent in  the  gentle  aperient  called  Seidlitz  powders.  These  consist  of  a
mixture  of  two  drachms  of  tartrate  of  potassa  and  soda,  (Rochelle  salt,)
and  two  scruples  of  bicarbonate  of  soda,  put  up  in  a  white  paper,  and
thirty-five  grains  of  tartaric  acid,  contained  in  a  blue  one.  The  contents
of  the  white  paper  are  dissolved  in  about  half  a  pint  of  water,  to  which


ACONITUM NapELLUS.  175

those  of  the  blue  paper  are  added  ;  and  the  whole  is  taken  in  a  state  of
effervescence.  A  colorless  solution  of  sulphate  of  quinia  has  long  been
employed  by  Eclectics ;  it  may  be  made  by  adding  equal  parts  of  tar-
taric acid  and  sulphate  of  quinia  to  as  much  water  as  may  be  desired.

Off.  Prep.  —  Ferri  et  Morphiae  Tartras ;  Ferri  et  Quiniae  Tartras ;
Quiniae  et  Morphiae  Tartras;  Quiniae  et  Saliciniae  Tartras;  Potassse
Bitartras  ;  Potassae  Tartras.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.
Monkshood.
Nat.  Ord. — Ranunculacea3. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Trigynia.

LEAVES AND ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  perennial  herbaceous  plant,  also  known  by  the
name  of  Wolfsbane;  it  has  a  turnip-shaped  or  fusiform  root,  from  three
to  six  lines  in  diameter,  and  three  or  four  inches  long ;  externally  brown-
ish, internally  whitish  and  fleshy,  and  sending  off  many  long,  thick,
fleshy  fibers.  When  the  plant  has  arrived  at  maturity,  there  are  usual-
ly two  roots  united,  the  older  of  which  is  dark-brown,  and  supports  the
stem ;  the  younger  is  of  a  light  yellowish-brown,  and  is  destined  to  fur-
nish the  stem  of  the  following  year.  The  stems  are  simple,  erect,  round
and  smooth  ;  the  leaves  are  alternate,  petiolate,  divided  to  the  base  into
five  wedge-shaped  lobes,  which  are  called  trifid,  deep  green  upon  their
upper  surface,  light  green  beneath,  and  smooth  and  shining  on  both
sides.  The  flowers  are  of  a  dark  violet-blue  color,  large,  in  a  terminal
raceme,  short  pedicels  ;  the  raceme  is  simple  and  cylindrical.  The  peta-
loid  sepals  are  five ;  the  upper  being  helmet-shaped  and  concealing  the
petals  ;  the  lateral  broad  and  rounded ;  the  lower  oblong  and  deflected.
The  petals  not  more  than  two,  supported  on  a  peduncle  or  claw,  and
have  a  hooked  spur,  and  a  bifid  and  revolute  lip.  The  stamens  are  fili-
form, converging,  with  whitish  anthers.  The  ovaries  are  from  three  to
five,  smooth,  with  simple  reflected  stigmas.  The  capsxdes  correspond  in
number  with  the  ovaries,  and  contain  many  wrinkled  and  angular  seeds.

History. — Monkshood  or  Aconite  is  a  native  of  most  parts  of  Europe,
growing  in  mountain  forests  and  plains,  and  is  cultivated  as  an  orna-
mental plant  in  the  gardens  of  Europe  and  this  country.  It  grows  from
two  to  six  feet  high,  and  bears  a  long,  dense  spike  of  beautiful,  deep-
blue  flowers,  which  make  their  appearance  in  May  and  June.  The  root,
which  consists  of  numerous  slender  radicles,  is  the  most  powerful  part
of  the  plant,  but  every  portion  of  it  is  possessed  of  highly  deleterious
properties.  There  are  several  varieties,  but  the  A.  Napellus  and  A.
Paniculalum  are  the  only  officinal  ones.  The  dried  leaves  and  root
retain their acridity  and narcotic  virtues; and the expressed  juice


176  Materia  Medtca.

possesses  the  properties  of  the  plant.  Its  medicinal  virtues  are  best
extracted  by  alcohol,  and  the  alcoholic  extract  is  the  most  convenient
and  energetic  preparation.  It  contains  an  alkaloidal  principle,  termed
Aconita,  or  Aconitina,  a  black  oily  matter,  albumen,  muriate  and  sul-
phate of  lime,  starch,  etc.  The  smell  of  the  plant  is  feeble  but  nauseous,
and  its  taste  acrid  and  bitter,  leaving  in  the  mouth  a  sensation  of  heat
and  pungency,  and  a  degree  of  numbness.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aconite  is  an  energetic  acro-narcotic  poison  in
improper  doses,  occasioning  symptoms  of  gastric  irritation,  a  peculiar
tingling  and  numbness  of  the  mouth,  followed  by  loss  of  sensation,  and
paralvsis  of  the  voluntary  muscles,  but  without  coma  or  convulsions.
With  these  symptoms  will  be  thirst,  nausea,  vomiting,  purging,  spasms
of  the  stomach  and  intestines,  headache,  dimness  of  vision,  the  pupils
beino-  either  dilated  or  contracted,  excessive  prostration,  pallid  coun-
tenance, cold  extremities,  very  feeble  pulse,  and  delirium.  Death  ensues
from  paralysis  of  the  respiratory  muscles.  All  the  above  effects  are  not
experienced  in  every  case,  though  several  of  them  will  always  be  pre-
sent. On  dissection,  inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  bowels  is  found,
with  engorgement  of  the  brain  and  lungs.  There  is  no  antidote  known
for  poisoning  with  monkshood,  yet  a  timely  and  thorough  evacuation  of
the  stomach,  with  the  internal  and  external  use  of  stimulants,  have
restored  persons  in  imminent  danger  to  perfect  health.

In  maximum  medicinal  doses,  it  warms  the  stomach  and  general  sys-
tem, and  sometimes  occasions  nausea,  with  tingling  and  numbness  in
the  lips  and  fingers,  debility  of  the  muscles,  force  and  frequency  of
pulse  diminished,  as  well  as  a  diminution  of  the  frequency  of  respiration.
Sometimes  the  tingling  and  numbness  extend  over  the  whole  body,
with  headache,  vertigo,  neuralgic  pains,  and  general  prostration.  It
should  never  be  given  in  sufficient  quantity  to  produce  these  effects.
Applied  to  the  eye,  Aconitum  causes  contraction  of  the  pupil.

In  ansemical  headaches,  and  in  all  cases  attended  with  a  torpid  or
paralytic  condition  of  the  muscular  system,  its  use  is  contra-indicated.
It  is  a  very  useful  antiphlogistic  remedy,  and  possesses  anodyne,  seda-
tive, diaphoretic  and  diuretic  qualities.  It  is  especially  useful  in  febrile  and
inflammatory  diseases,  gout,  rheumatism,  epilepsy,  and  neuralgic  affec-
tions. In  scarlatina,  inflammatory  fever,  acute  rheumatism,  pneumonia,
peritonitis,  gastritis,  and  many  other  acute  disorders,  it  has  been  used
with  the  most  decided  advantage.  Its  action  is  more  especially  displayed
in  the  higher  grades  of  fever  and  inflammation.  The  best  preparation
is  the  alcoholic  extract,  formed  by  evaporating  a  tincture  made  of  a
pound  of  aconite  and  a  quart  of  alcohol.  The  dose  is  one-eighth  of  a
grain.  One  part  of  the  extract,  with  two  of  lard,  forms  an  excellent
ointment  for  painful  affections.  The  powdered  root  or  leaves  may  be
given  in  one  or  two  grain  doses,  gradually  increased. The  tincture,


ACONITINA.  177

made  by  macerating  one  ounce  of  the  powdered  root  with  six  ounces  of
alcohol,  for  two  or  three  weeks,  may  be  given  in  doses  of  eight  or  ten
drops,  three  times  a  day,  gradually  increased,  until  its  effects  are  ob-
vious. Its  continued  use  sometimes  produces  vomiting  and  diarrhea.

Off. Prep. — Extract.  Aconiti Alcoholicum  ;  Tinctura  Aconiti ;  Em-
plastrum  Extracti  Aconiti  Radicis.


ACONITINA.

Aconitina.

Preparation. — Take  of  Aconite  root,  dried  and  bruised,  two  pounds;
rectified  spirit,  three  gallons ;  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  solution  of  am-
monia, (Water  of  Ammonia,  U.  S.,)  purified  animal  charcoal,  each  a
sufficient  quantity.  Boil  the  aconite  with  a  gallon  of  the  spirit,  for  an
hour,  in  a  retort  with  a  receiver  fitted  to  it.  Pour  off  the  liquor,  and
again  boil  the  residue  with  another  gallon  of  the  spirit  and  with  the
spirit  recently  distilled,  and  pour  off  the  liquor  also.  Let  the  same  be
done  a  third  time.  Then  press  the  aconite,  and  having  mixed  all  the
liquors  and  filtered  them,  distil  the  spirit.  Evaporate  the  remainder  to
the  proper  consistence  of  an  extract.  Dissolve  this  in  water  and  filter.
Evaporate  the  solution  with  a  gentle  heat,  so  that  it  may  thicken  like
syrup.  To  this  add  of  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  mixed  with  distilled  water,
sufficient  to  dissolve  the  aconitina.  Next  drop  in  solution  of  ammonia,
and  dissolve  the  precipitated  Aconitina  in  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  mixed,
as  before,  with  water.  Then  mix  in  the  animal  charcoal,  occasionally
shaking  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Lastly,  filter,  and  having  again
dropped  in  solution  of  ammonia,  so  as  to  precipitate  the  aconitina,  wash
and  dry  it.

Chemical  Properties. — Aconitina,  when  freshly  precipitated,  is  said  to
be  white,  and  in  the  form  of  a  hydrate  ;  but  it  speedily  parts  with  its
water,  and  forms  a  brownish,  brittle  mass.  It  is  thought  not  to  be
crystallizable.  When  obtained  by  evaporating  its  alcoholic  solution,  it
a  glassy  luster.  In  powder,  it  is  white,  with  a  yellowish  tinge.  It  is
inodorous,  and  of  a  bitter  and  acrid  taste,  producing  a  benumbing  im-
pression on  the  tongue.  It  is  unalterable  in  the  air,  and  fusible  by  a
gentle  heat.  It  is  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  requiring  for  solution  150
parts  of  cold,  and  50  of  boiling  water  ;  alcohol  or  ether  dissolves  it
readily.  It  neutralizes  the  acids  ;  but  its  salts  are  not  crystallizable.
That  it  contains  nitrogen  is  proved  by  the  evolution  of  ammonia,  when
it  is  decomposed  by  heat.  It  is  incompatible  with  tinctures  of  iodine,  and
galls.

12


173  Materia  Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aconitina  is  too  powerful  a  poison  to  be  used
as  an  internal  medicine,  yet  as  an  external  application,  Dr.  Turnbull
has  found  it  useful  in  gout,  rheumatism,  neuralgia,  and  diseases  of  the
heart.  He  employed  it  in  the  form  of  tincture  or  ointment— one  grain
to  one  fiuidrachm  of  alcohol,  gradually  increased  to  even  eight  grains;
or  two  grains  rubbed  first  with  six  drops  of  alcohol,  and  then  with  a
drachm  of  lard,  applied  by  friction  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  and  to  be
of  service,  it  must  produce  a  sensation  of  heat  and  prickling,  followed
by  numbness  and  a  feeling  of  constriction.  It  should  not  be  applied  to
an  abraded  surface,  or  to  a  mucous  membrane,  lest  it  prove  dangerous.


ACORUS  CALAMUS.

Calamus.

Nat. Orel. — Aracea?. Acoraceas. Sex.  Si/st. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE RHIZOMA.

Description. — Calamus,  sometimes  called  Sweet  Flag,  has  a  perennial,
horizontal,  jointed,  and  compressed  root  or  rhizome,  from  six  to  twelve
lines  thick,  and  several  feet  in  length,  and  which  sends  off  numerous,
long,  round,  and  slender  radicles,  of  a  whitish  or  yellowish  color,  also
bunches  of  brown  fibers  from  its  joints,  which  resemble  coarse  hair ;
internally  the  root  is  white  and  spongy,  externally  whitish  with  a  tinge
of  green,  and  the  joints  are  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  length,  and
are  variously  shaded  with  different  tints  of  white  and  red.  The  leaves
are  radical,  sheathing  at  the  base,  long,  sword-shaped,  smooth,  green
above,  but  of  a  reddish  color  below,  variegated  with  green  and  white.
The  scape  ox  flower-stem  resembles  the  leaves,  is  usually  longer,  and  from
one  side  near  its  middle  it  sends  out  a  naked,  solitary,  oblique,  and
cylindrical  spadix,  tapering  at  each  end,  about  two  inches  in  length,  and
closely  covered  with  small,  pale  or  yellowish-green  flowers,  which  have
no  scent  except  when  bruised.  These  are  without  calyx,  and  have  six
equal  truncated  scales,  inclosing  six  stamens,  having  thick  filaments  and
bilobate  anthers.  The  ovary  is  sessile,  three-celled,  with  a  pointed  stigma.
The  capsule  is  several-seeded.

History. — Calamus  is  found  in  most  parts  of  the  world,  growing  on  the
borders  of  small  streams,  ponds,  wet  meadows,  swamps,  etc.,  and  flow-
ering in  May  and  June.  The  part  used  is  the  root  or  rhizome.  It
should  be  collected  late  in  the  autumn,  or  in  the  spring,  washed,  deprived
of  its  fibers,  and  dried  with  a  moderate  heat.  The  dried  roots  of  the
shops  are  of  various  lengths,  somewhat  flattened,  of  a  yellowish-brown
color  externally  and  wrinkled,  internally  whitish,  or  yellowish-white,  and


Actaea.  179

of  light  and  spongy  texture.  Water  or  alcohol  take  up  its  virtues.  It
has  a  strong  and  fragrant  odor,  and  a  warm  bitterish  aromatic  taste.  It
contains  volatile  oil,  resin,  extractive,  etc. ;  the  oil  is  lighter  than  water,
and  is  pale-yellow,  very  odorous  and  pungent.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  stimulating  tonic,  and  aromatic.  Useful  in
flatulent  colic,  dyspepsia,  atonic  conditions  of  the  stomach,  various  affec-
tions of  the  alimentary  canal,  and  as  an  adjuvant  to  quinia  and  bark  in,
intermittents.  It  forms  an  excellent  substitute  in  syrup  for  Godfrey's
Cordial.  Externally,  it  is  a  valuable  application  to  indolent  ulcers,  and
to  keep  up  the  discharge  from  blistered  surfaces  and  issues.  Dose  of
the  infusion,  made  by  scalding  an  ounce  of  the  root  in  a  pint  of  water,
from  four  to  six  fluid  ounces  ;  of  the  root,  from  a  scruple  to  a  drachm.
In  flatulent  colic  of  infants,  it  is  best  combined  with  magnesia.

Of.  Prep. — Decoctum  Acorus;  Infus.  Acorus.


ACTAEA.
Actaea  Alba. — White  Cohosh.
Actaea  Rubra. — Red  Cohosh.
Actjsa  Spicata. — Baneberry.

Nat  Ord. — Actasa. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Monogynia.

THE RHIZOMA.

Description. — Actaea  Alba,  sometimes  called  White  Baneberry,  is  about
two  feet  high,  with  large,  decompound  leaves ;  raceme  oblong,  with
pedicels  as  large  as  the  general  peduncle ;  petals  truncate  at  the  apex,
and  equaling  the  stamens ;  berries  milk-white  ;  flowers  white  and  appear-
ing late  in  May.

Actaea  Rubra  or  Red  Baneberry,  is  about  two  feet  high,  with  large
decompound  leaves;  raceme  ovoid  or  hemispherical,  petals  acutish  and
shorter  than  the  stamens  ;  pedicels  of  the  hemispheric  raceme,  slender  and
less  than  the  full  grown  peduncles  ;  berries  oval,  ripe  in  summer,  cherry
red,  and  forming  a  raceme  three  to  four  inches  long  ;  flowers  white,  and
appearing  in  April  and  May.  The  above  two  plants  are  natives  of  this
country,  they  are  perennial,  herbaceous,  and  found  in  the  rich  deep
mold  of  shady  and  rocky  woods,  from  Canada  to  Virginia.

Actaea  Spicata,  sometimes  called  Herb- Christopher,  is  a  European
plant,  generally  found  in  mountainous  woods,  and  attaining  the  hight  of
two  or  three  feet.  The  stem  is  erect,  leafy,  triangular,  and  but  little
branched ;  the  root  is  creeping  and  perennial :  the  leaves  are  petiolated,


180  Materia Medica.

twice  or  thrice  tern  ate  ;  leaflets  ovate,  lobed,  unequally  serrate  ;  flowers
white,  in  a  terminal,  solitary  ovate  spike  ;  pedicels  simple,  downy,  brac-
teate  at  the  base.  Sepals  four,  deciduous  ;  petals  spatulate  ;  stamens  sub-
ulate ;  ovary  ovate,  with  a  round,  sessile  stigma ;  berries  purplish  black,
succulent.

History. — The  root  is  of  a  dark-brown  color,  with  a  sweetish,  nauseous
odor,  but  which  is  greatly  dissipated  by  drying  ;  the  taste  is  bitterish
and  acrid.  The  berries  are  poisonous,  causing  delirium  and  death,  or  a
species  of  intoxication  accompanied  with  derangement  of  the  cerebral
functions,  and  irritation  of  the  digestive  organs.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  recent  root  of  Actaea  Spicata  is  a  violent
purgative,  resembling  that  of  the  black  hellebore  in  its  action ;  when
dried  it  is  not  so  active.  It  is  seldom  employed  internally.  A  decoction
used  locally  is  said  to  cure  the  itch,  and  to  destroy  lice.

The  A.  Alba  and  A.  Rubra,  possess  similar  qualities;  they  are  said  to
possess  purgative  and  emmenagogue  properties,  and  are  viewed  as  substi-
tutes for  the  Cimicifuga  Racemosa,  and  Caulophyllum  Thalictroides ;  but
this  is  undoubtedly  an  error.


ADEPS.
(Axungia,  Ed. Adeps  Suillus  Preparatus,  Dub.)
LARD. the  prepared  fat  of  the  sus  scrofa  or  common  hog,  free

FROM SALT.

History. — Good  lard  is  white,  inodorous,  granular  in  appearance,  of  a
sweetish  taste,  smooth  to  the  touch,  of  a  soft  consistency  at  ordinary
temperatures,  fusible  at  about  100°  F.,  insoluble  in  water,  sparingly
soluble  in  alcohol,  more  so  in  ether  and  the  volatile  oils,  is  dissolved  and
decomposed  by  the  stronger  acids,  and  is  converted  into  soap  when
boiled  with  caustic  alkaline  solutions.  When  melted  it  readily  unites
with  resins  and  wax,  on  which  account  it  is  extensively  used  in  making-
ointments  and  liniments.  When  heated  in  close  vessels,  it  undergoes  a
species  of  destructive  distillation,  by  which  margaric,  oleic,  acetic,  and
probably  benzoic  acids  are  formed,  together  with  other  less  important
modifications  of  its  constituent  fatty  principles.  It  consists  of  three
neutral  fatty  principles,  called  olein,  stearin  and  margarin,  which  are
found  in  most  animal-oils  and  fats,  and  upon  the  relative  proportions  of
which  depends  their  consistence  respectively.

Olein,  is  the  liquid  principle  of  oils  ;  when  pure  it  is  colorless,  has  a
sweetish  taste,  little  odor,  is  insoluble  in  water,  soluble  in  boiling  alco-
hol, readily  soluble  in  ether,  and  congeals  at  20°  F.  It  is  convertible
by  saponification  into  glycerin,  margaric  acid,  and  oleic  acid,  and  con-


Adiantum Pedantum.  18J

sists  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen.  Lard  contains  62  per  cent,  of
olein,  which  is  extensively  used  for  burning  in  lamps.

Stearin  is  white,  concrete,  of  a  crystalline  appearance  like  spermaceti,
pulverizable,  fusible  at  144°,  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol  or  ether,  inso-
luble in  either  of  these  fluids  when  cold,  and  convertible  by  saponifica-
tion into  a  peculiar  fatty  acid,  named  stearic  acid,  and  glycerin.  It
consists  also  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen,  and  may  be  separated
from  the  concrete  matter  of  lard,  by  treating  this  with  cold  ether  so
long  as  anything  is  dissolved  ;  the  stearin  is  left  behind,  and  the  ethe-
real solution  yields  margarin  by  evaporation.

Margarin  very  closely  resembles  stearin,  but  is  more  fusible ;  one
variety,  obtained  from  animal  fats  melting  at  118°,  and  being  soluble  in
cold  ether ;  another  variety,  from  vegetable  oils,  melts  at  82°.  Lard
should  be  kept  in  well  closed  vessels,  as  if  exposed  to  the  air  it  absorbs
oxygen,  and  becomes  rancid,  and  consequently  unfit  for  medicinal  use.
When  pure  it  consists  of  62  per  cent,  of  olein,  and  38  per  cent,  of  stea-
rin and  margarin  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — Lard  is  emollient.  It  is  sometimes  used  alone
in  frictions,  and  is  frequently  added  to  laxative  enemata ;  but  its  chief
use  is  as  an  ingredient  for  cerates  and  ointments.  When  applied  to
blistered  surfaces,  care  must  be  taken  that  it  be  not  rancid,  as  it  is  then
apt  to  cause  ulceration.


ADIANTUM  PEDATUM.
Maidenhair.
Nat.  Ord. — Filices,  or  Polypodiaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Adiantum  Pedatum  is  a  delicate  and  most  graceful
fern,  growing  from  twelve  to  fifteen  inches  high,  with  the  stipe  or  stalk
and  rachis,  slender,  polished,  and  black  or  dark-purplish,  very  glabrous;
the  frond  or  leaf  pedate,  with  pinnate  branches  ;  the  pinnce  halved,  tri-
angular-oblong, entire  on  the  lower  margin  from  which  the  veins  all  pro-
ceed, and  incised  at  the  upper  and  fruit-bearing  margin  ;  the  barren  seg-
ments are  toothed,  the  fertile  ones  entire.  aSW?  linear,  oblong  ;  arranged
along  the  margin  of  the  frond  ;  involucre  formed  by  turning  back  the
margin  of  the  frond  over  the  sori,  and  it  opens  inward.  Petiole
smooth.

History. — This  plant  is  perennial,  and  is  found  in  deep  woods  on  moist,
rich  soil,  throughout  the  United  States.  The  leaves  are  bitterish  and
somewhat  aromatic,  and  yield  their  properties  to  boiling  water.


182  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Maidenhair  is  refrigerant,  expectorant,  tonic,
and  sub-astringent.  In  decoction  it  forms  an  elegant  refrigerant  drink  in
febrile  diseases,  and  in  erysipelas,  and  is  also  beneficial  in  coughs,  chro-
nic catarrh,  hoarseness,  influenza,  asthma,  etc.  It  is  likewise  reputed
efficacious  in  pleurisy,  and  in  jaundice.  The  decoction  or  syrup  may  be
used  freely.  This  plant  is  highly  valued  by  some  practitioners,  and
deserves  investigation.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Adiantum  ;  Infusum  Adiantum.


^ESCULUS  HIPPO  CAST  ANUM.

Horse-chestnut.

Nat.  Ord. — Hippocastanacese — Sapindacese,  and  iEsculacese.  Sex.  Syst. —
Heptandria  Monogynia.

BARK AND FRUIT.

Description. — The  ^Esculus  Hippocastanum  is  a  beautiful  and  lofty
tree,  with  numerous,  spreading  branches,  covered  with  a  rough,  brown
bark.  The  wood  is  white  and  soft,  and  is  very  liable  to  decay.  The
leaves  are  large,  on  long  footstalks,  and  are  composed  of  seven  leaflets
arising  from  a  common  center,  the  middle  one  being  the  largest ;  they
are  of  a  spathulate  form,  acuminate,  serrate,  much  varied,  and  of  a
bright-green  color.  The  flowers  are  in  thyrsoid  racemes  or  panicles,  at
the  extremity  of  the  branches.  Calyx  pale-green,  five-toothed,  and
spreading.  The  corolla  is  formed  of  five  petals,  which  are  irregular,
unequal,  spreading,  inserted  into  the  calyx  by  narrow  claws,  waved  at
the  edges,  of  a  white  color,  marked  below  with  a  yellowish-red  spot.
The  stamens  are  seven,  with  awl-shaped  filaments,  supporting  reddish,
oblong,  double  anthers.  The  ovary  is  roundish,  and  furnished  with  a
short  style  and  pointed  stigma.  The  fruit  is  prickly,  coriaceous,  round-
ish, three-celled,  and  usually  containing  two  seeds,  which  are  exalbumi-
nous,  with  a  brown,  shining  testa,  and  a  large,  paler  kilum.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Asia,  and  was  introduced  into
Europe  and  this  country,  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century.  It
is  of  rapid  growth,  flowers  in  May  and  June,  and  ripens  its  fruit  late  in
autumn.  The  bark  has  little  odor,  and  an  astringent,  bitter,  not  disa-
greeable taste. It  contains  tannin.

The  ^scidus  Glabra,  or  Buckeye,  common  to  Ohio,  and  other  West-
ern States,  is  said  to  be  useful  as  a  substitute  for  the  ^Esculus  Hippocas-
tanum.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Horse-chestnut  Bark  is  tonic,  astringent,
febrifuge,  narcotic,  and  antiseptic. It  has  been  found  very  efficacious  in


Agaric.  183

the  treatment  of  intermittent  fever,  given  in  doses  of  from  half  an  ounce
to  an  ounce  of  the  bark,  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours.  It  is  infe-
rior, however,  to  cinchona.  Ten  grains  of  the  powder  of  the  rind  of
the  nuts,  have  been  found  equivalent,  in  narcotic  power,  to  three  grains  of
opium.  A  strong  decoction  of  the  bark  has  been  recommended  as  a
lotion  to  gangrenous  ulcers.  The  powdered  kernel  of  the  fruit  produces
sneezing,  and  has  been  used  as  a  sternutatory  in  complaints  of  the  head
and  eyes.


AGARIC.
Touchwood. Spunk. Tinder.

Nat.  Orel. — Fungales,  or  Fungaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Fungi.

History. — This  is  the  product  of  different  species  of  a  genus  of  mush-
rooms, denominated  Boletus.  The  Boletus  Laricis  which  grows  upon
the  larch  of  the  old  world,  is  the  white  agaric,  ox  purging  agaric  of  medi-
cal writers.  It  is  of  various  sizes,  from  that  of  the  fist,  to  that  of  a
child's  head,  is  hard,  spongy,  brownish  or  reddish  externally,  and  inter-
nally of  a  light,  white,  spongy,  somewhat  farinaceous,  friable  mass,
which,  though  capable  of  being  rubbed  into  powder  upon  a  sieve,  is  not
easily  pulverized  in  the  ordinary  mode,  as  it  flattens  under  the  pestle.
It  has  a  sweetish,  very  bitter  taste.

The  Boletus  ignarius,  or  agaric  of  the  oak,  is  compared  in  shape  to
the  horse's  hoof.  Its  diameter  is  from  six  to  ten  inches  when  young,  it
is  soft  like  velvet,  but  subsequently  becomes  hard  and  ligneous.  On  the
upper  surface,  it  is  smooth,  but  marked  with  circular  ridges  of  different
colors,  more  or  less  brown  or  blackish  ;  on  the  under,  it  is  whitish  or
yellowish,  and  full  of  small  pores ;  internally  it  is  tough  and  fibrous,
and  of  a  tawny-brown  color.  It  is  composed  of  short  tubular  fibers
compactly  arranged  in  layers,  one  of  which  is  added  every  year.  It
has  neither  taste  nor  smell.  The  best  is  that  which  grows  on  the  oak,
and  collected  in  August  or  September.  It  is  prepared  for  use  by
removing  the  exterior  rind  or  bark,  cutting  the  inner  part  into  thin  slices,
and  beating  these  with  a  hammer  until  they  become  soft,  pliable,  and
easily  torn  by  the  fingers.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  White  Agaric  has  been  found  useful  in
checking  the  night-sweats  of  phthisis,  and  other  diseases,  in  the  dose  of
eight  grains,  and  gradually  increased  to  a  drachm  during  the  day,  and
produces  no  inconvenience  to  the  digestive  functions.  It  is  said  to  act
as  a  cathartic  with  some  persons,  in  doses  of  from  six  to  thirty  grains.

The  agaric  of  the  oak,  is  principally  used  for  arresting  hemorrhage  from
wounds,  leech-bites,  etc.,  it  is immediately  applied  to  the  part  with


184  Materia Medica.

pressure,  and  acts  probably  mechanically,  by  absorbing  the  blood  and
causing  it  to  coagulate.  In  severe  cases  it  is  not  to  be  relied  upon.
It  has  sometimes  been  applied  to  the  purposes  of  moxa.  Steeped  in  a
solution  of  nitre,  and  dried,  it  becomes  very  inflammable,  and  is  used  as
a  tinder  under  the  name  of  Spunk  or  Punk.


AGAVE  VIRGINICA.

False  Aloe.
Nat.  Ord. Amaryllidacea?. Sex.  Syst. Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  This  is  a  perennial,  herbaceous,  stemless  or  scape-
bearing  plant,  with  a  premorse,  tuberous  root.  The  leaves  are  linear-
lanceolate,  fleshy,  glabrous,  radical,  with  cartilaginous  serratures  on  the
margin.  The  scape  is  simple,  glabrous,  with  leaf-like  scales  and  sessile
flowers,  terete,  and  from  three  to  six  feet  in  bight.  The  flowers  are
scattered  in  a  loose,  wand-like  spike,  very  fragrant,  greenish-yellow,
with  the  tube  longer  than  the  acute  segments.  The  corolla  is  erect,
superior,  tubular  or  funnel-form  ;  filaments  erect,  longer  than  the  corolla;
anthers  introrse.  Capsule  roundish,  obscurely  triangular,  three-furrowed,
three-valved,  three-celled,  and  many-seeded.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  Pennsylvania  and  the  Southern
States,  growing  on  dry  or  rocky  banks,  and  flowering  in  August  and
September.  In  South  Carolina,  it  is  known  by  the  name  of  Rattlesnake's
Master,  and  is  considered  an  antidote  to  the  bite  of  that  reptile.  The
root  is  the  pai-t  used,  it  is  very  bitter,  and  yields  its  properties  to
alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — False  aloe  is  reputed  laxative  and  carminative,
and  has  been  beneficially  employed  in  flatulent  colic,  and  in  obstinate
diarrhea.  It  is  also  said  to  be  a  valuable  counter-poison  to  the  bites  of
snakes.

The  Agave  Americana,  or  American  Aloe,  also  called  American  Agave,
and  Century  Plant,  is  an  evergreen  succulent  plant,  growing  in  Florida,
Mexico,  and  other  parts  of  tropical  America;  it  bears  a  strong  resem-
blance to  the  plants  of  the  genus  Aloe,  with  which  it  is  sometimes  con-
founded. The  root  and  leaves  when  cut  furnish  a  saccharine  juice,
which  may  be  converted  into  syrup  or  sugar  by  evaporation,  and
into  a  vinous  liquor  by  fermentation.  When  evaporated  to  the  con-
sistence of  a  soft  extract,  it  forms  a  lather  with  water,  and  is  sometimes
employed  as  a  substitute  for  soap.  The  fresh  juice  is  said  to  be  diuretic,
laxative,  and  emmenagogue. G.  Perrin,  M.  D.,  of  U.  S.  A.,  strongly


Ajuga  Cham.epitys —  Agrimonia  Eupatoria.  1S5

recommends  the  juice  of  the  Am.  Aloe,  as  a  remedy  in  scorbutus,  superior
to  all  others.  The  juice  is  prepared  by  cutting  the  leaves  off  close  to
the  root,  then  placing  them  in  hot  ashes  until  thoroughly  cooked,  when
they  are  removed,  and  the  juice  expressed  and  strained.  It  is  not  dis-
agreeable to  take,  agrees  with  the  stomach  and  bowels  and  may  be
given  in  doses  of  from  one  to  three  ounces  daily.


AJUGA  CHAM.EPITYS.

Ground  Pine.

Nat. Ord. — Lamiacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Ground-Pine  has  an  annual  diffused  stem,  with  three-
cleft  leaves;  and  thejloivers  solitary  and  axillary,  shorter  than  the  leaves.
Corolla  with  the  upper  lip  minute  and  two-toothed.  Stamens  longer
than  the  upper  lip  ;  anthers  all  reniform,  one-celled.

History. — This  is  a  low-creeping  plant,  a  native  of  Europe,  but  found
also  in  some  parts  of  the  United  States,  and  known  sometimes  under
the  names  of  Bugle  or  Germander.  The  leaves,  which  are  the  parts  used,
bear  some  resemblance  to  those  of  the  pine  in  shape,  and  possess  a
strong,  peculiar,  resinous,  not  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  bitter,  balsamic
taste.  By  distillation  with  water,  they  yield  a  small  proportion  of  vola-
tile oil,  resembling  that  of  turpentine.  Their  virtues  are  imparted  to
diluted  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Ground-pine  is  stimulant,  tonic,  diuretic,  and
aperient ;  it  has  been  successfully  employed  in  palsy,  gout,  rheumatism,
and  amenorrhea.  It  is  said  to  be  especially  useful  in  uterine  diseases,
and  paralytic  disorders ;  also  in  dropsy,  jaundice,  strangury,  and  all
visceral  obstructions.  Externally,  the  decoction  forms  an  excellent  wash
for  old  and  indolent  ulcers.  Dose  of  the  leaves  in  powder,  one  or  two
drachms;  but  the  vinous  infusion  is  considered  the  best  preparation  ;  its
dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms.


AGRIMONIA  EUPATORIA.

Agrimony.
Nat.  Ord. — Eosacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT AND LEAVES.

Description. — Agrimony  is  a  perennial  herb,  with  a  reddish,  tapering,
not  creeping  root,  branched  at  the  summit. The  stems  are  from  one  to


186  Materia Medica.

three  feet  in  hight,  leafy,  scarcely  branched,  and  covered  with  soft,
silky  hairs.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  nearly  smooth  beneath,  interrupt-
edly pinnate,  and  consist  of  three,  five,  or  seven  oblong-obovate,  or  oval-
lanceolate  leaflets,  from  one  to  three  inches  long,  and  about  one-third
as  wide,  sessile,  coarsely  serrated,  almost  glabrous,  with  various  minute
intermediate  ones;  the  terminal  leaflet  with  a  short  petiolule.  Stipules
of  the  upper  leaves,  large,  rounded,  dentate  or  palmate.  Flowers  very
numerous,  subsessile,  yellow,  in  a  dense  tapering  spike,  with  lobed
bracts ;  they  are  about  four  lines  in  diameter.  Racemes  six  to  twelve
inches  long,  spicate.  Petals  five,  rarely  twice  the  length  of  the  calyx.
Calyx  inferior,  five-cleft,  invested  with  an  outer  lobed  one  ;  calyx-tube
curiously  fluted  with  ten  ribs,  and  surmounted  with  reddish-hooked
bristles. Stamens  twelve  ;  carpels  two  ;  fruit  hispid.

History. — Agrimony  inhabits  Asia,  Europe,  and  North  America.  In
this  country  it  is  found  in  fields,  on  the  borders  of  woods,  and  along
the  roadsides,  bearing  a  yellow  flower  in  July  and  August.  It  is  some-
times known  by  the  name  of  Cockle-burr,  Stickwort,  etc.  It  has  an  agree-
able aromatic  odor,  which  is  strongest  in  the  flowers,  and  a  rough,
bitterish,  aromatic  taste,  which  is  more  powerful  in  the  root.  It  yields
its  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Agrimony  is  a  mild  tonic,  alterative  and  astrin-
gent. A  decoction  of  it  is  highly  recommended  in  bowel-complaints,
passive  hemorrhages,  gonorrhea,  leucorrhea,  and  chronic  affections  of
the  mucous  membranes  ;  likewise  in  jaundice,  and  visceral  obstructions,
and  as  an  alterative  in  cutaneous  diseases.  A  strong  decoction,  sweetened
with  honey,  is  reputed  an  invariable  cure  for  scrofula,  if  its  use  be  per-
sisted in  for  a  length  of  time ;  and  it  has  also  been  highly  extolled  in
the  treatment  of  gravel,  asthma,  coughs,  and  obstructed  menstruation.
Dr.  D.  C.  Payne  speaks  highly  of  a  continued  use  of  a  decoction  of  this
plant  in  the  treatment  of  erysipelas,  and  scrofulous  affections,  to  be
used  freely  in  connection  with  diet  and  regularity  of  the  bowels.  As  a
gargle,  the  decoction  is  useful  in  ulcerations  of  the  mouth  and  throat.
Dose  of  the  powdered  leaves,  one  or  two  drachms  ;  of  the  decoction
from  one  to  three  fluidounces.  The  root  is  very  astringent,  and  may  be
used  wherever  this  class  of  agents  is  indicated.  The  plant  has  been  also
celebrated  as  a  vermifuge.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Agrimoniee  ;  Infusum  Agrimoniae.


Alcohol.  187

ALCOHOL.

Absolute  Alcohol. — Hydrate  of  oxide  of  Ethyle.  Specific  gravity,
0.794-6.

Spiritus  Rectificatus. — Rectified  spirit. Specific  gravity,  0.835.

Alcohol  Dilutum. — Proof  Spirit.  Diluted  Alcohol.  Specific  gra-
vity, 0.935.

Preparation. — Alcohol  is  a  peculiar  liquid,  generated  for  the  most
part  in  vegetable  juices  and  infusions,  by  a  fermentation  called  the  vinous
or  alcoholic.  The  liquids  which  have  undergone  it  are  called  vinous
liquors,  and  are  of  various  kinds ;  thus,  the  fermented  juice  of  the  grape
is  called  Wine  ;  of  the  apple,  Cider ;  the  fermented  infusion  of  malt,  Beer.
This  fermentation  is  owing  to  the  presence  of  sugar  in  these  liquids,  and
in  other  instances,  to  the  conversion  of  starch  into  sugar,  by  some  un-
known spontaneous  change.

In  vinous  liquors,  the  alcohol  is  diluted  with  abundance  of  water,  and
associated  with  coloring  matter,  volatile  oil,  extractive,  and  various  acids
and  salts.  In  purifying  it  we  take  advantage  of  its  volatility,  which
enables  us  to  separate  it  by  distillation,  combined  with  some  of  the  prin-
ciples of  the  vinous  liquors  employed,  and  more  or  less  water.  The
distilled  product  of  vinous  liquors  forms  the  different  varieties  of  ardent
spirit  of  commerce.  When  obtained  from  wine,  it  is  called  Brandy ;
from  fermented  molasses,  Rum  ;  from  cider,  malted  barley,  or  rye,
Whisky  ;  from  malted  barley  and  rye-meal  with  hops,  and  rectified  from
juniper  berries,  Holland  Gin  ;  from  malted  barley,  rye  or  potatoes,  rec-
tified with  turpentine,  Common  Gin  ;  and  from  fermented  rice,  Arrack.
These  spirits  are  of  different  strengths,  that  is,  contain  different  propor-
tionate quantities  of  alcohol,- and  have  various  peculiarities  by  which
they  are  distinguished  by  the  palate.  Their  strength  is  accurately
judged  of  by  the  specific  gravity,  which  is  always  inversely  proportion-
ate to  their  concentration.  When  they  have  a  sp.  gr.  of  0.920  they  are
designated  in  commerce  by  the  term  Proof  Spirit.  If  lighter  than  this,
they  are  said  to  be  above  proof;  if  heavier,  below  proof.  Proof  spirit
may  be  considered  as  corresponding  with  the  average  strength  of  the
weaker  alcohol  used  in  pharmacy.

Proof  spirit  is  still  very  far  from  being  pure  ;  being  a  dilute  alcohol,
containing  about  half  its  weight  of  water,  together  with  essential  oil  and
other  foreign  matters.  It  may  be  further  purified  and  strengthened  by
re-distillation,  or  rectification  as  it  is  called.  Whisky  is  the  spirit  usually
employed  for  this  purpose,  and  from  every  hundred  gallons,  between
fifty-seven  and  fifty-eight  will  be  obtained,  of  the  average  strength  of
rectified  spirit,  (sp.  gr.  0.835,)  corresponding  to  the  alcohol  of  the  United
States'  Pharm.,  and  the  Spiritus  Rectificatus  of  the  London  and  Dublin


188  Materia  Medica.

Colleges.  When  this  is  once  more  cautiously  distilled,  it  will  be  further
purified  from  water,  and  attain  the  sp.  gr.  of  about  0.825,  which  is  the
lightest  spirit  which  can  be  obtained  by  ordinary  distillation.  It  still,
however,  contains  eleven  per  cent,  of  water.  In  the  meanwhile,  the
spirit,  by  these  repeated  distillations,  becomes  more  and  more  freed  from
essential  oil,  called  Grain,  or  Fusel  Oil.

If  it  be  desired  to  obtain  alcohol  of  still  greater  concentration,  (Abso-
lute alcohol),  it  is  necessary  to  avail  ourselves  of  certain  substances
which  have  a  powerful  affinity  for  water.  Of  this  nature,  are  lime,  car-
bonate of  potassa,  and  chloride  of  calcium.  These,  being  mixed  with
the  rectified  spirit,  unite  with  water  and  sink,  while  the  purer  spirit  floats
above,  and  may  be  separated  by  decantation  or  distillation.  By  availing
themselves  of  substances  of  this  nature,  the  London  and  Dublin  Colleges
are  enabled  to  produce  their  strongest  spirit,  which  they  denominate^l/coAo£.

Souberain  recommends  the  following  as  an  easy  method  for  obtaining
alcohol  free  from  water,  abundantly  and  economically : — "1st.  Rectify
alcohol,  marking  86°  of  the  centesimal  alcoholmeter  of  Gay-Lussac  (rec-
tified spirit)  by  distilling  it  from  carbonate  of  potassa.  This  operation
raises  its  strength  to  94°  or  95°.  2d.  Raise  this  alcohol  to  97°,  by  dis-
tilling it  with  fused  chloride  of  calcium,  or  by  digesting  it  with  quick-
lime, from  which  it  must  be  afterward  poured  off,  in  the  proportion  of  a
pint  of  the  alcohol  to  1^  ounces  of  the  chloride,  or  2|  ounces  of  the  lime.
3d.  Distil  the  product  of  this  operation  slowly  with  quicklime,  in  the
proportion  of  3|  ounces  to  the  pint.  The  product  will  be  absolute  alco-
hol. The  operation  may  be  shortened  to  two  steps,  by  distilling  the
alcohol  of  94°  or  95°,  with  an  excess  of  quicklime  (7£  ounces  to  the
pint).  In  all  cases,  before  decanting  or  distilling,  the  alcohol  must  be
digested  for  two  or  three  days  with  the  lime,  at  a  temperature  between
95°  and  100°  F.  Lime  will  not  answer  as  a  substance  to  be  distilled
from,  unless  it  be  in  sufficient  excess ;  for  otherwise,  toward  the  end  of
the  distillation,  the  hydrate  of  lime  formed,  will  yield  up  its  water  to  the
alcohol,  and  weaken  the  distilled  product."

Although  freed  from  water  by  the  processes  named,  alcohol  may  still
be  impregnated  with  a  portion  of  the  essential  oil,  called  grain  or  fusel
oil.  This  is  usually  removed  by  digesting  the  spirit  with  charcoal,  espe-
cially animal  charcoal.  The  same  end  may  be  attained  on  a  small  scale,
by  adding  a  little  of  the  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  to  the  spirit,  and
exposing  it  to  a  bright  light.  By  the  action  of  the  oxide  of  silver  on
the  oil,  it  is  converted  into  a  black  powder,  and  by  a  new  distillation,
the  spirit  is  obtained  pure.

With  the  exception  of  alcohol  and  whisky,  but  very  little  pure  liquors
are  to  be  had  in  this  country,  as  they  are  superseded  by  the  domestic
articles  manufactured  by  liquor  dealers.  The  following  formulas  for  the
manufacturing  of  domestic  liquors,  are  from  an  old  dealer  and  manufac-
turer.


Alcohol.  189

Domestic  Gin  is  made  of  neutral  spirits  forty  gallons,  good  Holland
fin  four  gallons,  oil  of  Juniper  three  ounces,  oil  of  Anise  one  ounce;
mix  together.  Domestic  brandy  consists  of  neutral  spirits  one  gallon,
good  brandy  one  pint,  molasses,  q.  s.  to  color,  sweet  spirits  of  nitre  eight
ounces.

History. — Alcohol  is  a  colorless,  transparent,  volatile  liquid,  of  a
penetrating,  agreeable  odor,  and  strong  burning  taste.  When  free  from
water  of  dilution,  it  is  called  anhydrous  or  absolute  alcohol,  and  has  the
specific  gravity  of  0.793  at  the  temperature  of  60°.  If  a  piece  of
anhydrous  baryta  be  dropped  into  the  liquid,  if  any  water  be  present  it
will  fall  to  powder  ;  otherwise,  it  will  not.  Alcohol  is  inflammable,  and
burns  without  smoke  or  residue,  the  products  being  water  and  carbonic
acid.  When  strong,  the  flame  is  bluish,  but  yellowish  when  weak.  It
combines  with  water  and  ether  in  all  proportions,  and  is  capable  of  dis-
solving a  great  number  of  substances,  as  sulphur,  phosphorus,  iodine,
ammonia,  caustic  potassa,  soda,  and  lilhia  ;  also  the  organic  vegetable
alkalies,  urea,  tannic  acid,  sugar,  mannite,  camphor,  resins,  balsams,
soap,  castor  oil,  and  volatile  oils  ;  also  most  of  the  chlorides  that  are
readily  soluble  in  water;  some  nitrates,  none  of  the  metallic  sulphates,
nor  the  insoluble  efflorescent  salts.  It  dissolves  fixed  oils  sparingly,
acts  on  most  acids,  forming  ethers  with  some,  and  effecting  the  solution
of  others,  and  dissolves  all  deliquescent  salts,  except  carbonate  of  po-
tassa. Alcohol  is  represented  by  C4  Hi  +  2HO — equivalent  46.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  powerful,  diffusible  stimulant,  and  is  the
intoxicating  ingredient  in  all  malt,  spiritous,  and  vinous  liquors.  It  is
never  used  in  its  pure  state  in  medicine,  but  when  diluted  forms  a  men-
struum for  many  remedies.  In  the  form  of  brandy,  it  is  useful  in  all
cases  of  prostration  or  sinking,  especially  in  typhus.  Brandy  is  said  to
be  cordial  and  stomachic ;  rum,  heating  and  sudorific  ;  gin  and  whisky,
diuretic.  The  danger  of  manufacturing  drunkards  by  the  administra-
tion of  wine  or  brandy,  bitters,  cordials,  and  the  like,  which  was  so
common  a  few  years  since,  we  are  glad  to  say,  has  now  almost  entirely
it  is  in  such  small  doses,  and  so  well  diluted  with  water,  that  no  fear  of
intemperance  can  arise  in  the  mind  of  the  physician.  There  are  very
few  cases  in  which  alcoholic  stimulants  are  given,  and  those  are  never
of  a  chronic  character,  or  in  which  these  fluids  have  to  be  used  longer
than  a  few  days.  The  discovery  of  our  concentrated  preparations,  and
improved  modes  of  treating  disease,  have  done  much  to  set  aside  this
dangerous  and  unscientific  practice.

Externally,  alcohol  is  sometimes  applied  to  produce  cold  by  evapora-
tion, or  to  stimulate  where  its  evaporation  is  repressed  ;  and  enters  into
many  discutient  and  stimulating  lotions.  A  mixture  of  equal  parts  of
white  of  egg  and  rectified  spirit,  is  said  to  be  an  excellent  application


190  Materia  Medica.

to  excoriations  from  pressure,  during  their  early  stage,  occurring  in  pro-
tracted diseases.  To  be  applied  frequently  with  a  fine  brush  or  feather,
and  renewed  as  it  dries,  until  an  albuminous  coating  is  formed  over  the
excoriated  surface.

Alcohol  is  extensively  employed  in  pharmacy,  either  rectified  or
diluted,  for  the  manufacture  of  tinctures,  spirits,  ether,  essences,  resin-
ous and  alcoholic  extracts,  and  for  many  other  purposes.


ALCOHOL AMYLICUM.
Amylic  Alcohol.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  light  liquid,  which  may  be  obtained  at  any
large  distillery,  by  continuing  the  distillation  for  some  time  after  the
pure  spirit  has  all  been  drawn  off,  any  quantity.  Introduce  it  into  a
small  still  or  retort  connected  with  a  condenser,  and  apply  heat  so  as  to
cause  distillation  ;  as  soon  as  the  oil  begins  to  come  over  unmixed  with
water,  the  receiver  should  be  changed,  and  the  distillation  being  resumed
and  carried  nearly  to  dryness,  the  desired  product  will  be  obtained.
The  liquid  drawn  over  during  the  first  part  of  the  distillation  will  consist
of  an  aqueous  fluid,  surmounted  by  a  stratum  of  the  Amylic  Alcohol.
This  latter,  though  impregnated  with  a  minute  quantity  of  water,  should
be  separated  and  preserved,  as  being  sufficiently  pure  for  use.

History. — This  oil  has  various  names,  as  Fusel  oil,  Grain  oil,  Corn-spirit
oil,  Potato-spirit  oil,  and  Hydrated  oxide  of  amyle.  It  is  always  present
in  the  products  of  the  alcoholic  fermentation,  and  is  an  ingredient  in  the
ardent  spirit  obtained  from  various  kinds  of  grain,  but  is  most  abundant
in  that  procured  from  fermented  potatos.  It  is  present  in  grain  spirit  in
the  proportion  of  about  one  part  in  five  hundred  by  measure.  If  the
whisky  procured  from  grain  or  potato  is  distilled  to  obtain  its  alcohol,
the  pure  spirit  will  come  over  for  a  certain  time,  after  which,  if  the  dis-
tillation be  continued,  a  milky  liquid  will  be  obtained,  which,  upon
standing,  will  be  covered  with  a  stratum  of  this  peculiar  oil.  Subjected
to  distillation,  the  milky  liquid  will  at  first  boil  at  a  comparatively  low
temperature,  and  yield  water,  and  a  little  of  the  oil ;  but  after  a  time  the
boiling  point  will  rise  to  269°,  when  the  oil  will  come  over  pure.  By
changing  the  receiver  when  the  oil  begins  to  distil  free  from  water,  the
pure  oil  is  collected,  separate  from  the  watery  part. —  U.  S.  Disp.

Fusel  oil  is  a  colorless,  oily  liquid,  very  mobile,  of  a  strong  and
nauseous  odor  which  produces  stupefying  effects,  and  an  acrid,  burning,
very  disagreeable  taste.  Its  vapor  when  inhaled,  causes  cough  and
spasmodic  dyspnoea,  resembling  asthma,  often  followed  by  vomiting.
As  usually  prepared  its  color  is  pale-yellow. Its  specific gravity  is


Aletris  Farinosa.  191

0.818  ;  that  of  its  vapor  3.15.  It  boils  at  269°,  and  at  —  4°  it  crystal-
lizes in  shining  scales.  It  is  soluble  in  all  proportions  in  alcohol  or  ether,
but  is  very  sparingly  so  in  water.  It  dissolves  iodine,  sulphur,  and
phosphorus,  and  forms  a  good  solvent  for  fats,  resins,  and  camphor.  It
does  not  leave  a  greasy  stain  upon  paper,  nor  take  fire  by  contact  with
flame,  but  begins  to  burn  only  when  heated  to  about  130°.  It  consists
of  ten  equivalents  of  carbon  60,  twelve  of  hydrogen  12,  and  two  of
oxygen  16=88.  When  heated  with  dry  hydrate  of  potassa  it  is  oxi-
dized, two  equivalents  of  hydrogen  are  given  off,  and  two  of  oxygen
absorbed,  and  the  potassa  is  found  combined  with  valerianic  acid  Cio  Ho
03.  It  is  generally  considered  to  be  a  hydrated  oxide  of  amyle,  its
formula  being  Cio  Hn  0-f  HO=Ayl  O  HO.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fusel  oil  is  used  in  the  preparation  of  valeri-
anic acid,  valerianate  of  soda,  etc.


ALETRIS  FARINOSA.

Unicorn  Root.

Nat.  Orel. — Liliaceae,  Lindley.  Haemodoraceae,  Brown. — Sex.  Syst.  Hex-
andria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Aletris  Farinosa,  also  known  by  the  several  names  of
Star-grass,  Colic-root,  Ague-root,  Crow-corn,  etc.,  has  apremorse,  perennial
root,  with  radicle  leaves,  spreading  on  the  ground  like  a  star,  sessile,
ribbed,  broad-lanceolate,  entire,  smooth,  of  a  pale-green  or  glaucous
color,  veined  longitudinally,  and  of  unequal  size,  the  largest  being  about
four  inches  long,  and  one-fourth  as  wide.  From  the  center  of  the  leaves
arises  the  scape  or  flower-stem,  which  is  from  one  to  three  feet  high,  erect,
simple,  with  remote  scales  or  bracts,  which  sometimes  expand  into  small
subulate  leaves.  Spike  slender,  scattered,  each  flower  with  a  short
pedicel  and  a  minute  bract.  Calyx  wanting.  Perianth  white,  of  an
oblong  bell-shape,  divided  in  the  limb  into  six  acute,  spreading  segments;
the  outside,  especially  as  the  flower  grows  old,  has  a  wrinkled,  roughish,
or  mealy  appearance.  Stamens  six,  short,  inserted  near  the  mouth  of  the
perianth  at  the  base  of  the  segments;  ovary  three-lobed,  pyramidal,
tapering,  semi-inferior  ;  style  triangular,  separable  into  three.  Capsule
triangular,  invested  with  the  permanent  perianth,  three-celled,  three-
valved  at  top. Seeds  numerous,  minute,  fixed  to  a  central  receptacle.

History. — Unicorn  Root  is  found  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,
usually  in  dry  sandy  soils  and  barrens.  Its  flowers  are  white  and
appear  in  June  and  July.  The  root  is  the  officinal  portion,  which  is
small,  crooked,  blackish  externally,  brown  or  whitish  within,  and  intensely
bitter. Alcohol  is  its  best  solvent. (See  Helonias  Dioica.)


192  Materia  Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Unicorn  Root,  in  the  recent  state  and  in  large
doses,  is  considerably  narcotic,  -with  emetic  and  cathartic  properties.
When  dried  these  properties  are  destroyed,  and  it  becomes  a  bitter  tonic.
It  has  been  used  in  decoction  or  tincture,  in  flatulent  colic,  hysteria,  and
to  increase  the  tone  of  the  stomach.  It  is  of  much  utility  in  dyspepsia,
as  well  as  in  cases  of  general  or  local  debility.  But  its  most  valuable
property  consists  in  the  tonic  influence  it  exerts  upon  the  female  genera-
tive organs,  giving  a  normal  energy  to  the  uterus,  and  thus  proving
useful  in  cases  where  there  is  an  habitual  tendency  to  miscarriage.  In
chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  and  engorged  conditions  of  the
uterus,  as  well  as  in  prolapsus  of  that  organ,  it  is  one  of  our  best  vegeta-
ble agents.  The  alcoholic  extract  is  an  elegant  form  in  which  to  employ
it,  in  the  above  affections.  In  uterine  diseases  it  may  be  given  alone
with  advantage,  or  employed  in  combination  with  asclepidin,  senecin,
caulophyllin,  or  cimicifugin.  In  flatulent  colic  and  borborygmi,  a  mix-
ture of  dioscorein  two  grains,  ginger  four  grains,  and  alcoholic  extract
of  aletris  two  grains,  may  be  divided  into  two  pills,  of  which  one  may  be
given  every  two  or  three  hours  with  decided  benefit.  (See  asclepidin).
The  resinous  extract  of  the  root,  aletrin,  is  not  so  much  employed  at
present,  as  the  alcoholic  extract  aletridin,  although  it  possesses  active
properties.  Dose  of  the  powdered  root,  from  five  to  ten  grains,  three
times  a  day;  of  the  saturated  tincture,  from  five  to  fifteen  drops,  in
water.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Aletridis  Alcoholicum.


ALISMA  PLANTAGO.

Water  Plantain.

Nat.  Ord. — Alismacea;. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria Polygynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  a  perennial,  caulescent  herb,  sometimes  called
Mad-dog  weed.  The  leaves  are  radical,  oval,  oblong  or  lanceolate,  sub-
cordate  at  the  base,  cuspidate  or  abruptly  acuminate,  five  to  nine-
nerved,  from  four  to  six  inches  in  length,  about  two-thirds  as  wide,  and
on  long  radical  petioles.  The  scape  is  one  or  two  feet  high,  with
whorled  panicled  branches ;  the  panicles  are  loose,  compound,  many-
flowered ;  branches  of  the  panicle  with  bracts  at  the  base.  Carpels
fifteen  to  twenty,  obliquely  obovate,  forming  an  obtusely-triangular
whorl  in  fruit.  The  flowers  are  small,  white,  whorled,  and  numerous ;
petals  three,  tinged  with  purple,  roundish,  deciduous,  larger  than  the
green,  ovate,  persistent  sepals.  Stamens  six;  achenia  obtusely  three-
cornered. Root  fibrous.


Allium  Sativum.  193

History. — Water  Plantain  is  common  to  Europe  and  the  United
States,  being  a  smooth,  handsome  inhabitant  of  ponds,  ditches,  streams,
etc.,  flowering  in  July.  At  one  time  the  root  was  in  great  repute  as  a
cure  for  hydrophobia,  but  subsequent  experiments  have  proved  it  ineffi-
cacious. The  leaves  are  the  parts  used.

Properties  and  Uses. — When  the  fresh  leaves  of  water-plantain  are
bruised  and  applied  to  the  skin,  they  produce  a  rubefacient  effect,  and
will  even  vesicate.  When  dried  and  powdered,  and  taken  in  the  dose
of  one  or  two  drachms  two  or  three  times  a  day,  they  have  been  suc-
cessfully employed  in  gravel  and  other  urinary  affections.


ALLIUM  SATIVUM.

Garlic.

Nat. Ord. — Liliacea?. Sex. Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE BULB.

Description. — This  is  a  very  extensive  genus,  including  over  sixty
species.  '  The  Allium  Sativum  is  officinal ;  it  is  a  perennial  plant,  bulb-
ous. The  bulbs  are  numerous,  and  inclosed  in  a  common  membranous
covering,  from  the  base  of  which  the  fibers  that  constitute  the  proper
root  descend.  The  stem  is  simple,  and  is  about  two  feet  high.  The
leaves  are  long,  acute,  flat,  distichous,  glaucous,  channeled  above,
sheathing  the  lower  half  of  the  stem.  At  the  termination  of  the  stem
is  a  cluster  of  flowers  and  bulbs  mingled  together,  and  inclosed  in  a
calyptriform,  horned  spathe,  which  opens  on  one  side  and  withers.
Umbels  bulbiferous.  The  flowers,  if  any,  are  pink,  red,  or  whitish,
rather  longer  than  the  stamens  and  appear  in  July.  Perianth,  deeply
six-parted,  segments  mostly  spreading,  permanent,  equal ;  ovary  angu-
lar ;  stigma  simple,  acute ;  capsule  three-lobed.  It  is  a  native  of  Sicily,
but  cultivated  in  various  sections  of  the  country.

History. — The  part  employed  is  the  bulb,  which  is  usually  dug  up,
with  a  portion  of  the  stem  attached,  and  after  having  been  dried  in  the
sun,  are  tied  together  in  bunches.  They  lose  nine  parts  in  weight  by
drying,  while  their  sensible  properties  are  but  little  diminished.  They
possess  a  disagreeable,  pungent  odor,  and  an  acrid,  bitter  taste,  both  of
which  are  owing  to  the  presence  of  an  essential  oil  which  is  very  vola-
tile. The  oil  is  of  a  yellow  color,  exceedingly  pungent  odor,  and  strong
acrid  taste;  is  heavier  than  water,  contains  sulphur,  and  irritates  or  even
vesicates  the  skin  when  applied  to  it.  Water,  alcohol,  or  vinegar,
extract  the  virtues  of  garlic.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  diuretic,  expectorant,  and  rubefa-
cient. Used  as  a  medicine,  and  for  culinary  purposes.  When  taken
13


194  Materia  Medica.

internally,  the  active  principle  is  speedily  absorbed,  and,  penetrating  the
system,  becomes  sensible  in  the  breath  and  various  secretions,  and  is
said  to  produce  the  same  effects,  when  applied  externally.  Taken
internally,  garlic  quickens  the  circulation,  excites  the  nervous  system,
promotes  expectoration  in  a  debilitated  state  of  the  vessels  of  the  lungs,
produces  diuresis  or  diaphoresis  according  as  the  patient  is  kept  cool  or
warm,  and  acts  as  a  tonic  and  carminative  to  the  stomach.  It  has  been
beneficially  used  in  coughs,  catarrhs,  hooping-cough,  hoarseness,  worms,
and  calculous  affections  during  the  absence  of  inflammation.  It  is  very
useful  in  the  nervous  and  spasmodic  coughs  of  children.  The  juice,
given  in  the  dose  of  a  few  drops,  is  said  to  check  nervous  vomiting ;  and
mixed  with  olive  or  sweet-almond  oil,  is  recommended  in  atonic  deaf-
ness. Garlic  juice,  sweet  oil  of  almonds,  and  glycerin,  of  each,  equal
parts,  mixed,  and  dropped  in  the  ear,  has  cured  several  cases  of  deaf-
ness. Externally,  the  bruised  bulbs,  applied  as  a  poultice  above  the
pubes,  has  restored  the  action  of  the  bladder,  in  cases  of  retention  of
urine,  from  debility  of  that  organ.  In  the  same  shape,  it  may  be
applied  to  the  spine  and  chest  of  infants  in  pneumonia;  to  the  feet  and
legs,  as  a  revulsive,  in  disorders  of  the  head,  and  febrile  complaints  of
children ;  and  has  been  employed  as  a  resolvent  in  indolent  tumors,
stimulating  the  absorbents  to  action.  It  may  be  taken  whole,  or  the
juice  may  be  administered  mixed  with  sugar.  The  dose  of  the  fresh
bulb  is  from  half  a  drachm  to  two  drachms ;  of  the  juice,  half  a
drachm.  If  used  too  largely,  or  in  excited  states  of  the  system,  it  is
apt  to  produce  flatulence,  gastric  irritation,  hemorrhoids,  headache,  and
fever.


ALLIUM  CEPA.

Onion.

Nat.  Ord. — Liliacea?. Tribe—  Scillese. Sex. Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE BULB.

Description. — The  onion  is  a  biennial  plant,  the  root  bearing  a  tuni-
cated  bulb,  compressed,  or  round,  or  oblong  in  figure,  invested  with  a
shining,  thin,  dry  membrane.  The  scape,  which  appears  the  second
year,  is  from  two  to  four  feet  high,  straight,  naked,  smooth,  stout,  fistu-
lous, bearing  at  the  top  a  large,  round  umbel  of  greenish- white  flowers,
and  swelling  toward  its  base.  The  leaves  are  fistulous,  terete,  distichous,
glaucous,  acute,  shorter  than  the  stem.  Spathe  reflexed,  generally
longer  than  the  lower  flowers.  Umbels  large,  regular,  compact,  many-
flowered,  not  bulbiferous.  Pedicels  about  an  inch  long,  thickened  at  the
point. Stamens  nearly  twice  as  long  as  the  perianth.


Alntts  Rubra.  195

History. — The  onion  is  supposed  to  be  a  native  of  Hungary,  but  is
now  found  over  the  whole  civilized  world.  The  bulbs  are  of  various
shapes  and  sizes,  are  composed  of  concentric  fleshy  and  succulent  lay-
ers, and  according  to  the  variety  are  reddish,  yellowish,  or  white.  They
have,  in  a  high  degree,  the  peculiar  pungent  odor  of  the  plant,  with  a
sweetish  and  acrid  taste.  It  contains  a  white  acrid  volatile  oil  holding
sulphur  in  solution,  albumen,  much  uncrystallizable  sugar  and  mucilage,
phosphoric  acid  both  free  and  combined  with  lime,  acetic  acid,  citrate
of  lime,  and  lignin.  The  expressed  juice  is  susceptible  of  the  vinous
fermentation.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  onion  is  stimulant,  diuretic,  expectorant,
and  rubefacient ;  used  moderately  it  increases  the  appetite,  and  promotes
digestion,  but  in  large  quantities  it  is  apt  to  occasion  flatulence,  gastric
uneasiness,  and  febrile  excitement.  The  juice,  mixed  Avith  sugar,  forms
a  pleasant  syrup,  useful  in  coughs,  catarrhs,  and  croup,  to  be  given  in
the  absence  of  much  inflammatory  action.  Roasted  and  split,  it  is  occa-
sionally employed  as  an  emollient  cataplasm  to  boils  and  other  suppu-
rating tumors.  In  dropsy  and  gravel,  a  saturated  tincture  made  with  good
gin,  has  been  recommended.  Boiling  deprives  the  onion  of  its  essential
oil,  and  it  then  becomes  a  mild  esculent,  much  used  as  food.


ALNUS  RUBRA.
Tag  Alder.
Nat.  Ord. — Betulaceaa. Sex.  Syst. — Moncecia  Tetrandria.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  plant  is  the  Alnus  Serrulata  of  Aiton  and  Willde-
now,  and  is  known  by  the  names  of  Smooth  Alder,  and  Common  Alder.  It
is  a  well-known  shrub  growing  in  clumps,  and  forming  thickets  on  the
borders  of  ponds  and  rivers,  and  in  swamps.  The  stems  are  numerous,
rather  straight,  and  from  six  to  fifteen  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are
obovate,  acuminate,  doubly  serrulate  with  minute  teeth,  thickish,
smooth  and  green  on  both  sides,  strongly  veined,  the  veins  and  their
axils  being  hairy  beneath,  from  two  to  four  inches  long,  by  two-thirds  as
wide,  and  on  petioles  one-half  or  one-third  of  an  inch  long.  The  sti-
pules are  elliptical  and  obtuse.  Aments  two  or  three  inches  long,  slender,
pendulous,  fascicled  at  the  ends  of  the  branches  ;  fertile  aments  short,
thick,  dark-brown,  persistent,  ovoid-oblong,  several  together  a  little
below  the  sterile  one. Stamens  four. Fruit  ovate.

History. — This  shrub  blossoms  in  March  and  April,  bearing  flowers
of  a  reddish-green  color.  The  bark  is  the  part  used  and  imparts  its
properties  to  boiling  water.


196  Materia  Medica.

Properties  and  Uses.  — Tag  Alder  Bark  is  alterative,  emetic,  and
astringent.  A  decoction  or  extract  of  it  is  useful  in  scrofula,  secondary-
syphilis,  and  several  forms  of  cutaneous  disease.  The  inner  bark  of  the
root  is  emetic  ;  and  a  decoction  of  the  cones  is  said  to  be  astringent,  and
useful  in  hematuria,  and  other  hemorrhages.  An  excellent  ophthalmic
powder  is  made  by  boring  a  hole  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  diame-
ter, lengthwise,  through  a  stout  piece  of  a  limb  of  tag  alder.  Fill  the
opening  with  finely -powdered  salt,  and  close  it  at  each  end.  Put  it  into
hot  ashes,  and  let  it  remain  till  the  tag  is  almost  all  charred,  (three  or
four  days,)  then  split  it  open,  take  out  the  salt,  powder,  and  keep  it  in  a
vial.  To  use  it,  blow  some  of  the  powder  in  the  eye,  through  a  quill.
An  article  named  Alnuine  is  said  to  have  been  obtained  from  this  plant,
which  possesses  alterative,  tonic,  and  astringent  properties,  and  is  recom-
mended in  herpes,  syphilis,  scorbutus,  scrofula,  impetigo,  etc.,  in  doses
of  one  to  three  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day.  Likewise  an  essen-
tial agent,  Alnuin,  for  the  same  purpose.  We  have  not  been  advised  of
the  manner  in  which  these  agents  are  prepared,  and  therefore  can  say
but  little  concerning  them.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Alnus  .  Infusum  Alnus.


ALOE SPICATA.

Aloes.
Nat.  Orel. — Liliacese. Sex. Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

INSPISSATED JUICE OF THE LEAVES.

Description. — The  Aloe  Spicata,  or  Spiked  Aloe,  is  a  native  of  South
Africa,  growing  near  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  sandy  soil.  The  stem
is  woody,  round,  from  three  to  four  feet  high,  about  five  inches  in  diam-
eter, and  leafy  at  the  summit  ;  the  leaves  are  thick,  fleshy,  spreading,
subverticillate,  about  two  feet  long,  broad  at  the  base,  gradually  narrow-
ing to  the  point,  channeled  or  grooved  on  their  upper  surface,  remotely
teethed  upon  their  edges  ;  their  'parenchyma  almost  colorless.  Spike  a
foot  long,  very  compact,  with  horizontal  and  campanulate  flowers,  of  a
scarlet  color,  which  contain  a  large  quantity  of  purplish  honey  juice.
Beneath  each  flower  is  a  broad,  ovate,  acute  bracte,  of  a  white  color,
with  three  green  streaks,  and  nearly  as  long  as  the  corolla.  The  three
inner  petals  are  ovate,  obtuse,  white,  with  a  triple  green  line,  and
broader  than  the  three  outer,  which  otherwise  resemble  them.  The  sta-
mens are  much  longer  than  the  perianth.

Aloe  Socotrina,  is  said  to  be  a  native  of  the  island  of  Socotra;  its  stem
is  erect,  woody,  a  foot  and  a  half  high,  or  more,  naked  below,  where  it


Aloe  Spicata.  197

is  strongly  marked  with  the  scars  of  former  leaves  ;  the  leaves  are  at  the
summit  of  the  stem,  amplexicaul,  green,  ascending,  ensiform,  rather
concave  on  their  upper  surface,  convex  beneath,  and  curved  inward  at
the  point,  and  marked  with  numerous  small,  white  marginal  serratures  ;
the  parenchyma  abounding  in  a  bright  brownish-yellow  juice.  Raceme
cylindrical,  unbranched  ;  the  flowers  are  scarlet  at  the  base,  pale  in  the
center,  and  greenish  at  the  point.  The  stamens  are  unequal,  three  of
them  being  longer  than  the  corolla.

Aloe  Vulgaris,  is  a  native  of  south-eastern  Europe,  and  north  Africa,
and  is  cultivated  in  Italy,  Sicily,  Malta,  and  the  West  Indies.  It  has  a
short,  simple,  cylindrical  and  woody  stem ;  the  leaves  being  fleshy,  am-
plexicaul, first  spreading,  then  ascending,  lanceolate,  glaucous-green,  a
little  mottled  with  darker  spots,  flat  on  the  upper  surface,  convex
beneath,  and  armed  with  hard  reddish  spines,  distant  from  each  other,
and  perpendicular  to  the  margin ;  the  parenchyma  is  slightly  colored
brown,  and  very  distinct  from  the  tough  leathery  cuticle.  The  scape  is
axillary,  glaucous-reddish,  branched;  spike  cylindrical-ovate.  The
flowers  at  first  erect,  then  spreading,  afterward  pendulous,  yellow  and
not  longer  than  the  stamens.

The  juice  obtained  by  expression  from  the  parenchyma  is  mucilagi-
nous, and  possesses  but  little  medicinal  virtue ;  the  proper  aloetic  juice
is  obtained  from  the  inter- cellular  passages  found  between  the  longitu-
dinal vessels  which  are  situated  beneath  the  epidermis  of  the  leaves,
and  which  juice  may  be  readily  obtained  by  cutting  these  in  a  transverse
direction.

History. — There  are  several  species  of  Aloe,  from  which  the  officinal
drug  is  obtained — the  A.  Spicata,  A.  Socotrina,  A.  Vulgaris,  etc.,
which  grow  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  the  first  at  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  furnishing  the  Cape  Aloes  ;  the  second  in  the  island  of  Socotra,
from  whence  is  taken  the  Socotrine  Aloes ;  and  the  third,  in  the  East
and  West  Indies,  Italy,  Spain,  Barbary  coast,  etc.,  which  furnish  the
Barbadoes  Aloes.

Cape  Aloes,  when  freshly  broken,  has  a  very  dark  olive  or  greenish
color,  approaching  to  black,  with  a  smooth,  bright  surface,  and  translu-
cent edges.  The  powder  is  of  a  fine  greenish-yellow  color.  It  has  a
strong,  disagreeable,  but  not  nauseous  odor,  and  a  peculiar  bitter  taste.
It  is  sometimes  confounded  with  the  Socotrine  Aloes,  especially  the
finer  sorts.  Socotrine  Aloes,  is  in  pieces  of  a  yellowish,  or  reddish-
brown  color  ;  its  interior  surface  lighter  than  its  exterior,  but  rendered
darker  by  exposure  to  the  air.  Its  surface  is  somewhat  glossy,  and  its
fracture  smooth  and  conchoidal,  with  sharp,  semi-transparent  edges.  Its
powder  is  bright-yellow.  The  odor  is  peculiar,  not  unpleasant,  -with  a
bitter,  disagreeable,  but  aromatic  taste.  It  is  the  best  article  for  medi-
cinal purposes. Barbadoes  Aloes,  is  very  little  used,  except  in  veteri-


198  Materia  Medica.

nary  practice. Beside  these,  we  have  several  other  varieties,  useless  to
name  here.

Aloes  yields  its  active  matter  to  cold  water,  and  when  good,  is  almost
wholly  dissolved  by  boiling  water  ;  but  the  inert  portion,  or  apoihiim  of
Berzelius,  is  deposited  as  the  solution  cools.  It  is  also  soluble  in  alco-
hol, rectified  or  diluted.  Long  boiling  impairs  its  purgative  properties,
by  converting  the  aloesin  into  insoluble  apotheme.  The  alkalies,  their
carbonates,  and  soap,  alter,  in  some  measure,  its  chemical  nature,  and
render  it  of  easier  solution.  It  is  inflammable,  swelling  up  and  decrepi-
tating when  it  burns,  and  giving  out  a  thick  smoke  which  has  the  odor
of  the  drug.  Those  substances  only  are  incompatible  with  aloes,  which
alter  or  precipitate  the  aloesin,  as  the  insoluble  portion  is  without  action
upon  the  system.  Its  aqueous  solution  keeps  a  long  time,  even  for
several  months,  without  exhibiting  moldiness  or  putrescency  ;  but  it
becomes  ropy,  and  acquires  the  character,  which  it  did  not  previously  pos-
sess, of  affording  an  abundant  precipitate  with  the  infusion  of  galls.
Analysis  has  detected  in  aloes,  85  parts  in  100  of  bitter  extractive,
called  aloesin,  2  of  ulmate  of  potassa,  2  of  sulphate  of  lime,  0.25  of
o-allic  acid,  8  of  albumen,  and  traces  of  carbonates  of  potassa  and  lime,
and  phosphate  of  lime.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  purgative,  emmenagogue,  and  anthel-
mintic. In  doses  of  from  half  a  grain  to  a  grain,  two  or  three  times  a
day,  it  exerts  a  decided  tonic  influence,  but  is  seldom  resorted  to  for  this
purpose.  As  a  laxative  and  purgative,  its  applications  are  unbounded  ;  it
acts  more  especially  on  the  muscular  coat  of  the  large  intestines,  rather
increasing  their  peristaltic  motion,  than  effecting  copious  thin  or  watery
discharges  ;  and  from  its  tendency  to  irritate  the  rectum,  especially
when  frequently  repeated,  it  is  apt  to  give  rise  to  hemorrhoids,  or  aggra-
vate them  when  already  existing.  When  applied  endermically  to  an
ulcer  or  blistered  surface,  it  purges  as  effectually  and  promptly  as  when
taken  into  the  stomach  ;  ten  grains  used  thus,  will  purge  in  from  six  to
ten  hours.  It  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  no  action  on  the  jejunum
or  ileum ;  and  some  imagine  it  to  influence  the  duodenum,  and  especially
the  mouths  of  the  biliary  ducts,  causing  an  increased  flow  of  bile ;  stim-
ulating the  intestinal  canal,  when  that  secretion  is  suspended  as  in  jaun-
dice. Its  emmenagogue  influence  is  attributed  by  some  to  a  sympathetic
extension  of  this  irritation  from  the  rectum  to  the  uterus  ;  but  there  is  no
doubt  that  it  exerts  a  direct  influence  on  this  organ,  independent  of  the
intestinal  irritability.  It  is  said  that  one  to  three  grains  of  extract  of
hyoscyamus,  or  hops,  or  two  grains  of  ipecacuanha,  mixed  with  the
aloetic  dose,  will  prevent  its  irritating  effect  on  the  lower  intestines.  An
increase  of  the  quantity  of  aloes  beyond  the  medium  dose,  is  not  attended
by  a  corresponding  increase  of  effect.  Aloes  has  been  efficacious  in
constipation,  dyspepsia,  and  ascarides  ;  in  this  last  instance,  being  used


Aloesin.  199

in  form  of  injection,  ten  grains  to  three  ounces  of  water,  for  children.
In  chlorosis  and  amenorrhea  it  has  often  proved  serviceable,  and  is  used
for  this  purpose,  in  various  combinations.  In  cases  of  delicate  females,
with  loss  of  appetite,  torpor  of  the  bowels,  and  suffering  with  suppres-
sion of  the  menses,  the  following  has  been  recommended  for  the  pur-
pose of  exciting  proper  ovarian  or  uterine  action :  Take  of  best  aloes,
pulverized,  asafcetida,  pulverized,  of  each,  half  a  drachm,  cantharides,
pulverized,  twenty  grains ;  mix  and  rub  well  together  with  a  little  soap,
and  divide  into  twenty  pills.  Of  these  give  from  one  to  three,  three
times  a  day.  If  the  patient  be  very  feeble,  some  of  the  salts  of  iron
may  also  be  added.  Injections  of  aloes,  composed  of  from  ten  to  thirty
grains  dissolved  in  two  or  three  fluidounces  of  water,  and  thrown  up  the
rectum  daily,  and  continued  for  a  week  previous  to  the  menstrual  period,
have  sometimes  proved  effectual.

Aloes  should  never  be  given  in  inflammatory  diseases,  in  irritable,
plethoric  habits,  in  gastritis,  enteritis,  where  piles  are  present,  to  females
liable  to  sudden  uterine  evacuations,  nor  during  pregnancy.  In  hemor-
rhoids it  may  be  given  when  modified  by  combination.  Soap,  or  an
alkaline  carbonate,  lessens  its  irritant  action.  The  union  of  other  purga-
tives with  aloes,  often  modifies  its  tendency  to  irritate  the  rectum.  One
grain  of  aloes  with  two  or  three  grains  of  sulphate  of  iron,  will  also
modify  this  action,  and  will  produce  as  much  effect  as  two  or  three  grains
of  aloes.  As  a  cathartic,  aloes  will  be  found  useful  in  habitual  constipa-
tion from  intestinal  torpor,  jaundice,  scrofula,  hypochondriasis,  and  where
there  is  a  tendency  to  cerebral  congestion.  Dose  of  aloes,  is  from  two
to  ten,  or  even  twenty  grains ;  and  the  most  convenient  form  of  admin-
istration is  that  of  pill.  It  enters  as  a  constituent  into  a  great  number
of  useful  compound  remedies.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Aloes  Compositum;  Enema  Aloes  Composita;
Extractum  Colocynthidis  Compositum ;  Pilulae  Aloes  Compositse  ;  Tinc-
tura  Aloes  ;  Tinctura  Aloes  et  Myrrhae.


ALOESIN.

Bitter  Extractive  of  Aloes.

Preparation. — Exhaust  powdered  Aloes  with  cold  water;  evaporate
the  infusion  one-half ;  add  an  excess  of  acetate  of  lead,  which  precipitates
the  gallate,  ulmate  and  albuminate  of  that  metal ;  pour  into  the  clear
liquor  solution  of  ammonia,  which  gives  a  yellowish-orange  colored  pre-
cipitate, consisting  of  oxide  of  lead  combined  with  Aloesin,  and  which
must  be  separated  and  washed  with  boiling  water,  and  then  decomposed


200  Materia Medica.

by  a  current  of  sulphureted  hydrogen,  but  out  of  contact  with  atmos-
pheric air.  Sulphuret  of  lead  is  deposited,  and  a  colorless  liquid  floats
above  it,  which  must  be  decanted,  and  evaporated  in  vacuo.

History. — Thus  prepared,  Aloesin  is  in  colorless,  or  pale-yellow  scales,
like  a  varnish,  without  any  sign  of  crystallization,  of  a  powerful  aloetic
taste,  soluble  in  cold  water,  alcohol,  and  especially  weak  spirit,  sparing-
ly soluble  in  ether,  and  not  at  all  in  fixed  or  volatile  oils.  Its  aqueous
solution,  when  exposed  to  the  air,  owing  to  oxidation,  becomes  dark-red;
it  is  not  precipitated  by  iron  salts,  acetate  of  lead,  isinglass  solution,  or
infusion  of  galls.  Heat,  exposure,  and  moisture  convert  it  into  an  in-
soluble, inert  oxygenated  extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — Same  as  aloes.  Eight  grains  of  aloesin  being
equal  to  ten  of  Socotrine,  and  fifty  of  Cape  aloes.


ALOINE.

The  Purgative  Principle  of  Barbadoes  Aloes.

Preparation. — Pulverize  the  aloes  with  sand,  and  then  treat  it  with
cold  water  ;  strain  off  the  liquid,  and  evaporate  it  in  vacuo  to  a  syrupy
consistence — set  it  aside  for  a  few  days,  when  it  will  be  filled  with  a
mass  of  brownish-yellow  granular  crystals.  This  is  impure  Alo'ine.
To  remove  the  brown  matter  associated  with  it,  re-crystallize  it  repeated-
ly from  warm  water,  until  the  crystals  are  of  a  sulphur-yellow.  In
making  these  solutions,  the  temperature  of  the  water  should  not  exceed
150°  F. At  212°  Alo'ine  oxidizes  rapidly,  and  is  decomposed.

History. — When  pure,  it  crystallizes  in  stellated  groups  of  small  pris-
matic needles,  whose  purity  is  shown  by  the  color,  which  should  not
deepen  by  exposure  to  the  air  in  desiccation.  It  is  completely  neutral,
sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water,  but  readily  in  warm,  with  a  taste,  at
first  sweetish,  but  soon  becoming  intensely  bitter.  Its  solutions  in  the
alkalies  and  their  carbonates  is  of  an  orange-yellow,  and  the  liquid
absorbs  oxygen  upon  contact  with  the  atmosphere,  which  rapidly  deepens
its  color.  Boiled  with  alkalies  or  acids,  it  is  speedily  transformed  into  a
brown  resin.  Corrosive  sublimate,  nitrate  of  silver,  or  neutral  acetate
of  lead,  do  not  cause  its  precipitation  ;  concentrated  subacetate  of  lead
produces  a  precipitate  of  an  intense  yellow,  soluble  in  excess  of  water,
and  becoming  deeper  colored  on  exposure.  Cold  fuming  nitric  acid  dis-
solves it,  without  disengaging  gas;  forming  a  reddish-brown  liquid  ;  to
which,  if  sulphuric  acid  be  added  in  great  excess,  a  yellow  pulverulent
body  is  thrown  down,  which  explodes  when  heated.  By  dry  distillation,
alo'ine  furnishes  a  slightly  aromatic,  volatile  oil,  and  a  quantity  of  resin-
ous substance. It  forms  crystallized  compounds  with  bromine,  but  not


Alpinia Cardamomum.  201

with  chlorine,  although  it  combines  equally  well  with  this  latter.  Bro-
mine, added  to  a  cold  aqueous  solution  of  alo'i'ne,  instantly  forms  a  yellow
precipitate,  while  the  supernatant  liquid  assumes  a  very  acid  reaction,
consequent  upon  the  formation  of  hydrobromic  acid.  By  dissolving  the
precipitate  in  warm  alcohol,  and  cooling  the  solution,  bromated  aloine  is
obtained  in  brilliant  yellow  needles,  grouped  in  stars.

Properties  and  Uses. — Same  as  aloes. Dose  of  alo'ine,  one-fourth  of
a  grain  to  a  grain.


ALPINIA  CARDAMOMUM.
Cardamom.

Nat. Ord. — Zingiberacea;,  Lindley. Scitamineas, Brown. Sex.  Syst. —
Monandria  Monogynia.

THE FRUIT. CARDAMOM SEED.

Description. — Alpinia  Cardamomum  has  a  tuberous  horizontal  root  or
rhizoma,  with  numerous  fleshy  fibers,  and  sending  up  from  eight  to
twenty  erect,  simple,  smooth,  jointed,  green  and  shining,  perennial  stems,
which  rise  from  six  to  ten  feet  in  night,  and  bear  alternate,  spongy,
sheathing,  leaves.  The  leaves  are  bifarious,  subsessile  on  their  sheaths,
elliptical-lanceolate,  fine-pointed,  somewhat  villous  above,  sericeous  un-
derneath, entire,  with  strong  midribs,  and  short  footstalks,  from  one
to  two  feet  long,  and  from  one  to  five  inches  broad.  The  sheaths
are  slightly  villous,  with  a  rounded  ligula  rising  above  the  mouth.
There  are  from  three  to  five  scapes  proceeding  from  the  base  of  the
stem,  which  are  from  one  to  two  feet  long,  lying  upon  the  ground,
fiexuose  and  jointed ;  the  branches  or  racemes  alternate,  one  from  each
joint  of  the  scape,  sub-erect,  and  two  or  three  inches  long.  Bracts  soli-
tary, oblong,  smooth,  membranous,  striated,  sheathing,  one  at  each  joint
of  the  scape.  Flowers  alternate,  short-stalked,  solitary  at  each  joint  of
the  racemes,  opening  in  succession  as  the  racemes  lengthen.  Calyx
monophyllous,  funnel-shaped,  three-toothed  at  the  mouth,  about  three
quarters  of  an  inch  long,  striated  with  fine  veins,  permanent.  Tube  of
corolla  slender,  as  long  as  the  calyx  ;  limb  double,  exterior  of  three,
oblong,  concave,  nearly  equal,  pale  greenish-white  divisions  ;  inner-lip
obovate,  much  longer  than  the  exterior  divisions,  somewhat  curled  at
the  edge,  with  the  apex  slightly  three-lobed,  marked  chiefly  in  the
center  with  purple  violet  stripes.  Filament  short,  erect.  Anther  double,
emarginate.  Ovary  oval,  smooth.  Style  slender.  Stigma  funnel-
shaped.  Capsule  oval,  somewhat  three-sided,  size  of  a  small  nut-
meg, three-celled,  and  three-valved  ;  seeds  pale-brown,  coriaceous,  nu-
merous.


202  Materia Medica.

History^—  This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  mountains  of  Malabar,  grow-
ing spontaneously  in  the  forests  after  the  removal  of  the  undergrowth.
The  fruit,  which  is  the  officinal  part,  is  not  obtained  until  at  the  end  of
the  fourth  year;  it  is  a  three-celled  capsule,  containing  numerous  seeds.
The  seeds  constitute  about  74  parts  by  weight  in  the  hundred  of  the
fruit  or  capsules  received  in  commerce.  They  are  small,  irregular,  an-
gular, rough,  of  a  brown  color,  and  are  easily  pulverized  ;  their  odor  is
fragrant,  and  their  taste  warm,  slightly  pungent,  and  highly  aromatic.
The  capsules  are  from  three  to  nine  lines  long,  three-sided  with  rounded
angles,  ovate-oblong,  of  a  yellowish-white  color,  and  three  or  four  lines
in  thickness  ;  they  are  commonly  rejected,  although  they  are  slightly
aromatic.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  the  virtues  of  the  seed,  which  con-
tain a  volatile  oil,  of  an  agreeable,  penetrating  odor,  and  a  strong
aromatic,  camphoraceous,  slightly  bitter  taste.  Its  specific  gravity  is
0.945.  It  undergoes  a  change,  soon  becoming  deprived  of  its  odor  and
taste.  The  oil  obtained  by  percolation  of  ether  through  the  powdered
seeds,  and  evaporation  of  the  ether,  is  of  a  light  greenish-brown  color,
consists  of  volatile  and  fixed  oils,  and  keeps  better  than  the  oil  procured
by  distillation.  The  seeds  should  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  capsules
until  wanted,  as  by  this  means  their  aromatic  properties  are  the  best
preserved.

Properties  and  Uses. — Cardamom  seeds  are  aromatic,  stomachic,  and
carminative,  chiefly  used  in  flatulency,  and  as  an  adjuvant  or  corrective
in  compound  preparations. Dose  from  ten  grains  to  two  drachms.

Off.  Prep.  —  Syrupus  Stillingiee  Compositus;  Tinctura  Cardamomi ;
Tinctura  Cardamomi  Composita.

ALTHAEA  OFFICINALIS.

Marsh-Mallow.
Nat. Orel. — Malvaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Monadelphia  Polyandria.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  Althaea  officinalis  is  a  herbaceous,  perennial,  hoary
green  herb,  peculiarly  soft  and  downy,  with  line  starry  pubescence,  and
having  a  tap-shaped,  rather  woody,  perpendicular  branching  root.  The
stems  are  several,  erect,  from  two  to  five  feet  in  hight,  simple,  round,
branched  and  leafy  toward  the  summit,  and  tough  and  pliant.  The
leaves  are  alternate,  petiolate,  nearly  cordate  at  the  base,  oblong-ovate
and  obscurely  three  to  five-lobed  above,  various  in  breadth,  plaited,  five-
ribbed,  unequally  serrated,  somewhat  angular,  soft  and  pliable,  and
clothed  on  both  sides  with  a  soft  velvety  down.  The  flowers  are  termi-
nal, in  very  short,  dense  axillary  panicles,  rarely  solitary,  and  of  a  deli-
cate, uniform,  blush  color. The  corolla  has  five  spreading,  obcordate


Althaea  Officinalis.  203

petals,  of  a  pale-purplish  color  ;  the  fruit  consists  of  numerous  capsules
united  in  a  compact  circular  form,  eacli  containing  a  single  seed.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  salt  marshes  and  wet  situations  in  many
parts  of  Europe,  and  has  been  cultivated  in  several  parts  of  (his  country.
It  flowers  from  July  to  September.  Our  shops  are  supplied  nearly  ex-
clusively from  Europe.  The  whole  plant  abounds  in  mucilage.  The
root  is  in  pieces  of  three,  four  or  more  inches  in  length,  round,  nearly
as  thick  as  the  finger,  sometimes  split,  white,  downy,  with  a  peculiar
faint  smell,  a  mild,  mucilaginous,  sweetish  taste,  and  a  short,  somewhat
fibrous  fracture.  It  contains  a  large  proportion  of  mucilage,  which  is
extracted  by  cold  or  hot  water,  and  the  solution  decomposes  if  allowed
to  stand  any  great  length  of  time.  Those  pieces  which  are  plump  and
but  slightly  fibrous  should  be  preferred,  while  those  should  be  rejected
which  are  woody,  moldy,  discolored,  of  a  sour  or  musty  smell,  or  of  a
sourish  taste.

The  Hibiscus  Palustris,  (or  H.  Moscheutos)  Marsh  Hibiscus,  of  this
country,  has  a  root  very  much  resembling  that  of  the  Marsh-mallow,
possesses  exactly  the  same  properties,  and  may  be  as  effectually  used.
It  is  a  tall,  showy,  perennial  plant,  growing  in  salt  marshes,  near  salt
springs,  and  on  wet  prairies,  and  flowers  in  August.  The  stem  is  sim-
ple, erect,  herbaceous,  round,  downy,  and  from  four  to  six  feet  inhight.
The  leaves  are  from  four  to  six  inches,  by  three  to  four  inches,  often
with  two  lateral  lobes,  ovate,  obtusely  dentate,  and  hoary -tomentoae
beneath.  The  flowers  are  larger  than  those  of  the  hollyhock,  rose-col-
ored, purple  in  the  center.  Peduncles  long,  axillary,  or  connected  with
the  petiole,  usually  distinct  from  it,  but  sometimes  united  with  it,  and
jointed  above  the  middle. Styles  one  inch  longer  than  the  stamens.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  roots  of  each  of  the  above  plants  are
demulcent  and  diuretic,  and  may  be  used  indiscriminately,  the  one  for
the  other.  They  will  be  found  valuable,  in  the  form  of  decoction,  in
diseases  of  the  mucous  membranes,  as  hoarseness,  catarrh,  pneumonia,
gonorrhea,  vesical  catarrh,  renal  irritation,  acute  dysentery  and  diarrhea.
In  strangury,  inflammation  of  the  bladder,  hematuria,  retention  of  urine,
some  forms  of  gravel,  and  indeed  in  nearty  every  affection  of  the  kidney
and  bladder,  their  use  will  be  found  advantageous.  I  make  much  use
of  them  combined  with  equal  parts  of  spearmint,  in  urinary  derange-
ments. They  are  likewise  efficacious  in  gastro-intestinal  irritation  and
inflammation.  Externally,  they  are  very  useful  in  the  form  of  poultice,
to  discuss  painful  inflammatory  tumors,  and  swellings  of  every  kind,
whether  the  consequence  of  wounds,  bruises,  burns,  scalds,  or  poisons;
and  have,  when  thus  applied,  a  happy  effect  in  preventing  the  occurrence
of  gangrene.  As  a  mucilaginous  demulcent  only,  the  Althaea  Rosea,  or
hollyhock  may  be  substituted.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Altheeae  ;  Infusum  Althseae.


204  Materia Medica.

ALUMEN.
Alum. Sulphate  of  Alumina  and  Potassa.

History. — Officinal  Alum  is  a  double  salt,  consisting  of  the  tersulphate
of  alumina,  united  with  sulphate  of  potassa.  It  is  occasionally  manu-
factured from  earths  which  contain  it  ready  formed,  but  most  generally
from  minerals  called  Alum  Ores,  the  principal  of  which  is  the  alum-stone.
This  is  calcined  and  exposed  to  the  air  for  three  months,  being  frequently
sprinkled  with  water,  in  order  to  soften  it.  Then  it  is  lixiviated,  and
crystallized  by  evaporation.

Alum  is  a  white,  slightly  efflorescent  salt,  crystallized  in  regular  octa-
hedrons, with  a  sweetish  astringent  taste.  It  dissolves  in  fourteen  or
fifteen  times  its  weight  of  cold  water,  and  three-fourths  of  its  weight  of
boiling.  It  reddens  litmus.  When  heated  above  212°,  it  undergoes
the  aqueous  fusion  ;  and  if  the  heat  be  continued,  it  loses  its  water,
swells  up,  becomes  a  white,  opaque,  porous  mass,  and  is  converted  into
the  officinal  preparation  called  Dried  Alum,  (Ahanen  Exsiccatum).  It
is  incompatible  with  the  alkalies  and  their  carbonates,  lime  and  lime-
water,  magnesia  and  its  carbonates,  tartrate  of  potassa,  and  acetate  of
lead. Its  specific  gravity  is  1.71.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  ordinary  doses  of  ten  to  twenty  grains  every
three  or  four  hours,  in  solution,  syrup  or  molasses,  it  is  astringent  and
antispasmodic.  In  larger  doses  of  thirty  to  sixty  grains  every  three  or
four  hours,  it  is  purgative,  and  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  emetic.
As  an  astringent,  it  is  used  in  passive  hemorrhages,  colliquative  sweats,
diarrhea  attending  typhoid  fever,  diabetes  and  chronic  diarrhea  and
dysentery.  Also,  in  gleet  and  leucorrhea,  and  by  some  during  the
inflammatory  stage  of  gonorrhea,  in  solution  with  an  infusion  of  marsh-
mallow.  In  colica  pictonum  it  has  been  highly  extolled  as  a  purgative  ;
and  is  recommended  as  an  emetic  in  pseudo-membranous  croup.  As  an
antispasmodic,  it  has  been  found  useful  in  hooping-cough.  In  various
anginose  affections  it  has  been  successfully  applied  locally,  in  powder  or
solution,  also  as  a  gargle  in  sore-throat  and  relaxation  of  the  uvula,  as  a
wash  for  ptyalism,  and  as  an  injection  in  gleet  and  leucorrhea,  alone  or
conjoined  with  sulphate  of  zinc.  It  has  likewise  proved  very  useful  in
purulent  ophthalmia  of  infants,  and  in  the  latter  stages  of  conjunctival
inflammation.  In  colica  pictonum  it  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from
thirty  to  sixty  grains,  every  three  hours  ;  in  this  disease  it  allays  nausea
and  vomiting,  relieves  pain  and  flatulence,  and  opens  the  bowels  with
more  certainty  than  any  other  medicine.  It  is  frequently  applied  as  a
local  styptic  either  in  powder  or  solution,  in  epistaxis,  metrorrhagia,  and
to  check  the  bleeding  from  cut  surfaces  ;  it  may  be  applied  on  lint,  or
on  a  small  piece  of  sponge  if  used  in  solution.  From  four  to  ten  grains
of  alum  to  the  ounce  of  water,  is  of  sufficient  strength  for  a  collyrium.


Amaranthus  Hypochondriacus.  205

I  have  found  much  advantage  from  the  use  of  the  following  preparation
in  troublesome  cough,  especially  when  attended  with  tickling  or  irritation
of  the  fauces,  larynx,  etc.: — Take  of  a  saturated  solution  of  alum,  syrup
of  balsam  of  Tolu,  each  two  fiuidounces,  camphorated  tincture  of  opium
one  fluidounce  ;  mix.  The  dose  for  an  adult  is  a  tablespoonful  three  or
four  times  a  day,  or  whenever  the  cough  is  very  troublesome.  Several
practitioners  to  whom  I  have  recommended  the  preparation,  have  found
it  very  efficacious.

Alumen  Exsiccatum. — Dried  or  Burnt  Alum,  sometimes  called  Alu-
men Ustmn,  is  prepared  by  heating  alum,  until  ebullition  ceases,  and  it
becomes  dry.  It  is  principally  used  as  a  mild  escharotic,  to  destroy  fun-
gous flesh. It  differs  from  alum  only  in  the  absence  of  water.

Alum  Whey,  is  made  by  boiling  two  or  three  drachms  of  powdered
alum  in  a  pint  of  milk,  and  then  straining  off  the  thin  liquor.  It  may
be  given  internally,  in  diarrheas,  etc.,  in  doses  of  from  half  an  ounce  to
one  or  two  ounces.  Externally,  applied  over  the  eye  as  a  poultice,  it  is
very  serviceable  in  inflammations  of  that  organ.

Off.  Prep. — Alumen  Exsiccatum  ;  Cataplasma  Aluminis  ;  Lotio  Zinci
Compositum ;  Pulvis  Stypticus.


AMARANTHUS HYPOCHONDRIACUS.

Amaranth.

Nat.  Ord. — Amaranthaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Moncecia  Pentandria.

the  leaves.

Description. — Amaranthus  Hypochondriacus  is  an  annual  herb,  with
a  stout,  upright  stem,  and  growing  from  three  to  four  feet  high.  The
leaves  are  oblong,  lanceolate,  mucronate,  green  with  a  red-purple  spot,
or  tinged  with  purple ;  flowers  clustered  in  racemes,  and  of  a  bright-red
purple,  as  well  as  the  awl-shaped  bracts.  Racemes  pentandrous,  com-
pound, erect,  compact.  Stamens  five.  The  whole  plant  is  dark-red,  or
reddish-purple,  with  long  plume-like  clusters.

History. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Princes'  Feather,
Lovely  Bleeding,  Red  Cocks-comb,  etc.,  is  a  native  of  the  Middle  States,  and
is  cultivated  as  an  ornamental  plant  in  gardens.  It  bears  deep  bright-
red  flowers  in  August.  The  leaves,  which  are  the  parts  used,  are  also
red,  and  yield  their  virtues  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Amaranth  is  astringent.  The  decoction  drank
freely  is  highly  recommended  in  severe  menorrhagia,  and  has  also  been
found beneficial in diarrhea, dysentery, and hemorrhage from the


206  Materia Medica.

bowels.  It  has  likewise  been  used  as  a  local  application  in  ulceration
of  the  mouth  and  throat,  in  leucorrhea,  and  as  a  wash  to  foul,  indolent
ulcers.


AMBROSIA  TRIFIDA.

Tall  Ambrosia.

Nat.  Ord- — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Pentandria.

THE LEAVES.

Description.  —  Ambrosia  Trifida  is  variously  known  by  the  names
Horseweed,  Bitter-weed,  Great  Rag-weed,  Horse-cane,  Rich-weed,  etc.  It  is  a
rouo-h,  hairy,  herbaceous,  annual  plant,  with  an  erect,  branching,  fur-
rowed stem,  from  five  to  ten  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  from
four  to  seven  inches  broad,  scabrous  and  hairy,  with  three  large,  deep
lobes  which  are  oval,  lanceolate,  acuminate  and  closely  serrated ;  the
lower  leaves  are  often  five-lobed.  Petioles  narrowly-winged,  ciliate ;
racemes  often  paniculate.  Flowers  mean  and  obscure,  in  long  leafless
spikes,  axillary  and  terminal.  Fruit  (fertile  involucre)  turbinate-
obovoid,  with  a  short  conical  pointed  apex,  six-ribbed,  the  ribs  terminat-
ing in  as  many  cristate  tubercles.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  low  grounds  and  along  streams,  from
Canada  to  Georgia,  and  west  to  Louisiana  and  Arkansas,  bearing  green-
ish-yellow flowers  in  August.  It  is  much  in  use  among  farmers,  for  the
"slabbers"  in  horses,  effecting  a  cure  in  a  few  hours.  It  has  a  spicy,
pleasant,  aromatic  taste,  slightly  resembling  ginger,  and  imparts  its  pro-
perties to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plant  is  slightly  stimulant,  astringent,  and
antiseptic.  Useful  in  decoction  as  an  injection  in  leucorrhea,  prolapsus
uteri,  chronic  gonorrhea,  and  gleet;  also  valuable  as  a  collyrium,  in
ophthalmia,  and  as  a  wash  or  gargle — with  its  internal  use  also — in  the
sore  mouth  of  nurses.  It  will  be  found  an  excellent  application  to  mer-
curial, and  all  other  ulcers  of  a  fetid  or  gangrenous  character.  As  a
remedy  for  mercurial  salivation,  used  every  half  hour  as  a  wash,  it  is
said  to  be  prompt  and  efficacious.  Internally,  the  decoction  is  useful  in
fevers,  attended  with  a  disposition  to  putrescency,  diarrhea,  and  dysen-
tery. Dose  of  the  decoction  from  one  to  two  ounces.  Two  preparations
are  said  to  have  been  obtained  from  this  plant,  called  Ambrosine  and
Elatine.  The  former,  it  is  stated,  is  found  associated  with  elatine,  and
forms  beautiful  and  brilliant,  pearl-like,  prismatic  crystals  with  sulphuric
acid;  it  is  tasteless  and  inodorous,  and  can  be  retained  on  the  most
sensitive  stomach.  It  is  recommended  as  a  tonic,  diuretic,  and  altera-
tive in  dropsical  affections  with  great  loss  of  vitality ;  in  nephritis  and


Ammoniacum.  207

albuminuria ;  likewise  in  diabetes,  consumption,  scrofula,  etc.  Dose,
one  to  three  grains,  three  to  six  times  a  day.  If  this  agent  is  as  effec-
tual as  its  manufacturers  state,  it  will  become  one  of  the  most  valuable
in  the  Materia  Medica. — Elatlne  is  obtained  in  the  form  of  a  white,  floc-
culent  precipitate.  Propei-ties  and  dose  similar  to  ambrosine.  We  have
not  been  able  to  learn  the  mode  of  preparing  these  articles.

The  Ambrosia  Artemisi.efolia  (A.  Elatior),  Roman  Wormwood,  or
Rag-weed,  has  a  slender  stem,  rising  from  one  to  three  feet  high,  much
branched,  and  pubescent  when  young ;  the  leaves  are  opposite,  and  the
upper  alternate,  twice  pinnatifid,  smoothish  above,  paler  or  hoary
beneath ;  barren  flowers  small,  green,  in  terminal  racemes,  or  spikes
loosely  panicled;  the  fertile  ones  sessile  about  the  axils  of  the  upper
leaves ;  fruit  obovoid,  or  globular,  pointed,  armed  with  about  six  short
acute  teeth  or  spines.  It  is  sometimes  called  Hog-weed.  It  is  very  com-
mon in  all  our  fields,  and  would  probably  prove  fully  as  efficacious,  if
not  more  so  than  the  A.  Trifida.  It  is  highly  recommended  as  a  fomen-
tation in  recent  inflammation  from  wounds  or  injuries  of  any  kind.
Made  into  a  salve  by  bruising  the  green  leaves,  and  simmering  them  in
spirits  and  cream,  it  is  very  useful  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  and  some
forms  of  ulcer.


AMMONIACUM.

Gum  Ammoniac.

Nat.  Orel. — Apiacea?. Sex.  Syst. Pentandria  Digynia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE OF DOREMA AMMONIACUM.

Description. — The  Dorema  Ammoniacum  has  a  large,  perennial  root,
with  stems  rising  from  seven  to  ten  feet  high,  about  four  inches  in  cir-
cumference at  the  base,  clothed  with  a  glandular  down,  smooth,  glaucous,
resembling  Opoponax.  The  leaves  are  large,  petiolate,  somewhat  two-
pinnate.  Pinnae  in  three  pairs,  each  pair  somewhat  remote.  Leaflets
inciso-pinnatifid,  with  oblong,  mucronulate,  entire,  or  slightly-lobed
segments,  coriaceous.  Petiole  downy,  very  large,  and  sheathing  at  the
base.  Umbels  proliferous,  racemose;  partial  umbels  globose,  on  short
stalks,  often  arranged  in  a  spiked  manner.  General  and  partial  involucre
wanting.  Floivers  sessile,  immersed  in  wool.  Petals  white,  ovate,
reflexed  at  the  point.  Margin  of  calyx  with  five  minute,  acute,  mem-
branous teeth.  Disk  large,  fleshy,  cupshaped.  Stame?is  and  styles
yellow,  the  latter  complanate,  recurved  at  apex.  Stigmas  truncate.
Ovary  very  woolly.  Fruit  elliptical,  compressed,  with  a  broad  flat  edge;
mericarps  with  three  distinct,  filiform,  primary,  dorsal  ridges,  and  alter-
nating with  them  are  four  obtuse,  secondary  ridges.  Vitta?,  one  beneath
each  secondary  ridge,  one  beneath  each  of  the  broad  marginal  primary


208  Materia Medica.

ridges,  and  two  on  each  side  of  the  suture  of  the  commissure,  the  exter-
nal ones  being  very  minute.  The  above  description  is  gathered  from
those  given  by  Don,  Fontannier,  and  others.

History . — For  a  long  time  a  knowledge  of  the  plant  which  furnishes
the  Gum  Ammoniac  was  a  matter  of  doubt  and  uncertainty,  but  from
specimens  obtained  in  Persia,  by  Colonel  Wright,  and  examined  by  Dr.
David  Don,  it  was  ascertained  to  belong  to  a  genus,  Dorema,  and  not  to
the  Ferula,  as  was  formerly  supposed,  although  somewhat  allied  to  it.
The  Dorema  Ammoniacum  is  an  umbelliferous  plant,  growing  spontane-
ously in  various  Persian  provinces,  in  dry  plains  and  gravelly  soils.  In
the  month  of  May,  or  in  the  early  part  of  summer,  it  abounds  in  a  milky
juice,  which  flows  out  upon  the  slightest  puncture.  M.  Fontannier  states
that  it  exudes  spontaneously,  and  that  the  harvest  is  about  the  middle  of
June  ;  but  Captain  Hart  says  that  when  the  plant  is  mature,  it  is  pierced
in  all  directions  by  an  insect  of  the  beetle  kind  ;  the  juice  exudes  through
the  punctures  thus  made,  hardens  upon  the  surface,  and  when  dry  is
collected  by  the  natives.  It  is  still  supposed,  however,  to  be  sometimes  fur-
nished by  other  and  dissimilar  plants  of  Asiatic  as  well  as  African  growth.

Gum  Ammoniac  is  not  a  pure  gum,  but  a  gum-resin  ;  it  comes  to  us
in  tears,  or  in  aggregate  masses,  and  is  frequently  mixed  with  foreign
matters.  The  tears  are  the  preferable  parts  to  use  ;  the  purest  are  irreg-
ular in  shape,  more  or  less  globular,  opake,  yellowish  externally,  whitish
internally,  compact,  homogeneous,  brittle  when  cold,  and  breaking  with
a  conchoidal  shining  fracture.  The  masses  are  darker,  and  of  less
uniform  structure,  and  appear  when  broken,  to  be  composed  of  numer-
ous tears  imbedded  in  a  grayish  or  brownish  substance.  Ammoniac
has  a  peculiar  smell,  which  is  stronger  in  the  masses  than  in  the  tears ;
the  taste  is  bitter,  slightly  sweetish,  and  somewhat  acrid.  Its  specific
gravity  is  1.207.  It  softens  by  heat,  and  becomes  adhesive,  but  does
not  melt ;  and  when  burned,  it  swells  up,  with  a  white  flame,  and  emits
a  smoke  of  a  strong,  resinous,  slightly  alliaceous  odor.  It  forms  an
opake  milky  emulsion  when  triturated  with  water,  but  which  becomes
clear  upon  standing.  It  is  partly  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  vinegar,  and
alkaline  solutions  ;  the  alcoholic  solution  is  clear,  but  becomes  milky  on
the  addition  of  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  and  expectorant,  and  in  large  doses
cathartic.  Used  in  chronic  catarrh,  asthma,  cough,  and  chronic  pulmo-
nary affections,  where  from  debility  of  the  vessels  there  is  too  large  a
secretion  from  the  bronchial  mucous  membrane,  or  where  expectoration
is  deficient.  It  has  likewise  been  advised  in  chronic  amenorrhea,  espe-
cially when  attended  by  hysterical  or  chlorotic  conditions  of  the  system.  It
is  unsuited  to  inflammatory  affections.  Dose,  ten  to  thirty  grains  in  pill
or  emulsion.  Externally,  used  in  the  form  of  plaster,  as  a  discutient  or
resolvent  in  scrofulous  tumors,  tumors  of  the  joints,  indolent  tumors,  etc.


Ammonia.  209

Gum  Ammoniac  enters  into  a  cement  for  mending  glass,  china,  etc.,
and  which  is  useful  to  druggists,  physicians,  chemists,  and  others  ;  it  is
called  Armenian  Cement,  and  Diamond  Cement,  and  on  account  of  its
utility  we  give  its  mode  of  preparation.  Take  of  isinglass  two  drachms,
sprinkle  it  with  water,  and  allow  it  to  stand  until  softened,  then  add  as
much  proof  spirit  as  will  leather  more  than  cover  it,  and  dissolve  it  with
a  moderate  heat.  Take  of  gum  mastic  one  drachm,  and  dissolve  it  in  two
or  three  drachms  of  rectified  spirit.  Mix  these  -two  solutions,  and  stir  in
one  drachm  of  gum  ammoniac,  which  has  been  previously  reduced  to
fine  powder,  and  rubbed  down  with  a  little  water.  If  necessary,  evapo-
rate in  a  water-bath  to  about  the  consistence  of  thick  molasses,  and  keep
it  in  a  bottle.  When  required  for  use  place  the  bottle  in  warm  water,
and  allow  the  cement  to  soften,  then  apply  it  with  a  stick,  or  a  small
hard  brush  to  the  china  or  glass  previously  warmed.  Compress  the  pieces
firmly  together  until  cold,  taking  care  to  make  the  contact  perfect,  and
using  a  very  thin  layer  of  cement.  When  properly  applied  the  cement
is  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  strong  as  the  china  itself,  unless  exposed  to  the
combined  action  of  heat  and  moisture.


AMMONIA.

Ammonia.

History. — Ammonia  was  unknown  to  the  ancients ;  it  was  discovered
in  a  state  of  solution  by  Black  in  175G,  and  in  the  pure  gaseous  condition
by  Priestley  in  1774.  All  the  ammoniacal  compounds  owe  their  dis-
tinctive properties  to  the  presence  of  this  gas,  which  is  composed  of  one
equivalent  of  nitrogen  14,  and  three  of  hydrogen  3,= 17.  Its  symbol  is
NH3  ;  its  specific  gravity  is  0.59.

Ammonia  may  be  obtained  from  any  one  of  its  salts  by  the  process  of
single  decomposition  ;  but  on  account  of  its  cheapness  it  is  most  generally
obtained  from  the  muriate  of  ammonia  or  sal-ammoniac,  acted  on  by
lime.  The  chemical  changes  that  occur  are  disengagement  of  the  am-
monia,  and  a  union  of  the  lime  with  the  hydrochloric  acid,  forming
chloride  of  calcium  and  water.  Under  ordinary  atmospheric  temper-
atures and  pressures  ammoniacal  gas  is  permanent;  but  at  50°,  and
under  a  pressure  of  six  atmospheres,  it  is  condensed  into  a  colorless,
very  mobile  liquid  of  the  density  of  760.  It  is  transparent  and  colorless,
like  common  air,  but  possesses  a  hot,  acrid  taste,  and  a  highly  pungent,  suf-
focating odor ;  it  is  irrespirable,  spasmodically  closing  the  glottis  when
an  attempt  is  made  to  inhale  it,  and  irritates  and  inflames  animal  tex-
tures. It  has  a  powerful  alkaline  reaction,  turning  reddened  litmus  paper
purple,  turmeric  brown,  and  blue  cabbage  green.  It  combines  readily
with  acid,  forming  crystallizable  salts  which  are  either  sublimed  or
14


210  Materia  Medica.

decomposed  by  heat,— those  with  volatile  acids  being  sublimed  without
change,  while  those  with  fixed  acids  part  with  their  ammonia.  In
contact  with  a  gaseous  acid,  the  two  gases  unite,  and  solidify,  forming  a
white  powder.  It  is  absorbed  by  alcohol,  but  more  especially  by  water.
Water  of  59°  F,at  the  atmospheric  pressure  of  thirty  inches  absorbs  670
times  its  volume  of  ammonia.  The  salts  of  ammonia  are  divided  into
hydracid  salts,  in  which  it  is  supposed  the  hydrogen  of  the  acid  is
transferred  to  the  elements  of  the  ammonia  during  the  act  of  uniting  ;
and  oxacid  salts,  in  which  the  acids  combine  with  oxide  of  ammonium  ;
this  oxide  is  supposed  to  be  formed  by  the  union  of  the  elements  of  one
equivalent  of  water,  (which  is  always  contained  in  the  oxacid  salts  of
ammonia,  and  which  cannot  be  separated  without  destroying  their
nature,)  with  the  elements  of  one  equivalent  of  ammonia.

Off.  Prep. — Liquor  Ammonias;  Liquor  Ammonias  Acetatis;  Liquor
Ammonias  Fortior  ;  Linimentum  Ammonias  ;  Tinctura  Castorei  Ammo-
niata ;  Tinctura  Guaiaci  Ammoniati ;  Tinctura  Valerianae  Ammoniata ;
Ammonias  Carbonas  ;  Ammonias Hydrochloras  ;  Ammonias  Phosphas.


AMMONLE HYDROCHLORAS. (Ammonice Murias.)
Chlorohydrate,  or Muriate  of  Ammonia.

SAL AMMONIAC.

History. — Formerly,  Sal-ammoniac  was  obtained  from  Egypt,  where
it  was  manufactured  by  subliming  the  soot  resulting  from  the  burning  of
camel's  dung,  which  is  used  there  as  fuel.  At  present  it  is  prepared  in
various  ways,  for  instance,  by  the  union  of  hydrochloric  acid  gas  and
ammoniacal  gas  ;  or  by  the  double  decomposition  of  sulphate  of  ammo-
nia and  muriate  of  soda.  The  sulphate  of  ammonia  is  obtained  from
various  sources  ;  sometimes  by  lixiviating  the  soot  of  coal,  sometimes  by
decomposing  with  sulphuric  acid  the  ammoniacal  salts  contained  in  the
watery  fluid  which  is  formed  in  manufacturing  coal  gas,  and  sometimes  by
decomposing  with  sulphate  of  lime  or  sulphate  of  iron  the  impure  car-
bonate of  ammonia  produced  by  the  destructive  distillation  of  animal
refuse,  but  more  especially  in  the  preparation  of  animal  charcoal  from
bones.

The  hydrochlorate  of  ammonia  which  is  consumed  in  the  United
States,  is  of  foreign  manufacture  ;  the  crude  variety  being  imported
from  Calcutta ;  the  refined  from  England.  It  is  usually  sold  in  thick
cakes,  convex  on  one  surface,  concave  on  the  other,  white,  translucid,
tough,  fibrous,  permanent  in  the  air,  no  odor,  but  possessing  a  pungent,
saline,  acrid  taste.  It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  hydrochloric
acid  36.42,  and  one  of  ammonia  17=53.42  ;  or,  in  ultimate  constituents,


Ammonia  Hydrochloras.  211

of  one  equivalent  of  chlorine,  one  of  nitrogen,  and  four  of  hydrogen.
According,  however,  to  the  new  view  taken  of  the  constitution  of  ammo-
niacal  salts,  it  is  the  protochloride  of  ammonium,  (NH4  CL).  Its  spe-
cific gravity  is  1.45.  Three  parts  of  cold,  and  one  of  boiling  water,
dissolves  it,  and  cold  is  produced  during  its  solution.  Alcohol  partially
dissolves  it.  It  is  difficult  to  pulverize,  which,  however,  may  be  effected
by  stirring  a  boiling  saturated  solution  of  the  salt ;  as  it  cools,  it  granu-
lates, and  after  being  dried,  is  readily  pulverizable.  In  a  damp  atmos-
phere it  becomes  moist.  Heat  sublimes  without  decomposing  it.  It  is
incompatible  with  the  mineral  acids,  potassa  and  its  carbonates,  soda,
lime,  magnesia,  acetate  of  lead,  nitrate  of  silver,  and  most  metallic  salts
whose  base  forms  insoluble  salts  with  muriatic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Internally,  it  is  refrigerant,  laxative,  diaphoretic
and  diuretic  ;  being  purgative  in  large  doses,  but  constipating  in  small
ones.  Its  primary  influence  is  exerted  on  the  alimentary  canal ;  its
secondary,  on  the  capillary,  glandular,  and  lymphatic  systems,  as  well
as  on  the  mucous,  serous,  and  fibrous  tissues,  on  all  of  which  it  acts  as
a  stimulating  alterative.  In  very  large  doses,  it  acts  as  a  narcotic  irri-
tant, producing  inflammation  of  the  alimentary  canal,  and  also  coma  and
tetanic  convulsions.  It  has  been  recommended  internally  in  all  tubercu-
lous diseases,  in  chronic  pulmonary  affections,  rheumatic  face-ache,
hemicrania,  ischuria,  chronic  dysentery,  amenorrhea  the  result  of  defi-
cient uterine  action,  and  in  all  chronic  diseases  of  mucous  or  serous  tis-
sues. The  dose  is  from  five  to  thirty  grains,  every  two  or  three  hours,
in  powder,  mixed  with  powdered  gum,  or  sugar,  or  dissolved  in  syrup  or
mucilage.

Externally,  muriate  of  ammonia  employed  in  solution,  has  been  found
valuable  as  a  stimulant  and  resolvent,  in  contusions,  chilblains,  indolent
tumors  and  ulcers  ;  and  is  of  benefit  in  chronic  ophthalmia,  some  forms
of  headache,  itch,  and  many  cutaneous  affections.  In  erysipelas  and
erysipelatous  inflammations,  I  have  found  the  following  mixture  an
excellent  local  application  :  Take  of  muriate  of  ammonia,  one  ounce,
distilled  water,  half  a  pint ;  mix,  and  dissolve,  then  add  tincture  of
camphor,  four  ounces,  tincture  of  lobelia,  four  ounces.  To  be  shaken
each  time  previous  to  bathing  with  it.  It  allays  the  burning  heat  and
itching,  and  in  many  instances  assists  in  preventing  the  further  develop-
ment or  extension  of  the  disease.  As  a  gargle,  in  the  chronic  form  of
cynanche  tonsillaris,  it  is  often  serviceable,  in  solution  ;  about  one  ounce
of  the  salt  to  nine  fluidounces  of  water,  and  one  of  alcohol,  is  of  conve-
nient strength.  As  a  wash  for  ulcers,  or  as  an  injection  in  leucorrhea,
the  solution  must  be  still  further  diluted, — say  from  one  to  four  drachms
of  the  salt  to  a  pint  of  water.

Of.  Prep. — Ammonia  Carbonas ;  Liquor  Ammoniae.


212  Materia  Medica.

AMPELOPSIS  QUINQUEFOLIA.

American  Ivy.

Nat.  Ord.—  Vitaceaj. Sex.  Syst.— Pentandria  Monogynia.

BARK AND TWIGS.

Description. — This  is  a  woody  vine,  with  a  rooting,  climbing  stem, —
quinate  and  digitate  leaves ;  leaflets,  oblong,  acuminate,  petiolate,  den-
tate, smooth,  and  turn  crimson  in  autumn  ;  flowers  inconspicuous,  green-
ish, or  white,  in  dichotomous  clusters  ;  calyx  entire  ;  petals  five,  distinct,
spreading ;  ovary  two-celled,  cells  two-ovuled  ;  style  very  short ;  berries
dark-blue,  acid,  smaller  than  peas,  and  two-celled,  cells  one  or  two-
seeded.

History. — The  American  Ivy  is  a  common  and  familiar  shrubby  vine,
climbing  extensively,  and,  by  means  of  its  radicating  tendrils,  supporting
itself  firmly  upon  trees,  ascending  to  the  hight  of  fifty  feet;  in  the  same
manner  it  ascends  and  overspreads  walls  and  buildings  ;  its  large  leaves
constituting  a  luxuriant  foliage  of  dark  glossy  green.  It  is  found  in  wild
woods  and  thickets  throughout  the  United  States,  and  blossoms  in  July,
ripening  its  small  blackish  berries  in  October.  In  various  sections  it  has
different  names,  as  Woodbine,  Virginian  Creeper,  Five  Leaves,  False
Crrape,  Wild  Wood  Vine,  etc.  The  bark  and  twigs  are  the  parts  used.
It  is  considered  a  valuable  remedy.

Properties  and  Uses. — Alterative,  tonic,  astringent,  and  expectorant.
Used  principally  in  form  of  syrup  in  scrofula,  syphilitic  affections,  and
wherever  an  alterative  is  required.  It  has  also  been  recommended  in
bronchitis  and  other  pulmonary  complaints.  Dose  of  the  syrup  or
decoction,  two  to  four  ounces,  three  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Ampelopsis ;  Infusum  Ampelopsis.


AMYGDALA COMMUNIS.

Almond  Tree.

Nat.  Ord. — Drupacese,  (Be  Candolle)  Eosacese. Suborder,  Amygdalese. Sex.
Syst. — Icosandria  Monogynia.

KERNELS.

Amygdala  Amara. Bitter  Almonds.
Amygdala  Ddlcis. Sweet  Almonds.

Description. — The  Amygdalus  Communis  or  Almond  tree  is  a  tree
from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  high,  with  a  pale-brown  rugged  bark,  and


Amygdala  Communis.  213

dividing  into  numerous  spreading  branches.  The  leaves  are  upon  short
footstalks,  are  about  three  inches  long,  and  three  quarters  of  an  inch
broad,  lanceolate,  acuminate,  thin,  veined,  minutely  serrated,  with  the
lower  serratures  and  petioles  glandular,  and  of  a  bright  light-green
color.  Theflowers  are  large,  pink  or  white,  sessile,  in  pairs,  and  appear-
ing before  the  leaves.  Calyx  reddish,  with  blunt  segments.  Petals
variable  in  size,  always  much  larger  than  the  calyx,  ovate,  concave,
irregularly  notched.  Stamens  spreading,  about  half  the  length  of  the
petals.  Ovary  woolly  ;  style  simple.  Fruit  a  leathery,  hoary  drupe,
with  the  sarcocarp  spontaneously  cracking  and  dropping  off  the  puta-
men.  Stone  oblong,  or  ovate,  acute,  hard  in  various  degrees,  always
rugged,  and  pitted  with  irregular  holes.  Seed  oblong,  compressed,
ovate,  with  a  brown  testa,  at  the  apex  of  which  there  is  a  broad  round
brown  chalaza.  Cotyledons  very  large,  plano-convex.  Both  the  sweet
and  bitter  almonds  are  taken  from  this  tree,  of  which  there  are  several
varieties, — the  sweet  almond  is  obtained  from  the  A.  Dulcis,  and  the
bitter  almond  from  the  A.  Amara.

History. — The  Almond  tree  is  a  native  of  most  of  the  warm  parts  of
Asia,  and  Barbary,  and  is  cultivated  in  many  parts  of  southern  Europe.
The  best  of  the  sweet  kind  come  from  Malaga.  The  kernel  of  the
sweet  almond  is  inodorous,  farinaceous,  and  of  an  agreeable  taste  ;  that
of  the  bitter  almond  is  also  inodorous  when  entire  ;  but  when  triturated
with  water,  has  the  odor  of  prussic  acid,  and  the  taste  resembles  that
of  the  peach  kernel.  Both  varieties  of  kernel  contain  oil ;  the  sweet,  a
fixed  oil ;  the  bitter  a  fixed  oil,  and  an  essential  oil  impregnated  with
hydrocyanic  acid.  The  fixed  oil  may  be  obtained  by  expression;  it  is
colorless  or  slightly  yellowish,  sweet  and  bland  to  the  taste.  The  essen-
tial oil  may  be  obtained  from  the  bitter  almonds  by  distillation  with
water,  after  having  deprived  them  of  their  fixed  oil.  This  oil,  called
Oil  of  Bitter  Almonds,  is  of  a  yellowish  color,  heavier  than  water,  with
an  acrid,  bitter,  burning,  taste,  and  the  odor  of  hydrocyanic  acid  ;  it  is
soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,  slightly  soluble  in  water,  and  deposits  on
standing,  crystals  of  benzoic  acid.  This  oil  does  not  pre-exist  in  the
almond,  but  is  formed  by  the  action  of  water  on  some  of  its  constituents,
termed  emulsin,  and  amygdalin ;  the  latter  is  a  crystalline  substance
peculiar  only  to  the  bitter  almond.  Oil  of  bitter  almonds  is  a  most  active
poison,  acting  as  rapidly  as  hydrocyanic  acid,  and  giving  rise  to  the  same
symptoms.  It  is  seldom  used  as  a  medicine,  but  is  largely  employed  by
perfumers,  confectioners,  and  cooks,  who  prepare  from  it  an  "  essence
of  almonds,"  which  is  a  solution  of  two  drachms  of  the  oil  in  six
drachms  of  alcohol.

A  putassa  soft  soap,  made  with  lard  and  perfumed  with  essential  oil
of  almonds  is  sold  as  a  shaving  soap,  under  the  name  of  Saponaceous
Cream  of  Almonds. It  is  made  by  melting  fine  clarified  lard,  seven


214  Materia  Medica.

pounds,  in  a  porcelain  vessel,  by  means  of  a  salt-water  bath,  or  a  steam
heat  under  fifteen  pounds  pressure;  then  run  into  it,  very  slowly,  potassa
ley,  containing  about  twenty-six  per  cent,  of  caustic  potassa,  three  pounds
and  twelve  ounces,  agitating  continually  from  right  to  left  during  the
whole  time.  When  about  half  the  ley  is  run  in,  the  mixture  begins  to
curdle  ;  it  will,  however,  finally  become  so  firm  and  compact  that  it  can-
not be  stirred,  if  the  operation  is  successful.  The  soap  is  now  finished,
but  is  not  pearly  ;  it  will,  however,  assume  that  appearance  by  long
trituration  in  a  mortar,  gradually  adding  rectified  spirit  two  ounces,  in
which  has  been  dissolved,  essential  oil  of  almonds  two  drachms.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sweet  almonds  are  demulcent,  and  are  chiefly
used  in  emulsion,  and  as  a  vehicle  for  other  medicines.  The  oil  or  emul-
sion has  been  employed  in  cough,  diseases  attended  with  intestinal  irri-
tation, and  for  mitigating  the  acrimony  of  the  urine  in  calculous  affec-
tions, cystitis,  gonorrhea,  etc.  Externally,  the  oil  is  sometimes  used  in
lotions  and  cosmetics.  Dose  of  the  oil,  one  to  two  drachms.  Bitter
almonds  are  sedative,  and  in  large  doses  poisonous.  The  oil  of  bitter
almonds,  or  bitter  almond  water,  is  commonly  employed,  and  may  be
used  as  a  substitute  for  hydrocyanic  acid.  Dose  of  the  oil,  one  quarter
of  a  drop  to  one  drop,  gradually  and  cautiously  increased.  Seldom
used.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Amygdalae  Amara ;  Mistura  Copaibse  Composita ;
Oleum  Amygdalae.


AMYGDALUS  PERSICA.
Peach.

Nat.  Ord.  —  Kosaceas.  Drupaces,  De  Candolle.  Sex.  Syst.  —  Icosandria
Monogynia.

LEAVES AND KERNELS.

Description. — Amygdalus  Persica,  or  Peach  tree,  is  familar  to  almost
every  one.  It  is  supposed  to  be  originally  a  native  of  Persia.  The
leaves  are  lanceolate,  serrate,  with  all  the  serratures  acute  ;  flowers  soli-
tary, subsessile,  appearing  before  the  leaves,  rose-color,  with  the  odor  of
hydrocyanic  acid  ;  drupe  fleshy,  tomentose,  yellowish,  tinged  with  pur-
ple ;  calyx  five-cleft,  tubular,  deciduous ;  petals  five ;  nucleus  somewhat
compressed,  ovate,  acute,  rugosely  furrowed,  and  perforated  on  the
surface.

History.  —  The  peach  tree  is  cultivated  in  all  parts  of  the  United
States,  where  the  character  of  its  fruit  attains  to  greater  perfection  than
in  any  other  country. Its  hight  is  from  eight  to  fifteen  feet,  its  fruit  is


Amylum.  215

large,  being  from  one  to  three  inches  in  diameter,  juicy,  abounding  in
saccharine  matter,  and  of  a  delicious  flavor.  The  leaves  are  from  three
to  five  inches  long,  about  one-third  as  wide,  smooth,  green,  petioles
short,  with  one  or  two  glands.  There  are  about  two  hundred  varieties
of  this  fruit,  of  which,  probably,  one-third  are  clingstones,  the  flesh  ad-
hering to  the  stone,  and  the  remainder  freestones  or  clearstones,  the  flesh
free,  or  separating  from  the  stone.  The  kernels  of  the  fruit  bear  a
strong  resemblance  to  bitter  almonds,  in  appearance,  properties,  and
probably  chemical  nature ;  and,  together  with  the  leaves,  flowers,  and
bark,  have  also  their  peculiar  odor  and  taste,  and  would  very  likely
yield  hydrocyanic  acid. The  leaves  afford  a  volatile  oil  by  distillation.

Properties  and  Uses. — Peach  leaves  are  sedative,  laxative,  and  re-
puted anthelmintic.  In  all  inflammations  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen,
they  exert  a  decidedly  beneficial  influence  when  used  in  cold  infusion,
a  tablespoonful  every  hour  or  two.  In  hooping-cough,  irritable  bladder,
sick  stomach,  ischuria,  hematuria,  and  dysentery,  they  have  been  found
useful.  The  kernels  are  similarly  employed  in  the  form  of  tincture,  in-
fusion, or  syrup ;  four  ounces  of  the  kernels  to  a  quart  of  brandy  is  as-
serted to  form  a  powerful  tonic  in  intermittent  fever,  and  to  be  remark-
ably efficacious  in  curing  leucorrhea ;  dose,  a  teaspoonful  three  or  four
times  a  day.  Both  leaves  and  kernels  are  said  to  contain  hydrocyanic
acid.

Of.  Prep. — Infusum  Persicae.


AMYLUM.
Starch.

THE FECULA OF THE SEEDS OF TRITICUM VULGARE.

History. — Starch  is  a  principle  contained  in  various  organs  of  many
plants,  as  wheat,  rye,  barley,  oats,  rice,  peas,  beans,  chestnuts,  acorns,
potato,  etc.;  and  is  extracted  from  many  of  them  for  dietetic  and  medi-
cinal purposes,  under  the  several  names  of  Starch,  Arrow-root,  Tapioca,
Tous-les-mois,  and  Sago.  It  abounds  especially  in  the  different  kinds  of
grain,  among  which,  wheat,  yields  one  of  its  purest  varieties,  and  from
which  an  average  of  about  from  fifty  to  sixty  per  cent,  is  to  be  had.
In  preparing  starch  from  wheat-flour,  the  flour,  which  consists  of  starch,
gluten,  mucilage,  albumen,  several  salts,  and  some  bran,  is  kneaded  in
a  cloth  with  successive  portions  of  cold  water.  The  gluten  and  bran  re-
main in  the  cloth  ;  the  mucilage,  albumen,  and  salts  dissolve  in  the  water  ;
and  the  starch  passing  away  with  the  water  in  a  state  of  suspension,
gradually  falls  to  the  bottom.  By  allowing  the  albumino-mucilaginous
water,  from  which  it  has  subsided,  to  undergo  fermentation,  the  starch  is


216  Materia Medica.

thereby  purified  from  the  gluten;  for  tbe  acetic  acid  formed  during  this
process,  dissolves  the  gluten.

Starch  is  of  the  purest  white,  pulverulent,  opake,  nearly  inodorous,
and  tasteless,  and  is  usually  had  in  small,  columnar,  irregular  prisms.
Its  specific  gravity  is  1.53.  In  dry  air  it  is  permanent;  in  moist  air  it
absorbs  about  twenty-four  per  cent,  of  water,  without  losing  its  dry  ap-
pearance, and  which  may  be  driven  off  by  a  gentle  heat.  In  its  ordin-
ary state  it  contains  about  twelve  per  cent,  of  moisture.  It  is  insoluble
in  alcohol,  ether,  oils,  and  cold  water.  Alcohol  removes  from  it  a  trace
of  essential  oil,  on  which  its  odor  and  taste  depends.  Diluted  sulphuric
acid  resolves  it  into  sugar ;  nitric  acid  into  malic  and  oxalic  acids.  When
starch  has  been  triturated  or  agitated  with  water,  a  dark  purple  com-
pound is  formed ;  a  solution  of  starch  made  with  hot  water,  and  sub-
sequently cooled,  yields  on  the  addition  of  iodine,  an  immediate  deep-
blue  precipitate  of  iodide  of  starch  ;  thus  iodine  is  the  most  delicate  test
of  its  presence  in  any  mixture.  The  color  varies  with  the  proportions
employed ;  when  the  two  substances  are  about  equal,  the  compound  is
of  a  beautiful  indigo-blue ;  if  the  iodine  is  in  excess,  it  is  blackish-blue ;
if  the  starch,  violet-blue.  A  solution  of  iodide  of  starch,  when  heated
to  200°,  becomes  colorless,  but  on  cooling  recovers  its  blue  color  ;  boil-
ing permanently  destroys  the  color.  Alkalies  form  soluble  compounds
with  starch,  from  which  it  may  be  precipitated  by  acids.  Lime-water,
and  baryta-water,  precipitate  it  from  its  solution,  forming  insoluble  com-
pounds. When  starch  is  roasted,  it  is  converted  into  a  substance  soluble
in  cold  water,  called  British  Gum,  which  may  be  applied  in  the  arts  to
the  same  purposes  as  gum.

Starch  consists  of  organized  granules,  of  various  form  and  size,  being
small,  globular,  oval,  or  angular.  These  granules  have  each  a  thin  ex-
terior pellicle  or  tegument,  insoluble  in  water,  and  an  interior,  soluble
substance.  Amylin  is  the  name  applied  to  the  external  tegument;
amidin,  to  the  interior  mucilaginous  portion.  Dextrin  is  amidin  ren-
dered impure  with  variable  proportions  of  starch-sugar,  and  starch-gum
— and  may  be  prepared  by  boiling  the  starch  for  a  long  time  in  dilute
sulphuric,  muriatic,  or  oxalic  acid ;  and  if  the  boiling  be  still  further
continued,  a  saccharine  substance  is  produced,  similar  to  the  sugar  of
grapes.  Diastase  is  a  principle  developed  in  the  seeds  of  barley,  oats,
wheat,  etc.,  by  germination.  Starch  consists  of  carbon,  44,  hydrogen,
6.22,  and  oxygen,  49.78  ;  its  formula  is  Ci2  Hio  Oio.

Properties  and  Uses. — Starch  is  demulcent  and  nutritive.  It  is  used
in  mucilage,  or  in  emulsion,  for  suspending  drugs,  when  to  be  given  in-
ternally or  by  injection.  The  powder  is  dusted  upon  the  skin  to  absorb
irritating  secretions;  to  prevent  excoriation ;  to  soothe  the  pain  of  erysi-
pelas, and  to  prevent  intertrigo  in  infants.  Starch  may  be  used  as  an
antidote  to  iodine.


Anacyclus Pyrethrum —  Anagallis Arvensis.  217

ANACYCLUS PYRETHRUM.

Pellitory  of  Spain.

Nat.  Orel.  —  Composite,  (Becandotte)  Asteracea?,  (Lindley).  Sex.  Syst. —
Syngenesia  Superflua.

ROOT.

Description. — This  is  the  Anthemis  Pyretkrum  of  Willdenow,  and  of
the  U.  S.  Dispensatory,  the  name  of  which  has  been  changed  by  De
Candolle,  and  the  plant  placed  into  a  new  genus  on  account  of  a  differ-
ence in  the  structure  of  its  seeds.  Its  stems  are  numerous,  procumbent,
somewhat  branched,  pubescent.  Radical  leaves  spreading,  petiolated,
smoothish,  pinnately  divided ;  the  segments  much  cleft  into  linear,  subu-
late lobes  ;  cauline  leaves  sessile.  Branches  one-flowered.  Receptacle
convex,  with  oblong-obovate,  obtuse  paleae.  Florets  of  the  disk  are
yellow ;  the  rays  are  white  on  their  upper  surface,  and  reddish  or  purple
beneath  and  at  their  edges.

History. — Pellitory  of  Spain,  or  Spanish  Chamomile  is  a  native  of  the
Levant,  Arabia,  Syria,  and  the  South  of  Europe.  The  root  is  the  offi-
cinal part,  and  as  found  in  the  shops  it  is  about  the  size  of  the  little
finger,  cylindrical,  straight,  or  but  slightly  curved,  wrinkled  longitudi-
nally, of  an  ash-brown  color  externally,  whitish  within,  hard  and  brittle,
and  sometimes  furnished  with  a  few  radicles.  It  is  inodorous,  though
when  recent  it  possesses  a  very  disagreeable  smell ;  when  chewed  it
produces  a  peculiar  sense  of  heat,  pungency  and  tingling  in  the  mouth,
which  lasts  for  some  time,  and  which  is  attended  with  a  copious  flow  of
saliva.  Analysis  gives  a  brown,  very  acrid  substance,  of  a  resinous  ap-
pearance, which  is  insoluble  in  caustic  potassa  ;  a  dark  brown,  very  acrid,
fixed  oil,  soluble  in  potassa,  a  yellow  acrid  oil,  traces  of  tannin,  gum,
inulin,  and  various  salts. Alcohol  or  ether  dissolves  its  active  principle.

Properties  and  Uses. — Irritant  and  sialagogue.  Used  in  neuralgic
affections  of  the  head  and  face,  toothache,  paralysis  of  the  tongue,  and
of  the  muscles  of  deglutition.  The  tincture  makes  a  good  rubefacient
and  odontalgic  remedy.


ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS.

Red  Chickweed.

Nat.  Ord. — Primulacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Anagallis  Arvensis  is  a  beautiful  annual  trailing  plant,
in  fields,  roadsides,  etc.,  introduced  into  this  country  from  Europe. Its


218  Materia  Medica.

stem  grows  from  six  to  twenty  inches  long,  with  elongated  branches,  or
simple,  often  dotted  with  purple,  square,  and  more  or  less  procumbent.
The  leaves  are  sessile,  ovate,  many-ribbed,  opposite  or  ternate,  dotted
with  purple  at  the  back  ;  peduncles  longer  than  the  leaves ;  sepals  linear-
lanceolate,  about  equaling  the  petals;  petals  obovate,  obtuse,  longer
than  the  stamens,  crenate-glandular.  Flowers  opposite,  small  but  beau-
tiful, with  scarlet  petals,  opening  at  8  o'clock,  a.  m.,  and  closing  at
2,  p.  m.;  in  damp  weather  not  open  at  all.  Stamens  purple,  hairy,
dilated,  and  smooth  at  the  base.  Anthers  yellow,  heart-shaped.  Style
purple,  permanent.  Stigma  capitate.  Capsule  pale  and  transparent,
the  size  of  a  pea,  separating  all  round,  the  valves  marked  with  some
indications  of  longitudinal  separations  which  seldom  take  effect.  Seeds
roughish,  abrupt  externally,  each  with  a  central  dot.

History. — This  plant  has  several  names,  as  Red  Pimpernel,  Poor  Man's
Weather  Glass,  Scarlet  Pimpernel,  etc.  It  blossoms  in  June  and  July.  The
leaves  are  the  parts  used,  they  are  inodorous,  but  have  a  bitter,  some-
what acrid  taste.  Water  extracts  their  virtues.  The  plant  appears  to
possess  energetic  properties,  for  Orfila  destroyed  a  dog  by  making  him
swallow  three  drachms  of  the  extract ;  it  inflamed  the  mucous  mem-
brane of  the  stomach. Grenier  obtained  a  similar  result.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  precise  properties  of  this  plant  are  not
fully  known.  It  was  formerly  esteemed  as  a  counter  poison,  and  has
been  used  as  a  preventive  of  hydrophobia.  Its  internal  use  has  been
recommended  in  visceral  obstructions,  dropsy,  mania,  epilepsy,  delirium,
and  other  nervous  diseases;  also  in  febrile  delirium.  But  too  little  is
known  of  its  action  to  warrant  its  indiscriminate  employment  in  these
diseases.  It  may,  however,  be  used  in  form  of  poultice,  as  a  local
application  to  old  and  ill-conditioned  ulcers.


ANAMIRTA  COCCTJLUS.

Cocculus  Indicus.

Nat.  Ord.— Menispermacese. Sex.  Syst.—Dicetia,  Dodecandria.

THE FRUIT.

Description.— Anamirta  Cocculus,  formerly  called  according  to  Lin-
naeus, Menispermum  Cocculus,  is  a  strong,  climbing  shrub,  with  a  corky,
ash-colored  bark,  with  deep  cracks  or  fissures ;  the  leaves  are  thick,
smooth,  shining,  coriaceous,  roundish,  acute,  very  slightly  cordate,  if  at
all,  sometimes  truncate  at  the  base,  with  five  digitate  ribs,  about  six
inches  long,  and  as  many  broad  ;  stalks  a  little  shorter  than  the  leaves,
tumid  at  both  ends,  especially  the  lower. Flowers dioecious;  female


Andira  Inermis.  219

Jlowers  in  lateral  compound  racemes.  Calyx  of  six  sepals  in  a  double
series,  with  two  closely-pressed  bractioles.  Corolla  none.  Stamens
united  into  a  central  column  dilated  at  the  apex.  Anthers  numerous,
covering  the  whole  globose  apex  of  the  column.  Drupes,  one  to  three,
globose,  one-celled,  one-seeded.  Seed  globose,  deeply  excavated  at  the
hilum.  Albumen  fleshy.  Cotyledons  very  thin,  linear-oblong,  distant,
diverging,  very  membranous.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  Malabar  coast,  and  of  eastern
insular  and  continental  India.  The  parts  used  are  the  berries  or  fruit,
which,  as  found  in  the  shops,  are  round,  subreniform,  about  the  size  of  a
pea,  inodorous,  of  a  grayish-black  color,  and  composed  of  an  external,
thin,  hard,  brittle  shell,  covering  another,  which  is  white,  and  still
denser,  and  contains  a  white  nucleus  divided  by  a  central  placenta.
They  are  inodorous,  but  have  an  intensely  and  permanently  bitter  taste.
They  contain  picrotoxin,  or  picrotoxic  acid,  which  is  a  very  bitter,  poison-
ous principle,  mcnispermin,  an  alkaline  principle,  paramenispermin,  hy-
popicrotoxic  acid,  fixed  oil,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Poison.  Given  to  animals  it  acts  on  the  cere-
brospinal system,  causing  nervous  tremors,  convulsions,  and  tetanus;  it
also  acts  on  the  stomach  as  a  local  irritant.  It  is  never  used  internally,
but  has  been  applied  externally  in  form  of  powder  or  ointment,  in  some
obstinate  cutaneous  affections,  tinea  capitis,  and  for  the  destruction  of
vermin  in  the  hair.  It  is  sometimes  used  to  stupefy  fish  in  order  that
they  may  be  caught,  and  it  is  asserted  that  the  fish  thus  taken  are  not
poisonous.  It  is  likewise  added  to  malt  liquors  to  render  them  bitter  and
intoxicating,  but  which  is  highly  improper  and  dangerous.


ANDIRA  INERMIS.

Cabbage-tree  Bark.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabacese. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Decandria.

THE BARK.

Description. — Andira  Inermis,  (  Geoffroya  Inermis),  is  a  tree  of  mode
rate  hight,  branched  toward  the  top,  and  covered  with  a  smooth  gray
bark  ;  the  branches  are  suberect  at  their  extremities,  terete,  glabrous,
ash-colored.  The  leaves  are  about  a  foot  in  length,  alternate,  unequally
pinnate,  consisting  of  five  to  eight  pairs  of  oblong-lanceolate,  acuminate,
veined,  smooth  leaflets,  of  a  dark-green  color,  on  short  roundish  ferru-
ginous downy  stalks,  with  a  terminal  one  on  a  longer  footstalk.  The
flowers  are  rose- colored,  large,  branched,  and  arranged  in  erect,  axil-
lary, terminal  downy  panicles,  with  very  short  pedicels.  The  calyx  is
turbinate-campanulate,  covered  with  ferruginous  down,  of  a  dark-purple


220  Materia Medica.

color,  and  divided  into  five  obtuse  segments.  The  corolla  is  of  a  pale-
rose  color,  papilionaceous,  having  a  concave  vexillum,  emarginate  at  the
top,  and  longer  than  the  carina.  The  stamens  are  purple,  diadelphous,
with  roundish  anthers.  The  ovary  is  oval,  with  a  tapering,  curved  style,
and  hooked  stigma.  The  fruit  resembles  a  small  plum,  is  pulpy,  and
contains  a  hard  nut,  or  legume.

History. — This  tree  is  a  native  of  Jamaica  and  other  of  the  West
India  Islands.  The  bark  is  the  officinal  part ;  it  is  in  long,  thick,  fibrous
pieces,  externally  of  a  brownish-ash  color,  and  generally  covered  with
lichens,  and  internally  yellowish.  It  has  a  resinous  fracture,  a  disagree-
able smell,  and  a  sweetish,  mucilaginous,  bitterish  taste.

Properties  and  Uses. — Cabbage-tree  Bark  is  emetic,  purgative,  and
anthelmintic.  It  is  thought  by  some  to  be  a  dangerous  acro-narcotic  in
large  doses,  causing  troublesome  sickness,  fever,  and  delirium ;  on  which
account  it  is  not  much  used  in  practice,  although  it  has  proved  effectual
in  removing  the  lumbricoid  worms.  Dose  of  the  powdered  bark,  from
a  scruple  to  a  drachm  ;  of  the  extract  three  grains ;  of  the  syrup  or
decoction,  a  teaspoonful  two  or  three  times  a  day.  If  any  narcotic  or
other  unpleasant  effects  arise,  a  dose  of  castor-oil  must  be  administered,
and  the  patient  must  take  freely  of  lime-juice.


ANDROMEDA  ARBOREA.

Sorrel  Tree.

Nat. Orel. — Ericaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Andromeda  Arborea  is  a  tree  growing  from  forty  to  fifty
feet  high,  with  a  trunk  from  ten  to  fifteen  inches  in  diameter.  The  leaves
are  oblong-lanceolate,  acuminate,  serrate,  petiolate,  deciduous,  from  five
to  six  inches  long,  and  from  one  to  two  inches  broad,  villous  when  young,
at  length  smooth,  with  a  distinctly  acid  taste,  and  early  in  autumn  they
turn  bright  scarlet.  The  flowers  are  pedicellate,  secund,  spreading,  at
length  refiexed ;  panicles  terminal,  consisting  of  numerous  spicate
racemes.  Calyx  without  bractlets.  Corolla  ovate-oblong,  narrowed  at
the  summit,  five-toothed,  pubescent  externally.  Filaments  thickened ;
anthers  awnless,  the  cells  long  and  pointed ;  capsule  pyramidal,  pentan-
gular; seeds  ascending  from  the  base,  linear,  with  a  loose  coat  taper-
pointed  at  both  ends  ;  bracts  and  bractlets  minute,  deciduous.

History. — This  is  a  beautiful  tree,  growing  in  the  valleys  of  the  Alle-
ghany mountains,  from  Pennsylvania  to  Florida,  and  bearing  white
flowers  in  July.  The  leaves  are  the  parts  used  ;  they  have  a  very  plea-
sant acid  taste,  and  yield  their  properties  to  water.


Anemone  Nemorosa.  221

Properties  and  Uses. — Sorrel  Tree  leaves  are  tonic,  refrigerant  and
diuretic.  A  decoction  of  the  leaves  is  a  grateful  refrigerant  drink  in
fevers,  and  will  also  produce  diuresis.  Some  species  of  the  Andromeda
are  poisonous,  as  the  A.  Ovalifolia,  A.  Polifolia,  A.  Mariana,  A.  Nitida,
and  A.  Angustifolia ;  the  powder  upon  the  leaves  and  buds  of  the  A.
Speciosa,  and  A.  Pulverulenta,  is  a  powerful  errhine.


ANEMONE  NEMOROSA.
Wood  Anemone.

Nat.  Ord. — Kanunculacese. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE PLANT.

Description. — Anemone  Nemorosa,  sometimes  called  Windflower ,  is  a
delicate  and  pretty  plant,  with  a  creeping  root,  and  a  simple,  erect  stem,
with  a  single  flower  on  a  naked  peduncle,  and  from  six  to  nine  inches
high.  The  leaves  are  radical  and  ternate,  and  the  leaflets  undivided,  or
with  the  middle  one  three-cleft,  and  lateral  ones  two-parted,  incisely
dentate;  involucre  at  the  base  of  the  flower-stalks,  long  petioled,  divided
into  three,  toothed,  and  cut:  sepals  four  to  six,  oval,  white,  sometimes
tinged  with  purple  outside  ;  carpels  fifteen  or  twenty,  ovate,  with  a  short
style,  hooked.  Stamens  numerous,  much  shorter  than  the  sepals  ;
ovaries  numerous,  free,  collected  into  a  roundish  or  oval  head.

History.  —  This  plant  is  common  to  Europe  and  the  United  States,
bearing  purplish-white  flowers  in  April  and  May.  There  are  several
varieties  of  it,  which  possess  similar  properties,  as  the  A.  Patens,  of  this
country,  the  A.  Pratensis  and  A.  Pulsatilla,  or  Meadow  Anemone  of
Europe.  The  last  is  probably  the  most  active  among  them.  The  her-
baceous part  of  the  plant  is  employed  in  medicine.  A  volatile,  crystal-
lizable  solid,  called  Anemonine  is  obtained  from  the  various  species  of
anemone,  by  distilling  the  plants  with  water,  and  setting  the  product
aside;  it  crystallizes  in  brilliant  white  needles.  Its  formula  is  C2  H2  O2.
Alkalies  convert  it  into  anemonic  acid.  A  solution  of  it  has  been  used
externally  in  scaldhead,  ulcers,  caries,  indurated  glands,  venereal  nodes,
serpiginous  affections,  paralysis,  amaurosis,  cataract,  and  opake  cornea.
Its  internal  use  is  questionable.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  plants  are  acrid  and  poisonous.  They
have  been  recommended  in  amaurosis  and  other  diseases  of  the  eye,
secondary  syphilis,  cutaneous  diseases,  and  hooping-cough,  in  doses  of
one  or  two  grains  daily.  When  applied  to  the  head,  it  is  said  to  be  a
speedy  cure  for  tinea  capitis.  In  the  recent  state,  the  leaves  bruised  and
applied  to  the  skin  are  rubefacient. In  large  doses,  this  article  produces


222  Materia Medica.

nausea,  vomiting,  looseness  of  the  bowels,  and  bloody  urine.  It  is  very
seldom  applied  in  practice,  except  among  the  Homeopaths,  who  use  the
A.  Pulsatilla.


ANGELICA  ATROPURPUREA.

Purple  Angelica.

Nat.  Ord— Umbelliferse  or  Apiaceae. Sex.  Syst.— Pentandria  Digynia.

ROOT, HERB AND SEED.

Description. — Angelica  Atropurpurea,  sometimes  called  Masterwort,
High  Angelica,  etc.,  has  a  perennial,  purplish  root,  and  a  smooth,  herba-
ceous stem,  hollow,  glaucous,  from  one  to  two  inches  in  diameter,  and
rising  from  three  to  six  feet  high;  its  dark  purple  color  has  given  rise  to
its  specific  name.  The  leaves  are  ternate,  and  supported  by  very  large
inflated  petioles.  The  leaflets  are  pinnate,  five  to  seven,  sharply  cut-ser-
rate, acute,  pale  beneath,  the  terminal  one  sometimes  three-lobed,  the
lateral  ones  of  the  upper  division  decurrent.  Umbels  three,  large,  ter-
minal, many-rayed,  spreading,  spherical,  six  to  eight  inches  in  diameter,
without  the  involucre.  Umbellets  dense,  subhemispheric,  on  angular
stalks,  and  with  involucels  of  subulate  bracts  longer  than  the  rays.
Calyx  five-toothed  ;  petals  equal,  entire,  with  the  point  inflected.  Invo-
lucels short,  about  eight-leaved.  Fruit  smooth,  compressed,  somewhat
solid  and  corticate,  elliptic.

History. — This  plant  grows  from  five  to  eight  feet  high,  throughout
the  United  States,  in  meadows  and  marshy  woods,  and  flowers  in  June
and  July;  the  flowers  are  greenish-white.  The  whole  plant  has  a  strong
odor,  and  a  warm  aromatic  taste.  The  juice  of  the  recent  root  is  acrid,
and  is  said  to  be  poisonous ;  drying  dissipates  much  of  this  acri-
mony.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aromatic,  stimulant,  carminative,  diaphoretic,  ex-
pectorant, diuretic,  and  emmenagogue.  Used  in  flatulent  colic  and  cardial-
gia.  It  is  said  to  promote  the  menstrual  discharge.  In  diseases  of  the  uri-
nary organs,  calculi  and  passive  dropsy,  it  is  used  as  a  diuretic,  in  decoction
with  uva  ursi  and  eupatoreum purpureum.  Dose  of  the  powder,  thirty  to
sixty  grains ;  of  the  decoction,  two  to  four  ounces,  three  or  four  times  a
day.  The  Angelica  Arckangelica,  A.  Triquinati  and  A.  Lucida,  may  be
substituted  for  the  above.


Antennaria  Margaritaceum — Anthemis  Nobilis.  223

ANTENNARIA  MARGARITACEUM.

Pearl  Flowered  Life  Everlasting.

Nat.  Orel— Composite  or  Asteraceae. Sex.  %tf.— Syngenesia  Superflua.


THE LEAVES.


Description. — Antennaria  Margaritaceum  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  a
simple,  erect  stem,  corymbosely  branched  above  ;  the  leaves  are  linear-
lanceolate,  acute,  three-veined,  sessile,  and  beneath  the  stem  woolly ;
corymbs  many -flowered,  fastigiate  ;  scales  of  the  hemispheric  involucre
elliptic,  obtuse,  opake,  pearl-white,  the  outer  ones  only  tomentose  at
the  base.  Heads  dioecious  ;  the  pistillate  flowers  very  slender  ;  pappus
simple,  bristly,  capillary  in  the  fertile  flowers,  and  in  the  sterile  club-
shaped  or  barbellate  at  the  summit. Corolla  yellowish.

History. — The  name  Antennaria  is  from  the  resemblance  of  the  sterile
pappus  to  the  antenna?  of  many  insects.  The  plant  is  slightly  fragrant,
and  grows  in  dry  hills  and  woods  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States  ;
it  is  from  one  to  two  feet  in  hight,  and  bears  yellow  and  white  flowers  in
July. The  leaves  are  the  parts  used.

Properties  and  Uses. — Anodyne,  astringent  and  pectoral.  A  decoc-
tion has  proved  beneficial  in  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  and  in  pulmonary
affections.  Used  externally  as  a  cataplasm  in  painful  tumors,  contusions
and  sprains,  and  is  certainly  very  efficacious  in  relieving  pain  and  dis-
posing to  sleep,  often  succeeding  where  the  hop  poultice  has  proved  inef-
fectual. The  A.  Plantagineum,  and  A.  Dioicum,  or  white  plantain,  are
supposed  to  be  beneficial  in  snake-bites.


ANTHEMIS  NOBILIS.

Chamomile. Roman  Chamomile.

Nat.  Ord. — Compositse  Senecionideas,  or  Asteraceaa.  Sex.  Syst. — Syngene-
sia Superflua.

FLOWERS.

Description.  —  This  is  a  herbaceous  plant  with  a  strong,  perennial
root,  having  long  fibers.  The  sterns  in  a  wild  state  are  prostrate,  in
gardens  more  upright,  from  six  to  twelve  inches  long,  branched,  leafy,
round,  slender,  hollow,  furrowed,  downy.  The  leaves  are  pale-green,
bipinnate,  sessile,  with  small,  thread-like  leaflets  which  are  rather  flat  or
channeled  above,  convex  beneath,  somewhat  pubescent,  acute,  and  gen-
erally divided  into  three  segments. The  flower- heads  are  terminal,  soli-


m

224  Materia  Medica.

tary,  rather  larger  than  a  daisy,  with  a  convex  yellow  disk,  and  numer-
ous white,  spreading,  or  reflexed  rays.  The  calyx  is  common  to  all  the
florets,  of  a  hemispherical  form,  and  composed  of  several  small  imbri-
cated hairy  scales,  with  thin,  membranous  edges.  The  receptacle  is  coni-
cal or  convex,  prominent,  and  furnished  with  rigid  bristle-like  palese,
one  to  each  floret;  the  scales  of  (he  receptacle  do  not  appear  till  the  florets
of  the  disk  are  turned  to  one  side,  and  the  innermost  are  gradually  nar-
rowest. The  Jlorets  of  the  ray  are  usually  about  eighteen,  narrow,  ligu-
late,  white,  spreading,  three-toothed ;  the  disk  jlorets  are  numerous,  yel-
low, perfect,  tubular,  divided  into  five  lobes.  The  stamens  are  five,  very
short.  The  ovary  is  obovate,  and  supports  a  slender  style,  with  a  bifid,
reflexed  stigma.  The  seeds  are  ovate,  compressed,  and  slightly
crowned.

History. — Chamomile  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  extensively  culti-
vated for  medicinal  purposes  ;  by  cultivation  the  flowers  become  double,
but  the  properties  are  not  so  great  in  these  as  in  the  single  flowers,
because  the  disk  contains  the  virtues  in  the  greatest  degree.  The
flowers  which  are  the  whitest  are  the  best ;  the  seeds  yield  a  fixed  oil
by  expression.  As  found  in  the  shops,  chamomile  flowers  are  large,
almost  spherical,  of  a  dull-white  color,  a  fragrant  odor,  and  a  Avarmish,
bitter,  aromatic  taste.  By  distillation  they  yield  a  volatile  oil,  at  first  of
a  pale,  blue  color,  but  which  changes  to  yellow  or  brownish ;  its  stimu-
lant properties  depend  on  this  oil,  and  a  resin  ;  the  tonic,  on  its  bitter
extractive ;  it  also  contains  a  small  quantity  of  tannin.  Schendler  has
obtained  from  the  flowers  a  volatile  acid  in  minute  proportion,  much
resembling  valerianic  acid.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  their  virtues;
boiling  water  extracts  nearly  one-fourth  of  their  weight.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  small  doses  tonic,  and  in  large,  emetic.
Used  in  cold  infusion  in  dyspepsia,  and  in  all  cases  of  weak  or  irritable
stomach ;  also  in  intermittent  and  typhus.  A  strong  infusion,  warm,
and  taken  freely,  acts  as  an  emetic.  The  oil  is  carminative  and  anti-
spasmodic. Used  in  flatulency,  colic,  cramp  in  the  stomach,  hysteria,
nervous  diseases,  and  in  painful  dysmenorrhea.  Dose  of  the  oil,  five  to
fifteen  drops,  on  sugar ;  of  extract,  prepared  in  vacuo,  which  is  the  best
form  for  internal  administration,  one  to  three  grains.  The  flowers  of  the
Matricaria  Chamomilla,  or  German  chamomile,  possess  similar  properties
to  the  anthemis,  but  are  rarely  used  in  this  country,  except  by  German
practitioners.

Of.  Prep. — Extractum  Anthemidis ;  Extractum  Anthemidis  Fluidum;
Infusum  Anthemidis  ;  Oleum  Anthemidis  ;  Vinum  Symphytii  Compo-
situm.


Apium  Petroselinum.  225

APIUM  PETROSELINUM.
Parsley.
Nat.  Ord.— Apiacea?  or  Umbelliferse. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

ROOT.

Description. — Apium  Petroselinum,  Willdenow,  or  Petroselinum  Sati-
vum, Hoffman,  has  a  biennial,  fleshy,  fusiform  root,  with  an  annual,
round,  furrowed,  joint,  erect,  branching  stem,  striate  with  green  and
yellow  lines,  and  rising  from  two  to  four  feet  in  bight.  The  radical
leaves  are  compound,  pinnated  in  ternaries,  on  long  channeled  stalks ;
the  leaflets  are  rhomboidal-ovate,  wedge-shaped  at  the  base,  deeply
incised,  with  the  segments  mucronate,  and  sometimes  rounded.  Upper
leaves  gradually  become  more  entire  and  narrower,  till  the  uppermost
are  simply  ternate  with  linear  segments.  Umbels  terminal,  axillary,
pedunculated,  and  with  five  to  eight  rays.  General  involucre  none,  or
one  to  two  subulate  minute  bracts;  partial  involucre  with  six  or  eight
setaceous  bracts,  much  shorter  than  the  pedicels,  erect,  forming  a  per-
fect whorl.  Flowers  white  or  greenish ;  petals  rounded,  incurved,
scarcely  emarginate ;  calyx  with  the  limb  obsolete ;  disk  short,  conical,
somewhat  crenulate ;  styles  diverging.  Fruit  ovate,  about  a  line  long,
compressed,  pale  greenish-brown,  flat  on  one  side,  convex  on  the  other,
and  marked  with  five  longitudinal  ridges.  Stamens  longer  than  the
corolla.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  but  is  cultivated  in  gar-
dens throughout  the  civilized  world.  The  whole  plant  has  an  aromatic
odor,  and  the  leaves  are  used  for  culinary  purposes.  The  root,  which
is  officinal,  is  fusiform  and  fleshy,  with  a  pleasant  smell,  and  sweetish
taste ;  it  should  be  used  in  the  recent  state.  Its  properties  depend  upon
an  essential  oil,  and  are  taken  up  by  water,  wine,  alcohol,  or  ethei\

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic.  Very  useful  in  dropsy,  especially
that  following  scarlatina,  and  other  exanthematous  diseases.  Also,  used
in  retention  of  urine,  strangury,  and  gonorrhea.  The  seeds  have  a
strong,  terebinthinate  odor,  and  a  warm  aromatic  taste,  and  have  been
used  as  carminatives,  and  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  root — they  are
said  to  be  a  deadly  poison  to  the  parrot.  The  seeds,  as  well  as  the
leaves,  sprinkled  on  the  hair,  in  powder,  or  in  the  form  of  an  ointment,
will  effectually  destroy  vermin  ;  the  leaves,  applied  as  a  fomentation,  will,
it  is  asserted,  cure  the  bites  or  stings  of  insects.  The  leaves,  bruised,
are  a  good  application  to  contusions,  swelled  breasts,  and  enlarged
glands — reputed  to  "dry  up  the  milk"  of  wet-nurses.  The  oil  is  effica-
cious as  a  diuretic,  in  doses  of  three  or  four  drops  a  day ;  dose  of  the
infusion,  two  to  four  ounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Petroselini.
15


226  Materia Medica.

APOCYNUM  ANDROS^EMIFOLIUM.

Bitter-root.

Nat.  Orel— Apocynacese. Sex.  Syst— Pentandria  Digynia.


Description. — Apocynum  Androssemifolium  is  an  indigenous,  peren-
nial, herbaceous  plant,  with  a  large  and  bitter  root,  and  an  erect,  smooth
stem  which  rises  from  three  to  six  feet  high ;  it  is  simple  below,  repeat-
edly branching  above,  usually  red  on  the  side  exposed  to  the  sun,
lactescent,  and  covered  with  a  tough,  fibrous  bark.  The  leaves  are
opposite,  petiolate,  ovate,  acute,  entire,  smooth  on  both  sides,  paler  and
very  slightly  pilose  beneath,  and  two  or  three  inches  long.  Flowers  in
loose,  nodding,  terminal  or  axillary  cymes,  white,  tinged  with  red,
monopetalous,  campanulate,  with  five  acute  spreading  segments.  The
peduncles  are  furnished  with  minute,  acute  bracts.  Calyx  small,  five-
cleft,  much  shorter  than  the  tube  of  the  corolla.  Stamens  five,  with
very  short  filaments,  and  long,  sagittate,  connivent  anthers,  cohering
with  the  stigma  about  their  middle,  and  often  holding  fast  such  insects
as  may  thrust  their  proboscis  between  them.  The  nectary  consists  of
five  oblong  glandular  bodies,  alternating  with  the  stamens.  Ovaries  two,
ovate,  concealed  by  the  anthers  and  supporting  two  thick,  roundish,
sessile  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  in  the  form  of  a  pair  of  slender,  linear-
lanceolate,  drooping  follicles,  containing  numerous  oblong,  imbricated
seeds  attached  to  a  slender  central  torus,  and  each  crowned  with  a  long,
downy  pappus. Every  part  of  the  plant  is  lactescent.

History. — This  plant,  likewise  called  Dogsbane,  Milk-weed,  etc.,  is
found  in  nearly  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  from  Canada  to  Carolina,
growing  in  dry,  sandy  soil,  on  hill-sides,  or  in  woods,  flowering  in  June
and  July ;  when  any  part  of  it  is  wounded,  a  milky  juice  exudes.  The
root  is  the  officinal  portion,  it  is  large,  lactescent,  and  of  a  disagreeably
bitter  taste ;  the  bark,  which  forms  nearly  two-thirds  of  it,  is  the  active
part.  Analysis  has  discovered  it  to  contain  a  bitter  extractive,  a  red
coloring  matter  soluble  in  water  and  not  in  alcohol,  caoutchouc  and
volatile  oil.  It  yields  its  properties  to  alcohol,  but  especially  to  water.
Age  impairs  its  virtues.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Emetic,  diaphoretic,  tonic,  and  laxative;  it
has  been  found  very  valuable  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  hepatic  affec-
tions, and  in  conjunction  with  Menispermum  in  dyspepsia  and  amenor-
rhea. In  doses  of  forty  to  sixty  grains  it  promptly  induces  emesis,  with
scarcely  any  previous  nausea,  and  hence  is  useful  where  it  is  desired  to
evacuate  the  stomach,  without  producing  that  muscular  relaxation  inci-
dent to  a  long-continued nausea; however,  it  is said to occasion  a


Apocynum  Cannabinitm.  227

subsequent  weakness  or  languor,  from  which  the  patient  is  some  time  in
recovering.  As  a  laxative,  it  is  useful  in  cases  of  constipation,  and  in
hepatic  derangements.  As  a  tonic,  ten  or  twenty  grains  may  be  given
to  stimulate  the  digestive  apparatus,  and  thus  effect  a  corresponding  im-
pression on  the  general  system.  As  a  diaphoretic  it  must  be  combined
with  opium,  in  the  proportion  of  one  grain  of  the  latter  to  forty  of  the
former,  and  divided  into  three  or  four  doses ;  however,  as  a  diaphoretic,
it  is  inferior.  Also  reputed  useful  as  an  alterative  in  rheumatism,  scro-
fula, and  syphilis.  Prof.  Gregory  speaks  of  Apocynine  as  the  active
agent  of  the  A.  Androsaemifolium,  but  has  given  no  method  of  preparing
it.  It  is  said  to  be  very  bitter,  and  of  a  dark  orange  color.  Used  as  an
alterative  in  syphilitic  and  scrofulous  affections,  in  doses  of  half  a  grain
to  a  grain ;  as  a  purgative,  one  grain  to  two  grains.  It  has  been  bene-
ficially employed  in  liver  and  stomach  affections,  intermittents,  and  the
low  stage  of  typhoid  fevers.

I  have  used  a  preparation  called  Apocynin,  prepared  from  this  plant
by  Mr.  J.  B.  Robinson  of  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  jaundice,  combined  with
leptandrin  and  myricin,  with  excellent  effect,  as  well  as  in  hepatic
torpor,  and  constipation.  It  is  a  powder  of  a  dark-brown  color,  posses-
sing an  odor  similar  to  the  root,  and  a  bitter,  nauseous,  unpleasant  taste.
Mr.  Robinson  prepares  it  by  neutralizing  the  saturated  tincture  of  the
root  by  ammonia,  then  filtering  and  precipitating  the  apocynin  by  sul-
phuric acid,  which  must  be  added  gradually ;  when  obtained  it  is  to  be
washed  in  one  or  two  waters,  and  then  dried.  One  pound  of  the  root
yields  about  half  an  ounce  of  the  dried  apocynin,  and  much  care  must
be  taken  in  the  operation,  lest  the  whole  be  spoiled.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Apocyni ;  Extractum  Apocyni  Hydro- Alco-
holicum ;  Apocynin.


APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.
Indian  Hemp.

Nat.  Orel. — Apocynaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.


Description.  —  In  general  appearance  and  character  the  Apocynum
Cannabinum  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  the  Apoc.  Androsaemifolium.
The  root  is  perennial  and  creeping;  the  stems  are  erect,  herbaceous,
branching,  of  a  brown  color,  and  two  or  three  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves
are  opposite,  oblong-ovate,  acute  at  both  ends,  and  somewhat  downy
beneath.  The  cymes  are  many-flowered,  terminal  and  lateral,  panicu-
late, smooth.  The  corolla  is  small,  of  a  greenish  or  yellowish-white
externally,  with  a  tinge  of  pink  or  purple  within,  with  a  campanulate


228  Materia  Medica.

tube  not  longer  than  the  calyx.  The  calyx  is  about  as  long  as  the
corolla,  with  subulate  segments,  lanceolate.  Follicles  long  and  slender.
Fruit  similar  to  A.  Androsaemifolium.

History. — This  plant  is  indigenous  and  grows  in  similar  situations  with
the  Apoc.  Androssem.,  flowering  about  the  same  time.  It  likewise
abounds  in  a  milky  juice,  and  has  a  tough,  fibrous  bark,  which,  by  mace-
ration, affords  a  substitute  for  hemp,  but  of  a  whiter  color,  and  superior
in  strength  and  durability.  A  decoction  of  the  plant  affords  a  permanent
brown  or  black  dye,  according  to  the  mordant  used.  The  root  is  the
officinal  part ;  when  fresh  it  is  of  a  dark-chestnut  color,  with  a  nauseous,
somewhat  acrid,  and  permanently  bitter  taste,  and  a  strong,  unpleasant
odor.  When  dried  it  is  brittle  and  readily  pulverized,  affording  a
powder  somewhat  resembling  Ipecacuanha.  The  ligneous  portion  is
yellowish-white,  with  some  odor,  and  a  decided  bitter  taste ;  the  cortical
part  is  brown  externally,  and  white  within,  of  a  very  bitter,  nauseous
taste.  Analysis  has  ascertained  it  to  contain  tannin,  gallic  acid,  gum,
resin,  wax,  fecula,  a  coloring  matter,  caoutchouc,  lignin,  and  a  peculiar
bitter  principle  to  which  the  name  of  Apocynin  has  been  proposed.  The
root  yields  its  properties  to  alcohol,  and  more  readily  to  water;  its  vir-
tues are  impaired  with  age.  Every  part  of  this  plant,  in  the  recent
state,  exudes  a  milky  juice  when  wounded.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emeto-cathartic,  diuretic,  and  diaphoretic.  In
a  full  dose  it  occasions  much  nausea,  diminishes  the  frequency  of  the
pulse,  and  has  a  tendency  to  produce  drowsiness  independent  of  the
exhaustion  consequent  upon  vomiting;  copious  vomiting  soon  ensues,
and  subsequently  large  and  feculent  watery  stools.  A  general  per-
spiration almost  always  follows.  Its  diuretic  effects  vary  in  different
individuals,  being  very  manifest  in  some  and  less  so  in  others.  Snuffed
into  the  nostrils,  the  powder  will  excite  sneezing.

As  a  hydragogue  cathartic,  and  also  as  a  diuretic  in  those  instances
where  this  effect  is  displayed,  it  has  been  found  most  useful  in  dropsy.
In  diaphoretic  doses  it  has  proved  beneficial  in  intermittent  and  remit-
tent fevers,  and  pneumonic  affections.  As  an  emetic,  from  fifteen  to
thirty  grains  of  the  powder,  is  the  dose  ;  as  a  hydragogue  or  diuretic,
the  decoction  is  the  best  form  in  which  to  employ  it, — one  ounce  of  the
root  may  be  boiled  in  a  pint  of  water,  of  which  a  wineglassful  may  be
given  two  or  three  times  a  day,  or  oftener  if  required.  Smaller  quan-
tities of  the  decoction,  given  warm,  will  cause  diaphoresis;  as  a  purg-
ative, the  aqueous  extract  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  three  to  six
grains.  The  apocynin  obtained  from  this  plant  will  probably  be  found
identical  in  virtue  and  chemical  constitution  with  that  from  the  A,
Androsaemifolium.  Further  investigations  with  it  are  required,  before
anything  positive  and  satisfactory  can  be  made  known.


Aqua.  229

AQUA.

Water.

History. — From  the  almost  universal  solvent  powers  of  water,  it  is  the
most  extensive  pharmaceutical  agent  that  we  possess,  beside  being,
when  properly  employed,  a  most  valuable  remedy  for  a  large  number  of
diseases.  The  purest  water  that  can  be  obtained  is  distilled  water,  which
when  properly  prepared  in  clean,  glass  vessels,  is  colorless,  transparent,
tasteless  and  inodorous,  with  the  assumed  specific  gravity  of  unity,  and
with  which  as  a  standard,  the  specific  gravities  of  all  solids  and  liquids
are  compared.  It  is  the  only  admissible  water  for  pharmaceutic  and
chemical  tests,  as  the  presence  of  organic  or  saline  substances  in  it,  may
decompose  the  articles  to  be  dissolved,  or  impair  its  solvent  power.  At
a  temperature  of  32°  or  lower  it  becomes  ice;  at  212°  or  above,  it
forms  steam,  in  which  its  bulk  is  augmented  to  nearly  1700  fold,  and  its
specific  gravity  reduced  to  about  half  that  of  atmospheric  air  ;  it  is
likewise  compressible  to  a  certain  extent.  It  is  capable  of  absorbing  or
dissolving  to  a  greater  or  less  amount,  all  of  the  gases  ;  and  even  in  the
driest  weather,  it  constantly  exists  in  the  atmosphere,  in  the  form  of
invisible  vapor.  Pure  water  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  hydrogen,  1,
and  one  of  oxygen,  8=9=HO.  It  is  perfectly  neutral,  exhibiting
neither  acid  nor  basic  properties,  though  capable  of  combining  with  each,
and  increasing  their  activity.  It  should  always  be  kept  in  glass  vessels.
The  solvent  power  of  water  is  increased  by  heat.

Water  is  known  as  Soft-  Water,  Hard-  Water,  and  Mineral-  Water  ;  the
soft  are  always  preferred  to  hard-waters  in  pharmaceutical  preparations,
and  may  be  known  by  their  forming  a  lather  with  soap,  notwithstanding
they  may  contain  considerable  impurities.  Hard-water,  contains  one  or
several  salts  of  lime,  with  other  impurities,  curdles  soap,  and  is  unfit  for
internal  use,  or  domestic  purposes.  An  excellent  test  for  determining
the  quality  of  water  is  the  tincture  of  soap  ;  in  distilled  water  it  produces
no  effect ;  in  soft  water,  only  a  slight  opalescence  ;  and  in  hard  water,  a
milky  appearance.  We  have  several  varieties  of  water,  as  rain,  snow,
spring,  river,  well,  lake,  and  marsh  water  ;  the  first  two  are  the  purest,
the  following  three  come  next  in  order,  and  the  last  is  unwholesome,
and  ought  never  to  be  employed  for  domestic  or  medicinal  purposes-
Good  water  is  limpid,  without  smell,  and  does  not  curdle  soap  ;  and  its
transparency  is  but  little  affected  by  nitrate  of  baryta,  nitrate  of  silver,
or  oxalate  of  ammonia.

Rain  and  snow-waters,  are  distinguished  from  distilled  water,  chiefly
by  their  holding  in  solution  an  unusual  amount  of  atmospheric  gases.
To  obtain  either  of  them  pure,  they  must  be  collected  in  large  clean
vessels  as  the  rain  or  snow  falls  toward  the  earth ;  and  this  should  be
done  at  some distance from  houses,  commencing  some  time  after  they


230  Materia Medica.

have  fallen,  in  order  to  avoid  the  contamination  of  dust  and  other  impu-
rities in  the  atmosphere,  which  is  usually  present  with  the  first  fall  of
the  rain  or  snow.

Rain-water,  (aqua  pluvia)  may  by  proper  precautions  be  obtained
tolerably  pure  from  the  roofs  of  houses  on  which  it  falls,  by  allowing
the  impurities  to  be  washed  away  in  the  commencement  of  a  heavy  rain.
In  large  cities  the  rain-water  contains  nitrogenized  organic  matter.
Both  rain  and  snow-waters  may  be  applied  to  every  domestic  purpose,
as  well  as  to  most  chemical  and  pharmaceutical  operations.  But  no
water  should  ever  be  used  which  comes  in  contact  with  lead — for  the
lead  becomes  oxydized  by  the  oxygen  of  the  water,  which  oxide  is
reduced  to  a  carbonate  by  the  action  of  the  carbonic  acid  derived  from
the  air,  and  the  water  thus  containing  lead  may  produce  the  poisonous
effects  of  that  metal  upon  the  system.  The  more  soft  and  pure  the
water,  the  greater  the  risk.

Spring-water,  (aqua  fontana,)  is  that  which  springs  from  the  earth,
free  from  large  amounts  of  carbonic  acid,  or  salts,  and  not  possessing
elevated  temperatures  ;  it  is  the  general  beverage  of  mankind,  and  is
applicable  to  all  domestic  purposes.  Its  quality  depends  entirely  on  the
strata  through  which  it  flows  ;  those  springs  arising  from  traprocks,
sandstones,  transition  rocks,  and  primitive  rocks  are  the  purest ;  those
from  alluvial  strata,  limestone,  and  coal  formations  are  the  least  pure.
All  however  contain  variable  traces  of  the  salts  of  lime,  soda,  or  magnesia,
which  vary  according  to  the  locality  of  the  spring.

River -water,  (aqua  fluvialis)  especially  when  passing  through  alluvial
countries  and  near  great  cities,  contains  suspended  in  it  more  or  less
earthy,  and  vegeto-animal  impurities,  which  impair  its  transparency,
but  which  in  a  short  time  will  purify  itself  during  its  downward  course.
In  countries  where  the  rivers  pass  chiefly  over  primitive  rocks,  the
waters  are  found  to  be  almost  perfectly  pure.  When  moderately
pure  it  is  fit  for  all  ordinary  purposes,  though  if  it  contain  much  vegeto-
animal  matter,  it  is  apt  to  occasion  dysentery,  and  other  affections  of  the
bowels,  and  then  becomes  inadmissible  in  pharmacy.  The  Croton  water
of  New  York,  the  Schuylkill  water  of  Philadelphia,  and  the  Ohio  river
water,  are,  when  filtered,  sufficiently  pure  for  all  the  purposes  of  phar-
macy, where  distilled  water  is  not  expressly  required.  Lake-water,  in
the  United  States,  is  generally  a  pure  and  wholesome  water ;  in  other
instances  it  is  similar  to  the  river-water.

Well-water,  very  much  resembles  spring-water  in  its  qualities,  its
purity  being  proportioned  to  its  depth  and  amount  of  use.  In  large
cities  well-water  always  contains  nitrates,  owing  to  the  rapid  oxidation  of
nitrogenized  organic  matter,  which  filters  through  the  soil.  These
nitrates  prevent  the  formation  of  any  vegetable  matter  in  water,  even
when  long  kept.  A  very  pure  water  is  usually  obtained  from  the  Arte-
sian or  overflowing  wells.


Aqua.  231

Marsh-water  being  commonly  stagnant,  and  containing  vegetable  mat-
ters in  the  process  of  decomposition,  is  unwholesome,  and  should  never
be  employed  for  domestic  or  medicinal  purposes.

The  Journal  of  Pharmacy  of  March,  1848,  gives  the  following  pro-
cess of  Dupasquier  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  an  amount  of  organic
matter  held  in  solution  in  water,  above  the  minute  quantity  usually
present  in  good  water :  Place  into  a  small  flask  one  or  two  fluidounces
of  the  water  to  be  tested,  and  to  it  add  a  few  drops  of  solution  of  chloride
of  gold,  free  from  excess  of  muriatic  acid,  enough  to  give  the  water  a
slight  yellow  tint ;  then  boil  it.  If  the  yellow  tint  remains  unchanged,
the  ordinary  proportion  of  organic  matter  is  present ;  but  if  the  liquor
becomes  at  first  brownish  and  afterward  violet  or  bluish,  in  consequence
of  the  reduction  of  the  gold,  the  water  holds  a  greater  amount  of  organic
matter  than  usual.  This  organic  matter  is  of  the  nature  of  ulmin  or
gein.

Prof.  Faraday  states,  that  "one  grain  of  water  will  require  for  decom-
position an  electrie  current  equal  to  a  very  powerful  flash  of  lightning."
The  chemical  action  of  a  grain  of  water  upon  four  grains  of  zinc,  can
evolve  electricity  equal  in  quantity  to  that  of  a  powerful  thunderstorm  ;
and  he  states,  that  from  his  experiments  it  would  appear,  that  800,000
such  charges  of  the  Leyden  battery  would  be  necessary  to  supply  elec-
tricity sufficient  to  decompose  a  single  grain  of  water.  The  Leyden
battery  of  which  he  speaks,  consists  of  fifteen  jars,  containing  3510  square
inches,  or  about  twenty-four  and  a  half  square  feet  of  coated  glass,
charged  by  thirty  turns  of  a  plate  electrical  machine,  the  plate  being
fifty  inches  in  diameter,  and  of  immense  power,  giving  ten  or  twelve
sparks  an  inch  long  for  each  revolution.  In  relation  to  this  an  author  in
the  Philosophical  Magazine  remarks,  that  "the  estimate  that  800,000
discharges  of  the  battery  of  fifteen  jars,  equal  to  a  powerful  flash  of
lightning,  would  be  necessary  to  resolve  a  single  grain  of  water  into  its
elements,  is  certainly  astounding,  when  it  is  recollected  that,  according
to  Prof.  Faraday,  the  quantity  of  electricity  that  decomposes  a  body,  is
the  equivalent  quantity  of  electricity  that  had  previously  held  the  ele-
ments of  that  body  in  combination ;  for  he,  with  Davy  and  others,  con-
ceives that  electricity  and  chemical  affinity  are  identical  powers.  Hence,
in  one  grain,  that  is,  one  drop  of  water,  there  must  be  naturally  existing,
and  constituting  the  affinity  between  its  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  no  less
a  quantity  of  electricity,  than  800,000  charges  of  a  battery,  containing
3510  square  inches  of  coated  glass,  or  the  equivalent  of  a  very  powerful
flash  of  lightning.  If  this  quantity  of  electricity  were  converted  into
one  spark,  it  would  be  4166  miles  in  length,  taking  Prof.  Faraday's
mean  estimate  of  one  charge  of  his  battery  as  the  basis  of  calcu-
lation."

Mineral  ivaters,  are  those  which  present  a  large  proportion  of  carbonic
acid,  with  or  without  saline,  alkaline,  metallic,  earthy  and  other  foreign


232  Materia Medica.

substances,  and  which  exert  an  appreciable  therapeutical  influence  on
the  animal  economy.  For  all  practical  purposes,  they  may  be  conve-
niently arranged  into  carbonated,  sulphureted,  chalybeate,  and  saline  min-
eral waters,  for  an  account  and  list  of  each  of  which,  see  Appendix.
When  the  water  is  elevated  in  temperature  they  are  called  Hot  or  Ther-
mal springs ;  when  of  ordinary  temperature  or  lower,  they  are  called
Cold  Mineral  Springs.

Properties  and  Uses. — As  a  remedial  agent,  apart  from  its  natural
necessitous  use,  water  internally  is  a  tonic,  diuretic,  or  sudorific,  accord-
ing to  its  mode  of  administration.  Small  quantities,  taken  cold,  between
45°  and  60°,  and  occasionally  repeated,  act  as  a  tonic  ;  in  larger  doses
it  produces  diuresis,  and  diaphoresis,  the  latter  effect  more  especially,  if
the  patient  be  kept  warmly  covered,  and  it  is  extensively  used  for  this
purpose  in  many  acute  diseases.  Warm  water,  between  (50°  and  100°,
relaxes  the  fibers  of  the  stomach,  and,  particularly  if  given  in  large
quantities,  is  apt  to  provoke  nausea  and  vomiting.  In  fevers,  water  is
a  grateful  drink,  allaying  thirst,  moderating  the  fever,  often  producing
sleep  and  relief  from  restlessness  ;  and  is  sufficient,  unaided  by  other
means,  to  effect  a  rapid  solution  of  the  disease,  in  many  instances.  It
should  never  be  withheld  from  patients  laboring  under  febrile  or  inflam-
matory complaints,  who  crave  it.  During  the  operation  of  a  vegetable
emetic,  cool  water  at  60°,  is  more  agreeable,  and  fully  as  beneficial  in
assisting  the  emesis,  as  warm.

Externally,  water  is  frequently  applied  as  a  sedative  in  local  inflam-
mations, as  quinsies,  sore-throats,  ophthalmia,  sprains  and  contusions,
and  as  a  means  of  restraining  hemorrhage.  Cloths  wet  with  cold  water
and  applied  to  the  abdomen,  have  relieved  severe  pain  in  the  bowels,
retention  of  urine,  etc.  The  cold  dash  or  douche,  has  been  successfully
employed  in  delirium  tremens,  apoplexy,  tetanus,  hysteria,  convul-
sions, obstinate  constipation,  congestive,  bilious  and  typhoid  fevers.  The
wet  sheet  is  much  used  to  allay  febrile  and  inflammatory  conditions,  and
to  promote  diaphoresis.  As  an  injection  it  has  been  efficient  in  habitual
constipation,  and  excessive  tympanitic  distension,  as  well  as  dysentery.
Applied  warm  it  is  an  excellent  application  to  erysipelatous  inflamma-
tions. Ice  and  iced  water,  as  a  local  application,  are  said  to  be  very
useful  in  burns  and  scalds,  also  in  many  cerebral  affections.

As  a  bath,  water  is  also  an  important  remedy.  The  vapor-bath  accele-
rates the  circulation,  produces  profuse  sweating,  and  softens  and  re-
laxes the  skin,  and  may  be  employed  in  a  variety  of  cases.  The  hot
bath  has  a  similar  effect,  but  is  apt  to  be  dangerous  in  some  constitutions.
The  warm  bath  diminishes  the  frequency  of  the  pulse,  lessens  the  fre-
quency of  respiration  and  the  heat  of  the  body,  and  relaxes  the  skin.
It  acts  as  a  soothing  remedy,  producing  a  disposition  to  sleep.  It  is
useful  in  febrile and  inflammatory  diseases,  characterized  by  frequent


Aqua.  233

pulse,  preternaturally  hot  and  dry  skin,  and  much  restlessness  ;  also  in
spasms  and  convulsions  of  children,  retention  of  urine,  nephritic  pains,
and  the  like.  It  is  contra-indicated  in  diseases  of  the  head  and  chest.
The  cold  bath  acts  according  to  its  temperature  and  mode  of  application,
as  a  stimulant,  tonic,  and  sedative.

The  following  are  the  temperatures  at  which  baths  are  usually  ap-
plied : —

Water, cold, 50°  to 75°  F.

do temperate, 75  to 85  "

do tepid, 85  to 92  "

do warm, 92  to 98  "

do hot, 98  to  112  "

Vapor,  if  breathed,  tepid, 90  to  1U0  "

do  do warm 100  to  110  "

do  do hot, 110  to  130  "

do  if  not  breathed,  tepid, 96  to  106  "

do  do warm, 106  to  120  "

do  do hot, 120  to  160  "

Hot  air,  as  a  sudorific, 85  to  100  "

do as  a  stimulant, 100  to  130  "

In  addition  to  the  above  uses  of  water,  it  has  likewise  other  employ-
ments, as  follows  : —

The  Wet  Sheet  Packing,  or  Lien  Tuck  of  the  Germans.  A  mattress
of  cotton,  hair,  or  straw,  has  spread  over  it  three  or  four  large,  thick
comfortables,  and  over  these  one  or  two  soft  flannels.  A  linen  sheet
having  been  previously  dipped  in  cold  water,  or  for  very  delicate  persons
in  tepid  or  even  warm  water,  is  lightly  wrung  out,  so  as  not  to  drip,  and
spread  over  the  whole,  having  under  it  one  or  two  pillows  for  the  head.
The  patient  is  made  to  lie  upon  these  on  his  back,  and  is  quickly  and
snugly  enveloped  in  the  wet  sheet,  over  which  is  placed  the  flannels  and
blankets,  or  a  light  feather-bed  may  be  thrown  over  the  top,  in  case
comfortables  are  not  plenty.  Care  should  always  be  taken  to  turn  the
clothing  snugly  and  smoothly  around  the  feet  and  neck ;  and  if  the  feet
remain  cold,  bottles  of  cold  water  should  be  placed  to  them.  Headache
is  prevented  or  removed  by  the  application  of  cold  wet  cloths  applied  to
the  head.

The  time  for  remaining  thus  "packed,"  varies  in  different  cases,
averaging  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour,  depending  on  the  effect;  the
body  should  become  comfortably  warm  before  being  removed.  A  dis-
agreeable sensation  of  cold  is  first  experienced,  which  is  soon  followed
by  a  pleasurable  warmth  over  the  whole  surface,  and  sometimes  copious
perspiration,  though  this  last  is  not  always  indicated.  On  coming  out
of  the  "pack,"  the  plunge,  the  douche,  rubbing  wet  sheet,  or  towel-
washing  are  to  bo  employed  as  the  case  may  require.  If  the  patient
experiences  a  chill  after  coming  out,  a  thorough  rubbing,  followed  by
fifteen  or  twenty  minutes'  dry  packing,  will  usually  obviate  all  injurious


234  Materia  Medica.

consequences.  The  process  of  packing  should  never  be  continued  so
long  as  to  cause  headache,  languor,  muscular  debility  or  giddiness.

This  is  said  to  act  as  a  sedative,  reducing  the  heat  of  the  body,  and
excessive  arterial  action,  and  as  an  alterative,  correcting  morbid  secre-
tions and  restoring  healthy  ones.  In  fevers,  and  all  acute  inflamma-
tory disorders,  it  may  be  frequently  renewed  according  to  the  degree  of
fever  or  inflammation,  until  the  temperature  and  circulation  are  reduced
to  the  natural  standard,  and  the  skin  becomes  soft  and  perspirable.
Much  sweating  is  not  usually  to  be  desired.  In  chronic  diseases,  it
removes  internal  congestions,  develops  external  circulation,  produces  a
healthy  condition  of  the  skin,  and  may  be  used  in  many  forms  of  this
class  of  maladies.  If  carelessly  attended  to,  the  wet  sheet  may  give
rise  to  serious  difficulties.

When  the  wet  sheet  is  applied  to  the  trunk  of  the  body  only,  as  in
cases  of  feeble  persons,  where  there  is  not  sufficient  vitality  for  the  whole
sheet,  or  for  other  purposes,  it  is  termed  the  "Half  Pack  Sheet."

The  Douche  (doosh)  is  the  application  of  a  stream  of  cold,  tepid  or
warm  water,  from  a  greater  or  lesser  hight,  and  continued  for  a  time  indi-
cated by  its  effects.  The  force  of  the  stream,  and  time  of  application
should  be  carefully  adapted  to  the  strength  of  the  patient.  Very  nerv-
ous persons,  and  those  subject  to  determinations  to  the  brain,  should
resort  to  it  with  extreme  caution.  A  strong  douche  should  never  be
applied  to  the  head,  nor  should  it  be  long  continued  on  any  one  spot
along  the  vertebral  column.  A  douche  may  be  vertical,  oblique,  hori-
zontal, or  ascending.  The  most  common  are  in  perpendicular  streams
one  or  two  inches  in  diameter.  Its  effect  is  to  arouse  the  activity  of
the  absorbent  system,  and  is  hence  very  useful  in  gout,  rheumatism,
paralysis,  chronic  enlargements  of  the  viscera,  tumors,  etc.

The  ascending  douche  will  be  found  beneficial  in  piles,  uterine  dis-
placements, prolapsus  ani,  constipation  from  debility,  chronic  enlarge-
ment of  the  prostate  gland,  impotency,  etc.  The  stream  may  be  half
an  inch  to  an  inch,  and  should  not  be  forcible  enough  to  cause  absolute
pain  nor  serious  inconvenience.  Warm  water  douches  are  for  the  pur-
pose of  producing  relaxation  of  the  muscles  of  the  part  acted  upon,  and
are  hence  useful  in  rigidity  of  the  muscles,  painful  swellings,  chronic
inflammation  of  the  joints,  neuralgia,  spasmodic  and  bilious  colic,  reten-
tion of  urine,  amenorrhea,  uterine  rigidity,  etc.  In  some  cases  it  should
be  followed  by  a  momentary  cold  dash.

The  Rubbing  Wet  Sheet  is  a  large  sheet  dipped  in  water,  and  wrung
out  so  as  not  to  drip.  It  is  then  suddenly  thrown  around  the  patient's
body,  enveloping  him  closely  from  the  neck  to  the  feet,  and  the  body  is
then  rubbed  for  about  five  minutes  by  the  hands  of  the  attendant  on  the
outside  of  the  sheet.  It  is  to  be  followed  by  rubbing  with  dry  towels.
This  produces  a  strong  and  general  determination  to  the  whole  surface,


Aqua.  235

and  is  applicable  in  all  cases  where  a  strong  determination  is  desired
from  internal  organs  or  surfaces  to  the  skin.  It  will  be  found  valuable
in  the  early  stages  of  bowel  complaints,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  colic,  fevers,
etc.;  it  is  likewise  useful  for  exhaustion  following  mental  exertion,  many
forms  of  insanity,  delirium  tremens,  nightsweats,  wakefulness,  night-
mare, etc.  When  the  sheet  is  employed  drippingly  wet,  (the  dripping
sheet)  a  large  tub  or  pan  is  necessary  for  the  patient  to  stand  in,  to  avoid
wetting  the  floor.

The  Hip  or  Sitz  Bath  is  a  common  tub,  in  which  the  patient  sits  so
as  to  have  the  water  cover  the  hips  and  lower  part  of  the  abdomen.  A
vessel  made  for  the  purpose,  with  a  back  to  rest  against  is  more  conve-
nient. The  water  may  be  of  any  temperature,  and  the  time  of  applica-
tion varies  from  five  to  thirty  minutes.  According  to  its  application  it  is
tonic,  derivative,  or  sedative.  Tonic  when  applied  from  five  to  fifteen
minutes  ;  derivative  when  extended  from  fifteen  to  thirty  minutes  ;  and
sedative  according  to  its  effects.  Derivative  hip  baths  should  not  be
carried  to  the  point  of  producing  paleness  or  lividity  of  the  lips,  shiver-
ings,  nausea,  faintness,  or  headache,  and  according  to  the  effect  desired,
and  the  coldness,  torpor,  and  debility  of  the  patient,  indicate  that  the
quantity  of  water  should  be  lessened,  or  its  temperature  elevated.  It  is
useful  in  debility,  irregularity,  obstruction,  and  torpor  of  the  organs  of
the  pelvis  and  lower  part  of  the  abdomen.  A  blanket  is  generally  thrown
around  the  patient  during  this  bath.

The  Shallow  Bath  is  a  circular,  or  oval  tub,  raised  about  twelve
inches  from  the  floor,  and  with  water  in  it  from  four  to  six  inches  deep.
The  patient  sits  in  this,  while  the  attendant  sprinkles  his  head,  and  rubs
his  chest,  abdomen,  and  back.  It  may  be  employed  from  one  to  thirty
minutes,  and  should  be  followed  by  a  good  dry  rubbing.  It  is  used  at  a
temperature  from  60°  to  75°,  and  is  excellent  in  cutaneous  affections,
and  other  cases  where  a  mild  derivative,  or  moderately-sedative  influ-
ence is  desired.

The  Plunge  Bath  may  be  any  vessel  or  place,  the  water  being  from
55°  to  65°,  which  will  allow  the  patient  to  plunge  into  it,  head,  or  feet
foremost  as  he  fancies,  or  to  quickly  immerse  the  whole  body  up  to  the
neck.  The  time  for  remaining  in  it,  varies  from  a  few  seconds  to  two  or
three  minutes,  or  in  high  fever,  to  ten  or  fifteen  minutes.  It  is  generally
taken  after  the  sweating  process,  and  after  the  wet  sheet,  when  the
patient  can  bear  the  exertion ;  in  these  cases  the  sheet  is  not  to  be
removed  until  at  the  plunge.  It  is  very  useful  in  all  febrile  and  chronic
affections,  but  should  be  employed  with  care,  or  avoided  altogether  in
consumptive,  and  dropsical  patients,  and  those  laboring  under  organic
diseases  of  the  heart.

These  are  the  principal  applications  of  water  in  Hydropathic  practice  ;
yet  there  are  several  others  of  a  useful  character,  as  the  Foot  Bath,


236  Materia Medica.

the  Head  Bath,  the  Shower  Bath,  the  Vapor  Bath,  etc.,  the  mode  of
application  of  which  are  generally  well  understood,  as  well  as  their
effects.  Cold  water  may  likewise  be  used  in  form  of  a  bandage  or  girdle,
by  applying  one  or  more  folds  of  linen  wet  in  cold  water,  to  the  part
affected,  or  around  the  abdomen,  and  covering  it  with  a  dry  cloth  or
other  material  to  retain  the  heat.  The  wet  girdle  or  abdominal  wrapper
or  compress,  is  applied  around  the  abdomen  in  all  acute  diseases  of  the
abdominal  viscera.  The  bandages  are  applied  warm  or  cold,  according
to  the  indications  they  are  intended  to  fulfill.

Mineral  waters  vary  in  their  effects  upon  the  system,  according  to
their  constituent  combination.  The  acidulous  waters  are  powerful  and
diffusive  stimulants  of  the  nervous  and  circulatory  systems,  likewise
diuretic.  Generally  useful  in  dyspepsia,  passive  dropsy,  chronic  diseases,
chlorosis,  and  phosphatic  gravel  ;  contra-indicated  in  recent  palsy,  apo-
plexy and  active  hemorrhages  and  inflammations.

Alkaline  waters  are  antacid,  antilithic,  and  diuretic.  Useful  in  gout,
gravel  and  stone.  Purgative  waters  also  possess  diuretic  properties,  and
are  useful  in  all  cases  where  laxatives  are  required.  Chalybeate  waters
are  tonic,  and  used  in  dyspepsia,  all  kinds  of  chronic  cachexies,  gout,
and  chronic  diseases  generally.  Sulphurous  wraters  are  stimulant,  dia-
phoretic, diuretic  and  emmenagogue,  and  are  found  beneficial  in
chlorosis,  rheumatism,  dysmenorrhea,  secondary  syphilis,  chronic  cuta-
neous diseases,  and  deranged  conditions  of  the  stomach  and  liver.  They
are  contra-indicated  in  plethora,  determination  to  the  head,  and  active
hemorrhages  and  inflammations.  Waters  which  contain  iodine  or  bro-
mine, have  been  found  of  some  use  in  goitre  and  scrofula.  Sea-water
internally  is  an  emetic  and  purgative ;  as  a  bath  it  has  all  the  effects  of
an  ordinary  cold  bath,  with  the  addition  of  exerting  a  more  stimulant
action  on  the  skin  than  fresh  water,  owing  to  its  saline  contents.  It  has
been  found  serviceable  in  rickets,  enlargement  of  glands,  or  joints,  some
chronic  cutaneous  eruptions,  scrofula,  and  many  chronic  diseases.


ARALIA  HISPIDA.

Dwarf  Elder.

Nat. Orel — Araliacene. Sex.  SysL— Pentandria  Pentagynia.

bark  of  the  root.

Description. — Aralia  Hispida  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  a  low  stem,
from  one  to  two  feet  high,  the  lower  part  woody  and  shrubby,  and
thickly  beset  with  sharp,  stiff  bristles,  the  upper  part  herbaceous  and
branching.  The  leaves  are  bipinnate  ;  the  leaflets  oblong-ovate,  acute,
cut-serrate;  umbels  many,  simple,  globose,  axillary  and  terminal,  on  long


Aralia  Nudicaulis.  237

peduncles,  followed  by  bunches  of  dark-colored,  nauseous  berries.  It
flowers  from  June  to  September.  The  whole  plant  exhales  an  unpleas-
ant odor.

History. — This  is  a  low  undershrub,  growing  from  New  England  to
Virginia,  in  fields,  hedges,  rocky  places,  and  along  the  roadsides.  The
fruit  is  round,  black,  and  one-celled,  containing  three  irregular-shaped
seeds.  The  bark  of  the  plant  is  employed  in  medicine,  but  that  of  the
root  is  the  most  active.  It  yields  its  virtues  to  water.  It  is  known  in
various  sections  of  the  country  by  the  names  of  Wild  Elder,  Bristlestem-
Sarsaparilla,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  leaves  in  warm  infusion  are  sudorific.  The
bark  is  diuretic  and  alterative.  Very  valuable  in  dropsy,  gravel,  sup-
pression of  urine,  and  other  urinary  disorders.  The  juice  and  decoction
of  the  fresh  roots  are  said  to  be  emetic  and  hydragogue,  and  have  been
found  efficacious  in  dropsy.  Dose  of  decoction,  two  to  four  ounces,
three  times  a  day.

Of. Prep. — Decoctum  Aralise.


ARALIA  NUDICAULIS.

Small  Spikenard.

Nat. Ord. — Araliacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Pentagynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  Aralia  Nudicaulis  is  an  indigenous  perennial  plant,
with  one  leaf  and  one  flower-stem,  springing  together  from  the  root,
or  from  a  very  short  stalk,  and  seldom  rising  two  feet  in  Light.  The
root  is  large  and  fleshy.  The  leaf,  which  stands  upon  a  long  foot-
stalk, is  either  tri-ternate,  or  tri-quinate,  with  oblong-oval,  acuminate
leaflets,  rounded  at  the  base,  serrate  on  the  margin,  and  smooth  on  both
surfaces.  The  flower-stem  or  scape  is  naked,  shorter  than  the  leaf,  and
terminating  by  three  small  umbels,  each  consisting  of  from  twelve  to
thirty  yellowish  or  greenish  flowers.  The  fruit  consists  of  small  round
berries,  about  the  size  of  the  common  elder.  The  root  is  horizontal,
creeping,  several  feet  in  length,  more  or  less  twisted,  as  thick  as  the  little
finger,  and  of  a  yellowish-brown  color  externally.

History. — This  plant,  sometimes  known  as  American,  Wild,  or  False
Sarsaparilla,  is  indigenous,  growing  in  rocky  woods  and  rich  soils  in  the
northern  and  middle  States.  The  root,  which  is  the  officinal  part,  pos-
sesses a  fragrant  balsamic  odor,  and  a  warm,  aromatic,  sweetish  taste.
It  yields  its  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Alterative,  and  gently  stimulant.  Used  in
decoction  or  syrup  as  a  substitute  for  Smilax  Sarsaparilla,  in  cutaneous,


238  Materia  Medica.

rheumatic  and  syphilitic  affections  ;  also  in  pulmonary  diseases.  Exter-
nally, a  strong  decoction  of  it  is  useful  as  an  application  to  zona
(shingles)  and  as  a  stimulant  wash  to  old  ulcers.

The  Aralia  Racemosa,  Pettymorrel,  or  Spikenard,  has  a  herbaceous,
widely-branched,  smooth  stem,  three  or  four  feet  in  hight,  dark-green,
or  reddish,  and  arising  from  a  thick  aromatic  root ;  the  leaves  are  decom-
pound ;  the  leaf-stalks  divide  into  three  partitions,  each  of  which  bears
three  or  five  large,  ovate,  pointed,  serrate,  slightly  downy  leaflets.
Umbels  numerous,  small,  arranged  in  branching  racemes  from  the  axils
of  the  leaves  or  branches.  It  flowers  in  July,  and  grows  in  rich  wood-
lands. The  root  is  large,  spicy,  and  aromatic,  and  possesses  properties
similar  to  that  of  the  A.  Nudicaulis;  it  is  much  used  in  pulmonary
affections,  and  enters  into  the  compound  syrup  of  spikenard.

Off. Prep. — Syrupus  Aralise  Compositus.


ARALIA  SPINOSA.

Prickly  Elder.

Nat.  Ord. — Araliacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Pentagynia.


Description. — The  Aralia  Spinosa,  sometimes  called  Toothache  Tree,
Southern  Prickly  Ash,  and  Angelica  Tree,  is  an  indigenous  arborescent
shrub,  with  a  crooked,  shrubby,  unbranched  stem,  which  is  naked  and
prickly  below,  with  the  leaves  crowded  at  the  summit  of  the  stems,
somewhat  like  the  palms  ;  it  is  generally  not  more  than  ten  to  twenty
feet  high,  but  in  the  south  it  sometimes  attains  to  even  sixty  feet.  The
petioles  are  very  long  and  prickly ;  the  leaves  are  bipinnately  compound,
composed  of  ovate-acuminate,  serrate,  mostly  glabrous  leaflets,  which
are  somewhat  glaucous  beneath.  The  umbels  are  in  large,  much
branched  panicles,  with  small,  few-leaved  involucres.  The  powers  are
small,  white,  with  connivent  styles,  and  appear  in  August  and  Septem-
ber ;  sometimes  they  are  polygamous,  as  the  number  of  berries  bears  no
proportion  to  the  flowers. The  fruit  is  a  blackish,  juicy  berry.

History.  —  The  Prickly  Elder  is  found  chiefly  in  the  southern  and
western  States,  and  is  much  cultivated  in  gardens  as  an  ornamental
plant:  It  grows  in  low,  damp,  fertile  woods.  The  bark,  root,  and
berries  are  medicinal,  but  the  first  is  principally  employed ;  it  yields  its
properties  to  alcohol  or  water.  It  is  thin,  of  a  grayish  color  externally,
and  a  yellowish  white  within,  with  a  peculiar  but  aromatic  odor,  and  a
bitterish,  pungent,  acrid  taste.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aromatic,  stimulant,  diaphoretic  and  alterative;
the  fresh  bark  is  emetic  and  cathartic. The  tincture  has  been  used  in


Arctium Lappa.  239

chronic  rheumatism,  syphilis,  and  in  some  cutaneous  diseases.  The
warm  infusion  will  vomit,  unless  made  very  weak.  The  tincture  of  the
berries  has  been  found  advantageous  in  violent  colic,  and  rheumatism,
and  from  their  pungency,  have  been  found  beneficial  in  relieving  tooth-
ache. Much  use  was  made  of  this  bark  by  the  Eclectics  in  Cincinnati,
during  the  cholera  of  1849-50,  in  cases  where  cathartics  were  required,
but  where  the  action  of  every  purgative  was  very  difficult  to  control ;
the  preparation  was  composed  of  one  drachm  compound  powder  of
Jalap,  one  drachm  Aralia  Spinosa,  and  two  drachms  compound  powder
of  Rhubarb.  Given  in  powder,  in  half  teaspoonful  doses  ;  or  the  pow-
der was  infused  in  half  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  of  which  infusion,  when
cold,  a  tablespoonful  was  given  every  half  hour.  In  no  case  in  which
it  was  given,  did  it  produce  a  tendency  to  looseness  or  choleraic  dis-
charges.

It  is  a  powerful  sialagogue,  and  is  valuable  in  diseases  where  the
mouth  and  throat  are  dry  and  parched,  as  a  very  small  portion  of  the
powder  will  produce  a  moisture  and  relieve  difficult  breathing ;  also
useful  in  sore-throat.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Aralise  Spinosa  ;  Tinctura  Araliae  Spinosa.


ARCTIUM  LAPPA.

Burdock.

Nat.  Orel. — Asteracete ;  Cynaracese,  (Lindley).  Sex.  Syst. —  Syngenesia
^Equalis.

ROOT AND SEEDS.

Description. — By  De  Candolle  this  plant  is  named  Lappa  Minor,  and
by  Gsertner,  Lappa  Major.  It  is  a  biennial  plant,  with  a  fleshy,  tapering
root,  a  foot  or  more  in  length,  of  a  brown  color  externally,  white  inter-
nally, furnished  with  thread-like  fibers,  and  having  withered  scales  near
the  summit.  The  stem  is  erect,  three  or  four  feet  high,  succulent,  pubes-
cent, branching,  bearing  very  large,  cordate,  denticulate  leaves,  of  a
dark-green  color  above,  whitish  and  tomentose  beneath,  and  standing  on
long  footstalks.  The  flowers  are  purple,  globose,  in  panicled  heads.
The  involucre  consists  of  imbricated  scales,  with  a  horny,  hooked  ex-
tremity, by  which  they  can  attach  themselves  to  clothes,  and  the  hair  or
wool  of  animals.  The  florets  are  all  perfect,  five-cleft,  with  a  ten-nerved
tube.  The  stamens  have  papillose  filaments,  and  their  anthers  are  ter-
minated by  filiform  appendages,  and  have  subulate  tails  at  the  base.
The  stigmas  are  free  at  the  apex,  diverging  and  curved  outward.  The
receptacle  is  somewhat  fleshy,  flat,  and  furnished  with  stiff  subulate
fringes.  The  achenia  are  oblong,  smooth,  with  a  rough,  prickly  pappus.
The  seeds  are  quadrangular.


240  Materia  Mkdica.

History. — Burdock  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  grows  abundantly  in
this  country,  among  rubbish,  on  road-sides,  and  cultivated  grounds.
The  root  and  seeds  are  the  officinal  parts  ;  the  first  loses  about  four-
fifths  of  its  weight  by  desiccation  ;  it  should  be  collected  in  the  spring.
The  odor  of  the  root  is  weak  and  unpleasant,  the  taste  sweetish,  mucila-
ginous, slightly  bitter  and  astringent.  It  contains  sugar,  gummy  ex-
tractive, a  large  quantity  of  inulin,  some  salts,  etc.  "Water  or  diluted
alcohol  extracts  its  properties.  The  seeds  are  aromatic,  bitterish,  and
somewhat  acrid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Alterative,  diaphoretic,  diuretic,  and  aperient.
Useful  in  scorbutic,  syphilitic,  scrofulous,  gouty,  leprous,  and  nephritic
diseases.  To  prove  effectual  its  use  must  be  persevered  in  for  a  long
time.  The  seeds  are  more  diuretic  than  the  root,  and  are  said  to  be
likewise  a  more  useful  alterative ;  they  are  principally  used  in  nephritic
complaints.  Externally  the  leaves  or  their  juice  in  the  form  of  an  oint-
ment, have  been  employed  with  advantage  in  cutaneous  diseases,  and
obstinate  ulcers.  Dose,  of  a  decoction  or  syrup,  half  a  pint  three  times
a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Arctii ;  Extractum  Arctii ;  Syrupus  Sarsaparillse
Compositus.

ARCTOSTAPHYLOS  UVA  URSI.

Uva  Ursi.

Nat.  Ord. — Ericaceae Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  known  also  as  Bearberry,  Upland  Cranberry,
etc.,  is  a  low,  evergreen  shrub,  with  a  perennial,  long,  fibrous  root ;  the
stems  are  procumbent,  round,  woody,  and  branched,  covered  with  a
smooth,  deciduous  bark.  The  leaves  are  numerous,  alternate,  evergreen,
obtuse,  obovate,  entire,  coriaceous,  smooth,  dark-green  and  wrinkled
above,  reticulated  and  paler  beneath,  acute  at  base,  and  supported  on
short  petioles.  The  flowers  grow  in  small  clusters  at  the  extremities  of
the  branches,  each  on  a  short,  red,  reflexed  peduncle,  furnished  with
several  minute  bracts ;  they  are  usually  six  to  twelve  on  each  branch,
drooping,  and  of  a  pale  rose  color.  The  calyx  is  small,  obtusely  five-
toothed,  persistent,  and  of  a  reddish  color.  The  corolla  is  ovate  or
urceolate,  smooth,  white  with  a  reddish  tinge,  transparent  at  the  base,
contracted  at  the  mouth,  hairy  inside,  with  five  short,  reflexed  segments.
The  stamens  are  ten,  with  subulate  downy  filaments  inserted  at  the  base
of  the  corolla,  and  reddish  incumbent  anthers,  of  two  oval  cells,  opening
by  two  terminal  pores,  and  furnished  with  a  pair  of  short  horns  or  spurs.


Arctostaphylos  Uva  Ursi.  241

The  ovary  is  roundish,  bearing  a  cylindrical  erect  style,  with  a  simple
stigma.  Disk  a  black  indented  ring.  Fruit  small,  globose,  smooth,
depressed,  scarlet,  containing  a  mealy  pulp  of  an  austere  or  insipid
taste,  and  five  almost  united  angular  seeds.  This  plant  is  the  Arbutus
Uva  Ursi  of  Linnaeus,  and  Willdenow,  from  which  it  was  separated  by
Sprengel,  principally  on  account  of  the  difference  of  its  berry.

History. — The  Uva  Ursi  is  a  perennial  evergreen,  common  in  the
northern  part  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  America,  growing  on  barren,
gravelly  hills,  and  elevated  sandy  plains.  It  flowers  from  June  to  Sep-
tember, and  ripens  its  berries  during  the  winter.  The  leaves  are  the
only  part  used  in  medicine,  they  should  be  collected  in  autumn,  and  the
green  leaves  only  selected.  They  are  about  an  inch  long,  and  two  to
three  lines  wide,  often  spatulate  in  form.  They  are  sometimes  adul-
terated with  the  leaves  of  the  whortleberry  or  cowberry,  Varcinium
Vitis  Idoea,  from  which  they  may  be  detected,  by  the  rounder  shape,
and  the  revolute  edges  of  the  Vaccinium,  and  by  their  being  dotted
beneath  instead  of  reticulated  as  in  the  genuine  leaves.  Leaves  of  the
Chimaphila  Umbellata  may  be  determined  by  their  greater  length,  their
cuneiform  lanceolate  shape,  and  their  serrate  edges.

The  leaves  of  Uva  Ursi  when  dried  have  a  faint  odor  like  hay,  and
a  bitterish,  strongly  astringent  taste,  which  becomes  finally  sweetish.
Their  powder  is  of  a  yellowish-brown  color.  Analysis  has  discovered
in  them  gallic  and  tannic  acids,  resin,  gum,  bitter  extractive,  some  salts,
volatile  and  fixed  oils,  lignin,  and  a  peculiar  principle,  called  ursin,
which  contains  its  diuretic  power.  The  leaves  yield  their  properties  to
water  or  alcohol.

Ursin,  is  said  by  J.  C.  C.  Hughes,  to  be  prepared  as  follows  ;  mace-
rate one  pound  of  the  leaves  of  Uva  Ursi  in  water  for  twelve  hours,  and
displace  until  two  quarts  of  liquor  are  obtained.  Then  precipitate  the
tannin  with  a  solution  of  gelatin,  and  filter.  Evaporate  the  filtered  liquor
to  dryness,  and  dissolve  the  remaining  extract  in  strong  alcohol,  and
treat  it  with  purified  animal  charcoal  for  twenty-four  hours.  Again  filter,
evaporate,  and  redissolve  in  absolute  alcohol,  and  treat  again  with  puri-
fied animal  charcoal  for  twenty-four  hours ;  filter  and  crystallize  by
spontaneous  evaporation.  Press  the  crystals,  redissolve  in  absolute
alcohol,  treat  with  animal  charcoal,  filter,  and  again  crystallize  by  spon-
taneous evaporation.  The  crystals  are  colorless,  transparent,  needle-
shaped  prisms,  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  and  dilute  acid,  but  insoluble
in  fixed  and  essential  oils.  Subacetate  of  lead  and  carbonate  of  potassa
precipitate  its  aqueous  solution  ;  lime-water,  and  tincture  of  chloride  of
iron  do  not  affect  it.  It  is  neutral  to  test-paper,  and  combustible.  One
grain  acted  as  a  powerful  diuretic.  Arbutin  and  Arctuvin  have  also
been  obtained  from  the  leaves  by  Kawalier,  but  their  therapeutical  influ-
ences are  not  positively  known.
16


242  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses.—Vva  Ursi  is  an  astringent,  tonic,  and  diuretic.
As  an  astringent  it  is  applicable  to  all  the  purposes  for  which  astringents
are  used,  as  in  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery;  diabetes,  and  monorrha-
gia. Its  principal  use  however  is  in  chronic  affections  of  the  kidneys
and  urinary  passages,  in  vesical  catarrh,  chronic  gonorrhea,  gleet,  leucor-
rhea,  incontinence  of  urine,  strangury,  and  in  excessive  mucous  dis-
charges. It  changes  the  color  of  the  urine,  and  its  astringent  principle
has  been  detected  in  that  secretion,  also  reputed  efficacious  as  an  anti-
lithic  in  calculous  affections.  In  gonorrhea,  with  bloody  and  mucous  dis-
charges, and  pain  in  the  vesical  region,  it  speedily  allays  all  these
unpleasant  symptoms.  Dose  of  the  powder  ten  to  sixty  grains  ;  of  the
decoction,  one  to  three  fluidounces,  made  by  boiling  one  ounce  of  Uva
Ursi  with  a  pint  and  a  half  of  distilled  water  to  a  pint ;  of  the  extract
five  to  fifteen  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Uvae  Ursi.


ARGENTI  NITRAS.

Nitrate  of  Silver. Lunar  Caustic.

Preparation. — Mix  Nitric  Acid,  five  fiuidrachms  with  distilled  water
two  fluidounces,  and  dissolve  silver,  in  small  pieces,  one  ounce,  in  the
mixture  on  a  sand-bath ;  then  gradually  increase  the  heat,  so  that  the
resulting  salt  may  be  dried.  Melt  this  in  a  crucible  over  a  gentle  fire,
and  continue  the  heat  until  ebullition  ceases  ;  then  immediately  pour  it
into  suitable  molds.  It  should  be  kept  in  bottles  with  glass  stoppers,
as  corks  quickly  decompose  it — especially  its  solution.  If  the  heat  be
raised  to  too  high  a  temperature,  the  salt  decomposes  and  turns  black.

Chemical  Properties.  —  If  the  solution  be  allowed  to  crystallize  by
evaporation  and  cooling,  it  assumes  various  forms,  as  hexangular  or
rhombic  tables,  or  right  rhombic  prisms,  of  a  transparent  or  colorless
appearance,  which  turn  black  when  exposed  to  the  light,  or  to  the  direct
rays  of  the  sun.  The  stick  or  rods  of  the  salt,  are  at  first  white,  but
from  the  action  of  light,  become  grayish,  and  when  broken  they  present
a  crystalline  texture  with  a  radiated  surface.  They  differ  from  the
crystallized  nitrate  only  in  form  and  color,  and  do  not  contain  any  water
of  crystallization,  as  has  been  supposed.

Nitrate  of  silver  is  a  very  heavy  salt,  having  an  intense,  persistent,
and  bitter  metallic  taste  ;  it  fuses  at  426°,  and  undergoes  decomposition
at  about  600°,  parting  with  its  oxygen  and  nitrous  acid,  and  leaving  the
metal  in  a  state  of  purity.  It  is  soluble  in  its  own  weight  of  cold-water,
and  in  four  parts  of  alcohol.  It  stains  the  skin,  and  almost  all  organic
substances  of  a  dark  or  black  color,  and  corrodes  the  soft  tissues.  These
spots  may  be  removed  by  placing  on  them  a  few  drops  of  tincture  of


Argenti  Nitras.  243

iodine,  which  converts  the  salt  into  an  iodide  of  silver  ;  this  is  to  be
dissolved  by  a  solution  of  hyposulphite  of  soda,  made  of  the  strength  of
half  a  drachm  to  a  fluidounce  of  water,  after  which  the  spots  may  be
washed  out  with  warm  water.

Indelible  ink  for  marking  linen,  etc.,  owes  its  character  to  this  salt ;  the
common  formula  fortius  preparation  is  as  follows:  take  of  nitrate  of  silver
five  scruples,  gum  arabic  two  scruples,  sap-green  one  scruple,  distilled
water  one  fluidounce  ;  mix  together  ;  with  this  the  linen  is  to  be  marked,
having  had  the  following  preparation  or  mordant  previously  applied;
take  of  carbonate  of  soda  half  an  ounce,  distilled  water  four  ounces.
An  ink  has,  however,  been  recently  used,  which  does  not  require  a
mordant,  flows  freely  from  the  pen,  does  not  require  a  strong  or  long
continued  heat  to  develop  the  black  mark,  and  which  will  not  destroy
the  texture  of  the  finest  cambric.  It  is  prepared  thus  ;  dissolve  nitrate
of  silver  one  ounce,  in  a  sufficient  quantity  of  distilled  water ;  also
dissolve  crystallized  carbonate  of  soda  one  ounce  and  a  half,  in  sufficient
distilled  water.  Mix  the  two  solutions;  a  precipitate  ensues  which  must
be  collected  and  washed  on  a  filter.  Introduce  the  washed  precipitate,
still  moist,  into  a  Wedgewood's-ware  mortar,  and  add  to  it  tartaric  acid
eight  scruples,  rubbing  them  together  until  effervescence  has  ceased ;
add  strong  liquor  ammonia  in  sufficient  quantity  to  dissolve  the  tartrate
of  silver  (about  two  ounces)  ;  then  mix  in  archil,  half  a  fluidounce,
white  sugar  four  drachms,  powdered  gum  arabic  twelve  drachms,  and
add  distilled  water  sufficient,  if  required,  to  make  six  fluidounces  of  the
whole  mixture.

Nitrate  of  silver,  especially  in  solution,  should  always  be  kept  in
bottles  with  glass  stoppers,  as  cork  quickly  decomposes  it.  It  is  an
anhydrous  salt,  and  is  composed  of  116  parts  or  one  equivalent  of  pro-
toxide of  silver,  and  54.15  parts,  or  one  equivalent  of  nitric  acid,  (AgO-f-
NOs),  and  is  incompatible  with  almost  all  spring  and  river-water,  on
account  of  the  common  salt  usually  contained  in  them,  with  soluble
chlorides,  sulphuric,  hydro-sulphuric,  muriatic,  and  tartaric  acids,  and
their  salts,  with  the  alkalies  and  their  carbonates,  lime-water,  and  astrin-
gent vegetable  infusions.

This  salt  is  liable  to  adulterations,  among  the  principal  of  which  are
the  nitrates  of  lead,  copper,  zinc,  and  potassa;  or  it  may  contain  free
silver,  by  having  been  exposed  to  too  high  a  heat  during  fusion.  It
almost  always  contains  a  small  proportion  of  free  silver  when  in  sticks,
which  may  be  known  by  the  undissolved  black  powder  present  in  its
solution  in  distilled  water.  Precipitate  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  by
an  excess  of  chloride  of  sodium  ;  if  this  precipitate  is  entirely  soluble  in
ammonia  the  salt  is  pure  ;  if  not,  lead  is  present.  Sulphureted  hydrogen
passed  through  the  liquid,  after  having  removed  the  above  precipitate,
gives  a  white  precipitate  if  zinc  be  present,  and  black  if  there  be  any
copper. Nitrate  of  potassa  may  be  suspected  when  a  colorless  fracture


244  Materia  Medica.

is  presented  upon  breaking  the  sticks,  and  when  the  salt  is  entirely  soluble
without  the  black  powder  sediment.  It  may  be  detected  by  precipitating
a  solution  of  the  suspected  salt  with  an  excess  of  muriatic  acid ;  pass
sulphureted  hydrogen  to  remove  any  metals  present,  filter  the  solution,
and  evaporate, — if  pure  it  will  all  evaporate — if  nitre  be  present,  it  will
be  left,  and  easily  recognized  by  its  properties.  Impurities,  without
regard  to  their  character,  may  be  ascertained  by  dissolving  29  grains  of
the  salt  in  a  fluidounce  of  distilled  water,  to  which  9.12  grains  of  muriate
of  ammonia  are  to  be  added ;  briskly  agitate  the  mixture  for  a  few
seconds,  and  then  allow  it  to  rest,  until  precipitation  has  ceased  ;  then
if,  on  the  addition  of  more  muriate  of  ammonia,  no  farther  precipitation
ensues,  the  salt  is  impure.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  certain  class  of  practitioners,  consider  this
salt  as  a  tonic  and  antispasmodic,  and  employ  it  to  fulfill  these  indica-
tions, in  epilepsy,  chorea,  angina  pectoris,  etc.,  as  well  as  administering
it  in  intestinal  ulceration  during  typhoid  fever,  diarrhea,  etc.  However,
it  is  never  used  as  an  internal  agent  by  Eclectics,  but  as  an  escharotic,
either  dissolved  in  distilled  water,  or  in  the  solid  form.  When  employed
in  solution,  its  strength  is  varied,  according  to  the  condition  of  the  parts
to  be  acted  upon,  and  the  character  of  the  affection — from  five  grains  to
eighty  to  the  fluidounce  of  water.  It  has  been  beneficially  applied  to
ulcers,  warts  and  other  excrescences,  fungous  flesh,  chancres,  and  in
ulcers  of  the  cornea,  some  forms  of  ophthalmia,  fetid  discharges  from  the
ear,  aphthous  affections  of  the  mouth,  and  spongy  gums.  It  has  like-
wise been  recommended  as  a  topical  remedy  in  erysipelas  and  various
other  external  inflammations,  leucorrhea,  gonorrhea,  uterine  ulcerations,
granulations,  and  excoriations,  and  stricture  of  the  urethra ;  also  in  ring-
worm, and  some  other  forms  of  chronic  cutaneous  diseases.  A  solution
of  it  is  highly  recommended  in  chronic  laryngitis,  pharyngitis,  pertussis,
asthma,  and  venereal  ulceration  of  the  throat,  applied  by  means  of  a
sponge  fastened  to  one  end  of  a  piece  of  whalebone.  The  solid  stick  is
sometimes  used  in  ulcerations  of  the  throat,  and  chilblains.  If  the  pain
be  excessive  from  the  application  of  the  nitrate,  it  may  be  at  once
relieved  by  washing  the  parts  with  a  solution  of  common  salt,  which
decomposes  it,  and  converts  it  into  the  insoluble  chloride  of  silver.  The
same  article  is  an  antidote  to  its  poisonous  effects  when  taken  internally
in  too  large  doses.

ARISTOLOCHIA  SERPENT  ARIA.

Virginia Snakeroot.

Nat.  Ord. — Aristolochiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Gynandria  Hexandria.

KOOT.

Description.  —  Aristolochia  Serpentaria,  also called Snakeroot,  and
Snakeweed,  is  a  perennial  herbaceous  plant,  with  a  short,  horizontal,


Aristolochia Serpentaria.  245

knotty,  brown  caudex,  which  sends  out  numerous,  slender  fibers.  The
stems  are  erect,  flexuous,  round,  jointed,  slender,  about  eight  or  ten
inches  in  hight,  of  a  reddish  or  purple  color  near  the  base,  and  rise
singly  or  severally  from  the  same  root.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  petio-
late,  oblong,  entire,  acuminate  at  apex,  cordate,  and  three-nerved  at
base,  surface  more  or  less  pubescent,  and  of  a  pale  yellowish-green
color.  The  flowers  proceed  from  the  joints  near  the  root,  and  stand
singly  on  long,  slender,  round,  jointed  peduncles,  which  are  somewhat
scaly,  and  curve  downward  so  as  nearly  to  bury  the  flower  in  the  earth,
or  among  the  decayed  leaves  ;  they  have  a  stiff,  leathery  texture,  and  a
dull  brownish-purple  color.  The  -peduncle  which  supports  them  has  one
or  more  bracts,  and  gradually  enlarges  into  a  furrowed  obovate  ovary.
The  calyx  is  of  a  dull-purplish,  or  reddish  color,  with  a  long,  contorted
tube,  bent  in  the  form  of  the  letter  S,  swelling  at  its  two  extremities,
having  its  throat  surrounded  by  an  elevated  edge  or  brim,  and  its  border
expanded  into  a  broad,  irregular  margin,  forming  an  under  and  upper
lip,  which  are  closed  in  a  triangular  manner  in  the  bud.  Corolla  none.
Anthers  six  or  twelve  in  number  and  sessile,  oblong,  obtuse,  and  attached
to  the  sides  or  under  part  of  a  large,  round,  sessile  stigma,  which  is
divided  into  six  parts,  and  supported  by  a  short  fleshy  style  upon  an
oblong,  angular,  hairy,  inferior  germ.  The  fruit  is  an  obovate,  hexan-
gular,  six-celled  capsule,  with  numerous  small,  flat  seeds.

History. — Several  species  of  Aristolochia  are  confounded  in  the  drug
market  with  the  above,  but  as  they  are  all  nearly  identical  in  medical
properties,  it  is  of  but  little  importance ;  still  a  brief  notice  of  them  may
be  proper :

A.  Hirsuta. — Stem  flexuous,  jointed,  erect,  pubescent;  leaves  alternate,
large,  cordate,  rounded,  obtuse,  upper  ones  abruptly  acuminate,  very
pubescent,  with  prominent  veins  ;  peduncles  sub-radical,  scaly,  one-
flowered,  hirsute.  Calyx  also  pubescent.  This  species  grows  in  the
Southern  States,  to  which  market  it  is  more  common,  being  seldom
brought  to  the  north  ;  the  roots  resemble  in  taste  and  color,  the  A.
Serpentaria.

A.  Hastata,  of  Nuttall,  or  A.  Sagittata,  of  Muhlenberg. — Stem  flexu-
ous, simple,  erect;  leaves  mostly  subcordate,  hastate,  acute,  or  attenu-
ated, sublanceolate,  auriculate  ;  peduncles  nearly  all  radical ;  lip  of  the
corolla  ovate.  Some  doubt  has  been  expressed  about  viewing  this  as  a
distinct  species  ;  it  grows  in  the  Southern  States,  and  is  frequently  found
mixed  with  the  officinal  plant.

A.  Reticulata.  —  Stems  numerous,  short,  slender,  round,  flexuous,
jointed,  simple,  but  sometimes  branched  near  the  root;  when  young  very
pubescent,  but  slightly  villous  when  old.  Leaves  on  short,  villous  peti-
oles, oblong,  cordate,  large, obtuse,  reticulated  with  very  prominent


246  Materia Medica.

veins,  and  villous  on  both  sides,  especially  upon  the  veins.  Peduncles
subradical,  hairy,  scaly,  several-flowered.  Flowers  on  short  pedicels,
small,  purplish,  very  pubescent.  Capsule  hexagonal,  deeply  sulcate,
somewhat  hirsute.  This  species  is  one  of  recent  introduction,  and  is
much  in  use ;  it  is  derived  from  Louisiana,  Arkansas,  and  other  south-
western locations;  it  differs  from  the  officinal  root,  in  having  larger
fibers  and  which  are  less  interlaced,  but  is  fully  equal  to  it  as  a
medicine.

A.  Tomentosa. — Stem  twining,  ascending  to  the  tops  of  the  tallest
trees;  leaves  roundish,  cordate,  villous  beneath  ;  peduncles  solitary,  axil-
lary, ebracteate ;  calyx  densely  villous ;  limb  trifid,  greenish-yellow,
orifice  oblique  and  gaping ;  margin  elevated,  dark-purple,  rugose  ;  inner
part  of  tube  white,  with  purple  spots  ;  stigmas  three.  This  species  is
found  in  Carolina  and  the  south-western  States  ;  its  root  is  thick,  creep-
ing, and  coarser  than  the  officinal,  and  is  less  aromatic  than  that  of  the
other  species  just  named.

The  Aristolochia  Serpentaria  is  found  in  the  middle,  southern,  and
western  States,  growing  on  hill  sides,  and  in  rich,  shady  woods ;  it
flowers  in  May  and  June.  As  found  in  the  shops,  the  root  is  in  tufts  of
slender,  long,  matty  brittle  fibers,  attached  to  a  short,  knotted,  rugged
head.  The  color  of  the  recent  root  is  yellowish,  but  becomes  brown  by
age  ;  its  powder  is  grayish.  The  odor  is  pungent,  camphoraceous,  and
agreeable,  and  the  taste  warm,  bitter,  and  also  camphoraceous.  Water,
alcohol,  or  proof  spirit,  extracts  the  medical  principles  ;  its  alcoholic
tincture  being  greenish,  its  aqueous  infusion  yellowish-brown.  Analysis
has  found  in  it,  a  green,  fragrant  oil,  a  yellowish-green  resin,  extractive,
gum,  albumen,  lignin  and  some  salts.  The  oil  exists  more  largely  in
the  A.  Reticulata,  which  is  the  most  powerful  of  this  family  of  plants.

Virginia  Snakeroot  is  sometimes  adulterated  with  the  roots  of  Spigelia
Marilandica,  and  the  young  roots  of  Polygala  Senega  ;  the  first  may  be
known  by  their  want  of  the  bitter  taste,  as  well  as  by  the  difference  in
the  stem  and  leaves,  when  present;  the  latter,  by  their  difference  in  odor
and  taste,  by  being  single,  and  by  the  projecting  line  running  from  one
end  of  the  root  to  the  other.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  tonic,  diaphoretic,  or  diuretic,  accord-
ing to  the  manner  of  its  administration.  In  warm  infusion  it  produces
diaphoresis,  and  is  beneficial  in  adynamic  eruptive  fevers,  where  the
eruption  is  tardy,  or  has  receded.  In  typhoid  febrile  conditions,  in  cases
where  active  stimulation  cannot  be  borne,  it  will  be  found  very  available.
It  has  been  employed  successfully  in  periodic  fevers  in  conjunction  with
sulphate  of  quinia.  As  a  gargle  the  infusion  is  sometimes  valuable  in
malignant  sore-throat.  In  dyspepsia  it  has  been  employed  as  a  tonic,
and  has  proved  useful  in  amenorrhea.  If  taken  too  long  it  occasions
gripings,  nausea,  vomiting, and  dysenteric  tenesmus. Long boiling


Arnica  Montana.  247

impairs  its  virtues.  A  cold  infusion  is  useful  in  convalescence  from  fevers.
Dose  of  the  powder,  ten  to  thirty  grains;  of  the  decoction,  one  to  two
fluidounces  ;  tincture,  one  to  two  fluidrachms.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Serpentariae  ;  Extractum  Serpentariae  Fluidum ;
Tinctura  Serpentariae  Composita.


ARNICA  MONTANA.
Leopardsbane.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE BOOT AND HERB.

Description. — Arnica  Montana,  is  a  perennial,  herbaceous  plant,  with
a  horizontal,  woody,  blackish  or  brownish  root,  which  terminates
abruptly  at  the  lower  end,  and  which  is  furnished  with  many  long,
slender,  dark-colored  fibers.  The  stem,  rises  about  a  foot  in  hight,  is
simple,  obscurely-angled,  striated,  rough,  hairy,  and  terminates  'in  one,
two,  or  three  upright  peduncles,  each  bearing  one  very  large  flower  of  a
deep  yellow  color,  somewhat  tinged  with  brown.  The  radical  leaves  are
ovate,  entire,  ciliated,  and  obtuse  ;  the  cauline  ones  are  lanceolate,  and
in  opposite  pairs  ;  both  are  bright-green,  and  slightly  pubescent  on  their
upper  surface.  The  involucre  is  cylindrical,  and  composed  of  fifteen  or
sixteen  rough,  hairy,  lanceolate  scales,  of  a  dingy -green  color,  but  purple
at  the  points.  The  disk  florets  are  very  numerous,  tubular,  with  a  five-
lobed  limb  ;  those  of  the  radius,  about  fourteen,  ligulate,  striated,  three-
toothed,  and  hairy  at  the  base.  The  achenia  are  oblong,  blackish,  hairy,
and  crowned  with  a  straw-colored  capillary  pappus.

History.  —  This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  mountainous  districts  of
Europe  and  Siberia,  in  moist,  shady  situations,  flowering  in  June  and
July ;  it  is  likewise  found  in  the  northern  regions  of  this  continent,  west
of  the  Mississippi.  The  flowers,  leaves,  and  root,  have  been  used  in
medicine,  but  the  flowers  are  generally  preferred.  When  fresh,  the
whole  plant  has  a  disagreeable  odor,  very  strong  when  fresh,  and  excit-
ing sneezing ;  the  taste  is  acrid,  bitterish,  and  permanent.  Its  virtues
are  extracted  by  water.  Analysis  has  detected  in  the  flowers,  gallic
acid,  gum,  albumen,  yellow  coloring  matter,  an  odorous  resin,  a  blue
volatile  oil,  some  salts,  and  a  bitter,  acrid  matter,  supposed  to  be  iden-
tical with  cytisin,  the  bitter  principle  of  Cytisus  Laburnum.  Cytisin  is  a
yellow  substance,  of  a  bitter,  nauseous  taste,  deliquescent,  readily  soluble
in  water  and  dilute  alcohol,  less  soluble  in  strong  alcohol,  and  insoluble
in  ether. Five  grains  of  it  are  powerfully  emetic  and  cathartic.


248  Materia Medica.

Arnicina  is  obtained  from  the  flowers,  by  subjecting  them  to  a  process
similar  to  that  by  which  lobelina  is  extracted  from  lobelia  inflata.  It  has
a  decided  alkaline  reaction,  and  combines  with  acids,  forming  a  series  of
salts.  It  has  a  slightly  bitter,  but  not  acrid  taste,  with  an  odor  of  castor,
and  from  the  aqueous  solutions  of  its  salts,  it  is  precipitated  by  tincture
of  galls  in  somewhat  dense  flocks  ;  it  is  more  readily  soluble  in  alcohol
and  ether,  than  in  water.  A  high  temperature  decomposes  it,  which
also  obtains  when  subjected  to  the  action  of  caustic  alkalies.  It  has  not
yet  been  employed  in  medicine,  though  it  probably  possesses  the  active
principles  of  the  Arnica  in  a  concentrated  form.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  it  causes  heat  in  the  throat,
nausea,  vomiting,  spasmodic  contractions  of  the  limbs,  difficulty  of  res-
piration, and  sometimes  inflammation  of  the  alimentary  canal,  and  coma.
Its  poisonous  effects  are  best  counteracted  by  the  free  use  of  vinegar,  or
other  dilute  vegetable  acid.

In  small  doses,  it  accelerates  the  pulse,  increases  the  perspiration,
excites  a  flow  of  urine,  and  is  said  occasionally  to  cause  headache  and
giddiness.  In  Germany,  it  is  esteemed  as  a  stimulant  in  typhoid  fever
and  other  adynamic  febrile  diseases,  in  chronic  palsy,  and  amenorrhea ;
also,  as  a  tonic  in  chronic  rheumatism,  and  as  a  tonic  and  diuretic  in  the
asthenic  forms  of  dropsy.  In  intermittent  fever  it  has  proved  very  suc-
cessful, also,  in  nyctalopia  and  amaurosis  ;  and  is  reputed  to  be  highly
serviceable  in  that  disordered  condition  of  the  system  which  succeeds
concussion  of  the  brain,  from  falls,  blows,  etc.  It  has  also  been  recom-
mended in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  nephritis,  gout,  chlorosis,  and  almost
every  disease  where  there  is  debility,  torpor,  or  inactivity  of  function.
Externally,  it  is  used  in  the  form  of  a  fomentation,  or  diluted  tincture  of
the  flowers,  both  to  prevent  and  discuss  local  inflammations,  and  to
remove  ecchymosis.

Dose  of  the  powder,  five  to  ten  grains,  two  to  four  times  a  day ;  of
the  infusion,  made  by  adding  half  an  ounce  of  the  flowers  to  a  pint  of
water,  from  half  an  ounce  to  an  ounce  ;  of  the  extract,  which  is  an
excellent  form  of  administration,  from  five  to  ten  grains,  four  or  five
times  a  day.  In  preparing  an  infusion  of  the  flowers,  they  should  be
loosely  tied  in  a  bag,  in  order  to  prevent  the  down  or  fine  fibers  from
getting  into  the  infusion,  or  else  they  will  cause  troublesome  irritation  of
the  throat,  nausea,  and  vomiting.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Arnicae  ;  Tinctura  Arnicse.


Artemisia  Absinthium.  249

ARTEMISIA  ABSINTHIUM.
Wormwood.

Nat.  Ord  —  Asteracese. Sex.  Syst.— Syngenesia  Superflua.

TOPS AND LEAVES.

Description. — Artemisia  Absinthium  is  a  perennial  suffruticose  plant,
with  a  woody  root  branched  at  the  crown,  and  having  numerous  fibers
below.  The  whole  herb  is  covered  with  close,  silky  hoariness  ;  the  stems
are  numerous,  bushy,  growing  from  one  to  two  feet  in  hight,  round  fur-
rowed, and  panicled  at  their  summit.  The  lower  portion  of  the  stem
lives  several  years,  and  annually  sends  up  herbaceous  shoots,  which
perish  in  the  winter.  The  radical  leaves  are  doubly  or  triply  pinnatifid,
with  lanceolate,  obtuse,  dentate  divisions  ;  the  cauline  ones,  doubly  or
simply  pinnatifid,  with  lanceolate,  somewhat  acute  divisions  ;  floral  leaves
lanceolate;  all  are  canescent.  The  flowers  are  of  a  brownish-yellow
color,  hemispherical,  pedicelled,  nodding,  and  in  erect  racemes  ;  florets
of  the  disk  numerous  ;  those  of  the  ray  few.  External  scales  of  involucre,
linear  or  lanceolate,  silky ;  the  inner  broad,  rounded  and  scarious.
Styles  very  deeply  cloven.  Receptacle  convex,  clothed  with  fine  up-
right hairs.

History. — A  native  of  Europe,  but  cultivated  in  this  country.  It
flowers  in  July  and  August.  The  whole  plant  has  a  strong,  fragrant
odor,  and  an  intensely  bitter,  aromatic  taste.  Alcohol,  or  water,  takes
up  its  active  principles.  It  contains  a  volatile,  bitter,  acrid  oil,  absinthic
acid,  several  salts,  etc.

Absinthine,  the  bitter  principle  of  A.  Absinthium,  may  be  obtained  as
follows  :  Exhaust  the  dry  herb,  with  alcohol  of  0.863,  and  distil  the
clear  liquid  to  the  consistence  of  a  syrup,  transfer  the  residue  into  a
glass-stoppered  bottle,  and  shake  it  well  with  ether.  After  some  time
this  separates  with  a  yellowish-brown  color  ;  and  this  treatment  with
ether  is  to  be  repeated  until  it  no  longer  has  a  very  bitter  taste.  The
ethereal  liquid  is  to  be  distilled  in  a  water  bath  ;  the  residue  will  consist
of  a  viscid  mixture  of  a  blackish-brown  acid  resin,  and  absinthine.
Treat  it  with  water  to  which  a  few  drops  of  ammonia  have  been  added,
and  the  black  smeary  resin  will  be  principally  taken  up,  and  the  greater
portion  of  the  absinthine  be  left  behind.  In  proportion  as  it  becomes
purer  it  acquires  a  pulverulent  form.  On  adding  a  further  quantity  of
ammonia,  the  absinthine  is  also  dissolved  ;  but  on  triturating  with  con-
centrated ammonia,  far  less  passes  into  solution,  because  the  compound
of  ammonia  with  absinthine  is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  ammonia.  To
remove  the  ammonia,  digest  it  with  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  then  wash
it  with  water,  dissolve  it  in  alcohol,  and  add  solution  of  acetate  of  lead
to  it  as  long  as  any  turbidity  results,  then  filter,  and  pass  sulphureted


250  Materia  Medica.

hydrogen  into  the  liquid  to  decompose  the  excess  of  the  lead  salt.  The
alcoholic  solution  is  to  be  filtered  from  the  sulphide  of  lead,  mixed  with
a  small  quantity  of  water,  and  allowed  to  evaporate  slowly  in  a  warm
place  when  the  absinthine  separates  in  yellow  resinous  drops.  These
are  soft,  and  when  mixed  with  water,  become  coated  with  an  opake
membrane,  and  in  the  course  of  some  weeks  all  the  drops  become  con-
verted into  hard  masses,  which  are  jagged  and  rough  externally,  and
internally  are  radiate  and  indistinctly  crystalline.

Absinthine  thus  obtained  is  yellow,  or  brownish-yellow ;  its  powder  is
yellowish,  of  a  faint,  disagreeable,  bitter  odor  of  wormwood,  an  intensely
bitter  taste,  and  dissolves  readily  in  alcohol,  concentrated  acetic  acid,
solutions  of  ammonia,  and  caustic  potassa,  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric
acids.  It  is  less  soluble  in  ether,  hardly  at  all  in  water,  but  melts  in
boiling  water.  It  has  not  been  much  used  in  medicine,  but  probably
possesses  the  medicinal  principles  of  the  plant,  and  may  be  found  tonic,
hepatic  and  anthelmintic.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Anthelmintic,  tonic,  and  narcotic.  Used  in
intermittent  fever,  jaundice,  and  worms.  It  is  also  used  to  promote  the
appetite  in  atonic  dyspepsia,  amenorrhea,  chronic  leucorrhea,  obstinate
diarrhea,  etc.  Combined  with  a  fixed  alkaline  salt,  it  proves  powerfully
diuretic.  Externally  it  is  very  useful  in  fomentations  for  bruises  and
local  inflammations,  and  has  also  been  advised  as  an  external  application
in  chronic  affections  of  the  abdominal  viscera,  either  in  the  form  of
tincture,  infusion,  or  poultice.  In  large  doses,  wormwood  produces  gas-
tric irritation,  and  excitement  of  the  circulation.  Dose  of  the  powder,
ten  to  twenty  grains ;  infusion,  one  to  two  ounces.

The  Artemisia  Abrotanum  (southernwood)  A.  Santonica,  and  A.  Vul-
garis, (mugwort)  possess  similar  properties.  The  A.  Vulgaris,  has  been
reputed  beneficial  in  epilepsy,  hysteria,  and  amenorrhea.  Santonin,  or
Santonicin,  is  a  peculiar  white  crystallizable  principle,  derived  from  the
A.  Santonica,  and  some  other  species ;  it  is  soluble  in  ether  and  alcohol,
and  is  very  efficacious  as  a  vermifuge,  given  in  doses  of  three  or  four
grains,  twice  a  day.  The  high  price  of  santonin,  and  the  difficulty
experienced  in  obtaining  it  pure,  has  induced  M.  Gaffard  to  endeavor  to
obtain  from  the  wormseed  a  product  which  may  possess  the  advantages
of  the  former,  and  at  the  same  time  be  free  from  the  objections  to  the
use  of  the  latter.  This  product  he  calls  Brown  or  Impure  Santonin;  it
is  obtained  as  follows  :  Take  of  Aleppo  wormseed  three  ounces ;  car-
bonate of  potassa  one  ounce ;  slaked  lime,  sifted,  half  an  ounce  ;  water
from  three  to  three  and  a  half  pints.  Place  the  mixture  on  the  fire,
stirring  occasionally  with  a  wooden  spatula ;  let  it  boil  for  half  an  hour ;  on
removing  it  from  the  fire,  pass  it  with  expression  through  a  linen  cloth ;
let  it  settle,  decant  and  add  hydrochloric  or  nitric  acid  until  it  reddens
litmus  without  being  sensibly  acid  to  the  tongue.  Allow  it  to  rest,  pass
it  through a  filter  previously  moistened,  or  through  a  piece  of  close


Artemisia  Absinthium.  251

canvas,  and  allow  the  product  which  remains  on  the  filter  to  dry  in  the
open  air,  until  it  acquires  the  consistence  of  firm  butter.  This  product,
which  is  a  mixture  of  santonin,  resin,  and  essential  oil,  will  answer  for
the  various  pharmaceutic  forms  in  which  the  practitioner  may  wish  to
exhibit  it.  M.  G.  gives  it  in  the  form  of  lozenges,  composed  as  follows  :
Place  in  a  marble  mortar,  brown  santonin  three  drachms ;  add  by
degrees,  and  with  constant  trituration,  powdered  sugar  thirteen  ounces,
mixed  with  powdered  gum  one  ounce  and  a  half,  and  oil  of  lemon
twenty-five  drops,  so  as  to  make  a  homogeneous  powder.  Form  with  a
sufficient  quantity  of  water  a  mass  of  the  desired  consistence,  and  divide
into  lozenges,  each  of  which  shall  weigh,  when  dried,  fifteen  grains  ;  each
lozenge  will  then  contain  somewhat  more  than  one-third  of  a  grain  of
brown  santonin.  For  infants  under  six  months,  the  dose  is  one  lozenge
night  and  morning ;  from  six  months  to  a  year,  two  lozenges ;  from  one
to  two  years,  three  lozenges ;  from  two  to  four  years,  four,  night  and
morning  ;  for  those  older,  an  extra  lozenge  for  each  year,  to  be  given
night  and  morning,  and  continued  until  the  desired  effects  are  produced,
in  every  instance.

M.  Lecocq  obtains  santonin  by  taking  one  part  of  semen-contra  of
Aleppo  reduced  to  coarse  powder,  and  boiling  it  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour
with  ten  parts  of  water,  after  which  a  sufficient  quantity  of  slaked  lime
is  added  to  render  the  liquor  slightly  alkaline  ;  it  is  again  boiled  for  ten
minutes,  then  strained  through  a  cloth,  and  the  residue  pressed.  If  it
is  not  considered  sufficiently  exhausted,  which  may  be  ascertained  by  its
leaving  in  the  mouth  the  hot  and  pungent  taste  of  semen-contra,  it  is
boiled  again  with  five  quarts  of  water  and  a  little  slaked  lime;  it  is  then
strained,  and  the  residue  submitted  to  pressure.  The  united  liquors  are
evaporated  until  they  do  not  weigh  more  than  the  semen-contra  employ-
ed ;  they  are  then  placed  into  a  stone-ware  pot,  allowed  to  cool,  and  then
treated  with  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid.  A  fatty  and  resinous  mat-
ter instantly  separates,  in  thick  flakes,  which  float,  and  santonin  is  pre-
cipitated as  an  impalpable  powder  ;  it  is  strained  through  a  fine  cloth  ;
the  santonin  passes  with  the  liquor,  and  the  resinous  matters  remain  on
the  cloth.  Th's  substance,  which  contains  only  very  little  santonin  is
rejected.  After  a  day's  repose,  the  impure  santonin  is  deposited  at  the
bottom  of  the  vessel.  It  is  washed  with  distilled  water,  and  purified  by
combining  it  anew  with  lime.  For  that  purpose,  it.  is  put  into  a  porcelain
capsule,  with  about  two  quarts  of  distilled  water,  and  boiled.  A  certain
quantity  (50  to  60  grammes)  of  pulverized  quicklime  is  then  added  to
it,  and  the  combination  is  effected  in  a  short  time.  The  liquor  is  filtered
and  decolorized  with  animal  charcoal,  and  then  treated  with  hydro-
chloric acid,  which  immediately  precipitates  the  santonin ;  collect  this
on  a  paper  filter,  and  wash  it  with  distilled  water  until  the  washing  water
does  not  redden  litmus  paper,  and  dry  in  a  stove  secured  from  the
light. Thus  obtained,  santonin  occurs  in  pearly-white  bractese,  of  great


252  Materia.  Medica.

brilliancy,  and  promptly  becomes  colored  by  light ;  it  is  therefore  essen-
tial to  keep  it  in  a  black  glass  flask  and  well  corked.

It  is  important  for  the  success  of  the  above  operation  not  to  add  an
excess  of  lime  in  combining  the  impure  santonin  with  this  base,  for  the
bibasic  salt  of  santonin  is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  water  ;  it  is  better
to  leave  a  slight  excess  of  santonin ;  which  will  remain  on  the  filter  and
which  may  be  treated  anew  with  lime.

Off.  Prep. — Absinthine  ;  Infusum  Absynthii.


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

Dragonroot.
Nat.  Ord. — Araceas. Sex. Syst. — Moncecia  Polyandria.

CORMUS OR ROOT.

Description.  —  Arum  Triphyllum  (Ariscema  Triphylla)  is  variously
called  Wake  Robin,  Indian  Turnip,  Jack-in-the-pulpit,  etc.  It  has  a
round,  flattened,  perennial  root  or  cormus,  the  upper  part  of  which  is
tunicated  like  the  onion,  and  the  lower  and  larger  portion  tuberous  and
fleshy,  giving  off  numerous,  long  white  radicles  in  a  circle,  from  its
upper  edge ;  the  under  side  is  covered  with  a  dark,  loose,  wrinkled  epi-
dermis. Early  in  the  spring  a  large  spathe  grows  up,  which  is  ovate,
acuminate,  convoluted  into  a  tube  at  the  bottom,  flattened  and  bent  over
at  the  top  like  a  hood,  varying  in  color  internally,  being  green,  dark-
purple,  black,  or  variegated,  with  pale-greenish  stripes  on  a  dark  ground,
and  supported  by  an  erect,  round,  green,  purple,  or  variegated  scape,
invested  at  the  base  by  the  petioles  and  their  acute  sheaths.  Within  the
spathe  is  a  club-shaped  spadix,  shorter  than  the  spathe,  rounded  at  the
end,  green,  purple,  black,  or  variegated,  contracted  into  a  narrow  neck
at  the  base,  where  it  is  surrounded  by  the  stamens  or  germs.  In  the
fertile  plants,  it  is  invested  with  roundish  crowded  ovaries  each  tipped
with  a  stigma;  in  the  barren,  its  base  is  covered  with  conical,  fleshy
filaments,  each  bearing  from  two  to  four  circular  anthers.  Plants  which
are  perfectly  monoecious,  and  which  are  the  least  common,  have  stamens
below  the  ovaries.  The  upper  portion  of  the  spadix  gradually  decays,
together  with  the  spathe,  while  the  ovaries  are  converted  into  a  large
compact  bunch  of  shining,  scarlet  berries.  The  leaves  are  usually  one
or  two  in  number,  standing  on  long  sheathing  footstalks,  ternate ;  the
leaflets  oval,  mostly  entire,  acuminate,  smooth,  paler  on  the  under-side,
becoming  glaucous  as  the  plant  grows,  and  the  two  lateral  ones  some-
what rhomboidal.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  North  and  South  America,  grow-
ing in  all  moist  and  damp  situations,  and  flowering  from  May  to  July.


Asarum  Europium.  253

The  whole  plant  is  acrid,  but  the  root  is  the  only  part  employed ;  it  is
about  an  inch  or  two  in  diameter,  turnip-shaped,  dark  externally,  and
white,  fleshy,  and  solid  internally.  When  fresh,  it  is  very  acrid,  causing
when  chewed,  an  intense  burning  and  biting  sensation  in  the  mouth  and
fauces,  which  is  persistent,  and  leaves  a  subsequent  soreness;  milk
relieves  this  sensation,  considerably  modifying  its  intensity.  It  exerts
no  such  influence  upon  the  external  skin  except  upon  long  and  continued
application.  The  acrid  principle  is  highly  volatile,  is  not  taken  up  by
water,  alcohol,  the  acids,  or  oil,  and  is  wholly  dissipated  by  heat.  It
becomes  inert  by  age,  and  should  always  be  used  in  the  recent  state,  or
when  but  partially  dried  ;  if  buried  in  sand,  its  activity  may  be  pre-
served for  twelve  or  fifteen  months.  In  addition  to  its  acrid  principle,  it
contains  albumen,  gum,  sugar,  starch,  extractive  lignin,  and  salts  of
potassa  and  lime.  A  very  white,  delicate  and  nutritive  amylaceous
substance  can  be  prepared  from  it,  resembling  the  finest  arrowroot.  It
is  too  acrid  for  use  when  taken  immediately  from  the  ground.

Properties  and  Uses. — Acrid,  expectorant,  and  diaphoretic.  Recom-
mended in  flatulence,  asthma,  pertussis,  chronic  catarrh,  chronic  rheu-
matism, bronchitis,  pains  in  the  chest,  aphthous  sore-mouth,  colic,  low
stage  of  typhus,  and  various  affections  connected  with  a  cachectic  state
of  the  system.  Externally  it  has  been  used  in  scrofulous  tumors,  tinea
capitis,  and  other  cutaneous  diseases.  Dose,  of  the  powder,  ten  grains
two  or  three  times  a  day,  gradually  increased ;  it  may  be  taken  in  syrup,
honey,  or  gum  arabic  emulsion.

Off.  Prep. — Emplastrum  Picis  Compositum.


ASARUM  EUROPIUM.

Asarabacca.

Nat.  Orel. — Aristolochiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Dodecandria  Monogynia.

ROOT AND LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  called  Hazelwort,  or  Wild  Nard,
has  a  creeping '  root  or  rhizoma,  entangled,  with  numerous,  stout,
branching  fibers.  The  stems  are  very  short,  simple,  round,  herbaceous,
pubescent,  each  bearing  two  dark-green,  shining,  reniform,  obtuse,
entire,  somewhat  downy  leaves,  which  are  opposite,  two  inches  wide,
and  on  long,  downy  footstalks ;  also  one  drooping  flower,  not  an  inch
long,  fleshy,  of  a  dusky-purple  color,  and  placed  upon  a  short  terminal
peduncle.  The  calyx  is  campanulate,  greenish  at  the  base,  divided  into
three  pointed  purplish  segments,  which  are  erect,  and  turned  inward  at
their  extremity.  Corolla  wanting.  The  filaments  are  twelve,  and  pro-
longed beyond  the  anthers  into  a  small  hook. The  style  is  surmounted


254  Materia  Medica.

by  a  six-parted  reddish  stigma. The  fruit  is  a  six-celled  capsule,  coria-
ceous, and  crowned  with  the  persistent  calyx.

History. — This  is  a  European  plant,  growing  in  woods  and  shady
places.  It  flowers  in  May.  The  whole  plant  is  usually  employed,
which,  when  recent,  is  quite  acrid.  The  root  is  about  the  size  of  a
goosequill,  quadrangular,  knotted,  grayish,  and  occasionally  with  fibers
at  each  joint.  Its  odor  resembles  pepper,  and  its  taste  is  acrid;  the
leaves  are  bitter,  acrid,  nauseous,  and  slightly  aromatic.  The  powder
of  the  root  is  grayish,  of  the  leaves  yellowish-green.  Their  virtues
are  taken  up  by  water  or  alcohol,  but  dissipated  by  boiling,  and  impaired
by  age.  Analysis  has  found  in  the  root,  a  liquid  volatile  oil,  two  con-
crete volatile  substances  called  Asarum  Camphor  or  Asarone,  and
Asarite,  a  peculiar  bitter  principle  called  Asarin,  tannin,  extractive,
resin,  starch,  gluten,  albumen,  lignin,  citric  acid,  and  various  salts ;  in
the  leaves  are  asarin,  tannin,  extractive,  chlorophylle,  albumen,  citric
acid,  and  lignin.  The  volatile  oil  is  yellow,  of  an  acrid,  burning  taste,
valerian-like  odor,  glutinous,  and  lighter  than  water;  the  asarin  is  soluble
in  alcohol,  and  is  probably  identical  with  cytisin.  The  root  and  leaves
of  this  plant  should  always  be  carefully  dried  for  preservation.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emetic,  cathartic,  and  errhine.  Used  princi-
pally as  an  errhine  in  headache,  chronic  ophthalmia,  rheumatic  and
paralytic  affections  of  the  face,  mouth  and  throat.  Internally,  it  is  a
stimulant  in  doses  of  ten  or  twelve  grains ;  and  emetic  in  half  drachm
or  drachm  doses.  Said  to  be  used  in  France  by  drunkards  to  produce
vomiting.


ASARUM  CANADENSE.

Wild Ginger.

Nat.  Ord. — Aristolochiaceje. Sex.  Syst. — Dodecandria  Monogynia.


Description.  —  Asarum  Canadense,  likewise  called  Indian  Ginger,
Coltsfoot,  Canada  Snakeroot,  has  a  close  resemblance  to  the  A.  Euro-
pseum.  The  rhizoma  is  long,  creeping,  fleshy,  jointed,  yellowish,  and
furnished  with  radicles  of  a  similar  color.  The  stem  is  very  short,
dividing  before  it  emerges  from  the  ground  into  two  long  round  hairy
leafstalks,  each  of  which  bears  a  broad,  reniform  leaf  pubescent  on  both
sides,  light-green  and  shining  above,  veined  and  pale  or  bluish  below.
The  flower  is  solitary,  growing  from  the  fork  of  the  stem,  upon  a  pen-
dulous, hairy  peduncle,  being  often  concealed  by  the  loose  soil,  or
decayed  vegetable  matter  around  it.  The  calyx  is  very  woolly,  consisting
of  three  broad  concave,  acuminate  segments,  of  a  brownish,  dull-purple
or  greenish  color  on  the  inside,  at  top  and  bottom,  depending  on  the


Asclepias  Incarnata.  255

amount  of  light  which  the  plant  enjoys,  and  terminated  by  a  lono-,
spreading,  inflected  point,  with  reflexed  sides.  Corolla  wantin<>\  Fila-
ments twelve,  unequal  in  length,  inserted  upon  the  ovary,  and  rise  with
a  slender  point  above  the  anthers,  which  are  attached  to  their  sides  just
below  the  extremity.  Ovary  inferior,  somewhat  hexagonal;  style  coni-
cal, striated,  and  parted  at  top  into  six  recurved,  radiating  stigmas.
Capsule  six-celled,  coriaceous,  and  crowned  with  the  adhering  calyx.

History. — Wild  Ginger  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,  growing  in
woods  and  shady  places,  and  flowering  from  April  to  July.  The  whole
plant  has  a  grateful  aromatic  odor,  and  bitter,  but  agreeably  aromatic
taste.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  and  yields  its  active  principles  to
alcohol,  and  partially  to  water.  It  is  in  long,  contorted  pieces,  varying
in  thickness  from  a  line  to  four  or  five  lines  in  diameter,  brownish  and
wrinkled  externally,  internally  hard,  brittle,  and  whitish.  It  contains
a  light-colored,  pungent,  and  fragrant  essential  oil,  a  reddish,  bitter
resinous  matter,  starch,  gum,  fatty  matter,  chlorophylle,  and  salts  of
potassa,  lime,  and  iron.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Aromatic  stimulant,  tonic,  diaphoretic,  and
expectorant.  Used  in  colic  and  other  painful  affections  of  the  stomach
and  bowels  where  no  inflammation  exists,  and  in  chronic  pulmonary
affections.  Used  also  as  an  errhine.  Dose  of  the  powder,  half  a  drachm;
of  the  tincture  half  a  drachm  to  two  drachms.  It  may  be  advanta-
geously added  to  tonic  infusions  and  tinctures.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Lobeliee  Composita.


ASCLEPIAS  INCARNATA.

Swamp  Milkweed.
Nat.  Ord. — Asclepiadaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria Digynia.


Description. — This  plant  is  known  by  various  names,  as  Swamp  Silk-
weed,  Flesh-colored  Asclep>ias,  Rose-colored  Silkiceed,  White  Indian  Hemp,
etc.  It  has  a  smooth,  erect  stem,  with  two  downy  lines  above  and  on
the  branches  and  peduncles,  branching  above,  and  about  two  or  three
feet  high.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  oblong-lanceolate,  acute,  or  pointed,
obtuse  at  the  base,  on  short  petioles,  and  slightly  tomentose.  The
flowers  are  red  or  reddish-purple,  sweet-scented,  and  disposed  in  numer-
ous umbels  which  are  crowded,  erect,  mostly  terminal,  and  often  in
opposite  pairs.  Hoods  of  the  crown  entire,  horns  exsert,  subulate.  The
leaves  are  four  to  seven  inches  long,  and  from  one  half  an  inch  to  an
inch  and  a  half  wide  ;  umbels  are  from  two  to  six,  on  a  peduncle  two


256  Materia  Medica.

inches  long,  and  consist  of  from  ten  to  twenty  small  flowers.  There
are  several  varieties  of  this  plant,  the  A.  Pulchra,  which  is  more  hairy,
with  broader  and  shorter  petioled  leaves  ;  the  A.  Glabra,  which  is
almost  glabrous,  with  two  opposite  longitudinal  hairy  lines  on  the  stem,
and  leaves  glabrous,  with  rough  margins,  midrib  glandular  below  ;  and
the  A.  Alba  which  has  white  flowers.

History.— This  plant  grows  in  damp  and  wet  soils  throughout  the
United  States,  and  bears  red  flowers  from  June  to  August.  It  emits  a
milky  juice  on  being  wounded.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part;  it  varies
in  thickness  from  one  to  six  lines,  and  is  of  a  light-yellowish  or  brown-
ish color. It  imparts  its  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Anthelmintic,  for  which  purpose  the  powder
may  be  used  in  doses  of  ten  to  twenty  grains,  three  times  a  day  ;  or  the
decoction  two  to  four  ounces.  Prof.  Tully  recommends  it  in  catarrh,
asthma,  syphilis,  rheumatism,  and  worms.  Reputed  to  be  emetic  and
cathartic.  It  is  undoubtedly  a  valuable  agent,  and  worthy  further
investigation.


ASCLEPIAS  SYPJACA.

Common Silkweed.

Nat. Orel. — Asclepiadacere. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Asclepias  Syriaca,  (the  Asclepias  Cornuti  of  Decaisne,)
known  as  Milkweed  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  has  a  large,  stout,
simple,  somewhat  branched  stem,  growing  from  two  to  five  feet  high.
The  leaves  are  opposite,  oblong-lanceolate,  petiolate,  gradually  acute,  and
tomentose  beneath.  The  flowers  are  large,  and  sweet-scented,  arranged
on  several  umbels,  which  are  axillary,  subterminal,  nodding,  dense,  glo-
bose, each  of  twenty  or  more  flowers.  Calyx  segments  lanceolate.
Corolla  pale  or  greenish-purple,  reflexed,  leaving  the  corona,  which  is
of  nearly  the  same  hue,  quite  conspicuous.  But  few  of  the  flowers
prove  fertile,  producing  oblong,  pointed  pods  or  follicles  covered  with
sharp  prickles,  which  contain  a  mass  of  long,  silky  fibers  with  seeds
attached,  and  which  fibers  have  been  used  for  beds,  pillows,  and  in  the
place  of  fur  in  manufacturing  hats.

History. — Very  common  to  the  United  Slates,  growing  in  sandy  fields,
on  roadsides,  and  on  banks  of  streams.  It  bears  whitish-purple  flowers
in  July  and  August.  The  plant  also  gives  out  a  milky  juice  when
wounded.  It  contains  water,  wax-like  fatty  matter,  caoutchouc,  gum,
sugar,  with  various  salts. A  crystalline  resinous  substance,  allied  to


AsCLEPIAS TuBEROSA.  257

lactucone,  has  been  obtained  from  the  juice  of  the  A.  Syriaca,  to  which
the  name  of  Asclepione  has  been  given.  To  obtain  it,  the  juice  must  be
coagulated  by  heat,  then  filtered,  to  separate  the  liquid  portion,  and  then
digested  with  ether,  which  dissolves  the  asclepione,  and  yields  it  by
evaporation.  To  purify  it,  treat  the  residue  repeatedly  with  anhydrous
ether,  which  leaves  another  substance  undissolved.  Asclepione  is  white,
crystalline,  tasteless,  inodorous,  fusible,  insoluble  in  water  or  alcohol,
soluble  in  ether,  oil  of  turpentine,  or  concentrated  acetic  acid ;  potassa
in  a  hot  strong  solution  does  not  affect  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — Anodyne,  emmenagogue,  diuretic  and  altera-
tive. Useful  in  amenorrhea,  dropsy,  retention  of  urine,  dyspepsia,
asthma,  cough,  dyspnoea,  also,  in  scrofulous  and  rheumatic  disorders.
Both  the  root  and  inspissated  milky  juice  possess  anodyne  properties.
Dose  of  the  powder,  ten  to  twenty  grains  ;  of  the  decoction,  two  to  four
ounces  ;  of  the  tincture,  ten  to  sixty  minims.


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

Pleurisy  Root.

Nat. Ord. — Asclepiadacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia,

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  has  several  names  by  which  it  is  known  in
various  parts  of  the  country,  as  Butterfly -weed,  Windroot,  Tuber-root,
has  a  perennial,  large,  fleshy,  branching,  white,  and  sometimes  fusi-
form-like root,  from  which  numerous  stems  arise,  growing  from  one  to
three  feet  high  ;  these  are  erect,  or  more  or  less  procumbent,  round,
hairy,  green  or  red,  and  growing  in  bunches  from  the  root.  The  leaves
are  alternate,  the  lower  ones  pedunculated,  the  upper  sessile,  vary  from
linear  to  oblong-lanceolate,  hairy,  dark-green  above,  paler  beneath,
waved  on  the  edge,  and  in  the  old  plants  sometimes  revolute.  The
flowers  are  numerous,  erect,  of  a  beautifully  .bright-orange  color,  and
are  disposed  in  terminal,  rarely  lateral,  corymbose  umbels,  with  an  invo-
lucre of  numerous,  linear,  subulate  bracts.  The  calyx  is  much  smaller
than  the  corolla,  five-parted  ;  the  segments  subulate,  reflexed,  and  con-
cealed by  the  corolla.  Corolla  rotate,  five-parted,  the  segments  oblong
and  reflexed.  The  stamineal  crown  has  five  erect,  cucullate  leaves  or
cups,  with  an  oblique  mouth,  having  a  small,  incurved,  acute  appendage
or  horn,  proceeding  from  the  base  of  each,  and  meeting  at  the  center  of
the  flower.  The  mass  of  stamens  is  a  tough,  horny,  somewhat  pyra-
midal substance,  separable  into  five  anthers;  each  two-celled,  bordered
by  membranous,  reflected  edges  contiguous  to  those  of  the  next,  and
17


258  Materia  Medica.

terminated  by  a  membranous,  reflected  summit.  Pollen  masses  ten,
distinct,  yellowish,  transparent,  flat  and  spathulate,  ending  in  curved
Stalks,  which  unite  them  by  pairs  to  a  minute  dark  tubercle  at  top  ;  each
pair  is  suspended  in  the  cells  of  two  adjoining  anthers,  so  that  it'  a  needle
be  inserted  between  the  membranous  edges  of  two  anthers  and  forced
out  at  top,  it  carries  with  it  a  pair  of  the  pollen  masses.  Carpels  two,
completely  concealed  beneath  the  stigma  and  anthers,  ovate,  with  erect
styles,  terminated  by  a  flat,  pentagonal  disk-like  stigma.  Follicles  two,
often  one  or  both  abortive,  long,  narrow,  acuminated,  green,  with  a  red-
dish tinge  and  downy.  Seeds  ovate,  flat,  margined,  and  terminated  by
long  silken  hairs.

History. — This  is  an  indigenous  plant,  growing  in  gravelly  and  sandy
soils,  but  most  abundant  in  the  south,  and  flowering  in  July  and  August.
Unlike  the  other  species  of  Asclepias,  this  plant  does  not  emit  a  milky
juice  when  wounded.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  which  when  fresh
has  a  subacrid,  nauseous  taste,  but  when  dried  it  is  easily  pulverized,
and  has  a  bitterish  but  not  disagreeable  taste.  Boiling  water  or  alcohol
extracts  its  virtues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diaphoretic  and  expectorant,  without  stimu-
lating ;  likewise  said  to  be  carminative,  diuretic,  tonic,  and  antispasmo-
dic. Principally  used  in  decoction  or  infusion  in  pleurisy,  pneumonia,
catarrh,  febrile  diseases,  acute  rheumatism,  and  dysentery;  in  which  it
is  administered  warm  to  promote  diaphoresis,  without  increasing  the
temperature  of  the  body.  In  flatulency  and  indigestion,  it  is  efficient,
and  when  combined  with  the  Dioscorea  Villosa,  it  is  very  beneficial  in  all
cases  of  flatus  in  adults  and  children.  A  number  of  cases  of  prolapsus
uteri  have  been  cured  under  the  use  of  one  ounce  of  pleurisy-root  mixed
with  half  an  ounce  of  the  root  of  Aletris  Farinosa,  and  given  in  drachm
doses,  three  times  a  day.  In  uterine  difficulties  this  plant  deserves
further  investigation.  It  is,  undoubtedly,  one  of  our  most  useful  agents.
Dose  of  the  powder,  one  scruple  to  one  drachm,  three  or  four  times  a
day ;  of  the  decoction  or  infusion,  a  teacupful,  every  hour  or  two,  until
diaphoresis  is  produced.

Two  concentrated  preparations  are  obtained  from  this  article,  termed
Asdepidin  and  Ascletine.  The  former  was  first  manufactured  by  Mr.  W.
S.  Merrell,  the  latter  by  some  chemists  in  N.  York  ;  of  the  particular
method  of  preparing  the  latter,  we  have  been  unable  to  get  any  account.
The  asdepidin  is  a  dark,  semiliquid  mass,  and  is  prepared  by  evapora-
tion or  distillation  of  the  saturated  tincture  in  water,  similar  to  the  plan
pursued  for  obtaining  cimicifugin.  It  may  be  used  for  all  purposes  to
which  the  crude  article  is  applied  in  doses  of  from  one  to  five  grains,
three  or  four  times  a  day,  or  as  may  be  indicated.

A  pill  composed  of  equal  parts  of  asdepidin  and  dioscorein,  will  be
found  very  beneficial  in  flatulency,  borborygmi,  and  where  persons  are


Asparagus Officinalis.  2^9

subject  to  flatulent  and  bilious  colic.  In  some  cases,  especially  of  long
standing,  the  addition  of  pulverized  African  ginger  will  much  improve
its  efficacy.

Asdetine  is  said  to  be  the  active  principle  of  the  plant ;  it  is  a  beauti-
ful, white  powder,  with  but  little  taste  or  odor,  soluble  in  water,  but
insoluble  in  alcohol.  It  is  recommended  in  the  same  diseases  in  which
the  root  is  employed,  to  fulfill  similar  indications,  in  doses  of  from  one  to
three  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Off.  Pre}).  —  Extractum  Asclepidis  Hydro-alcoholicum  ;  Infusum
Asclepidis  ;  Pulvis  Asclepiae  Compositus  ;  Pulvis  Ipecacuanhas  Compo-
situs  ;  Tinctura  Lobelise  Composita  ;  Asclepidin.


ASPARAGUS  OFFICINALIS.

Asparagus.
Nat.  Ord. — Liliaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE YOUNG SHOOTS.

Description. — Asparagus  officinalis  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  an  erect,
herbaceous,  unarmed,  terete,  very  branching  stem,  from  two  to  four  feet
high.  The  leaves  are  setaceous,  flexible,  fasciculate,  filiform,  of  a  pale
pea-green  color  and  from  half  an  inch  to  one  and  a  half  inches  long;
flowers  axillary,  solitary,  or  in  pairs.  Berries  globose,  red,  three-celled.
Cells  two-seeded.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe  and  is  extensively  cultivated
there,  as  well  as  in  the  United  States,  as  an  article  of  diet.  The  root  is
inodorous,  and  has  a  weak  sweetish  taste  ;  when  dried  it  is  inert.  The
young  shoots  or  turiones,  which  are  much  used  as  food,  have  a  disagree-
able taste,  which  is  removed  by  boiling  with  water  ;  their  juice  contains
a  crystallizable  principle  called  Asparagin  or  Asparamide.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diuretic.  A  syrup  or  an  extract  prepared
from  the  young  shoots,  in  doses  of  one  or  two  fluidounces  of  the  former,
or  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm  of  the  latter,  is  said  to  greatly
increase  the  quantity  of  urine,  and  is  reputed  very  beneficial  in  repres-
sing an  undue  excitement  of  the  circulatory  system,  and  recommended
for  this  purpose  in  hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  and  other  diseases  of  that
organ,  attended  with  excessive  action,  and  without  phlogosis  of  the
stomach.


260  Materia  Medica.

ASPIDIUM  FILIX  MAS.

Male  Fern.

Nat.  Ord. — Filices  or  Filicaceje. — Polypodiaceze. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia
Filices.

KHIZOMA.

Description. — Male  fern  has  a  large,  perennial,  horizontal,  scaly  root
or  rhizoma,  from  which  numerous  fronds  or  leaves  arise,  forming  tufts
from  a  foot  to  four  feet  in  hight.  The  fronds  are  erect,  disposed  in  a
circle,  oval,  lanceolate,  acute,  pinnate,  bright-green,  and  leafy  nearly  to
the  bottom  ;  their  stalks  and  midribs  having  tough,  brown,  transparent
scales  throughout;  divisions  alternate,  taper-pointed,  pinnate  ;  the  pinnae
or  leaflets  numerous,  crowded,  sessile,  for  the  most  part  distinct,  occa-
sionally somewhat  combined  at  the  base,  oblong,  obtuse,  crenate  through-
out, the  lateral  notches  broadest  and  most  shallow,  the  terminal  ones
more  crowded  and  acute,  without  any  terminal  bristles ;  both  sides
smooth,  and,  destitute  of  glandular  globules,  but  a  depression  on  the  upper
one  over  the  insertion  of  each  sorus.  Sori  circular,  tawny,  ranged  in
simple,  close,  short  rows,  near  the  partial  midrib,  and  scarcely  occupying
more  than  the  lower  half  of  each  leaflet.  Indusium  circular,  durable,
crenate,  tumid,  with  a  cleft  terminating  in  the  central  depression.
Thecal  numerous,  shining-brown,  prominent  all  round  for  a  little  beyond
the  indusium.

History. — Found  growing  in  all  parts  of  Europe,  and  indigenous,
growing  in  shady  pine  forests,  from  New  York  to  Virginia.  The  root
or  rhizoma  is  the  officinal  part ;  the  best  are  about  six  inches  long,  and
an  inch  broad  ;  externally  it  is  of  a  brown  color,  internally  yellowish  or
reddish-white,  with  a  peculiar,  but  not  very  strong  odor,  and  a  sweetish,
bitter,  nauseous  and  astringent  taste.  It  should  be  collected  between
the  end  of  May  and  middle  of  September  ;  cleansed,  without  being
washed ;  then  dried  quickly  in  the  shade  and  open  air  without  heat,
those  parts  selected  which  are  greenish,  internally,  immediately  pulver-
ized, and  then  kept  in  well-closed  bottles.  The  powder  is  of  a  pale
greenish-yellow  color,  and  has  a  peculiar,  earthy,  disagreeable  odor,  and
a  nauseously  sweet  taste,  followed  by  some  bitterness  and  astringency.
It  loses  its  virtues  in  two  years.  An  ethereal  oil  is  obtained  by  evapo-
rating or  distilling  off  the  ether  from  an  ethereal  tincture.

It  is  a  thick,  dark,  liquid,  with  the  odor  and  taste  of  the  root,  though
somewhat  acrid,  and  contains  volatile  oil,  resin,  coloring  matter,  etc.
The  purer  the  ether  used,  the  less  resin  is  taken  up.  Male  fern  root
contains  a  volatile  oil,  a  fixed  oil,  resin,  gallic  and  acetic  acids,  uncrys-
tallizable  sugar,  tannin,  starch,  a  gelatinous  matter  insoluble  in  water
and  alcohol,  lignin,  and  various  earthy  and  saline  matters.


Astragalus Vekus.  261

Properties  and  Uses. — Anthelmintic.  Used  solely  for  the  removal  of
worms,  especially  the  tapeworm.  It  is  said  to  be  more  effectual  in
removing  the  tapeworm  of  Switzerland  (Bothriocephalus  latus)  than  the
Taenia  solium,  the  most  frequent  variety  in  France  and  England.  The
best  mode  of  administration  is  the  ethereal  oil  or  extract,  of  which
eighteen  grains,  or  from  twelve  to  twenty-four  drops  may  be  given  in
the  form  of  pill  or  emulsion,  at  night,  and  again  in  the  morning ;  two
hours  after  the  administration  of  the  last  dose,  a  purgative  dose  of  castor
oil  is  to  be  taken,  and  the  worm  is  discharged  dead,  without  any  severe
or  unpleasant  symptoms.  Dose  of  the  powder,  one  to  four  drachms;  of
the  ethereal  tincture  of  the  buds,  eight  to  thirty  drops,  and  which  is
made  by  digesting  one  part  of  the  buds,  in  eight  parts  of  ether.


ASTRAGALUS  VERUS.

Tragacanth.

Nat. Ord. — Fabacea?. Sex.  Syst.  —  Diadelphia  Decandria.

THE CONCRETE JUICE.

Description.  —  This  is  a  small  shrub  about  two  or  three  feet  in  hight,
with  a  stem  about  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  numerous,  very  closely
crowded  branches,  covered  with  imbricated  scales,  and  spines  which  are
the  remains  of  former  petioles.  The  leaves  are  a  little  more  than  half
an  inch  long,  and  consist  of  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  opposite,  villous,
stiff,  pointed,  linear,  hispid  leaflets,  with  a  midrib  terminating  in  a  sharp
yellowish  point;  stipules  at  first  downy,  afterward  smooth.  The  flowers
are  small,  yellow,  axillary,  in  clusters  of  from  two  to  five,  sessile,
papilionaceous,  and  furnished  with  cottony  bracts.  Calyx  tomentose,
obscurely  five-toothed.

History.  —  Tragacantha  or  Tragacanth  is  obtained  from  several
species  of  plants,  belonging  to  the  genus  Astragalus.  The  A.  Traga-
cantha of  Linnaeus,  now  the  A.  Massiliensis  of  Lamarck,  a  tree  growing
in  southern  Europe  and  northern  Africa,  and  which  yields  no  gum,  was
formerly  referred  to  as  affording  the  drug,  but  this  is  now  known  to  be
incorrect-  The  greater  portion  of  the  species  from  which  tragacanth  is
obtained,  are  natives  of  Asia,  having  rigidly  persistent  petioles,  forming-
spines.  Most  of  the  spinous  species,  furnish  the  peculiar  exudation,
which  is  known  in  commerce,  as  G~um  Tragacanth,  especially  those  in-
habiting warm  regions,  but  Botanists  have  not  positively  determined  as
to  the  particular  plants.  The  A.  Verus,  a  low  and  very  hispid  shrub,  is
stated  by  Olivier  to  afford  the  largest  proportion  of  the  gum  sent  to
Europe.  It  is  found  growing  naturally  in  Persia,  Armenia  and  Asia
Minor. The  gum  exudes  from  the  stem  naturally,  or  after  incisions,


262  Materia  Medica.

hardening  as  it  exudes  ;  and  is  gathered  from  July  till  September.  It  is
forwarded  to  India  through  Bagdad  and  Bassoro,  then  to  Russia,  and
from  thence  to  Aleppo.  The  other  species  which  are  admitted  to  fur-
nish the  gum,  are  A.  Gummifer,  a  native  of  Syria  and  Koordistan,
which  is  said  to  yield  the  white  or  best  variety ;  A.  Creticus,  growing  in
Crete,  and  A.  Aristatus,  a  native  of  Greece  and  the  south  of  Europe,
and  reputed  to  afford  some  of  the  tragacanth  imported  from  Smyrna  and
the  A.  Strobiliferus,  growing  in  Koordistan,  and  furnishing  the  dark-
colored,  or  inferior  gum,  which  is  mingled  with  the  commercial  article;
but  this  requires  confirmation.  The  plants  which  yield  tragacanth,
resemble  each  other  so  closely,  that  much  confusion  has  existed  among
Botanists  in  distinguishing  them.

Tragacanth  presents  the  appearance  of  very  thin,  pale-grayish,  or
grayish-yellow,  almost  parchment-like  plates  or  scales,  marked  by  spiral
or  circular  ridges.  It  is  semitransparent,  or  translucent,  resembling
horn  in  appearance,  hard,  more  or  less  fragile,  but  difficult  of  pulveriza-
tion, unless  exposed  to  a  freezing  temperature,  or  thoroughly  dried,  and
powdered  in  a  heated  mortar,  tasteless  and  inodorous.  Its  powder  is
very  fine  and  white.  Sometimes  pieces  of  a  slightly  reddish  color  are
met  with,  of  a  roundish  or  irregularly  oblong  shape.  The  specific  gravity
of  tragacanth  is  1.384.  Cold  or  boiling  water  converts  it  into  mucilage ;
introduced  into  cold  water,  it  absorbs  a  portion  of  that  fluid,  swells  very
much,  and  forms  a  paste  without  being  dissolved.  By  boiling,  its  solu-
tion is  nearly  completed.  The  mucilage  is  changed  to  a  blue  color  by
the  addition  of  iodine,  owing  to  the  presence  of  a  small  proportion  of
starch.  Tragacanth  is  insoluble  in  alcohol,  and  is  composed  of  a  sub-
stance soluble  in  water,  and  a  substance  not  soluble,  but  which  swells
when  placed  in  water.  The  soluble  portion  resembles  gum  arabic,  but
differs  from  it  by  not  yielding  any  precipitate  with  silicate  of  potassa  or
sesquichloride  of  iron  ;  the  insoluble  portion  is  called  Tragacantkin,  con-
stitutes 43  per  cent,  of  the  drugs,  and  is  supposed  to  be  identical  with
bassorin,  with  a  small  quantity  of  insoluble  starch.  The  composition  of
tragacanth  is  not  satisfactorily  settled  by  chemists  ;  M.  Guerin  considers
it  to  be  a  compound  of  53.3  parts  of  arabin  or  soluble  gum,  33.1  of
bassorin  and  insoluble  starch,  11.1  of  water,  and  when  burned  2.5  of
ashes.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tragacanth  is  nutritive  and  demulcent ;  seldom
used  except  for  the  suspension  of  heavy,  insoluble  powders,  to  impart
consistence  to  troches  and  lozenges,  and  to  form  paste  for  the  druggists,
with  which  to  label  their  prescriptions.


ASSAFCETIDA.  263

ASSAFCETIDA.

Assafcetida.

Nat.  Ord. — Apiaceaa,  or  Umbelliferae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

CONCRETE JUICE OF THE BOOT OF FERULA ASSAFCETIDA.

Description. — Ferula  Assafcetida,  Linnozus,  or  Narthex  Assafoetida,
has  a  perennial,  fleshy,  tapering  root,  with  a  coarse  hairy,  or  fibrous
summit,  about  the  size  of  a  man's  leg  when  full-grown,  either  simple
like  a  parsnep,  or  with  one  or  more  forks  ;  externally  it  is  blackish,  inter-
nally white,  and  abounding  in  a  very  fetid,  opake,  milky  juice.  The
leaves  are  radical,  six  or  seven  in  number,  nearly  two  feet  long,  shining,
coriaceous,  deep-green,  pinnated,  with  pinnatilid  segments  whose  lobes
are  oblong  and  obtuse ;  petiole  terete,  amplexicaul,  channeled  only  at  the
base.  The  leaves  grow  vigorously  through  the  winter,  and  wither  at
the  termination  of  spring.  From  the  midst  of  the  leaves,  rises  a  luxu-
riant, herbaceous  stern,  from  six  to  ten  feet  high,  two  inches  in  diameter
at  the  base,  solid,  simple,  erect,  round,  smooth,  striated,  the  spongy
medulla  traversed  by  bundles  of  tough,  fibrous  vessels,  the  surface
clothed  with  the  remains  of  persistent  leafless  petioles,  and  terminating
in  large  plano-convex  umbels  with  numerous  radii.  The  flowers  are
pale-yellow  ;  the  fruit  is  flat,  oval,  thin,  reddish-brown,  slightly  hairy
or  rough.  The  plant  varies  in  its  appearance,  according  to  its  situation
and  soil.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Persia.  The  gum-resin  is  prepared
from  incisions  into  the  upper  portion  of  the  root,  or  by  taking  successive
slices  from  it ;  plants  under  four  years  are  not  made  use  of,  as  they  yield
but  little,  if  any,  of  the  juice.  At  the  time  the  leaves  begin  to  fade,  the
root-leaves  and  stem  are  twisted  off  close  to  the  root,  and  the  soil  is
removed  from  its  crown.  About  forty  days  afterward,  a  thin  slice  is  cut
off  transversely  from  its  summit,  and  a  milky  juice  of  a  fetid,  alliaceous
odor  gradually  exudes.  In  about  two  days,  or  when  this  exudation  has
become  hardened,  it  is  scraped  off,  and  another  thin  slice  removed  as
before,  from  which  juice  again  flows,  and  this  process  is  repeated  until
no  more  juice  can  be  obtained  ;  while  this  collection  is  going  on,  the  root
is  constantly  protected  from  the  solar  rays.  The  concrete  juice  from
several  plants,  are  then  put  together,  further  hardened,  and  disposed  of
for  home  use  or  foreign  exportation.  The  assafcetida  in  this  country  is
either  from  India,  or  Great  Britain,  in  mats,  cases  or  casks,  of  from
eighty  pounds  to  several  hundreds  each.

This  gum-resin  as  met  with  in  the  shops  is  in  masses  of  different  sizes,
rather  soft,  varying  in  color,  becoming  reddish,  and  finally  a  dull  yellow-
ish-brown on  exposure  to  the  atmosphere  ;  on  being  broken  it  presents


264  Materia  Medica.

a  shining,  whitish  surface,  and  changes  color  as  it  becomes  exposed.
The  masses  have  an  irregular,  amygdaloid  appearance,  being  composed
of  whitish  tears  agglutinated  together.  Sometimes  the  tears  are  to  be
had  separate ;  they  are  oval,  irregular,  of  the  size  of  a  pea  or  larger,
brownish  externally,  white  internally,  and  of  weaker  odor  than  that  of
the  masses.  The  better  the  article  is  in  the  masses,  the  greater  the
quantity  of  tears,  with  but  a  small  portion  of  the  dark,  soft,  agglutinat-
ing material  in  which  they  are  imbedded.  Assafoetida  has  a  fetid,  tena-
cious and  alliaceous  odor,  and  a  strong,  peculiar,  persistent,  bitterish,
and  rather  acrid  taste.  Age  hardens  it  and  renders  it  brittle,  beside
diminishing  its  taste  and  odor.  It  can  only  be  pulverized  at  a  low  tem-
perature, as  in  frosty  weather ;  in  warm  weather  it  softens  under  the
pestle.  Moderate  heat  softens  it  so  far  that  it  may  be  squeezed  through
a  coarse  cloth,  and  freed  from  impurities  of  a  mechanical  nature ;  a
stronger  heat  causes  it  to  froth  up,  and  at  a  red  heat  it  burns  with
clear,  lively  flame.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1.327.  Rubbed  with  cold  or
warm  water,  the  gum  is  dissolved,  forming  a  smooth  white  or  pink-
colored  persistent  emulsion,  in  which  the  resin  and  volatile  oil  are  sus-
pended. With  rectified  alcohol  it  forms  a  clear  tincture,  which  is  its
best  menstruum.  Spirit  dissolves  the  resin  and  oil,  but  is  too  feeble  a
solvent.  Sulphuric  ether  dissolves  the  volatile  oil  and  a  portion  of  resin  ;
solution  of  caustic  potassa  dissolves  it  almost  entirely,  forming  an  emul-
sion when  the  alkali  is  neutralized;  and  solution  of  ammonia  dissolves
the  gum  and  oil,  with  part  of  the  resin.  It  readily  unites  with  other
resins,  gum-resins,  and  wax;  and  is  best  preserved  in  bladders  kept  in
tin  boxes.

Assafoetida  contains  volatile  oil,  resin  soluble  in  ether,  a  tasteless  resin
insoluble  in  ether,  gum,  bassorin,  sulphate  of  lime,  carbonate  of  lime,
oxide  of  iron  and  alumina,  malate  of  lime,  etc.  The  volatile  oil  may  be
procured  by  distillation  with  water  or  alcohol,  at  first  it  is  pale-green,
but  becomes  yellowish-brown  by  age,  is  lighter  than  water,  of  a  power-
fully offensive  odor,  and  a  taste  peculiar  to  the  gum-resin  ;  it  contains
sulphur. This  and  the  bitter  resin  are  the  active  principles.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  antispasmodic,  expectorant,  emmen-
agogue,  and  feebly  laxative.  Improper  in  inflammatory  conditions  of
the  system.  Used  in  hysteria,  hypochondria,  convulsions,  spasmodic
nervous  diseases  of  females,  spasm  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  various
irregular  nervous  disorders  which  accompany  debility  of  the  nervous
system,  and,  in  combination  with  morphia  and  quinia,  in  sick  or  nerv-
ous headache.  With  podophyllinandcunicifuginitisbeneficial  in  chorea.
Also  useful  in  pertussis,  asthma,  infantile  coughs  and  catarrhs,  croup,
measles,  etc.,  whenever  there  is  a  want  of  nervous  energy,  or  disposition
to  sink.  Likewise  efficient  in  amenorrhea  and  dysmenorrhea,  and  as  an
injection  in  tympanitic  abdomen,  lumbricus  and  ascarides. Dose,  in


Aster  Puniceus.  265

powder  or  pill,  from  five  to  ten  grains  ; of the  tincture,  from  half a
drachm  to  two  drachms.

Off. Prep.  —  Enema  Assafcetidse  Composita;  Tinctura  Assafcetidee  ;
Tmctura  Castorei  Ammoniata.


ASTER  PUNICEUS.

Red-stalked  Aster.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteracea?,  or  Composita?. Sex.  Syst.  — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE EOOT.

Description. — The  root  of  this  plant  is  perennial  and  fibrous  ;  the  stem
is  hispid,  paniculate  above,  furrowed,  generally  red,  or  at  least  on  the
south  side,  stout  and  tall,  growing  from  three  to  six  feet  in  hight.  The
leaves  are  oblong-lanceolate,  amplexicaul,  and  more  or  less  auriculate  at
base,  sparingly  serrate  in  the  middle  with  appressed  teeth,  rough  above,
nearly  smooth  underneath,  pointed  ;  lower  leaves  with  remote  serratures,
rough  edged,  and  rough  on  the  upper  surface,  all  acuminate  and  nar-
rowed at  the  base.  Involucre  loose,  longer  than  the  disk  ;  the  scales
linear-lanceolate,  long,  revolute,  nearly  equal,  and  in  two  rows.  Flowers
large,  showy,  and  of  a  pale  purple  or  lilac-blue  color.  Rays  from  fifty
to  eighty,  long  and  narrow.

History. — This  plant  is  found  growing  in  various  parts  of  the  United
States,  in  swamps,  ditches,  along  the  borders  of  small  streams,  and
sometimes  in  dry  soils.  It  flowers  from  July  to  October.  The  radicles
or  fibers  of  the  root,  are  the  parts  used  ;  they  are  about  the  size  of  a
pipestem,  having  a  pungent,  aromatic  odor  and  taste,  with  some  bitter-
ness and  astringency.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  their  active  properties.
This  plant  is  variously  known  by  the  names  of  Cocash,  Meadow  Scabisk,
Squaw-weed,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  and  diaphoretic.  The  warm  infusion
may  be  used  freely  in  colds,  rheumatism,  nervous  debility,  headache,
pains  in  the  stomach,  dizziness,  and  menstrual  irregularities.  This,
together  with  the  A.  Cordifolius  are  probably  equivalents  of  valerian.

The  Aster  ^Estivus,  named  Rheumatic-weed,  also  Sampson  Snokeroot,
Star  flower,  etc.,  resembles  the  above  plant,  having  lanceolate,  sub-clasp-
ing leaves,  tapering  to  the  apex;  margin  rough  ;  stem  branching  from
its  base,  erect,  hispid  ;  hranchlets  pilose ;  involucre  scaly  ;  scales  lax,
linear,  acute,  equal.  Flowers  middle  sized,  and  blue.  It  is  found  more
abundantly  west  of  the  Alleghany  mountains,  and  is  recommended  as
an  antispasmodic  and  alterative.  Principally  used  in  the  cure  of  rheu-
matism in  the  form  of  infusion  or  tincture  ;  recommended,  however,  in
hysteria,  chorea,  epilepsy,  spasms,  irregular  menstruation,  etc.,  internally;


266  Materia Medica.

and  used  both  externally  and  internally  in  many  cutaneous  diseases,
the  eruption  occasioned  by  the  poison  rhus,  and  in  the  bites  of  venomous
snakes.  Dose  of  the  infusion,  one  to  four  ounces  ;  of  a  saturated  tinc-
ture half  a  drachm  to  two  drachms.  This  plant  deserves  further  inves-
tigation.

ATROPA  BELLADONNA.

Belladonna.

Nat.  Ord. — Solanacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.


Description.  —  Atropa  Belladonna,  also  known  as  Deadly  Nightshade,
Dwale,  Black  Cherry,  etc.,  is  a  herbaceous,  perennial  plant,  with  a  thick,
branched,  fleshy,  creeping  root,  from  which  rise  several  erect,  cylindri-
cal, herbaceous,  annual,  hirsute,  purplish  stems,  to  the  bight  of  three  or
four  feet.  The  branches  are  dichotomous,  with  ovate,  entire,  somewhat
soft  leaves,  acuminate  at  both  ends,  of  a  dull-green  color,  mostly  in  pairs
of  unequal  size,  and  on  short  petioles.  The  flowers  are  imperfectly
axillary,  solitary,  stalked,  and  drooping.  The  calyx  is  green,  persistent,
and  divided  into  five  ovate  segments.  The  corolla  is  monopetalous,  cam-
panulate,  with  the  limb  divided  into  five  lobes,  dark  dull  purple  in  the
border,  paler  downward.  Stamens  five,  shorter  than  the  corolla,  bear-
ing cordate,  four-lobed  anthers.  Ovary  spheroidal,  with  a  nectariferous
gland  beneath,  and  supporting  a  long,  simple  style,  with,  a  two-lobed
stigma.  The  fruit  is  a  round,  two-celled  berry,  bearing  some  resem-
blance to  a  cherry,  with  a  transverse  furrow  on  each  side,  shining,
smooth,  at  first  green,  then  red,  and  finally  of  a  deep  purple  color,  and
containing  numerous  reniform  seeds,  imbedded  in  a  soft  pulp,  with  a
sweetish,  violet-colored  juice.  When  bruised,  the  whole  plant  exhales
a  fetid  odor.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  growing  in  shady  places,
flowering  in  June  and  July,  and  ripening  its  fruit  in  September ;  all  parts
of  it  are  active.  The  leaves  are  the  officinal  part,  and  should  be  col-
lected in  June  or  July ;  when  dry,  they  are  of  a  brownish-green,  or
grayish-green  color,  scarcely  any  odor,  and  a  faint,  sweetish,  slightly
nauseous  taste,  and  yield  their  properties  readily  to  alcohol  or  water.
The  root  is  long,  round,  varying  in  thickness  from  one  to  several  inches,
fibrous,  branched,  reddish-brown  externally,  whitish  internally,  scarcely
any  odor,  and  a  slightly  sweetish  taste.  It  should  be  collected  early  in
the  spring,  or  in  the  autumn,  from  plants  at  least  three  years  old ;  water
or  alcohol  is  its  menstruum.  The  extract  is  more  commonly  used  than
any  other  form.  Belladonna  contains  atropia  with  excess  of  malic  acid,
pseudotoxin,  phytocolla,  chlorophylle,  gum,  starch,  etc.


Atropia.  267

Properties  and  Uses. —  An  energetic  narcotic  poison.  When  taken  in
large  doses  it  exerts  an  influence  over  the  cerebro-spinal  system,  as
manifested  by  dilation  of  the  pupils,  dimness  or  loss  of  vision,  vertigo,
partial  deafness,  confusion  of  ideas,  constriction  in  the  throat,  difficulty
of  swallowing  and  articulating,  thirst,  nausea,  and  often  the  appearance
of  a  red  eruption ;  if  the  dose  be  excessive,  all  these  symptoms  will  be
greatly  aggravated,  with  delirium,  excessive  laughter,  violent  gestures,
and  finally  coma;  when  it  causes  death,  convulsions  often  precede  this
result.  Medicinally,  it  is  anodyne,  antispasmodic,  and  calmative,  with
some  diaphoretic  and  diuretic  properties.  It  is  exceedingly  valuable  and
useful  in  convulsions,  spasms,  epilepsy,  puerperal  convulsions,  neuralgia,
hooping-cough,  chorea,  mania,  paralysis,  amaurosis,  rheumatism,  gout,
dysmenorrhea,  obstinate  intermittents,  rigidity  of  os  uteri,  and  all  dis-
eases in  which  the  nervous  system  is  involved.  It  is  much  in  use  as  a
prophylactic  in  scarlatina.  Used  externally,  for  dilating  the  pupil  of  the
eye  in  various  operations  on  that  organ,  to  remove  spasmodic  stricture
of  urethra,  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  sphincter  ani.  Recommended,
also,  in  strangulated  hernia,  asthma,  and  paraphimosis.  The  following
has  been  recommended  in  neuralgia  of  the  uterus:  Mix  together  one
grain  and  a  half  of  alcoholic  extract  of  belladonna,  and  three-fourths
of  a  grain  of  opium.  Place  the  two  extracts  in  the  center  of  a  little
pledget  of  carded  cotton,  and  fold  it  up  so  as  to  inclose  the  extract ;  tie  it
up  with  a  very  strong  thread,  and  leave  a  double  thread  eight  inches  long
attached  to  it.  The  plug  is  to  be  introduced  into  the  vagina  by  the
physician  or  patient,  and  placed  upon  the  neck  of  the  uterus,  where  it  is
to  be  retained  from  twelve  to  twenty-four  hours.  In  very  painful  men-
struation accompanied  by  leucorrhea,  from  eight  to  fifteen  grains  of
tannic  acid,  or  geraniin  may  be  added  to  the  tampon.  Dose  of  the
powdered  leaves,  one  to  two  grains,  once  or  twice  a  day,  and  gradually
increased  till  the  peculiar  effects  of  the  medicine  are  produced ;  of  the
extract  one-fourth  of  a  grain  to  two  grains.

The  remedies  in  cases  of  poisoning  by  it,  are  the  stomach-pump,
emetics  and  purgatives,  cold  to  the  head,  and  in  the  comatose  stage,
ammonia  internally,  with  external  stimulants.

Off.  Prep.  —  Atropia;  Emplastrum  Belladonnas ;  Emplastrum  Bella-
donnas Compositum  ;  Extractum  Belladonnas  Alcoholicum  ;  Tinctura  Bel-
ladonnas ;  Unguentum  Belladonnas.


ATROPIA.

THE ALKALINE PRINCIPLE OF A. BELLADONNA.

Preparation. — The  following  is  the  process  employed  by  Mein. The
roots  of  plants  two  or  three  years  old  were  selected. Of  these,  reduced


268  Materia Medica.

to  an  extremely  fine  powder,  24  parts  were  digested,  for  several  days,
with  60  parts  of  alcohol  of  86  or  90  per  cent.  The  liquid  having  been
separated  by  strong  expression,  the  residue  was  treated  anew  with  an
equal  quantity  of  alcohol ;  and  the  tinctures,  poured  together  and  filtered,
were  mixed  with  one  part  of  hydrate  of  lime,  and  frequently  shaken  for
twenty-four  hours.  The  copious  precipitate  which  now  formed  was
separated  by  filtering;  and  diluted  sulphuric  acid  was  added  drop  by
drop  to  the  filtered  liquor,  till  slightly  in  excess.  The  sulphate  of  lime
having  been  separated  by  a  new  filtration,  the  alcoholic  liquid  was
distilled  to  one-half,  then  mixed  with  six  or  eight  parts  of  pure  water,
and  evaporated  with  a  gentle  heat  till  the  whole  of  the  alcohol  was
driven  off.  The  residual  liquid  was  filtered,  cautiously  evaporated  to
one-third,  and  allowed  to  cool.  A  concentrated  aqueous  solution  of  car-
bonate of  potassa  was  then  gradually  added,  so  long  as  the  liquid  con-
tinued to  be  rendered  turbid ;  and  the  mixture  was  afterward  suffered
to  rest  some  hours.  A  yellowish  resinous  substance  which  opposes  the
crystallization  of  the  atropia  was  thus  precipitated.  From  this  the  liquid
was  carefully  decanted,  and  a  small  additional  quantity  of  the  solution
of  the  carbonate  was  dropped  into  it,  till  it  no  longer  became  turbid.
A  gelatinous  mass  now  gradually  formed,  which,  at  the  end  of  twelve
or  twenty-four  hours,  was  agitated  in  order  to  separate  the  mother-
waters,  then  thrown  upon  a  filter,  and  dried  by  folds  of  unsized  paper.
The  substance  thus  obtained,  which  was  atropia  in  an  impure  state,  was
dissolved  in  five  times  its  weight  of  alcohol ;  and  the  solution,  having
been  filtered,  was  mixed  with  six  or  eight  times  its  bulk  of  water.  The
liquor  soon  became  milky,  or  was  rendered  so  by  evaporating  the  excess
of  alcohol,  and,  in  the  course  of  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours,  deposited
the  atropia  in  the  form  of  light  yellow  crystals,  which  were  rendered
entirely  pure  and  colorless  by  washing  with  a  few  drops  of  water,  dry-
ing on  blotting  paper,  and  again  treating  with  alcohol  as  before.  From
twelve  ounces  of  the  root,  Mein  obtained  by  this  process  twenty  grains
of  the  pure  alkali. — Jour,  de  Pharm.  xx,  87.

History. — Thus  prepared,  atropia  crystallizes  in  white  silky  prisms,  is
inodorous,  and  of  a  bitter  taste ;  dissolves  in  ether  or  absolute  alcohol,
and  slightly  in  water;  it  melts  above  212°,  and  forms  soluble  salts  with
sulphuric,  nitric,  muriatic,  and  acetic  acids.  At  an  ordinary  tempera-
ture, water  dissolves  about  ji^th,  but  aided  by  heat  a  much  larger
portion  is  taken  up;  the  solution  has  a  bitter,  disagreeable  taste.  Dr.
A.  von  Planta  found  atropia  prepared  by  Merck  to  possess  the  following
properties:  It  dissolved  in  299  parts  of  water  at  the  ordinary  tempera-
ture ;  alcohol  dissolved  it  in  almost  every  proportion,  ether  less  readily.
Its  solubility  in  all  these  fluids  was  increased  by  heat.  At  194°  F.  it
fused  to  a  clear  transparent  mass,,  which  became  brittle  on  cooling ;  on
the  reapplication  of  heat,  and  again  allowing  it  to  cool,  it  was  converted


Avenge  Farina.  269

into  stellate  groups  of  crystals.  At  284°  F.  the  greater  portion  is
destroyed.  Heated  upon  platinum  foil,  it  melts,  puffs  up,  gives  off
white  fumes,  and  burns  with  a  bright  flame,  leaving  a  shining  black
cinder,  which  finally  disappears  entirely.  It  has  a  strong  alkaline
reaction,  and  combines  with  acids  forming  uncrystallizable  salts,
soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,  but  sparingly  so  in  ether.  Its  formula  is
C34  H25  N  Oe  =  289.

Properties  and  Uses. — Same  as  Belladonna.  Internally  from  one-twen-
tieth to  one-tenth  of  a  grain  may  be  given ;  and  for  external  use  it  is
preferred  on  account  of  its  quicker  action,  more  uniform  strength,  and
greater  cleanliness.  One  grain  dissolved  in  four  fluidrachms  of  distilled
water  by  means  of  a  few  drops  of  acetic  acid,  will,  on  the  application  of
one  drop  of  this  solution  to  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lid,  cause
dilatation  of  the  pupil  in  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes.  In  neuralgia,  one
grain  may  be  mixed  with  a  drachm  of  lard,  and  rubbed  on  the  affected
part.  Dr.  Lusanna  has  used  it  successfully  in  this  affection  by  the
endermic  and  iatraleptic  method.  The  skin  being  previously  removed
by  a  blister,  or,  what  is  still  better,  because  more  speedy,  the  ammonia-
cal  pomade  of  Goudret,  when  the  atropia  is  dissolved  in  a  small  quantity
of  alcohol,  then  mixed  with  simple  ointment  and  applied  to  the  denuded
surface.  In  this  way,  a  half  grain  to  a  grain  may  be  employed  in  the
twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours.  Iatraleptically,  he  uses  the  following
ointment  in  the  form  of  frictions  over  the  part  affected  every  two  or
three  hours,  consuming  a  portion  the  size  of  a  pea  each  time  :  #.  Atro-
pia, 5  centigrammes,  Alcohol  at  36,  q.  s.  Dissolve.  Add  axungia,
12  grammes.


AVENGE  FARINA.

Oatmeal.

Nat.  Ord. — Graminaceze. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Digynia.

SEEDS OF AVENA SATIVA, GROUND.

Description. — Avena  Sativa,  or  the  common  oat,  is  too  well  known  to
require  a  minute  description ;  it  has  a  smooth  stem,  from  two  to  four  feet
high,  with  linear  lanceolate,  veined,  rough  leaves,  with  loose,  striate
sheaths;  stipules  lacerate;  panicle  equal,  loose;  spikelets  pedunculate,
pendulous,  two-flowered,  both  flowers  perfect,  the  lower  one  mostly
awned ;  palece  somewhat  cartilaginous,  closely  embracing  the  caryopsis  ;
root  fibrous,  annual.

History. — Oats  were  known  to  the  ancient  Greeks  and  are  at  present
cultivated  in  all  civilized  countries,  principally  as  food  for  horses.  They
have  been  naturalized  in  Sicily,  and  have  been  found  in  the  island  of


270  Materia  Medica.

Juan  Fernandez.  Their  native  country  is  unknown.  In  the  north  of
England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  in  some  parts  of  France,  and  other
countries,  oats  form  a  large  portion  of  the  nutriment  of  the  inhabitants.
The  meal,  which  is  prepared  by  grinding  the  seeds,  is  made  into  a  gruel,
and  is  very  nutritious  and  digestible,  beside  being  somewhat  laxative;  it
forms  an  excellent  diet  for  the  sick  in  many  cases.  The  British  colleges
direct  groats,  which  are  the  seeds  deprived  of  their  husks;  and  these,
when  ground  into  fine  meal  or  flour,  are  prepared  groats.

Oats  contain,  according  to  the  analysis  of  Vogel,  66  per  cent,  of  meal,
and  34  per  cent,  of  husk  ;  the  dried  meal  consists  of  starch  59,  saccharo-
mucilaginous  extract  10.75,  albumen  4.3,  oleaginous  matter  2,  ligneous
fiber  and  moisture  24.  Other  analyses  have  been  made,  which  vary
from  the  above  in  quantity  and  elements,  showing  oats  to  consist  of  a
large  proportion  of  starch,  some  sugar,  gum,  oil,  albumen,  gluten,  a
nitrogenous  body,  epidermis,  alkaline  salts,  etc.

Oatmeal  is  inodorous,  slightly  bitter,  insoluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  and
the  oils;  but  alcohol  and  ether  remove  an  oleo-resinous  matter  from  it;
it yields its  nutritive  properties  freely  to  boiling  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Nutritive  and  demulcent.  Good  in  habitual
constipation,  but  not  in  dyspepsia,  accompanied  with  acidity  of  stomach.
In  the  form  of  gruel,  either  salted  or  seasoned  with  sugar,  honey,  or
the  pulp  of  fruit,  it  is  an  agreeable  nutritive  during  convalescence  from
acute  diseases,  in  the  puerperal  woman,  and  in  some  chronic  diseases.
Oatmeal  made  into  a  cake  with  water,  baked  and  browned  like  coffee,
then  pulverized  and  made  into  a  coffee,  or  infusion,  forms  a  drink  which
will  allay  nausea  and  check  vomiting,  in  a  majority  of  cases,  when  all
other  means  fail,  and  used  thus  is  very  useful  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,
cholera-morbus,  and  irritable  conditions  of  the  stomach.  Oatmeal  gruel
may  be  prepared  by  boiling  an  ounce  of  the  meal  with  three  pints  of
water  to  a  quart,  straining  the  decoction,  allowing  it  to  stand  till  it  cools,
and  then  pouring  off  the  clear  liquor  from  the  sediment.  Sugar,  raisins,
or  lemon-juice  are  frequently  added  to  improve  its  flavor.


BALSAMODENDRON  MYRRHA.

Myrrh.

Nat.  Ord.— Amyridacea>, or  Burseracese. Sex.  Syst—  Octandria  Monogynia.

CONCRETE JUICE OR GUMMY RESINOUS EXUDATION.

Description.— -The  Balsamodendron  Myrrha,  is  a  small  shrubby  tree,
covered  with  a  pale  gray  or  whitish  gray  bark,  and  with  squarrose  and
spinose  branches. The  leaves  are  ternate,  on  short  petioles,  and  consist


Balsamodendron  Myrrha.  271

of  obovate,  obtuse,  smooth  leaflets,  somewhat  denticulate  at  the  apex.
The  flowers  are  unknown.  The  fruit  is  oval,  lanceolate,  pointed,  smooth,
longitudinally  furrowed,  of  a  brown  color,  a  little  larger  than  a  pea,  sup-
ported on  a  very  short  peduncle,  and  surrounded  at  its  base  by  the  per-
sistent calyx.

History. — The  myrrh  tree  grows  in  Arabia,  and  in  the  neighborhood
of  Abyssinia  and  the  Red  sea.  The  juice  exudes  spontaneously  and
concretes  upon  the  bark,  which  when  collected  is  the  medicinal  gum
myrrh.  The  best  kind  of  myrrh  is  in  irregular  pieces,  somewhat  resem-
bling tears,  often  tuberculated,  varying  in  size  from  a  pea  to  a  large
walnut,  or  even  larger,  of  a  bright  reddish-brown  color  becoming  clearer
red  when  breathed  upon.  Myrrh  is  brittle  and  pulverizable,  and  has  a
peculiar,  agreeable,  balsamic  odor,  and  a  bitter,  aromatic,  not  unpleasant
taste.  "When  heated  it  softens,  then  froths  up,  and  at  length  inflames
and  burns  with  difficulty.  Its  active  constituents  are  oil  and  resin,  and
its  proper  solvent  is  rectified  spirit.  It  is  only  partially  soluble  in  water,
proof  spirit,  and  ether ;  water  dissolves  its  arabin,  and  the  mucilage
retains  the  oil  and  part  of  the  resin  in  the  state  of  emulsion  ;  proof  spirit
dissolves  some  of  the  resin.  Water  added  to  its  alcoholic  tincture  renders
it  opake,  but  without  any  precipitation.  Alkaline  solutions  dissolve  the
gum  resin.  Myrrh  consists  of  volatile  oil  2.6,  bitter  resin  23,  soluble
gum  46,  insoluble  gum  12.  Ruickholdt  has  obtained  in  100  parts,
volatile  oil  2.183,  resin  44.760,  arabin  40.818,  water  1.475,  and  various
salts,  etc.,  3.650.  He  calls  the  resin  myrrhin  ;  it  is  neutral,  but  by  being
kept  in  a  state  of  fusion  for  a  short  time  acquires  acid  properties,  which
state  he  proposes  to  term  Myrrhic  Acid.

Myrrh  added  to  nitric  acid,  produces  a  transparent,  dirty-yellowish
liquid;  false  myrrh  produces  a  bright  yellow  liquid,  and  bdellium  is  not
dissolved  by  it,  but  becomes  whitish  and  opake.  M.  Righini  states
that  if  myrrh  in  powder,  be  rubbed  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  with  an
equal  weight  of  muriate  of  ammonia,  and  fifteen  times  its  weight  of
water  gradually  added,  it  may  be  considered  pure,  if  it  dissolves  quickly
and  wholly.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  tonic,  antiseptic,  expectorant,  em-
menagogue,  and  by  some  considered  anthelmintic.  Used  in  debilitated
states  of  the  system,  in  chronic  catarrh,  phthisis,  humoral  asthma,  other
pectoral  affections  in  which  mucus  secretion  though  abundant  is  not
easily  expectorated,  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  etc.  Also  reputed  useful  in
chronic  gonorrhea,  gleet,  and  other  excessive  chronic  mucous  discharges.
As  a  local  application  it  is  useful  in  spongy  gums,  aphthous  sore  mouth
of  children,  indolent  and  gangrenous  ulcers.  It  is  sometimes  combined
with  hydrastis  and  capsicum,  in  aphthae,  and  with  tincture  of  castor  as
an  emmenagogue.  Dose  of  the  powder,  ten  to  thirty  grains  ;  of  the
tincture,  one  to  two  drachms.


272  Materia Medica.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Chenopodii  Composita  ;  Pulvis  Nigrum  ;  Pilulae
Copaibse  Composite  ;  Tinctura  Myrrhee  ;  Tinctura  Myrrhse  Composita ;
Tinctura  Aloes  et  Myrrhae  ;  Lotio  Myrrhse  Compositae.


BAPTISIA TINCTORIA.

Wild  Indigo.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabaceee. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

BARK  OF  THE  ROOT  AND  LEAVES.

Description. — Baptisia  Tinctoria,  also  known  as  Horse-fly  weed,  Rattle-
hush,  etc.,  has  a  large  and  woody  perennial  root,  very  irregular,  blackish
externally,  and  yellowish  within,  with  numerous,  lighter-colored  radicles.
The  stem  is  round,  yellowish-green,  smooth,  marked  with  black  dots,
much  branched,  and  growing  from  two  to  three  feet  high ;  the  branches
are  slender,  and  of  a  yellowish  color.  The  leaves  are  small,  alternate,
and  formed  of  three  sessile,  obovate,  smooth,  bluish-green  leaflets,  with
minute,  evanescent  stipules.  Racemes  loose,  terminal,  few-flowered.
Flowers  yellow,  in  small  loose  spikes  at  the  ends  of  the  branches,  six,
twelve  or  more  in  each  raceme.  Calyx  campanulate,  bilabiate,  upper
lip  entire  or  emarginate,  lower  trifid.  Stamina  included,  deciduous.
Ovary  stipitate,  bearing  a  minute  stigma.  Legume  bluish-black,  about
as  large  as  a  pea,  on  a  long  stipe,  inflated,  oblong,  with  a  row  of  small
subreniform  seeds.

History. — This  is  a  small  shrub,  found  in  most  parts  of  the  United
States  in  dry  situations,  though  occasionally  it  is  to  be  met  with  in  low,
marshy  ground.  It  flowers  in  July  and  August,  having  bright  yellow
flowers,  in  small  loose  clusters  at  the  end  of  the  branches.  The  fruit  is
an  oblong  pod,  of  a  bluish-black  color.  It  contains  indigo,  tannin,  an
acid,  and  baptisin.  When  the  whole  plant,  or  any  portion  of  it  is  dried,
it  becomes  black,  and  affords  a  blue  dye,  inferior  to  indigo.  In  some
parts  of  the  country  the  young  shoots  are  used  as  a  substitute  for  aspa-
ragus, to  which  they  bear  some  resemblance,  and  they  occasionally
cause  drastic  purgation,  especially  if  used  after  they  assume  a  green
color.  Alcohol,  or  water  will  take  up  its  active  properties.  Both  the
root  and  leaves  are  medicinal,  and  deserve  further  investigation.  The
root  is  inodorous,  and  of  a  nauseous,  somewhat  acrid  taste  ;  its  virtues
appear  to  reside  chiefly  in  the  bark.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Purgative,  emetic,  stimulant,  astringent  and
antiseptic.  Principally  used  on  account  of  its  antiseptic  virtues.  A
decoction  of  the  bark  of  the  root  is  an  excellent  application  as  a  wash  or
gargle  to  all  species  of  ulcers,  as  malignant  ulcerous  sore  mouth  and


Baptisia Tinctoria..  273

throat,  mercurial  sore  mouth,  scrofulous,  or  syphilitic  ophthalmia,  ery-
sipelatous ulcers,  gangrenous  ulcers,  sore  nipples,  etc.  ;  or  it  may  be
made  into  an  ointment  for  external  application.  As  a  poultice  or  fomen-
tation it  is  highly  useful  in  all  ulcers,  tumors,  or  inflammations  tending
to  gangrene.  In  fetid  leucorrhea,  fetid  discharges  from  the  ears,  etc.,
the  decoction  will  be  found  efficient,  if  injected  into  the  parts  with  a
suitable  syringe.  The  leaves  applied  in  fomentations,  have  discussed
tumors  and  swelling  of  the  female  breast,  resembling  scirrhus.

Internally,  it  may  be  used  in  the  form  of  decoction  or  syrup,  in  scar-
latina, typhus,  and  all  cases  where  there  is  a  tendency  to  putrescency.
It  acts  powerfully  on  the  glandular  and  nervous  systems,  increasing  all
the  glandular  secretions,  and  arousing  the  liver  especially  to  a  normal
action  ;  and  is  very  efficient  in  the  atonic  varieties  of  acute  rheumatism
and  pneumonia.

I  make  much  use  of  the  dried  alcoholic  extract  of  the  root-bark  in  the
low  stage  of  typhoid,  and  typhoid  conditions  generally  in  conjunction
with  leptandrin  ;  and  have  used  it  extensively  for  the  last  ten  years,
and  with  very  excellent  effect  in  all  diseases  of  a  tuberculous  character.
I  take  pleasure  in  introducing  to  the  profession,  the  active  principle  of
this  plant.  Baptism,  prepared  similarly  to  Aletrin,  or  it  may  be  pre-
cipitated by  an  acid,  or  by  acetate  of  lead  from  the  saturated  tincture  :
I  have  found  it  to  exert  a  powerful  influence  on  the  glandular  system  in
doses  of  from  one-fourth  to  one  half  a  grain  ;  if  given  in  large  doses  it
produces  a  very  disagreeable  prostration  of  the  whole  system.  It  is  also
an  excellent  application  to  gangrenous  and  erysipelatous  ulcerations,
malignant  and  fetid  ulcerations  of  the  cervix  uteri.  Combined  with  lep-
tandrin, podophyllin,  quinia,  or  cimicifugin,  in  diseases  where  these
agents  are  indicated,  it  will  be  found  valuable  in  typhus  and  typhoid
fevers,  and  all  diseases  of  a  typhoid  character,  when  administered  inter-
nally.

Baptism  is  of  a  yellowish-brown  color,  a  strong  odor,  similar  to  that
of  the  powdered  root,  and  of  a  rather  bitter,  not  very  disagreeable  taste,
persistent  in  its  character.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  ether,  the  mineral
acids,  acetic  acid,  also  in  volatile  oils,  oil  of  turpentine,  and  chloroform,
floating  on  the  surface  of  this  last.  Ammonia  added  to  it  in  water,
causes  it  to  be  nearly  completely  dissolved,  and  gives  a  dense,  light
bluish-yellow  solution.  Liquor  potassa,  likewise  causes  it  to  imperfectly
dissolve  in  water,  giving  a  dark-yellow  precipitate,  and  a  light  yellow
saponaceous  solution.  It  is  partially  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  on  the
addition  of  ammonia  becomes  entirely  dissolved,  but  gives  a  precipitate
on  standing.  Sulphuric  acid  turns  it  a  dark  yellowish-red  color;  nitric
acid  yellowish-green  ;  and  muriatic  acid  affects  no  change  in  its  color.

Dose,  of  the  decoction,  made  by  boiling  one  ounce  of  the  powdered
bark  in  two  pints  of  water,  down  to  one  pint — one  tablespoonful  every
18


274  Materia  Medica.

1,2,  or  4  hours  as  required — if  it  purge,  produce  nausea,  or  a  disagree-
able relaxation  of  the  nervous  system,  lessen  the  dose,  or  omit  its  use
entirely,  for  a  time ;  of  the  hydro-alcoholic  extract,  1  to  4  grains  every
2,  3,  or  4  hours.

The  Baptisia  Alba,  or  Prairie  Indigo  of  the  western  prairies,  with  the
flowers  white,  may  be  substituted  for  the  above.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Baptisiae  Hydro-Alcoholicum  ;  Pilulse  Baptisise
Compositae  ;  Unguentum  Baptisiae.


BAROSMA CRENATA. (Diosma  Crenata.)
Buchu.

Nat. Ord. — Rutaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant  formerly  belonged  to  the  genus  Diosma,  but
has  been  transferred  by  Botanists  to  that  of  Barosma.  It,  is  a  slender,
smooth,  upright,  perennial  shrub,  between  two  and  three  feet  in  hight,
with  twiggy,  somewhat  angular  branches,  of  a  brownish-purple  color.
The  leaves  are  opposite,  spreading,  about  an  inch  long,  ovate,  acute,  on
very  short  petioles,  very  obtuse,  delicately  and  minutely  crenated,  quite
glabrous,  rigid,  darkish-green  and  quite  smooth  above,  with  a  very  few
obscure,  oblique  nerves,  beneath  paler,  dotted  with  glands  which  are
scarcely  pellucid,  while  at  every  crenature  is  a  conspicuous  pellucid  gland.
The  flowers  are  whitish,  or  of  a  pale-reddish  color,  solitary,  on  short
pedicels  at  the  ends  of  short  lateral  shoots.  The  calyx  has  live  ovate-
acuminate,  persistent  sepals,  green,  tinged  with  purple,  beneath  which
are  two  or  three  pairs  of  small  imbricated  bracteas.  The  corolla  has
five  elliptic,  oblong,  bluntish  petals,  somewhat  spreading,  which  are
purple  when  in  bud,  and  blush-colored  when  fully  expanded.  The  sta-
mens are  five,  subulate,  and  bearing  ovate,  incumbent  anthers  ;  filaments
slightly  villous.  The  ovary  is  superior,  turbinate,  supporting  an  erect
style  crowned  with  a  minute,  five-lobed  stigma.  The  capsule  is  ovate,
containing  a  single,  oblong,  black,  shining  seed,  with  an  elastic  testa.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  southern  Africa,  the  officinal  part
of  which  is  the  leaf.  There  are  several  varieties  from  which  the  leaves
are  obtained,  as  the  Barosma  Crenata,  B.  Crenulata,  B.  Serratifolia,  etc.
The  leaves  are  odoriferous,  and  when  powdered  are  termed  by  the  Hot-
tentots, Booko  or  Buchu,  and  are  used  by  them  to  rub  upon  their  greasy
bodies.  They  likewise  prepare  a  Buchu  Brandy  by  distilling  the  leaves
with  wine,  and  which  they  employ  as  an  efficient  remedy  in  all  affections
of  the  stomach,  bowels,  and  bladder ;  they  also  apply  a  decoction  of  the
leaves  to  wounds.


Benzoin  Odoriferum.  275

As  found  in  our  markets,  the  leaves  are  from  three-quarters  of  an
inch  to  an  inch  in  length,  from  three  to  five  lines  broad,  elliptical,  lance-
olate-ovate, or  obovate,  sometimes  slightly  pointed,  sometimes  blunt  at
the  apex,  very  finely  notched  and  glandular  at  the  edges,  smooth,  green
on  their  upper  surface,  dotted  and  paler  beneath,  and  of  a  firm  consist-
ence. They  have  a  strong,  diffusive,  aromatic  odor,  with  very  faint  bit-
terness ;  the  taste  and  odor  being  somewhat  allied  to  pennyroyal,  and
which  will  serve  to  distinguish  them  from  senna  leaves.  If  they  be  pre-
served with  ordinary  care,  their  odor  will  remain  for  some  years.  The
leaves  of  the  B.  Serratifolia  may  be  known  by  their  linear-lanceolate
form,  and  serrulate  edges  ;  and  those  of  the  B.  Crenulata  much  resemble
those  of  the  B.  Grenata,  but  are  oblong-ovate,  and  have  a  narrow  pellu-
cid margin  around  the  whole  leaf.  They  all  possess  similar  properties.
Analysis  has  detected  in  them,  a  light,  yellowish-brown,  and  highly
odorous  volatile  oil,  gum,  extractive,  which  is  precipitated  by  infusion  of
galls,  chlorophylle  and  resin.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  their  virtues,
which  are  chiefly  dependent  on  the  volatile  oil  and  extractive.

Properties  and  Uses. — Buchu  is  a  stimulant,  diuretic,  antispasmodic,
and  tonic.  Useful  in  all  diseases  of  the  urinary  organs  attended  with
increased  uric  acid  ;  in  irritation  of  the  bladder  and  urethra  attending
gravel,  in  catarrh  of  the  urinary  bladder,  and  incontinence  connected
with  diseased  prostate.  It  has  also  been  recommended  in  dyspepsia,
dropsy,  cutaneous  affections,  and  chronic  rheumatism.  I  do  not,  how-
ever, think  it  equal  to  many  of  our  indigenous  remedies,  which  are
sadly  neglected  by  the  profession,  in  their  eagerness  for  something  at  a
distance  from  home.  Were  our  native  plants  more  closely  investigated,
there  would  be  but  little  use  for  foreign,  and  consequently  expensive
agents.  Under  favorable  circumstances  a  warm  infusion  of  Buchu
leaves,  will  cause  diaphoresis.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  twenty  to
thirty  grains,  two  or  three  times  a  day  ;  of  the  infusion,  two  to  four
ounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  of  the  tincture,  one  to  two
fluidrachms.

Off.  Prep.  —  Extractum  Barosmae  vel  Buchu  Fluidum ;  Infusum
Barosmae.


BENZOIN  ODORIFERUM.

Spicewood.

Nat.  Ord. — Lauraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Enneandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK AND BERRIES.

Description. — Benzoin  Odoriferum,  or  the  Laurus  Benzoin  of  Linnaeus,
is  sometimes  known  as  Spicebush,  Feverbush,  Wild  Allspice,  Benjamin-


276  Materia  Medica.

Bush,  etc.  ;  it  is  a  shrub  growing  from  five  to  twelve  feet  in  bight,  with
obovate-lanceolate,  veinless,  entire,  deciduous  leaves,  green  on  each
side,  and  slightly  pubescent  beneath ;  flowers  yellow,  in  little  naked
umbels  on  the  naked  branches,  often  dioecious  ;  huds  and  pedicels  smooth ;
fruit  the  size  of  an  olive,  bright-red,  in  clusters,  containing  an  ovate,
pointed  nut. Calyx  six-cleft,  with  oblong  segments.

History. — This  shrub  grows  in  moist,  shady  places,  in  all  parts  of  the
United  States ;  it  bears  greenish-yellow  flowers  in  April,  which  are  suc-
ceeded by  small  clusters  of  oval  berries,  and  which  in  the  latter  part  of
September,  when  ripe,  are  of  a  shining  crimson  color.  The  whole  plant
has  a  spicy,  agreeable  flavor,  which  is  strongest  in  the  bark  and  berries,
and  which  is  communicated  to  boiling  water,  or  proof  spirit.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aromatic,  tonic,  and  stimulant.  An  infusion
or  decoction  has  been  successfully  used  in  the  treatment  of  intermittents,
and  low  forms  of  fever,  also  as  an  anthelmintic.  The  berries  afford  a
stimulant  oil,  much  esteemed  as  an  application  to  bruises,  chronic  rheu-
matism, itch,  etc.,  and  has  some  reputation  as  a  carminative  in  flatulence,
flatulent  colic,  etc.  The  bark,  in  decoction,  is  said  to  be  refrigerant  and
exhilarating,  and  exceedingly  useful  in  all  kinds  of  fever,  for  allaying
excessive  heat  and  uneasiness  ;  a  warm  decoction  is  employed  to  produce
diaphoresis. The  decoction  may  be  drank  freely.


BENZOINUM.
Benzoin.

Nat.  Ord. — Styracaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE OF STYRAX BENZOIN.

Description.  —  Styrax  Benzoin  is  a  tall  tree  of  quick  growth,  with
many  strong,  round  branches,  covered  with  a  hoary  and  fine  whitish
downy  bark.  Its  leaves  are  alternate,  on  short  petioles,  ovate-acuminate,
entire,  smooth  above,  and  tomentose  beneath.  The  petioles  are  round,
striated,  channeled,  tomentose.  The  flowers  are  in  compound  axillary
racemes,  nearly  the  length  of  the  leaves,  usually  hang  all  on  the  same
side,  with  angular  downy  peduncles,  and  a  few,  tomentose,  oblong,
deciduous  bracts.  The  calyx  is  campanulate,  downy,  and  minutely  five-
toothed  ;  the  corolla  is  longer  than  the  calyx  and  is  five-cleft,  the  seg-
ments are  linear,  and  obtuse,  somewhat  silky  rather  than  tomentose.
Stamens  ten  ;  filaments  connected  below  into  a  tube  almost  as  long  as
the  calyx,  and  bearing  linear,  erect  anthers.  The  ovary  is  superior,
ovate-tomentose,  with  a  filiform  style  and  simple  stigma.  The  fruit  is  a
drupe  of  a  globose  form  containing  one  or  two  angular  nuts,  convex  on
one  side,  and  concave  on  the  other.


Benzoinum.  277

History. — This  tree  is  a  native  of  Sumatra,  Borneo,  Java,  Siam,  etc.,
where  it  is  cultivated ;  it  is  called  Benzoin  Tree  or  Benjamin  Tree,  and
furnishes  the  benzoin  of  commerce.  This  resinous  balsam  is  obtained
by  making  incisions  into  the  bark  of  trees  six  or  seven  years  old,  from
which  the  balsam  exudes  in  the  form  of  a  thick,  white,  resinous  juice,
which  is  allowed  to  remain  for  three  months  before  it  is  collected,  when
new  incisions  are  made.  There  are  several  varieties  of  benzoin,  the
best  of  which  are  in  tears  of  a  whitish  color,  and  united  by  a  reddish-
brown  connecting  medium ;  the  brown  or  blackish  masses,  which  are
more  common,  usually  contain  many  impurities,  and  are  inferior  to  the
tears.

Benzoin  is  firm,  brittle,  pulverizable,  of  an  agreeable  balsamic  odor
when  rubbed,  and  of  a  sweetish,  balsamic,  somewhat  acrid  taste.  When
pure,  it  is  wholly  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether.  When  heated,  thick,
white,  pungent  fumes  of  benzoic  acid  are  given  out,  which  cause  cough-
ing when  inhaled.  In  pulverizing  it,  sneezing  is  apt  to  be  induced.
Water  added  to  its  alcoholic  solution,  precipitates  it,  rendering  the  liquor
milky,  and  which  has  been  heretofore  much  used  as  a  cosmetic,  under
the  name  of  Virgin's  Milk.  Its  specific  gravity  is  from  1.06  to  1.09.
It  contains  volatile  oil,  resin,  a  balsamic  matter,  aromatic  extractive,  with
a  large  proportion  of  benzoic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  and  expectorant,  and  has  some  in-
fluence on  the  sexual  organs.  It  enters  into  the  manufacture  of  elixir
paregoric,  and  constitutes  the  basis  of  Turlington's  and  many  other
balsams,  which  exert  a  salutary  influence  in  healing  wounds ;  the  tincture
is  also  employed  to  form  a  coating  over  the  adhesive  preparation  so  well
known  as  Court  Plaster.  The  fumes  or  vapor  inhaled  into  the  lungs,
has  been  strongly  recommended  in  chronic  laryngitis.  But  principally
used  to  prepare  benzoie  acid,  to  improve  the  taste  and  odor  of  other
medicines,  and  in  perfumery.

A  preparation  has  been  recently  used  with  some  degree  of  success  in
hemorrhages,  called  Pagliari's  Hemostatic  or  Styptic.  It  is  made  by
boiling  together  for  six  hours  in  a  glazed  earthen  vessel,  Alum  one
pound,  Tincture  of  Benzoin  eight  ounces,  Water  ten  pounds.  As  the
water  evaporates  it  must  be  constantly  replaced  by  hot  water,  so  as  not
to  interrupt  the  ebullition,  and  stir  the  resinous  mass  round  constantly.
Then  filter  the  fluid  and  keep  in  stoppered  bottles.  It  is  limpid,  color  of
champagne,  styptic  in  taste,  and  aromatic  in  odor.  White  resin  has
been  successfully  substituted  for  the  benzoin.  Every  drop  of  this  fluid
poured  into  a  glass  containing  human  blood  produces  an  instantaneous
magma ;  and  by  increasing  the  proportion  of  the  styptic  to  the  quantity  of
the  blood,  a  dense,  homogeneous,  blackish  mass  results.  It  is  said  to  be
useful  in  all  arterial  and  venous  hemorrhages.  In  applying  it,  lint  and
bandages  should  be  used  to  prevent  the  coagula  which  forms  from  being


278  Materia Medica.

removed  from  the  mouths  of  the  vessels  ;  an  application  of  them  for
twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours  is  sufficient.

Off.  Prep.  —  Acidum  Benzoicum  ;  Tinctura  Benzoini  Composita ;
Unguentum  Benzoini.

BERBERIS  VULGARIS.

Barberry.

Nat. Ord. — Berberidaceje. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

BARK AND BERRIES.

Description. — Berberis  Vulgaris  is  an  erect,  deciduous  shrub,  from
three  to  eight  feet  high,  with  long,  bending  branches  which  are  dotted
with  triple  spines.  The  leaves  are  obovate-oval,  simple,  closely  serru-
late, crowded,  forming  fan-like  groups,  alternate,  from  one  and  a  half  to
two  inches  long,  and  about  one-third  as  wide,  tapering  at  their  base  into
the  petioles,  with  small  thorns  at  their  base,  which  are  a  transformation
of  the  primary  leaves.  The  flowers  are  many,  on  slender  and  pendulous
racemes,  yellow,  small,  and  succeeded  by  loose  branches  of  bright-red
berries,  of  an  oblong  form,  of  a  pleasant  acidulous  taste.

History.  —  This  shrub  is  found  from  Canada  to  Virginia,  on  hills,
mountains,  and  among  rocks ;  it  is  rare  in  the  west  and  in  rich  soils.  It
flowers  in  April  and  May,  and  ripens  its  fruit  in  June.  Berberine  is  its
active  alkaline  principle.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic  and  laxative.  Used  extensively  by
practitioners  in  the  New  England  States,  in  all  cases  where  tonics  are
indicated,  also  in  jaundice,  and  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery.  The
berries  form  an  agreeable  acidulous  draught,  useful  as  a  refrigerant  in
fevers,  also  beneficial  in  dysentery,  cholera-infantum,  diarrhea,  etc.
The  bark  is  bitter  and  astringent,  and  has  been  used  with  advantage  as
a  tonic,  and  has  proved  efficacious  in  the  treatment  of  jaundice.  The
bark  of  the  root  is  the  most  active ;  a  teaspoonful  of  the  powder  will
act  as  a  purgative.  A  decoction  of  the  bark  or  berries,  has  been  found
of  service  as  a  wash  or  gargle  in  aphthous  sore-mouth,  and  in  chronic
ophthalmia.


BERBERINA.

THE ALKALINE PRINCIPLE OP BARBERRY.

Preparation. — An  alcoholic  extract  of  the  Berberis  Vulgaris  is  pre-
pared, to  which  water  is  added.  This  throws  down  a  pulverulent  brown
substance ;  the  fluid  is  then  poured  off,  and  the  substance  dried ;  it  is


Betula  Lenta.  279

then  treated  with  alcohol,  which  takes  up  the  Berberine,  leaving  a  small
portion  undissolved.  By  evaporating  the  alcohol  the  berberine  remains.
It  resembles  an  extract,  and  is  of  a  brownish-yellow  color,  translucent,
with  the  smell  of  the  root,  and  a  pure,  bitter  taste;  it  becomes  soft
in  the  air.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol.  Berberine  may  be  obtained  in
crystals.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic  and  laxative,  operating  similar  to  a  com-
bination of  rhei  and  hydrastis.  Used  in  the  same  cases  as  the  root.
Dose,  two  to  ten  or  even  twenty  grains.  This  article  is  not  sufficiently
used  by  Eclectics.

BETULA  LENTA.

Black  Birch.

Nat.  Ord. — Betulacese. Sex.  Syst. — Monoscia  Polyandria.

BARK.

Description. — Betula  Lenta,  also  known  as  Cherry  Birch,  Sweet  Birch,
Mahogany  Birch,  etc.,  is  a  large  tree  growing  from  fifty  to  seventy  feet
in  hight,  with  a  diameter  of  from  two  to  three  feet.  The  leaves  are
cordate-ovate,  acuminate,  acutely  and  finely  doubly  serrate,  hairy  on  the
veins  beneath,  and  on  the  petioles.  Fertile  aments  erect,  elliptical,  thick,
somewhat  hairy ;  sterile  aments  two  to  three  inches  long,  longer  than
the  fertile,  and  not  so  thick ;  lobes  of  the  veiny  scales  nearly  equal,  obtuse,
diverging.

History. — This  is  a  well  known  tree,  growing  in  various  parts  of  the
United  States.  The  trunk  is  invested  with  a  dark-brown  or  reddish
bark,  which  becomes  rough  in  old  trees,  and  has,  together  with  the
leaves,  an  aromatic  flavor  and  taste,  somewhat  similar  to  Gaultheria
Procumbens.  The  wood  is  of  a  reddish  color,  strong,  compact,  and
takes  a  fine  polish  ;  it  is  much  used  in  cabinet  work.  The  cambium  is
used  in  the  spring  by  boys,  as  a  delicious  morsel.  The  bark  is  the  part
used,  and  yields  its  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Gently  stimulant,  diaphoretic,  and  astringent.
Used  in  warm  infusion  wherever  a  stimulating  diaphoretic  is  required,
also  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  cholera-infantum,  etc.  In  decoction  or
syrup,  it  forms  an  excellent  tonic  to  restore  the  tone  of  the  bowels,  after
an  attack  of  dysentery.  Said  to  have  been  useful  in  gravel,  and  female
obstructions.


280  Materia Medica.

BIDENS  BIPINNATA.

Spanish  Needles.
Nat.  Ord. — Asteracea;. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Frustranea.

ROOT AND SEEDS.

Description. — Bidens  Bipinnata  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  smooth,
branched  stem  growing  from  one  to  four  feet  high  ;  the  leaves  are  bipin-
nately  parted,  nearly  smooth,  petioled  ;  the  leaflets  are  ovate-lanceolate,
pinnatifid,  mostly  wedge-shaped  at  the  base;  heads  of  flowers  on  slender
peduncles,  each  with  three  or  four  obscure,  obovate,  yellow  rays ;  outer
involucre  of  linear  scales  as  long  as  the  inner,  and  nearly  as  long  as  the
short,  pale,  yellow  rays  ;  achenia  long  and  slender,  four-grooved  and
angled,  nearly  smooth,  three  or  four  awned,  which  adhere  to  the  dress
and  to  the  fleece  of  animals.

History. — This  is  a  common  plant,  growing  in  waste  places  on  dry
soils,  flowering  from  July  to  September,  and  found  from  Connecticut  to
Pennsylvania,  and  westward.

The  Bidens  Frondosa,  common  Beggar-Tick,  has  a  smooth,  branching,
rather  hairy  stem,  from  two  to  six  feet  high ;  the  leaves  are  three  to  five,
divided;  leaflets  lanceolate,  pointed,  coarsely  toothed,  mostly  stalked;
outer  leafy  involucre  much  longer  than  the  head,  ciliate  below  ;  rays
none  ;  flowers  in  clusters  at  the  end  of  the  branches,  yellow ;  achenia
wedge-obovate,  two-awned,  the  margins  ciliate  with  upward  bristles,
except  near  the  summit.  This  is  a  common,  very  troublesome  weed,
growing  in  moist,  cultivated  fields  throughout  the  United  States ;  the
achenia,  as  in  the  other  species,  adhering  by  their  retrorsely-barbed
awns  to  clothes,  etc. It  flowers  from  July  to  September.

The  Bidens  Connata  (Bidens  tripartita,)  Cuckold,  or  Swamp  Beggar's
Tick,  has  a  smooth  stem,  four-furrowed,  with  opposite  branches,  and
grows  from  one  to  three  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  lanceolate,  opposite,
serrate,  acuminate,  slightly  connate  at  the  base,  the  lower  ones  mostly
trifid  ;  the  lateral  divisions  united  at  the  base,  and  decurrent  on  the
petiole  ;  scales  of  the  outer  involucre  longer  than  the  head,  leafy,  mostly
obtuse,  scarcely  ciliate  ;  rays  none  ;  achenia  narrowly  wedge-form,  two,
three,  or  four-awned,  and  with  downwardly-barbed  margins.  Flowers
terminal,  solitary,  consisting  only  of  the  tubular,  yellow  florets,  sur-
rounded by  a  leafy  involucre.  This  is  likewise  a  common  weed  found
in  wet  grounds,  rich  fields,  swamps  and  ditches,  from  New  England  to
Missouri.  It  flowers  in  August.  The  root  and  seeds  of  all  these  plants
are  employed  medicinally,  and  may  be  used  in  decoction,  infusion,  or
tincture.


Brayera Anthelmintica.  281

Properties  and  Uses. — Emmenagooue  and  expectorant ;  the  seeds  in
powder  or  tincture  have  been  successfully  used  in  amenorrhea,  dysmen-
orrhea,  and  some  other  uterine  derangements;  and  an  infusion  of  the
root  has  proved  beneficial  in  severe  cough.  The  Bidens  Connata  has
likewise  been  recommended  in  the  above  affections,  also  in  palpitation  of
the  heart,  in  which  the  infusion  or  decoction,  drank  freely  through  the
day,  has  been  found  effectual.  The  Bidens  Frondosa  in  infusion  has
cured  several  severe  cases  of  croup,  even  where  they  have  been  con-
sidered beyond  aid.  A  strong  infusion  of  the  plant,  sweetened  with
honey,  was  administered  to  the  children,  warm,  in  doses  of  a  tablespoon-
ful  or  more  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  until  it  vomited.  A  quantity
of  mucous  and  membranous  shreds  were  ejected,  followed  by  immediate
relief ;  the  children  passed  into  a  sleep,  from  which  they  awakened  per-
fectly well.  In  a  few  hours  after  the  emetic  operation  of  the  warm  infu-
sion, it  acted  as  a  cathartic.  The  leaves  from  which  the  infusion  was
made,  were,  at  the  same  time,  placed  in  a  piece  of  flannel  with  some
brandy  added  to  them,  and  laid  over  the  chest  and  throat.  This  plan  is
also  beneficial  in  colds,  acute  bronchial  and  laryngeal  attacks  from  expo-
sures to  cold,  etc.


BRAYERA  ANTHELMINTICA.

Kousso. Cossoo.

Nat.  Ord. — Kosacea*. Sex.  Syst. —

THE FLOWERS.

Description. — This  is  a  tree  growing  about  twenty  feet  high,  with
round,  rusty,  tomentose-villose  branches,  marked  by  the  annular  cica-
trices of  the  fallen  leaves.  The  leaves  are  crowded,  alternate,  interrupt-
edly imparipinnate,  and  sheathing  at  the  base  ;  leaflets  oblong,  or  ellip-
tical-lanceolate, acute,  serrate,  villose  at  the  margin  and  on  the  nerves
of  the  under  surface.  Stipules  adnate  to  the  petiole,  which  is  dilated  at
the  base,  and  amplexicaul.  Flowers  dioecious,  small,  greenish,  and
becoming  purple  ;  repeatedly  dichotomous ;  the  pedicles  with  an  ovate
bract  at  the  base.  The  so-called  male  flowers  may  be  regarded  as  her-
maphrodite flowers,  inasmuch  as  the  carpels  are  well  developed.  The
female  flowers  are  somewhat  different  in  their  structure.  The  outer  seg-
ments of  the  calyx  are  much  more  developed  than  in  the  female  flowers,
and  are  four  or  five  times  larger  than  those  of  the  inner  row,  and  are
placed  somewhat  below  them  ;  the  petals  are  entirely  wanting ;  the  sta-
mina are  rudimentary  and  sterile. The  ripe  fruits  are  unknown.

History. — This  plant  was  introduced  into  notice  by  a  pharmacien  of
Paris,  and  its  properties  as  an  anthelmintic  were  investigated  by  the


282  Materia Medica.

Academy  of  Medicine,  as  early  as  1847  ;  who,  with  the  Academy  of
Sciences,  made  a  favorable  report.  It  grows  in  Abyssinia,  the  flowers
being  the  parts  of  the  plant  used ;  they  are  reduced  to  a  fine  powder,
which  is  brownish,  like  jalap,  bitter,  somewhat  nauseous,  and  an  odor
similar  to  scammony.  The  plant  is  named  in  honor  to  Dr.  Brayer,  who
first  made  its  virtues  known  in  Europe.  Bruce,  in  his  travels,  vol.  vii,
appendix,  gives  a  minute  description  of  the  plant,  and  calls  it,  in  testi-
mony of  esteem  for  a  friend,  "  Banksia  Abyssinica."  Dr.  Kirk,  in  the
appendix  to  the  second  volume  of  the  "  Highlands  of  Ethiopia,"  by  Sir
W.  C.  Harris,  calls  it  "  Hagenia  Abyssinica,"  and  states  "  that  a  cold
infusion  of  the  dried  flowers  and  capsules,  constitutes  the  famous  drasti-
cum  purgans  and  anthelminticum  of  the  Abyssinians."

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Purgative  and  anthelmintic.  Used  by  the
Abyssinians  for  tapeworm,  to  which  they  are  very  subject,  and  it  is  said
they  will  not  travel  without  having  some  of  the  Kousso  with  them.  The
dose  of  the  flowers  in  powder  is  a  small  handful,  or  about  four  drachms
and  a  half,  which  is  to  be  macerated  in  about  three  gills  of  lukewarm
water  for  fifteen  minutes.  The  infusion,  with  the  powder  suspended  in
it,  is  taken  either  in  one,  two  or  three  doses,  quickly  following  each
other.  It  is  recommended  that  lemon-juice,  or  tamarind  water,  should
be  taken  freely  before  and  after  the  Kousso.  The  patient  must  be  pre-
pared by  low  diet  for  one  or  two  days  previously,  and  by  a  dose  of  castor
oil,  or  other  purgative,  and  the  Kousso  is  to  be  taken  on  an  empty
stomach  before  breakfast.  The  clear  infusion  has  the  color,  and  a  some-
what similar  taste,  to  very  weak  senna  tea.  Its  operation  is  safe,  speedy,
and  most  effectual,  rarely  causing  any  annoyance  or  uneasiness,  except
a  slight  nausea,  and  this  but  seldom  ;  occasionally  emesis  takes  place,
or  diuresis.  A  gentle  cathartic  after  its  operation  is  also  advisable.  As
far  as  it  has  been  used,  it  has  not  failed  to  kill  and  expel  the  worm.


BUXUS  SEMPERVIRENS.
Box.

Nat.  Ord.  —  Euphorbiacea?. Sex.  Syst.  —  Moncecia  Tetrandria.

THE LEAVES.

Description.  —  Buxus  Sempervirens  is  a  small,  dense-leaved,  hard-
wooded,  evergreen  tree.  The  leaves  are  ovate,  opposite,  deep  shining
green,  becoming  red  in  the  autumn,  quite  smooth  and  entire,  with  the
cuticle  of  the  underside  readily  stripping  off ;  petioles  and  young  branches
slightly  downy ;  flowers  aggregate,  axillary,  pale-yellow.  Capsule  glob-
ular, three-horned,  tricoccous,  six-seeded,  bursting  elastically.  Seeds
parallel,  oblong,  slightly  compressed,  externally  rounded.


Calendula  Officinalis.  283

History. — This  is  an  exotic  though  generally  well-known  plant,  grow-
ing on  dry  chalky  hills  in  Europe,  and  the  west  of  Asia.  One  variety
of  it,  the  B.  Stiff ruticosa,  Dwarf-box,  with  obovate  leaves,  and  a  stem
scarcely  woody,  and  which  is  much  esteemed  for  borders  along  the
walks  of  gardens,  possesses  similar  medical  virtues.  It  is  of  very  slow
growth,  a  tree  eight  feet  high  must  be  one  hundred  years  old.  The
wood  is  yellow,  very  hard,  and  much  used  by  wood-engravers  for  wood-
cuts, also  for  other  purposes.  The  leaves,  which  are  the  parts  used,  are
bitter  and  nauseous,  and  impart  their  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Cathartic,  sudorific,  alterative,  and  anthel-
mintic. It  may  be  used  in  syrup  or  extract,  in  all  diseases  where  an
alterative  is  required  ;  said  to  be  an  equivalent  of  Stillingia  in  syphilis,
but  I  have  used  the  plant  somewhat  extensively,  and  do  not  consider  it
near  as  effectual.  In  doses  of  ten  or  twenty  grains  of  the  powdered
leaves,  it  proves  an  excellent  vermifuge.  The  dose  of  a  strong  decoc-
tion or  syrup,  is  from  half  an  ounce  to  an  ounce,  three  or  four  times  a
day.  And  in  combination  with  the  Stillingia  and  Corydallis,  in  the  form
of  syrup,  it  forms  one  of  the  best  antisyphilitic  remedies  known  in  prac-
tice. Reputed  to  possess  antispasmodic  virtues,  and  to  have  been  bene-
ficially used  in  epilepsy,  chorea,  hysteria,  etc.,  but  requires  further
corroboration.  Chips  of  the  wood  are  said  to  have  the  same  properties,
A  fetid  empyreumatic  oil,  oleum  buxi  was  formerly  prepared,  but  the  use
of  which  has  become  superseded  by  the  preparations  of  Guaiacum  ;  it
has,  however,  been  successfully  used  in  toothache.  Camels  who  eat
the  leaves  are  said  to  become  poisoned.


CALENDULA  OFFICINALIS.

Garden  Marygold.
Nat. Ord. — Asteracea?. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Necessaria.

THE LEAVES AND FLOWERS.

Description. — Calendula  Officinalis  has  a  fibrous,  annual  root,  with  a
stem  about  a  foot  high,  having  many  patent  dichotomous,  or  sometimes
trichotomous  branches,  striated,  green,  succulent,  hispido-pubescent.  The
leaves  are  alternate,  oblong,  acute,  mucronate,  sessile,  somewhat  succu-
lent, broad,  and  a  little  cordate  at  the  base,  the  margins  quite  entire,  and
often  scabrous-ciliate.  Flower-heads  large,  terminal,  solitary  upon  each
branch,  of  a  rich,  full  golden  yellow,  deeper  and  brighter  previous  to
their  full  expansion.  Involucre  of  many  nearly  equal,  appressed,  linear-
subulate,  pilose-hispid  leaves  or  scales,  not  one-third  so  long  as  the


284:  Materia Medica.

radiant  florets,  the  apices  a  little  recurved.  Achenia  carinate,  muricate,
incurved.  Corollas  of  the  ray  ligulate,  female  tridentate,  broadly  linear,
the  lower  tubular  portion  hairy.  Ovary  singularly  boat-shaped,  curved
like  a  horse-shoe,  large,  green,  downy  within,  having  a  thickened  mar-
gin, more  or  less  tuberculated  on  the  back.  Florets  of  the  center  all
tubular,  small,  male,  and  consequently  sterile  ;  the  mouth  five-cleft,  base
hairy. Abortive  ovaries  cylindrical,  downy,  green. Receptacle  dotted.

History. — This  is  a  well-known  garden  plant,  with  a  feeble,  aromatic,
not  very  unpleasant  smell,  and  a  bitter,  rough,  saline  taste.  The  leaves
and  flowers  are  generally  used,  and  impart  their  active  properties  to  alco-
hol, or  boiling  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Slightly  stimulant  and  diaphoretic.  Used  for
similar  purposes  with  saffron,  but  less  active.  Has  been  reputed  anti-
spasmodic, deobstruent,  and  emmenagogue,  and  recommended  in  low
forms  of  fever,  scrofula,  jaundice,  amenorrhea,  cancer,  etc.  Used  in
infusion,  or  in  the  form  of  extract,  from  four  to  six  grains,  three  or  four
times  a  day  ;  also  applied  locally  to  cancerous  and  other  ulcers.  Pro-
bably over-estimated.  Dr.  Wm.  J.  Clary  of  Monroeville,  Ohio,  writes
me  as  follows,  in  relation  to  this  plant :  "As  a  local  remedy,  after  sur-
gical operations,  it  has  no  equal  in  the  Materia  Medica.  Its  forte  is  its
influence  on  lacerated  wounds,  without  regard  to  the  general  health  of
the  patient,  or  the  weather.  If  applied  constantly,  gangrene  will  not
follow,  and  I  might  say  there  will  be  but  little,  if  any  danger  of  tetanus.
When  applied  to  a  wound,  it  is  seldom  that  any  suppuration  follows,  the
wound  healing  by  replacement  or  first  intention.  It  has  been  tested  by
several  practitioners,  and  by  one,  is  used  after  every  surgical  operation
with  the  happiest  effect.  You  need  not  fear  to  use  it  in  wounds,  and  I
would  not  be  without  it,  for  a  hundred  times  its  cost.  It  is  to  be  made
into  a  saturated  tincture  with  whisky  diluted  with  one-third  its  quantity
of  water ;  lint  is  saturated  with  this,  applied  to  the  parts,  and  renewed
as  often  as  it  becomes  dry."


CALX.

Lime.


Preparation. — Lime  does  not  exist  in  the  pure  or  caustic  state  in  nature,
but  is  obtained  from  some  form  of  the  native  carbonate,  which  is  cal-
cined by  an  exposure  to  strong  heat;  the  carbonic  acid  is  thus  driven
off,  and  the  lime  remains.  It  is  usually  procured  from  common  lime-
stone, which,  however,  contains  several  impurities.  A  purer  lime  may
be  obtained  from  chalk;  and  when  intended  for  nice  chemical  operations
white  marble  or  oyster-shells  should  be  used.  These  may  be  reduced
to  small  fragments,  placed  in  a  covered  crucible,  and  exposed  to  a  full


Calx.  285

red  heat  for  three  hours;  after  the  lime  has  become  cool,  it  should  be  at
once  secured  in  well-closed  vessels,  to  prevent  it  from  absorbing  carbonic
acid  from  the  atmosphere,  which  it  does  very  speedily.

History. — Lime  is  a  grayish-white,  brittle,  earthy-like  substance,  of  a
strong,  alkaline,  caustic  taste,  infusible,  except  under  the  compound
blow-pipe,  of  the  specific  gravity  2.3.  It  rapidly  absorbs  moisture  and
carbonic  acid  from  the  atmosphere,  reducing  the  air  to  a  state  of  perfect
dryness,  and  falls  into  a  white  powder,  which  is  a  mixture  of  carbonate
and  hydrate.  It  has  an  alkaline  reaction.  If  carbonic  acid  be  present,
the  effervescence  will  take  place  on  dissolving  the  lime  in  muriatic  acid,
but  not  without.  Lime  is  not  readily  soluble  in  water,  it  requiring  about
seven  hundred  times  its  weight  of  temperate  water  for  entire  solution  ;
hot  water  dissolves  it  less  readily.  A  thick  liquid,  called  Milk  of  Lime
is  made  by  mixing  lime  with  an  excess  of  water.  When  water  is  added
to  lime,  it  cracks  and  becomes  reduced  to  powder,  with  the  evolution  of
heat.  Hydrate  of  lime  or  slaked  lime  is  prepared  by  adding  water  to
quicklime,  by  small  quantities  at  a  time,  until  it  falls  to  powder;  it  is
white,  pulverulent,  and  much  less  caustic  than  lime  ;  it  is  used  princi-
pally for  preparing  chlorinated  lime.

Lime  is  the  oxide  of  calcium,  and  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  cal-
cium 20.5,  and  one  of  oxygen  8,  =  28.5.  It  forms  a  very  deliquescent
salt  by  reaction  with  muriatic  acid,  and  a  sparingly  soluble  one  with  sul-
phuric, by  which  it  may  be  determined  from  other  alkaline  earths.  It
is  incompatible  with  all  acids,  acidulous,  metallic,  and  ammoniacal  salts,
borates,  alkaline  carbonates,  and  astringent  vegetable  infusions.

Properties  and  Uses. — Internally,  see  Aqua  Calcis.  Externally,  as  an
escharotic.  Mixed  with  caustic  potassa  it  forms  the  Potassa  cum  Calce,
a  powerful  caustic,  for  cauterizing  the  neck  of  the  uterus,  or  other  parts.
This  caustic,  also  known  as  Vienna  powder  or  paste,  is  made  by  reducing
caustic  potassa  one  ounce  and  a  half,  and  quicklime  two  ounces,  each
separately,  to  powder  in  a  heated  mortar ;  then  mix  them  carefully  and
rapidly,  and  keep  the  mixture  in  a  wide-mouthed  bottle  with  a  ground
stopper.  In  using  this  caustic,  the  powder  must  be  moistened  with  a
little  alcohol,  so  as  to  reduce  it  to  a  soft  paste,  which  is  to  be  applied  to
the  part  to  be  cauterized.  In  this  case,  the  potassa  only  acts  upon
caustic  potassa  generally  does :  but  to  bound  the  space  still  more  accu-
rately, it  may  be  surrounded  by  a  ring  of  diachylon  plaster.  Dr.  Filhos
has  prepared  a  caustic  of  the  same  agents,  which  is  more  easily  used,  it
is  called  the  Caustic  of  Filhos.  It  is  made  by  fusing  together  six  ounces
of  caustic  potassa,  and  three  ounces  of  quicklime  ;  the  mixture  is  poured
into  leaden  cylinders  inclosed  in  glass  tubes,  and  which  are  to  be  sealed
afterward  at  each  end.

In  cases  where  diaphoresis  is  desirable,  without  disturbing  the  patient,
it  may  be  effected  as  follows :  Take  a  piece  of  lime  about  the  size  of  a


286  Materia  Medica.

Sicily  orange,  wrap  around  it  a  wet  rag,  but  not  too  wet.  Around  this
wrap  several  thicknesses  of  dry  muslin  or  cloth.  Place  one  thus  pre-
pared on  each  side  of  the  patient,  and  by  both  thighs  ;  it  will  soon  induce
copious  perspiration.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Calcis  ;  Liquor  Calcis  ;  Potassa  Cum  Calce.


CAMPHORA.

Camphor.

Nat. Ord.— Lauraceaa. Sex.  Syst.— Enneandria  Monogynia.

Camphor  is  a  peculiar  concrete  substance  derived  from  Laurus  Cam-
phora  and  purified  by  sublimation.  It  is  chiefly  brought  to  this  country
from  Canton,  in  the  crude  state,  and  undergoes  purification  before  it  can
be  used  for  medicinal  purposes.

Description. — Laurus  Camphora  is  an  evergreen  tree  of  considerable
size,  with  a  trunk  straight  below,  but  divided  above  into  many  drooping,
smooth  branches,  covered  with  a  greenish  bark.  The  leaves  are  alter-
nate, on  long  footstalks,  ovate-lanceolate,  somewhat  coriaceous,  entire,
smooth,  bright-green  and  shining  above,  paler  beneath,  triple-nerved,
with  a  depressed  gland  opening  by  a  pore  at  the  axils  of  the  principal
lateral  veins  beneath,  and  two  or  three  inches  in  length.  Petioles  an  inch
to  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  slender,  smooth.  Panicles  axillary  and  ter-
minal, corymbose,  naked.  Leaf-buds  scaly.  Flowers  small,  white,
smooth  externally,  pedicelled,  and  in  clusters.

History. — The  Camphor  tree  is  a  native  of  Japan,  China,  the  East
Indies,  etc.  It  is  an  aromatic  tree,  all  parts  of  it  yielding  the  odor  of
camphor.  Camphor  is  obtained  in  Japan  by  cutting  the  wood,  roots,  etc.,
of  the  tree  in  small  pieces,  boiling  them  in  water,  in  large  iron  vessels,
over  which  are  placed  earthen  capitals,  containing  rice-straw  cones.  The
heat  sublimes  the  camphor,  which  rises  into  the  capital  and  condenses
upon  the  straw.  In  China,  the  process  is  somewhat  different;  the  pieces
of  the  tree  are  boiled  in  water  until  the  camphor  concretes  upon  the
stick  used  in  stirring ;  the  liquor  is  then  strained  and  allowed  to  cool,
when  the  camphor  hardens.  This  is  then  placed  in  alternate  layers  with
finely  powdered  dry  earth,  in  a  copper  basin,  on  which  another  is
inverted,  and  heat  being  applied,  the  camphor  sublimes  and  adheres  to
the  upper  vessel.  In  this  state  it  is  impure,  and  of  a  dirty-grayish  color,
being  known  as  Crude  Camphor;  it  is  re-sublimed  for  pharmaceutical
and  other  uses.

Camphor  has  a  crystalline  texture ;  white,  translucent  and  shining,
brittle,  but  somewhat  elastic,  of  a  powerful,  penetrating,  diffusible  odor,
and  of  a  pungent,  bitter,  cooling  taste. It  cannot  be  pulverized  alone,


Camphora.  287

but  is  easily  so  by  the  aid  of  a  few  drops  of  alcohol.  It  slowly  evapor-
ates when  exposed  to  the  air,  and  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  fixed  and
volatile  oils,  and  acetic,  nitric,  and  sulphuric  acids.  Nitric  acid  converts
it  into  camphoric  acid  and  oil  of  camphor;  sulphuric,  into  artificial  tan-
nin and  charcoal.  Resins  and  fats,  when  heated  with  it,  unite  in  all  pro-
portions. By  the  application  of  polarized  light,  the  smallest  portion  of
natural  camphor  may  be  distinguished  from  the  artificial  camphor  (hy-
drochlorate  of  camphene).  If  small  fragments  of  each  be  placed  sepa-
rately on  glass  slides,  and  a  drop  of  alcohol  added  to  each,  they  dissolve
and  speedily  re-crystallize.  If  the  crystallization  of  the  natural  camphor
is  watched  by  means  of  the  microscope  and  polarized  light,  a  most
beautiful  display  of  colored  crystals  is  seen,  while  with  the  artificial  cam-
phor nothing  of  the  kind  is  witnessed.  Camphor  is  lighter  than  water,
and  keeps  up  a  constant  rotatory  motion  when  small  fragments  are  placed
on  that  fluid.  It  volatilizes  at  ordinary  temperatures,  melts  at  288°,  and
boils  at  400°.  It  is  considered  to  be  an  oxide  of  camphogene,  or  cam-
phene, which  is  composed  of  ten  equivalents  of  carbon  60,  and  eight
of  hydrogen  8=68.  With  one  equivalent  of  oxygen,  (Cio  Hs  0)  cam-
phene forms  camphor;  with  four,  hydrated  camphoric  acid;  and  with
half  an  equivalent  of  hydrochloric  acid,  artificial  camphor.

When  camphor  is  triturated  with  dragon's  blood,  guaiacum,  galbanum,
or  assafoetida,  the  mixture  preserves  the  pilular  consistence  indefinitely.
With  benzoin,  tolu,  mastic,  and  ammoniac,  the  mixture  becomes  soft,  by
exposure  to  the  air.  With  olibanum,  gamboge,  euphorbium,  amber,
and  myrrh,  the  mixture  remains  pulverulent,  though  grumous.  Assafoe-
tida, galbanum,  sagapenum,  tolu,  dragon's  blood,  olibanum,  mastic,
benzoin,  tacamahac,  guaiacum,  and  ammoniac,  destroy  to  a  greater  or
less  extent  the  odor  of  camphor.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses  camphor  is  a  narcotic  and  irri-
tant ;  in  small  ones,  sedative,  anodyne,  antispasmodic,  diaphoretic,  and
anthelmintic.  It  appears  to  influence  chiefly  the  cerebral  and  nervous
systems,  through  the  agency  of  which  it  affects  the  circulation.  Mucous
membranes  with  which  it  comes  in  contact  are  irritated  directly,  and
acceleration  of  the  circulation  may  ensue  as  a  secondary  effect.  It  is
used  to  allay  nervous  excitement,  subdue  pain,  arrest  spasm,  and  some-
times to  induce  sleep.  In  the  delirium,  watchfulness,  tremors,  and
starting  of  the  tendons  in  typhoid  conditions,  it  is  of  much  utility  as  a
nervo-stimulant.  In  inflammatory  affections,  as  remittent  and  intermit-
tent fevers,  acute  rheumatism,  etc.,  it  acts  beneficially  as  a  diaphoretic
and  sedative  ;  and  is  also  valuable  in  gout,  neuralgia,  dysmenorrhea,
after-pains,  puerperal  convulsions,  and  painful  diseases  of  the  urinary
organs,  acting  as  a  sedative,  anodyne,  and  antispasmodic.  It  is  often
advantageously  combined  with  opium  in  chordee,  and  hysteric  nympho-
mania, and  all  irritations  of  the  sexual  organs.  By  some  physicians  it  is
said  to  act  as  an  aphrodisiac,  exciting  the  urinary  and  genital  organs


288  Materia Medica.

causing  a  burning  sensation  along  the  urethra,  and  voluptuous  dreams  ,
by  others  again,  it  is  used  as  an  antaphrodisiac,  and  to  allay  urinary  and
genital  irritations.  It  is  said  to  be  an  antidote  to  poisoning  by  strychnia.
An  oleaginous  injection  of  camphor  in  the  early  stage  of  gonorrhea,  often
allays  urethral  irritation;  also,  the  tenesmus  from  ascarides  and  dysen-
tery, when  injected  into  the  rectum.  It  enters  into  many  embrocations
and  liniments  for  rheumatic,  neuralgic,  and  deep-seated  pains,  cynanche
tonsillaris,  contusions  from  blows,  sprains,  chilblains,  chronic  cutaneous
diseases,  and  as  a  stimulant  for  indolent  and  gangrenous  ulcers.  The
vapor  of  camphor,  inhaled  into  the  lungs  has  been  found  beneficial  in
asthma  and  spasmodic  cough  ;  and  the  powder  may  be  used  as  a  snuff
for  the  relief  of  nervous  headache,  and  catarrh  in  its  commencing  stage.
The  best  form  of  using  this  agent  is  the  aqua-  camphorae.  The  admin-
istration of  opium  will  best  counteract  the  injurious  effects  of  an  over-
dose of  camphor.  Dose  of  the  powder,  one  to  ten  grains.  When  given
in  the  solid  form,  it  is  capable  of  producing  ulceration  of  the  gastric
mucous  membrane.

Off.  Prep.  —  Aqua  Camphorae ;  Emplastrum  Plumbi  Compositum;
Emplastrum  Resinee  Compositum  ;  Emplastrum  Calefaciens  ;  Linimen-
tum  Camphori  Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Saponis  Camphoratum  ;  Lini-
mentum  Olei  Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Capsici  Compositum  ;  Linimen-
tum Opii  ;  Mistura  Camphorae  Composita  ;  Mistura  Copaibae  Composita  ;
Pulvis  Ipecacuanhse  et  Opii ;  Pilulae  Camphorae  Compositae  ;  Tinctura
Camphorae ;  Tinctura  Camphorae  Composita ;  Tinctura  Serpentariee
Composita;  Tinctura  Opii  Acetata;  Unguentum  Plumbi  Compositum.


CANELLA ALBA.
Canella.

Nat.  Ord. — Meliacea?  or  Canellea?. Sex.  Si/st. — Dodecandria  Monogynia.


Description. — Canella  Alba  is  a  tree  with  a  very  straight  and  upright
stem,  growing  from  ten  to  fifty  feet  in  hight,  and  branched  only  near  the
top.  It  is  covered  with  a  whitish  bark ;  the  inner  bark  is  thick,  smooth,
pale,  with  a  pungent,  aromatic  taste,  dry  and  crumbling  betAveen  the
teeth.  The  branches  are  erect  and  spreading;  the  leaves  are  petiolated,
irregularly  alternate,  oblong,  obtuse,  entire,  of  a  dark-green  color,
shining  and  coriaceous,  dotted  when  young,  opake  when  old.  The
flowers  grow  at  the  extremities  of  the  branches  in  clusters,  they  are
small,  of  a  violet  color,  and  are  seldom  fully  expanded.  The  calyx  is
five-leaved  and  persistent;  the  sepals  are  roundish,  smooth,  concave,
and  membranous. The  petals  are  much  longer  than  the  sepals,  oblong,


Canna.  289

erect,  concave,  thick,  deciduous,  two  somewhat  narrower  than  the
others.  Stamens  monadelphous,  forming  an  urceolate  tube,  to  die  outer-
side  of  which  the  anthers  adhere.  The  ovary  is  superior,  ovate,  three-
celled,  bearing  a  cylindrical  style  with  three  convex,  blunt  stigmas.
The  fruit  is  an  oblong,  fleshy,  smooth,  black  berry,  which  is  three-
seeded,  or  by  abortion  one-celled,  and  one  or  two-seeded.  The  seeds
are  exalbuminous,  with  linear  cotyledons.

History.— A  South  American  tree;  the  bark  is  of  a  pale  orange
yellow  color  externally,  and  yellowish  white  on  the  inner  surface,  with
an  aromatic  odor,  and  a  warm,  bitterish,  very  pungent  taste.  Alcohol
extracts  its  active  properties,  giving  a  bright-yellow  tincture,  which  is
rendered  milky  by  the  addition  of  water.  It  pulverizes  readily,  yielding
a  yellowish-white  powder.  By  distillation  with  water,  a  large  propor-
tion of  a  fragrant,  essential  oil  is  obtained,  of  a  reddish  or  yellowish
color.  It  contains  two  oils,  mannite,  bitter  extractive,  resin,  gum,
starch,  albumen,  and  various  saline  substances.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aromatic  stimulant  and  gentle  tonic.  Useful
in  combination.  In  the  West  Indies  it  is  used  as  a  condiment,  and  has
been  advised  in  scurvy.  Some  smokers  add  this  bark  to  their  smoking-
tobacco  to  remove  the  unpleasant  odor  from  the  tobacco,  and  to  impart
a  degree  of  fragrance  to  their  smoking-rooms.


CANNA.
Canna  Starch.

History. — Canna  Starch,  called  by  the  French  "  Tous  les  3Iols,"  is  the
fecula  of  an  undetermined  species  of  Canna.  Some  suppose  it  to  be
obtained  from  the  root  or  rhizome  of  the  Canna  Coccinea,  and  others  of
the  Canna  Edulis. Both  suppositions,  however,  are  very  uncertain.

Canna  Starch  comes  from  the  West  India  island,  St.  Kitts.  Be  its
origin  what  it  may,  it  is  an  excellent  arrowroot.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a
light,  beautifully  white  powder,  with  a  satiny  appearance,  very  unlike
the  ordinary  forms  of  fecula ;  it  looks  more  like  potato-starch  than  any
other  variety  of  fecula,  and  its  granules  are  larger,  being  from  the
300th  to  the  200th  of  an  inch  in  length.  Under  the  microscope  these
granules  are  oval  or  oblong,  usually  more  or  less  ovate,  with  numerous,
regular,  closely  set,  and  unequally  distant  concentric  rings,  and  a  circu-
lar hilum,  usually  at  the  smaller  extremity,  and  occasionally  double,
from  which  proceed  the  cracks  observable  in  some  of  the  larger  grains.
This  starch  has  the  ordinary  chemical  properties  of  common  starch,  and
forms,  when  prepared  with  boiling  water,  a  stiff  jelly.
19


290  Materia Mkdica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Canna  starch  forms  a  nutritious  and  wholesome
food  for  infants  and  invalids.  It  may  be  prepared  in  the  same  manner
as  arrowroot,  and  may  be  used  in  the  same  cases.  By  many  it  is  pre-
ferred to  any  other  kind  of  arrowroot.


CANNABIS  SATIVA.
Hemp.

Nat.  Orel. — Urticacere  or  Cannabinacese. Sex.  Syst. — Dicecia  Pentandria.

THE DRIED TOPS AND RESIN.

Description. — Cannabis  Sativa  is  an  annual  plant,  growing  about  three
feet  high,  covered  with  a  very  fine,  rough  pubescence,  scarcely  visible
to  the  naked  eye.  The  stem  is  erect,  branched,  bright-green,  angular.
The  leaves  are  alternate  or  opposite,  on  long,  lax  petioles,  digitate,
scabrous,  with  linear-lanceolate,  sharply-serrated  leaflets,  tapering  into  a
long,  smooth,  entire  point;  stipules  subulate.  Flowers  in  axillary  clus-
ters, with  subulate  bracts ;  the  males  lax  and  drooping,  branched  and  leaf-
less at  the  base;  females  erect,  simple,  and  leafy  at  the  base.  Calyx
of  male,  downy ;  of  female,  covered  with  short  brownish  glands.  Ache-
nium  ovate,  one-seeded;  seeds  roundish-ovate,  somewhat  compressed,
about  the  eighth  of  an  inch  long,  of  a  shining  gray  color,  inodorous,  and
of  a  disagreeable,  oily,  sweetish  taste.

History. — Hemp  is  a  native  of  Persia  and  the  northern  parts  of  India,
whence  it  has  been  introduced  into  many  other  countries.  The  hemp
of  this  country  is  identical  with  the  eastern  plant  in  its  botanical  charac-
ters, but  differs  somewhat  from  it  in  its  physical  qualities,  the  India
plant  being  more  powerful  in  its  action  on  the  system,  and  which  is
probably  owing  to  the  influence  of  climate,  cultivation,  etc.  In  the
eastern  countries  an  infusion  of  hemp  is  much  employed  as  an  intoxicat-
ing drink;  and  it  is  smoked  the  same  as  tobacco,  with  which  it  is
frequently  mixed.  An  alcoholic  extract  of  the  dried  tops  is  the  form
employed  in  medicine,  which  is  made  by  passing  the  vapor  of  boiling
alcohol  from  the  boiler  of  a  still  into  the  dried  plant  contained  in  a  con-
venient receptacle,  and  evaporating  the  condensed  liquor  at  a  tempera-
ture not  exceeding  150°  F.  The  concrete  resinous  exudation  of  the
plant  is  known  in  India  by  the  name  of  Churrus.

Properties  and  Uses. — Narcotic,  and  may  be  used  in  place  of  opium
in  all  cases  where  that  drug  disagrees  with  the  patient.  The  churrus  is
said  to  alleviate  pain,  exhilarate  the  spirits,  increase  the  appetite,  pro-
duce decided  aphrodisia,  and  cause  sleep ;  and  in  large  doses,  to  occasion
intoxication,  a  peculiar  kind  of  delirium  and  catalepsy. The  preparation


Cantharis  Vesicatoria.  291

most  used  is  the  alcoholic  extract ;  if  of  good  quality,  half  a  grain  or  a  o-rain
will  affect  the  system,  while  that  of  the  shops  will  require  from  ten  grains
to  half  an  ounce.  Alarming  effects  have  been  produced  by  over-doses.
Very  favorable  reports  have  been  made  of  its  effects  in  cholera,  neural-
gia, rheumatism,  tetanus,  and  insanity.  A  tincture  of  the  extract,  made
by  dissolving  three  grains  in  a  fluidrachm  of  proof  spirit  has  likewise
been  used  with  advantage  —  the  dose  to  correspond  with  that  of  the
extract.  Ten  drops  of  it  every  half  hour  have  been  administered  in
cholera;  and  have  been  successfully  employed  in  menorrhagia,  which
had  resisted  all  ordinary  means  for  months ;  it  has  also  proved  service-
able in  uterine  hemorrhage.  The  following  is  said  to  be  a  certain  cure
for  gonorrhea:  take,  while  in  blossom,  equal  parts  of  tops  of  the  male
and  female  hemp,  Cannabis  Sativa,  bruise  them  in  a  mortar,  and  express
the  juice,  to  this  add  an  equal  portion  of  alcohol.  Dose,  from  one  to
three  drops  every  two  or  three  hours.  The  green  plant  collected  in  the
spring,  and  two  or  three  twigs  placed  in  or  between  beds,  will,  it  is
asserted,  certainly  and  effectually  cause  bedbugs  to  remove  from  the
room  in  which  they  are  used.

CANTHARIS  VESICATORIA.

Cantharides.

Cantharis.  Class  Insecta.  Order  Coleoptera,  Linn. — Family  Trachelides.
Tribe  Cantharides,  Latreille.

Gen.  Ch.  Tarsi  entire  ;  nails  bifid  ;  head  not  produced  into  a  rostrum  ;
elytra  flexible,  covering  the  whole  abdomen,  linear  semicylindric  ;  wings
perfect ;  maxillce  with  two  membranaceous  lacin'm,  the  external  one  acute
within,  subuncinate  ;  antennce  longer  than  the  head  and  thorax,  recti-
linear ;  first  joint  largest,  the  second  transverse,  very  short ;  maxillary
palpi  larger  at  tip. — Say.

History. — There  are  a  number  of  insects  inhabiting  various  sections
of  the  world  which  possess  acrid  properties,  and  which,  when  applied
to  the  skin  produce  vesication ;  the  most  common  in  use  are  those
under  present  consideration,  Spanish  Flies,  or  Cantharides,  the  Cantharis
Vesicatoria  of  Latreille,  Melo'e  Vesicatorius  of  Linnaeus,  or  Lytla  Vesica-
toria, and  Cantharis  officinalis  of  other  naturalists.  At  what  period  they
were  introduced  into  the  practice  of  medicine  is  a  matter  of  uncertainty.
The  Spanish  fly  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  imported  into  this  country
from  Messina  and  St.  Petersburg.  Those  from  Russia  are  the  best,
and  may  be  known  by  their  greater  size,  and  somewhat  copper  color.
This  insect  may  be  distinguished  from  other  analogous  ones,  by  present-
ing two  wing  covers  of  a  shining-green  color,  long  and  flexible,  which
cover  two  membranous  wings  of  a  brownish  color ;  the  head  is  large


292  Materia  Medica.

and  heart-shaped,  having  two  thread-like,  black,  jointed  antennae  ;  the
thorax  is  short  and  quadrilateral,  and  along  the  head  and  chest  is  a
longitudinal  furrow.  The  fly  is  about  six  or  ten  lines  long,  and  weighs
about  two  grains  and  a  half.  They  have  a  peculiar,  disagreeable  odor,
and  a  faint  resinous  taste,  followed  by  acridity.  In  the  countries  which
they  inhabit  they  are  found  on  certain  trees  as  the  elder,  plum,  rose,
white  poplar,  privet,  elm,  lilac,  ash,  and  honeysuckle,  the  leaves  of  which
serve  them  as  food.  In  the  state  of  larva,  they  inhabit  the  earth,  and
prey  upon  the  roots  of  plants.  In  the  months  of  May  and  June,  they
come  forth  in  swarms  in  the  form  of  flies,  and  fill  those  trees  and  shrubs
which  they  prefer.  At  this  season  they  are  collected,  which  is  attempted
at  dawn,  when  they  are  torpid  from  the  cold  of  the  night ;  to  undertake
their  removal  in  the  day-time  would  be  a  serious  measure.  Those  who
gather  them  being  protected  with  masks  and  gloves,  shake  them  from
the  trees  and  receive  them  into  sheets  spread  below ;  they  are  then
immersed  in  vinegar  or  exposed  to  the  vapor  of  boiling  vinegar,  spirit,
or  turpentine,  for  the  purpose  of  killing  them,  after  which  they  are
quickly  dried  in  the  sun,  or  in  heated  apartments,  and  when  perfectly
dried,  are  put  into  casks  or  boxes  lined  with  paper,  and  closed  so  as  to
exclude  as  much  as  possible  the  atmospheric  moisture.  It  abounds  the
most  in  Spain,  Italy,  Southern  France,  Southern  Russia,  Sicily,  and  is
found  to  some  extent  in  all  the  South  of  Europe  and  in  Western  Asia.

together  with  the  disagreeble  odor  of  the  living  insect,  and  an  acrid,
burning,  and  urinous  taste.  They  are  easily  pulverized,  the  powder
presenting  a  dirty  grayish-brown  color,  interspersed  with  numerous
shining-green  particles,  the  fragments  of  the  feet,  head,  and  wing  covers.
And  as  these  particles  resist  the  process  of  putrefaction  for  a  long  time,
they  may  consequently  be  detected  in  the  stomach  many  months  after
death  occurring  from  the  internal  administration  of  cantharides.  When
kept  perfectly  dry,  and  well  closed,  the  vesicating  property  of  the  flies
may  be  preserved  for  many  years.  Hence  they  should  always  be  kept
in  well  stoppered  bottles,  and  powdered  only  as  required.  If  purchased
in  powder  they  may  have  lost  their  activity,  or  suffered  from  adultera-
tion with  euphorbium,  or  some  other  insects.  To  preserve  them  from
insects,  various  means  have  been  advised,  as  the  introduction  of  a  few
lumps  of  camphor  into  the  vessel  containing  them,  or  the  addition  of
carbonate  of  ammonia,  or  a  few  drops  of  strong  acetic  acid.  Exposing
them  for  half  an  hour  in  glass  bottles,  to  the  heat  of  boiling  water,
destroys  the  insects  and  eggs,  without  impairing  the  virtues  of  the  flies;
of  course  they  must  not  be  allowed  to  come  in  contact  with  the  water.
The  properties  of  the  fly  are  much  diminished  by  the  insects  which  feed
upon  tliem.

Cantharides  powder  yields  its  active  properties  to  boiling  water,  acetic
acid,  alcohol,  proof  spirit,  ether,  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils. The  active


Cantharis  Vesicatoria.  093

principle  is  a  white,  crystalline  substance,  termed  Cantharidin,  which  is
soluble  in  ether,  acetic  acid,  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  and  in  alkaline  solu-
tions. It  is  in  small,  white,  pearly  prisms,  which  are  neutral,  insoluble
in  water  and  cold  alcohol,  but  soluble  in  ether,  alkaline  solutions,  acetic
acid,  the  oils,  and  in  boiling  alcohol  which  deposits  it  upon  coolino- ;  it
fuses  at  210°,  volatilizes  at  a  higher  heat  without  decomposition,  and
evaporates  slowly  at  atmospheric  temperatures.  It  is  said  to  exist  prin-
cipally in  the  trunk  and  soft  parts  of  the  body,  and  may  be  obtained  by
exhausting  powdered  cantharides  with  cold  rectified  spirit,  by  percola-
tion, concentrating  the  tincture  till  most  of  the  alcohol  is  expelled,  and
allowing  the  residue  to  rest  for  a  long  time  until  crystals  form.  It  may
be  freed  from  impurities  by  elutriation  with  a  little  cold  rectified  spirit,
which  scarcely  acts  on  crystallized  cantharidin  ;  and  it  may  be  obtained
quite  pure  by  re-dissolving  them  in  boiling  rectified  spirit,  adding  animal
charcoal,  and  re-crystallizing  them  by  rest  and  cooling.  Ether  is,  how-
ever, preferred  to  alcohol  in  preparing  these  crystals,  as  it  dissolves  less
of  the  green  oil,  which  is  very  difficult  to  separate.  The  composition
of  cantharidin  is  carbon  61.68  per  cent.,  hydrogen  6.04,  and  oxygen
32.28,  or  Cio  He  (H

Cantharides  are  found  to  contain  in  addition  to  their  active  principle,  a
green  oil,  insoluble  in  water,  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  inert  as  a  vesica-
tory; a  black  matter,  soluble  in  water,  insoluble  in  alcohol,  and  inert;  a
yellow  viscid  matter,  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,  and  inert  as  a  vesicant;
a  fatty  matter  insoluble  in  alcohol ;  phosphates  of  lime  and  magnesia,
acetic  acid,  etc.  Although  cantharidin  is  insoluble  in  water  and  cold
alcohol,  yet  the  decoction  and  tincture  of  cantharides  possess  the  active
properties  of  the  insect,  which  is  owing  to  the  presence  of  the  yellow
matter  combined  with  it.  The  best  menstruum  for  cantharides  is  sul-
phuric ether,  which  dissolves  only  the  active  constituents.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  narcotic  and  irritant ;  in  medi-
cinal doses,  stimulant  and  diuretic.  In  large  doses,  its  use  is  dangerous,
being  attended  often  by  violent  inflammation  of  the  alimentary  canal  and
urinary  organs,  strangury,  irritation  of  the  sexual  organs,  in  the  female,
abortion  ;  also,  headache,  delirium,  convulsions  and  coma.  Twenty-four
grains  of  the  powder  or  one  ounce  of  the  tincture  have  produced  alarm-
ing symptoms.  There  is  no  known  antidote  to  its  poisonous  effects,
which  must  be  treated  on  general  principles.  Medicinally,  they  are
sometimes  given  in  chronic  gonorrhea,  gleet,  leucorrhea,  seminal  weak-
ness, paralysis  and  chronic  inflammation  of  the  bladder.  They  have
also  been  reputed  useful  in  the  anasarcous  swellings  succeeding  scarla-
tina, diabetes,  scaly  cutaneous  eruptions,  chronic  eczema,  incontinence
of  urine,  amenorrhea,  etc.  Thirty  drops  of  solution  of  potassa,  given
every  hour,  is  said  to  be  an  effectual  remedy  in  cantharidal  strangury.


294  Materia  Medica.

Dose,  of  powdered  cantharides,  half  a  grain  to  two  grains. (See  Tinc-
tura  Cantharidis.)

Externally,  cantharides  cause  redness,  vesication,  suppuration  or
sloughing,  according  to  the  length  of  contact  with  the  integuments.
Their  most  general  use  is  to  produce  vesication.  Blisters  are  sometimes
beneficial  in  tic-douloreux,  sciatica,  local  chronic  inflammations,  diseases
of  the  brain,  chest  and  abdomen,  to  excite  the  languid  action  of  vessels,
in  recession  of  exanthematous  affections,  and  to  rouse  from  general
defective  sensibility,  as  in  typhoid  fever.  In  their  application  to  children,
much  care  should  be  observed,  especially  in  typhoid  conditions,  exan-
thema, and  where  a  tendency  to  sloughing  exists.  A  piece  of  white
paper  soaked  with  the  Gantharidin,  which  is  greenish  and  liquid,  laid
on  the  part,  and  covered  with  a  compress,  and  confined  by  means  of  a
bandage,  will  vesicate  in  three  or  four  hours.  A  vesicating  oil  has  been
recommended  by  E.  Dupuy,  prepared  as  follows :  To  one  part  of
pulverized  cantharides  add  in  a  close  vessel,  a  mixture  of  chloroform
and  castor  oil  of  each,  by  weight,  one  and  a  half  parts ;  after  some
hours  transfer  the  ingredients  to  a  glass  apparatus,  and  displace  the
liquid  in  the  usual  way ;  it  will  amount  to  about  two-thirds  of  the
original  bulk  of  the  liquid  employed.  A  few  drops  of  this  vesicating  oil
applied  to  the  arm  of  an  adult  will  produce  a  perfect  blister  in  about
eight  hours.  It  is  easy  of  application  on  any  surface,  holds  the  vesicat-
ing agent  free  from  the  disagreeable  concomitants  of  the  ordinary  fly-
blister,  and  retains  the  cantharidin  in  a  soluble  state.  Its  action  will
probably  be  favored  by  the  use  of  oil-silk  over  the  application  of  it  to
the  skin.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Cantharidis ;  Emplastrum  Cantharidis.


CANTHARIS  VITTATA.

Potato  Fly.

Description. — The  Potato  Fly  is  found  principally  in  the  middle  and
southern  States ;  it  makes  its  appearance  in  July  and  August,  and  feeds
upon  the  potato  plant.  Some  seasons  the  fly  exists  in  great  numbers.  It
resembles  the  Spanish  Fly,  though  somewhat  smaller,  being  about  five
or  six  lines  in  length.  Its  head  is  of  a  light-red  color,  with  dark  spots
upon  the  top  ;  the  antennae  are  black ;  the  elytra  or  wing  covers  are
also  black,  with  a  central  yellow  longitudinal  line,  and  yellow  margins;
the  thorax  is  black,  with  three  yellow  lines ;  and  the  abdomen  and  legs
are  covered  with  an  ash-colored  down.  During  the  season  of  their
appearance,  they  may  be  found  on  the  plant  in  the  morning  and  evening,
but  during  the  heat  of  the  day,  they  descend  into  the  soil. They  may


Caoutchouc.  295

be  collected  by  sbaking  them  from  the  plant  into  hot  water,  after  which
they  should  be  carefully  dried  in  the  sun.

History.  —  The  Potato  Fly,  though  not  so  much  employed  as  the
Spanish  Fly,  is  fully  equal,  if  not  superior  to  it  as  a  vesicant ;  indeed,  its
effects  are  found  to  take  place  more  promptly  than  with  the  foreign  insect,
which  may,  probably,  be  owing  to  its  greater  freshness.

There  are  several  other  species  of  blistering  fly  in  the  United  States,
which  are,  probably,  not  at  all  inferior  to  cantharides  ;  as  the  Cantharis
Cinerea,  or  ash-colored  cantharis  which  inhabits  the  northern  and  middle
States  ;  the  C.  Atrata,  or  black  cantharis,  common  to  the  northern  and
middle  States,  and  likewise  found  in  Barbary ;  the  C.  Marginata  of  the
middle  and  eastern  States,  and  which  feeds  on  the  various  species  of
clematis,  and  also  on  the  cimicifuga;  and  likewise  the  G.  Alvida,  C.
Nuttalli,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  vesicating  property  of  all  these  insects,  is
very  likely  owing  to  the  presence  of  the  same  proximate  principle,  and
therefore  they  may  be  applied  to  the  same  purposes,  and  administered
in  the  same  doses  and  preparations  as  the  Spanish  Cantharis.


CAOUTCHOUC.

Gum  Elastic. Indian  Rubber.
Nat.  Orel — Euphorbiacese. Urticacese. Sex.  Syst. — Moncecia  Syngenesia.


Description. — The  tree  (Ficus  Elastica)  from  which  Caoutchouc  is
obtained  has  a  trunk  from  two  feet  to  two-and-a-half  in  diameter,  and
from  forty  to  sixty  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  approximated,
three  foliolate,  articulated  at  the  top  of  a  long  slendf ;  stalk,  convex
below,  furrowed  above,  and  swelled  at  its  base  ;  leaflets  smooth,  oval,
acute,  green  above,  cinereous  beneath.  Flowers  monoecious.  Calyx
five-cleft.  Fruit  oblong,  greenish,  three-cornered,  broadest  at  base,
tricoccous,  each  coccus  opening  with  two  valves.  Seed  ovate,  brownish
variegated  with  black,  with  a  thin,  brittle  testa,  and  a  sweet,  nut-like
pleasant  kernel.

History. — This  substance  is  the  coagulated  or  inspissated  juice  of
several  tropical  trees,  the  Siphonia  Cahuchu,  Siphonia  Elastica,  Jatro-
pha  Elastica,  and  Hevea  Guianensis,  all  of  which  are  supposed  to  be
identical.  On  being  wounded,  the  juice  flows  out,  which  is  dried  on
molds  of  clay,  and  which  comes  to  us  in  various  shapes.  It  is  gener-
ally blackened  by  smoke,  but  when  pure  is  nearly  colorless  ;  in  thin
layers,  transparent,  highly  elastic,  lighter  than  water,  without  taste  or


296  Materia Medica.

smell,  insoluble  in  water,  alcohol,  weak  acids  and  alkaline  solutions.
It  dissolves  in  pure  ether,  oil  of  turpentine,  naphtha,  coal-tar  naphtha,
bisulphuret  of  carbon,  and  volatile  oils.  Its  solutions  in  ether,  oil  of
turpentine,  and  coal-tar  naphtha,  when  dried  up,  leave  the  gum  in  an
elastic  state,  and  on  this  principle  water-proof  cloth  is  made  ;  the  same
is  said  to  be  the  case  with  its  solutions  in  the  oils  of  lavender,  sassa-
fras and  cajuput.  Under  exposure  to  heat,  caoutchouc  first  melts,  and
then  distils,  yielding  a  mixture  of  several  oily  liquids,  all  of  which,  as
well  as  pure  caoutchouc  itself,  are  carbo-hydrogens.

Caoutchouc  is  not  affected  by  atmospheric  air,  chlorine,  muriatic  or
sulphurous  acid  gas,  or  ammonia.  It  consists  of  87.2  parts  of  carbon,
and  12.8  of  hydrogen.

Caoutchoucine  is  said  to  be  the  lightest  fluid  known,  and  yet  its  vapor
is  denser  than  the  heaviest  of  the  gases.  It  is  prepared  by  cutting
India  rubber  into  small  pieces  containing  about  two  cubic  inches  each,
placing  them  into  a  cast-iron  still  connected  with  a  well-cooled  worm-
tub,  or  any  flat  vessel  with  a  large  evaporating  surface,  the  entire  top
of  which  can  be  removed  for  the  purpose  of  cleaning  it  out.  Heat  is
to  be  applied  in  the  usual  way,  until  the  thermometer  rang-es  at  about
600°  F.,  when  as  it  progresses  upward  to  this  temperature,  a  dark-
colored  oil  or  liquid  is  distilled  over.  When  the  thermometer  reaches
600°  or  thereabouts,  nothing  is  left  in  the  still  but  dirt  and  charcoal.
This  toil  is  to  be  rectified,  and  thereby  obtaining  fluids  varying  in
specific  gravity,  the  lightest  of  which  has  not  been  under  .670.  At
each  rectification  the  color  becomes  brighter  and  paler,  until  at  about
specific  gravity  .680  it  is  colorless  and  highly  volatile.  It  must  be
rectified  with  one-third  its  weight  of  water.  To  enable  the  dirt  to  be
removed  from  the  bottom  of  the  still  with  greater  ease,  throw  in  com-
mon solder  to  the  depth  of  about  half  an  inch  ;  when  this  becomes
fused  the  dirt  is  easily  taken  off.  The  disagreeable  smell  of  this  liquid
may  be  removed  by  shaking  it  up  with  nitro-muriatic  acid,  in  the  pro-
portion of  four  fluidounces  of  the  acid  to  one  gallon  of  the  liquid.
Mixed  with  alcohol,  caoutchoucine  dissolves  all  the  resins,  especially
copal  and  india  rubber,  at  the  common  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,
and  it  speedily  evaporates,  leaving  them  again  in  the  solid  state.  It
mixes  with  oils  in  all  proportions.  It  promises  to  be  a  very  valuable
article  for  the  solution  of  resins  in  the  manufacture  of  varnishes,  and  for
liquefying  oil-paints  with  instead  of  turpentine.  Being  very  volatile  it
requires  to  be  kept  in  close  vessels.

"When  caoutchouc  is  immersed  in  a  bath  of  fused  sulphur,  heated  to
various  temperatures,  by  absorbing  the  sulphur,  it  assumes  a  carbon-
ized appearance,  and  finally  acquires  the  consistency  of  horn ;  this  is
termed  Vulcanized  caoutchouc.  The  same  vulcanized  condition  can  also
be  produced  either  by  kneading  the  india  rubber  with  sulphur,  and  then
exposing it  to  a  temperature of 190°,— or  by  dissolving the india


Capsicum  Anxuum.  297

rubber  in  any  known  solvent,  as  turpentine,  previously  charged  with  sul-
phur. Thus  treated,  caoutchouc  remains  elastic  at  all  temperatures  ;  in
its  ordinary  state  it  is  quite  rigid  at  a  temperature  of  4U°  ;  it  is  not
affected  by  any  known  solvents,  nor  by  heat  short  of  the  vulcanizing
point,  and  acquires  extraordinary  powers  of  resisting  compression.  A
cannon  hall  was  broken  to  pieces  by  being  driven  through  a  mass  of
vulcanized  caoutchouc,  which  exhibited  no  other  trace  of  its  passage
than  a  scarcely  perceptible  rent.  This  article  may  be  used  for  various
useful  purposes,  as  springs  for  locks,  ornaments,  bottles  for  volatile
fluids,  as  a  covering  to  protect  wires  from  corrosion  in  sea  or  on  land,
life-boats,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Caoutchouc  is  much  used  for  erasing  pencil
marks  ;  in  forming  flexible  tubes  for  chemical  purposes,  and  catheters
and  bougies  for  surgical  uses.  Melted,  it  is  applied  as  a  luting  to  the
joints  of  chemical  apparatus  ;  in  the  shape  of  thin  layers,  for  covering
the  mouths  of  bottles,  and  for  other  purposes  in  which  the  exclusion  of
air  and  moisture  is  requisite.  Heated  and  softened  by  the  flame  of  a
taper,  it  may  be  applied,  but  not  while  hot,  to  the  cavity  of  a  decayed
tooth  to  relieve  toothache,  also  over  leech-bites,  to  suppress  hemorrhage.
It  has  been  given  in  doses  of  one  or  two  grains,  gradually  increased,  in
phthisis,  but  is  seldom  or  never  employed  internally.  Externally,  it
has  been  used  as  an  ingredient  of  sticking  plasters  and  liniments.
Caoutchouc  dissolved  in  oil  of  origanum  or  cajuput,  and  spread,  upon
oil-silk  or  cloth,  and  allowed  to  dry,  forms  an  excellent  stimulating  "plas-
ter for  many  local  difficulties.


CAPSICUM  ANNUUM.

Cayenne  Pepper.

Nat.  Ord. — SolanacefB. Sea?.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

FRUIT.

Description. — This  is  an  annual  plant,  with  the  stem  herbaceous,
crooked,  smooth,  somewhat  angular,  branching  above,  and  growing
from  one  to  three  feet  high  ;  the  leaves  are  ovate  or  oblong,  acuminate,
smooth,  entire,  sometimes  hairy  on  the  veins  underneath,  of  a  dark-
green  color,  and  supported  on  long  petioles.  The  flowers  arc  white,
solitary,  and  stand  on  long,  curved,  axillary  peduncles.  The  calyx  is
persistent,  tubular,  and  five-lobed  ;  the  corolla  is  monopetalous,  wheel-
shaped,  with  a  five-cleft  limb.  The  stamens  are  five,  with  dark  colored,
oblong  anthers.  The  ovo.ry  is  ovate,  supporting  a  filiform  style,  and
terminating  in  a  blunt  stigma. The  fruit  is  a  long,  pendulous,  inflated


298  Materia  Medica.

pod  or  berry,  light,  smooth,  shining,  of  a  bright  scarlet,  orange,  or
yellow  color,  with  two  or  three  cells,  containing  a  spongy  pulp,  and
numerous  whitish  reniform  seeds.

History. — There  are  several  species  of  Capsicum,  as  the  C.  Annuum,
C.  Frutescens,  C.  Buccatum,  C.  Minimum,  elc.  They  are  natives  of  the
East  and  West  Indies,  and  of  most  hot  climates  throughout  the  globe,
and  are  cultivated  in  this  country.  They  all  agree  in  producing  c
shining  vesicular  berry  of  a  greenish,  yellowish,  cherry-red,  or  most
generally  scarlet  color,  consisting  of  a  thin,  fleshy,  inflated,  bilocular,
or  trilocular  capsule,  and  many  small,  flat,  reniform  seeds.  The  Bird
Pepper,  C.  Minimum,  is  usually  deemed  the  best ;  the  C.  Annuum  and
C.  Baccatum  are  the  most  extensively  used.  The  flowers  appear  in
July  and  August,  and  the  fruit  ripens  in  October.  The  long,  conical,
pointed,  recurved  fruit  is  that  usually  employed  in  medicine.

All  the  varieties  of  Capsicum  have  a  faint,  peculiar  odor,  and  a  hot,
acrid  taste,  which  in  some  is  so  intense  that  the  smallest  fragment,  when
chewed,  will  excite  an  insupportable  glow  of  pungency  and  heat  over
the  whole  mouth  and  throat.  This  acridity  is  imparted  to  hot  water,
ether,  spirit,  vinegar,  and  fixed  oils.  Powdered  Cayenne  Pepper,  of
good  quality,  is  of  a  bright  color,  varying  from  a  beautiful  red  to  a
brown  or  yellow,  which  fades  on  exposure  to  light — the  color  will  assist
much  in  judging  the  quality  of  the  article.  The  active  principle  is
termed  Capsicin.  It  may  be  obtained  by  freeing  the  fruit  from  the
seeds,  submitting  it  to  the  action  of  alcohol,  and  evaporating  the  filtered
tincture.  During  the  evaporation  a  red-colored  wax  separates,  and  the
residuary  liquor  by  further  evaporation  affords  an  extract,  to  which
sulphuric  ether  is  to  be  added.  This  dissolves  the  capsicin,  which  may
be  obtained  by  evaporating  the  ether.  It  is  a  yellowish-brown,  or  red-
dish-brown oleaginous  substance,  of  an  overpowering  acrid  taste,  vola-
tilizes at  a  moderate  elevation  of  temperature,  and  disengages  so  acrid
a  vapor,  that  half  a  grain  will  cause  every  person  in  a  large  room  to
cough  and  sneeze  violently.  It  is  slightly  soluble  in  water  and  vinegar,
and  very  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  oil  of  turpentine,  and  the  caustic
alkalies,  which  it  renders  reddish-brown.  The  other  constituents  of
capsicum  are  coloring  matter,  an  azotized  substance,  gum,  pectic  acid,
and  saline  matters.  It  is  frequently  adulterated  with  sawdust,  canthar-
ides,  and  red-lead.  This  last  may  be  detected  by  placing  a  portion  of
the  suspected  powder  in  some  dilute  nitric  acid,  allow  it  to  digest,  then
filter,  and  if  any  oxide  of  lead  be  present,  the  addition  of  a  solution  of
sulphate  of  soda,  will  throw  down  a  white  precipitate.

Properties  and  Uses. — Capsicum  is  a  pure,  powerful  stimulant.  The
infusion  is  much  used  in  colds,  catarrh,  hoarseness,  etc.  In  dyspepsia,
it  stimulates  the  nerves  of  the  stomach,  promotes  the  secretion  of  the
digestive  juices,  and  assists  peristaltic  motion. It  forms  an  excellent


Capsicum  Annuum.  299

addition  to  quinia  in  intermittents,  where  there  is  a  deficiency  of  gastric
susceptibility.  It  has  been  also  used  in  spasmodic  affections,  passive
hemorrhages,  especially  uterine,  and  when  combined  with  the  compound
powder  of  ipecacuanha,  will,  in  many  instances,  arrest  hemorrhage  after
parturition,  promptly.  It  has  been  used  successfully  in  Asiatic  Cholera.
A  preparation  made  by  adding  one  ounce  of  powdered  Capsicum,  and
two  ounces  of  salt  to  one  quart  of  vinegar,  has  been  found  an  excellent
anti-emetic,  in  all  cases  of  vomiting  or  nausea.  To  be  given  in  table-
spoonful  doses,  as  often  as  required.  It  has  received  the  name  of  Anti-
emetic drops.  Capsicum  may  be  used  wherever  a  pure  stimulant  is  indi-
cated, in  all  cases  of  diminished  vital  action,  and  maybe  combined  bene-
ficially with  other  remedies,  in  order  to  promote  their  action,  as  emetics,
cathartics,  diaphoretics,  tonics,  etc.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  one
to  six  grains ;  of  the  tincture,  from  half  to  one  drachm.

Externally,  the  infusion  and  tincture  have  been  found  valuable  as  a
stimulant  gargle  in  the  ulcerated  throat  of  scarlatina,  or  in  chronic
cynanche  tonsillaris  ;  also  as  a  counter-irritant,  as  an  application  to  indo-
lent ulcers,  and  in  chronic  ophthalmia.  It  enters  into  various  tinctures
and  liniments.  The  concentrated  tincture  of  capsicum  has  been  highly
recommended  in  the  treatment  of  chilblains  and  toothache.  In  the
former  a  piece  of  sponge  or  flannel  must  be  saturated  with  it,  and  rubbed
well  over  the  seat  of  the  chilblain,  until  a  strong  tingling  and  electrical
feeling  is  produced.  This  application  should  be  continued  daily,  until
the  disease  is  removed  ;  relief  will  be  experienced  on  the  very  first
application,  and  frequently  there  will  be  a  total  removal  of  the  disease
after  the  second  or  third  application.  This,  however,  will  depend  upon
the  severity  of  the  case.  This  medicine  possesses  an  extraordinary
power  in  removing  congestion  by  its  action  upon  the  nerves  and  circula-
tion ;  if  the  skin  is  not  broken,  it  never  causes  excoriation  by  rubbing
with  it.  For  toothache,  place  a  drop  or  two  of  the  tincture  on  cotton,
and  apply  it  to  the  affected  part,  the  relief  will  be  immediate.  Tinctura
capsici  concentrata,  is  prepared  by  macerating  four  ounces  of  capsicum
in  twelve  ounces  of  rectified  spirit  for  seven  days — then  filter.

The  Ethereal  Oil  of  Capsicum,  prepared  by  the  evaporation  of  a  satu-
rated ethereal  tincture  of  the  pods,  is  sometimes  used  as  a  rubefacient.
It  is  of  a  brilliant  yellowish  color,  with  a  peculiar  odor  and  aromatic
taste,  and  filled  with  crystals  of  capsicin  of  curious  dendroid  forms.

Off.  Prep. — Emplastrum  Calefaciens ;  Linimentum  Olei  Compositum  ;
Linimentum  Camphori  Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Capsici  Compositum  ;
Pulvis  Lobelke  Compositus  ;  Pilulae  Camphorse  Composites  ;  Pilulee
Valerianae  Compositse  ;  Tinctura  Capsici ;  Tinctura  Lobelice  et  Capsici ;
Tinctura  Myrrh ae  Composita;  Tinctura  Camphorse  Composita;  Tinctura
Viburni Composita ;  Vinum  Hydrastis  Compositum.


300  Materia  Medica.

CARBO  ANIMALIS.
Animal Charcoal.

CHARCOAL  PREPARED  FROM  BONES BONE  BLACK,  IVORY  BLACK.

Preparation. — Animal  Charcoal  is  much  used  in  pharmacy  and  the
arts,  and  is  prepared  by  subjecting  bones  to  a  red  heat  in  close  vessels.
The  bones  are  usually  subjected  to  destructive  distillation  in  iron  retorts
or  cylinders,  and  when  the  ammoniacal  liquor  called  Bone  Spirit  ceases
to  come  over,  the  residuum  is  charred  bone,  or  bone-black.  In  this
form  it  is  impure,  and  although  serviceable  for  many  purposes  in  phar-
macy and  the  arts,  yet  it  will  be  found  unfit  for  others  unless  purified.
The  impurities  it  contains  are  phosphate  and  carbonate  of  lime,  carburet,
and  siliciuret  of  iron,  and  sulphurets  of  iron  and  calcium.  To  purify  it,
the  bone-black  in  fine  powder,  is  digested  in  diluted  muriatic  acid,  which
dissolves  or  decomposes  all  the  calcareous  compounds  as  well  as  sul-
phuret  of  iron,  with  the  disengagement  of  much  carbonic  acid  and  some
sulphureted-hydrogen.  The  residuum  is  then  thoroughly  washed  with
boiling  water,  and  contains  only  charcoal  with  a  small  proportion  of  car-
buret and  silica.  The  charcoal  is  now  thoroughly  dried,  at  first  by  a
moderate  heat,  and  then  at  a  low  red-heat :  because  its  decolorizing
power  which  was  destroyed  in  the  previous  steps  of  its  purification,  is  only
restored  after  the  action  of  a  pretty  strong  heat.

History. — Animal  Charcoal  is  a  tasteless,  insoluble,  rather  coarse
powder,  of  a  dark-brownish-black  color.  It  somewhat  resembles  vege-
table charcoal,  but  is  more  dense,  and  less  combustible.  Upon  long
exposure  to  the  atmosphere  it  absorbs  moisture,  and  loses  its  decolorizing
properties,  for  which  it  is  chiefly  employed.  Its  decolorizing  power  is
said  to  depend  upon  a  peculiar  aggregation  of  its  particles,  induced  by
the  presence  of  phosphate  of  lime.  It  not  only  removes  the  coloring
principle  of  vegetable  infusions  and  tinctures,  but  is  likewise  capable  of
taking  up  their  bitter  principles,  and  when  purified,  takes  iodine  from
solutions  containing  it,  takes  numerous  salts  from  their  aqueous  solutions,
and  converts  chiomate  of  potassa  into  the  carbonate.

Properties  and  Uses. — It  is  principally  used  in  pharmacy  for  decolor-
izing vegetable  principles,  as  quinia,  morphia,  etc.  ;  also  for  clarifying
syrups,  and  for  depriving  spirits  derived  from  grain  of  a  peculiar  volatile
oil,  called  Grain  oil.  It  has  likewise  been  highly  extolled  as  an  internal
remedy,  in  doses  of  half  a  grain  to  three  grains,  twice  a  day,  in  scrofu-
lous and  cancerous  affections,  goitre,  obstinate  chronic  glandular  indura-
tions, etc.  Not  used  in  this  country  medicinally.  Like  vegetable  char-
coal, it  destroys  the  odor  of  putrid  animal  matter.  Dr.  A.  B.  Garrod  in
a  paper  read  before  the  Medical  Society  of  London,  Nov. 17th,  184C,


Carbo  Ligni.  301

recommends  purified  animal  charcoal  in  cases  of  poisoning  by  opium,
strychnia,  aconite,  belladonna,  stramonium,  tobacco,  hemlock,  arsenic,  etc.
First  remove  as  much  of  the  poison  as  possible  by  means  of  the  stomach
pump,  or  emetics  combined  with  the  antidote,  and  then  give  a  large
quantity  of  the  animal  charcoal  diffused  in  warm  water ;  a  vegetable
emetic  must  not  be  used  as  the  charcoal  would  destroy  its  emetic  pro-
perty. He  considers  this  agent  equal,  if  not  superior  to  the  hydrated
sesquioxide  of  iron,  as  an  antidote  to  arsenious  acid.


CARBO  LIGNI.

Charcoal.

Preparation. — Wood,  or  vegetable  charcoal  for  pharmaceutical  or  other
purposes  is  made  by  piling  billets  of  wood  in  a  conical  form,  and  then
covering  them  with  earth  and  sod  in  such  a  way  as  to  exclude  the  access
of  atmospheric  air  ;  several  holes  must  be  left  at  the  bottom,  and  one  at
the  top  of  the  pile,  in  order  to  produce  a  draught  to  commence  the  com-
bustion. The  wood  is  to  be  kindled  from  the  bottom,  and  when  com-
bustion has  taken  place  and  the  whole  pile  ignited,  the  holes  at  the  top
and  bottom  are  to  be  closed,  leaving  only  a  limited  access  of  air.  By
this  process,  the  volatile  portions  of  the  wood,  consisting  of  oxygen  and
hydrogen  are  dissipated,  while  the  carbon  remains  in  the  form  of  char-
coal. From  17  to  18  per  cent,  of  charcoal  is  obtained  by  this  process;
but  if  the  wood  be  charred  in  iron  cylinders,  from  22  to  24  per  cent,  of
charcoal  is  obtained,  beside  the  collection  of  pyroligneous  acid,  tar,  and
empyreumatic  oil,  the  volatile  products  of  the  wood.

For  medical  purposes,  charcoal  thus  prepared  is  not  sufficiently  pure
for  exhibition,  as  all  the  volatile  portions  of  the  wood,  are  not  wholly
removed.  It  may  be  purified,  according  to  Lowitz,  by  filling  a  crucible
with  ordinary  charcoal  finely  pulverized,  and  luting  on  a  perforated
cover.  Then  expose  the  whole  to  a  red  heat,  and  continue  it  as  long  as
a  blue  flame  issues  from  the  aperture  in  the  cover.  When  this  ceases,
allow  (he  charcoal  to  cool,  and  transfer  it  quickly  to  bottles  which  must
be  well  stopped.

History. — Wood  charcoal  is  a  dark-broAvnish-black  powder,  composed
of  shining  particles,  tasteless  and  inodorous,  insoluble  in  water,  and  per-
manent in  the  air.  It  is  easily  inflammable,  and  readily  consumed,
much  more  so  than  animal  charcoal.  It  is  a  good  conductor  of  electri-
city, but  a  bad  one  of  heat.  If  perfectly  dry,  it  absorbs  many  times  its
own  bulk  of  certain  gases.  It  corrects  the  fetor  from  putrid  animal
matters,  and  decolorizes  vegetable  infusions,  but  not  so  promptly  as  the
animal  charcoal.  It  decomposes  metallic  compounds  when  heated  with
them  by  depriving  them  of  their  oxygen. If  exposed  to  the  air,  it


302  Materia.  Medica.

increases  rapidly  in  weight,  in  consequence  of  its  absorption  of  moisture,
which  takes  place  to  the  amount  of  from  ten  to  fifteen  per  cent.  Combus-
tion disengages  its  carbonic  acid,  leaving  behind  an  ash  composed  of
earthy  matters  and  carbonate  of  potassa.

Properties  and  Uses. — As  a  medicine,  charcoal  should  always  be  puri-
fied. It  is  antiseptic  and  absorbent.  Used  in  dyspepsia  attended  with
fetid  breath  and  putrid  eructations  ;  also  in  dysentery,  to  correct  the  fetor
of  the  stools.  Useful  in  acidity  of  stomach,  flatulency,  obstinate  consti-
pation, and  in  the  nausea  and  constipation  attending  pregnancy.  Dose,
from  twenty  grains  to  half  an  ounce,  repeated  according  to  indications.
Externally,  used  in  poultices  to  correct  fetor  of  ulcers,  arrest  gangrene,
etc.,  and  is  efficient  in  many  cutaneous  diseases.  It  occasionally  enters
into  tooth-powders,  and  may  be  used  with  advantage  to  correct  the  fetor
of  the  mouth,  and  cleanse  the  teeth.  In  such  cases  the  charcoal  pre-
pared from  bread  is  the  best,  as  it  contains  no  gritty  particles.

Off.  Prep. — Cataplasma  Carbonis.


CARTHAMUS  TINCTORIUS.

Dyer's Saffron.

Nat Ord. — Asteracea\ Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

FLOWERS.

Description. — Carthamus  Tinctorius,  sometimes  known  as  Safflower,
Bastard  Saffron,  etc.,  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  smooth  stem  growing
from  one  to  two  feet  high,  striate,  and  branching  at  top.  The  leaves  are
alternate,  ovate-lanceolate,  sessile,  spinose-denticulate,  subamplexicaul,
smooth  and  shining.  The  flowers  are  compound,  in  large,  terminal
solitary  heads.  The  florets  are  of  an  orange-red  color,  with  a  funnel-
shaped  corolla,  of  which  the  tube  is  long,  slender,  cylindrical,  and  the
border  divided  into  five  equal,  lanceolate,  narrow  segments.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  Levant  and  Egypt,  and  is  cul-
tivated in  many  parts  of  Europe  and  America.  The  florets  are  the
officinal  part.  They  are  generally  met  with  in  flaky  masses  of  a  red
color,  intermixed  with  the  yellow  filaments ;  their  odor  is  peculiar  and
aromatic,  and  the  taste  slightly  bitter.  The  cultivated  safflower  in  this
country,  is  usually  sold  impressed,  as  American  Saffron.  They  contain
two  coloring  matters— one  of  which  is  yellow  and  soluble  in  water;  the
other  is  red,  insoluble  in  water,  slightly  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  very
soluble  in  alkaline  solutions,  and  is  called  Carthamine  or  Carthamic  Acid;
it  is  this  latter  which  renders  safflower  valuable  as  a  dye,  especially  of  silk,
and  when  mixed  with  finely-powdered  talc  it  forms  a  rouge. Safflower


Carcm  Carui.  303

is  often  used  to  adulterate  saffron,  but  may  be  detected  by  its  tubular
form,  and  the  yellowish  color  of  the  style  and  filaments.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Emmenagogue,  laxative  in  large  doses,  and
diaphoretic.  Used  as  a  diaphoretic  among  children  in  warm  infusion,
and  as  a  substitute  for  saffron,  in  colds,  measles,  scarlatina,  and  other
exanthematous  diseases.  To  be  taken  tolerably  freely.  The  infusion
may  be  made  by  adding  two  drachms  of  the  flowers  to  a  pint  of  boiling
water.  The  seeds  are  white  and  angular,  and  have  been  much  used  as
purgative  and  emmenagogue.  They  yield  an  oil  by  expression,  which
has  been  used  as  a  local  application  in  rheumatic  and  paralytic  affec-
tions, also  for  bad  ulcers.


CARUM  CARUI.

Caraway.
Nat.  Ord. — Apiacea?  or  Umbellifera3. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

SEEDS, (HALE ERUITS).

Description.  —  Carum  Carui  is  an  umbelliferous,  biennial  plant,  with
a  fusiform,  whitish,  fleshy  root,  and  an  erect  stem,  about  two  feet  high,
furrowed,  and  branched  above.  The  lower  leaves  are  of  a  bright-green
color,  petiolate,  smooth,  bipinnate,  with  numerous  finely-cut  leaflets,  the
segments  of  which  are  narrow,  linear,  and  pointed ;  those  of  the  stem
are  smaller,  opposite,  one  of  them  with  a  dilated  petiole,  the  other  ses-
sile. The  flowers  are  numerous,  small,  of  a  pale  flesh-color,  and  termi-
nate the  branches  of  the  stem  in  erect  umbels,  which  are  generally
without  an  involucre,  but  are  sometimes  furnished  with  one  to  three
involucral  leaflets.  The  calyx  is  very  small ;  the  petals  are  five,  small
and  inflexed ;  the  stamens  are  about  as  long  as  the  petals,  and  bear
small,  roundish,  two-lobcd  anthers ;  the  ovary  is  ovate,  and  supports
styles  which  are  at  first  verjr  short,  but  become  elongated.  The  meri-
carps  are  elliptic-ovate,  of  a  grayish-brown  color,  and  are  marked  with
single  vittae.

History. — Caraway  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  has  been  introduced
into  this  country.  It  flowers  in  May  and  June,  and  the  seeds,  which
are  the  officinal  portions,  are  not  perfected  until  the  second  year,  when
they  become  ripe  in  August.  They  are  obtained  by  cutting  down  the
plant,  and  threshing  it  on  a  cloth.  They  are  of  a  brownish  color,  with
five  lighter-colored  primary  ridges,  and  a  vitta  -in  each  interval,  are
about  two  lines  in  length,  and  slightly  curved  inward.  The  odor  is
pleasantly  aromatic,  and  the  taste  warm,  sweetish,  and  spicy;  which
properties  depend  upon  a  volatile  oil,  which  is  officinal,  and  which  may
be  obtained  by  distillation. The  oil  is  at  first  pale,  becomes  darker  by


304  Materia Medica.

age,  and  lias  the  peculiar  fragrance  and  taste  of  the  seed. The  virtues
of  the  seed  are  readily  yielded  to  alcohol  or  ether.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aromatic  carminative.  Used  in  flatulent  colic,
especially  of  children,  and  as  an  adjuvant  or  corrective  of  other  medi-
cines. In  substance  the  dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  grains.  The  oil,  however,
is  mostly  employed.  (See  Oleum  Carui.)  The  seeds  are  much  used
by  the  cook  and  confectioner  to  improve  the  flavor  of  cakes  and  comfits,
while  at  the  same  time  they  gently  stimulate  the  digestive  organs.

Off.  Pre}). —  Oleum  Carui;  Tinct.  Cardamomi  Comp.


CARYOPHYLLUS  AROMATICUS.

Cloves.

Nat.  Ord. — Myrtacea). Sex.  Si/st. — Icosandria  Monogynia.

UNEXPANDED FLOWERS.

Description.  —  Caryophyllus  Aromaticus  is  an  elegant  tree,  rising  to
the  hight  of  fifteen  or  twenty  feet;  it  is  of  a  conical  or  pyramidal  form,
is  always  green,  and  the  whole  plant  is  glabrous.  The  branches  are
numerous,  slender,  opposite,  and  more  or  less  virgate.  The  stem  is  of
hard  wood,  and  covered  with  a  smooth,  grayish  bark.  The  leaves  are
about  four  inches  in  length  by  two  in  breadth,  opposite  and  decussate,
persistent,  somewhat  coriaceous  and  shining,  with  a  strong  midrib  and
parallel  lateral  nerves ;  ovate-lanceolate,  entire,  smooth  on  both  sides,
with  numerous  pellucid  dots,  of  a  green  color,  paler  beneath,  and  taper-
ing gradually  at  the  base  into  a  slender  footstalk  about  two  inches  in
length.  The  flowers  exhale  a  strong,  penetrating,  agreeable  odor,  and
are  in  short  terminal  cymes,  trichotomously  divided,  and  jointed  at
every  division.  The  calyx  is  superior,  and  consists  of  a  cylindrical  tube,
and  four  ovate,  concave,  spreading  segments ;  it  is  first  green,  but  sub-
sequently red,  coriaceous.  The  />etaZs  are  four,  ovate,  concave,  yellow-
ish-red, larger  than  the  calyx,  coherent  by  their  edges,  and  forming  a
calyptra  which  is  caducous.  In  the  center  of  the  calyx,  and  at  the  top
of  the  ovary,  is  a  quadrangular,  elevated  line  or  gland,  surrounding,
but  not  embracing  the  base  of  the  shortish,  obtusely-subulate  style;
around  this  line,  immediately  within  the  petals,  the  stamens  are  inserted;
these  are  longer  than  the  petals,  and  bear  small,  yellow,  ovate-cordate,
two-celled  anthers.  The  ovary  is  oblong,  almost  cylindrical,  two-celled,
and  many  small  ovules  in  each  cell.  The  berry  is  purplish,  elliptical,
one  or  two-seeded. Seed  covered  with  a  soft,  thin,  integument.

History. — A  tall  and  beautiful  tree,  growing  in  tropical  climates. The
flowers  are  collected  in  October  and  November,  before  they  are  fully


Cassia  Fistula.  305

developed,  and  consist  of  a  tubular  calyx,  bearing  a  roundish  bud  of
unexpanded  petals;  they  are  quickly  dried  in  the  shade  to  prevent  the
escape  of  volatile  oil.  The  finest  kinds  are  plump,  heavy,  and  dark,
and  give  out  oil  when  squeezed  with  the  nail.  They  are  from  five  to
ten  lines  long,  and  from  one  to  one  and  a  half  thick,  dark-brown  exter-
nally, yellowish-red  internally,  of  a  strong,  fragrant  odor,  and  of  a  hot,
pungent,  aromatic,  permanent  taste.  Cloves  contain  volatile  oil,  fixed
oil,  a  peculiar  tannin,  gum,  resin,  fiber,  water,  and  two  crystalline  prin-
ciples called  Caryophyllin  and  Eugenin.  They  impart  their  sensible
properties  to  alcohol,  spirit,  and  ether;  water  extracts  only  the  odor.
The  active  properties  reside  in  the  volatile  oil,  which  is  of  a  pale  reddish-
brown  color,  darkens  by  age,  and  is  heavier  than  water;  it  is  extremely
pungent  and  acrid.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Aromatic,  stimulant,  and  irritant.  Used  to
relieve  nausea,  or  vomiting,  flatulency,  and  to  excite  languid  digestion:
chiefly  employed  to  assist  or  modify  the  action  of  other  remedies,  and
prevent  a  tendency  to  their  producing  sickness  orgriping.  Dose,  from  five
to  ten  grains.

Off.  Prep.  —  Linimentum  Olei;  Mistura  Cajuputi  Composita;  Oleum
Caryophylli;  Pilulae  Aloes  Compositae ;  Tinctura  Quiniee  Composita;
Tinctura  Guaiaci  Aromatica;  Vinum  Cinchonae  Compositum.


CASSIA FISTULA.


Purmnof  Cassia.


Nat.  Ord- — Fabacece,  or  Leguminosa*. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

FRUIT,  OR  PULP  OF  THE  PODS.

Description. — Cassia  Fistula  is  a  large  tree  growing  from  twenty  to
forty  feet  high,  with  a  trunk  of  hard,  heavy  wood,  dividing  toward  the
top  into  numerous  spreading  branches,  and  covered  with  a  smooth,  ash-
colored  bark.  The  leaves  are  pinnate,  alternate,  from  twelve  to  eighteen
inches  long,  deciduous.  The  leaflets  are  opposite  or  nearly  so,  from  four
to  eight  pairs,  ovate,  pointed,  smooth,  undulated,  of  a  pale-green  color,
polished  on  both  sides,  on  short,  round  petioles,  from  two  to  six  inches
long,  and  from  one  and  a  half  to  three  broad.  The  flowers  are  large,
fragrant,  bright-yellow,  on  long,  slender,  smooth  pedicels.  Racemes
axillary,  pendulous,  simple,  one  or  two  feet  long.  The  calyx  has  five
nearly  equal,  oblong,  obtuse,  smooth  sepals.  The  corolla  consists  of
five  petals,  which  are  oval,  unequal,  concave,  spreading,  and  waved.
The  three  lower  filaments  much  longer  than  the  others,  and  having  a
double  curve,  but  no  swelling.  Anthers  on  the  three  long  filaments
20


306  Materia  Mkdica.

oblong,  opening  by  two  lines  on  the  face,  the  other  seven  clavate,  with
pores  at  the  small  end.  Ooury  filiform,  smooth,  cylindrical,  curved,  one-
celled,  containing  numerous  seeds.  The  fruit  is  a  woody,  dark-blackish-
brown,  cylindrical  pod  or  legume,  a  foot  or  more  in  length,  and  about
an  inch  in  diameter,  with  two  longitudinal  furrows  on  one  side,  and  one
on  the  other,  divided  into  numerous  cells  by  thin  transverse  diaphragms,
each  containing  a  single,  oval,  smooth,  shining,  somewhat  compressed
seed,  imbedded  in  a  viscid,  black,  sweetish  pulp.

History. — Purging  Cassia  is  a  native  of  Upper  Egypt  and  the  East
Indies,  from  whence  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  transplanted  to  other
parts  of  the  world.  It  is  found  in  India,  Cochin- China,  West  Indies,  and
South  America.  The  fruit  is  the  officinal  portion.  Those  pods  are  to  be
selected  which  are  the  heaviest,  and  do  not  rattle  when  shaken,  as  they
contain  the  most  pulp,  which  is  the  part  used.  To  obtain  it,  the  pods
are  first  bruised,  and  boiling  water  is  poured  on  them  so  as  to  wash  out
the  pulp  ;  the  decoction  is  then  strained,  and  evaporated  to  the  proper
consistence.  The  pulp  has  a  faint,  nauseous  odor,  and  a  sweet,  mucila-
ginous taste;  it  contains  sugar,  gum,  a  substance  resembling  tannin,  a
glutinous  principle,  and  a  coloring  matter  soluble  in  ether,  with  a  small
portion  of  water.  When  good  it  should  be  black  and  shining ;  if  kept
in  a  damp  place  it  becomes  moldy,  and  long  exposure  causes  it  to  tum
sour.  It  keeps  longest  when  preserved  in  the  pod.  It  is  nearly  soluble
in  water,  and  its  active  parts  are  taken  up  by  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  mild  and  effectual  laxative,  useful  in  habitual
constipation.  If  administered  in  large  doses  it  purges,  occasioning  also
nausea,  flatulence,  and  griping.  Dose  as  a  laxative,  one  or  two  drachms,
as  a  purgative  one  or  two  ounces.  It  is  seldom  employed  except  as  an
ingredient  in  the  confection  of  senna.


CASSIA  MARILANDICA.

American  Senna.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabacea^. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.


Description.  —  Cassia  Marilandica  is  an  indigenous,  perennial  plant,
growing  from  four  to  six  feet  high,  with  round,  striated,  smooth,  or
slightly  hairy  stems.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  rather  long,  not  numer-
ous, and  composed  of  from  six  to  nine  pairs  of  ovate,  lanceolate,
smooth,  entire  leaflets,  green  above,  and  yellowish-green  beneath  ;  the
common  petiole  is  furnished  at  the  base  with  a  large  ovate,  stipitate,
shining-green  gland,  terminating  in  a  dark  point  at  the  top,  which  is


Cassia  Acutifolia.  307

sometimes  double.  The  flowers  are  bright  yellow,  in  axillary  racemes,
on  furrowed  peduncles  ;  the  pedicels  are  long,  glandular,  and  bracteate.
The  petals  are  five,  concave,  very  obtuse  and  unequal,  the  two  lower
being  the  largest.  The  stamens  are  ten,  with  yellow  filaments,  and
brown  anthers,  which  open  by  a  terminal  pore.  The  three  upper  sta-
mens bear  short  abortive  anthers  ;  the  three  lowermost  are  long,  curved,
and  tapering  into  a  beak.  The  fruit  or  legume  is  pendulous,  from  two
to  four  inches  long,  narrow,  arcuated,  mucronate,  blackish,  with  a  few
scattered,  reddish  hairs,  and  containing  many  seeds.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  in
low,  moist  situations,  and  flowering  from  June  to  the  latter  part  of
August,  about  which  time  the  leaves  should  be  collected,  or  in  the
beginning  of  September.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  their  virtues.  The
leaves  have  a  faint  odor,  and  a  nauseous  taste  not  unlike  that  of  the
foreign  senna,  to  which  drug  it  is  not  inferior  in  medicinal  activity.
They  are  usually  had  in  compressed  packages  from  the  Shakers,  who
cultivate  the  plant.  Mr.  Martin  of  Philadelphia,  found  the  leaves  to
contain  albumen,  mucilage,  starch,  chlorophylle,  yellow  coloring  matter,
volatile  oil,  fatty  matter,  resin,  lignin,  salts  of  potassa  and  lime,  and  a
principle  analogous  to  catkartin.

The  Cassia  C/tamcecrista,  Prairie  Senna  or  Partridge  Pea,  growing  on
the  western  prairies,  is  an  excellent  substitute  for  the  above  ;  it  is  like-
wise known  as  Dwarf  Cassia  and  Sensitive  Pea.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  A  safe  and  efficient  cathartic,  equal  to  the
imported  article,  for  which  it  may  be  substituted.  But,  owing  to  the
presence  of  argel  leaves,  the  foreign  senna  has  its  activity  increased,
hence,  in  giving  the  American  article,  the  dose  will  be  one-third  larger
than  of  the  other.  Its  most  convenient  form  of  administration  is  that
of  infusion,  which  should  be  combined  with  articles  similar  to  the  infu-
sion of  imported  senna,  in  order  to  obviate  any  tendency  to  griping.
The  dose  in  powder  is  from  half  a  drachm  to  two  and  a  half  drachms.
The  infusion  may  be  made  by  adding  one  ounce  of  the  leaves,  with  a
drachm  of  coriander  seeds,  to  a  pint  of  boiling  water.  Macerate  for  an
hour  in  a  covered  vessel,  and  strain  ;  dose,  four  or  five  fluidounces.


CASSIA  ACUTIFOLIA.

Senna.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — There  are  several  species  of Cassia  plant,  which  are
supposed  to  yield  the  Senna,  as  the  C.  Acutifolia,  C.  Obovata,  C.  Elon-


308  Materia Medica.

gata,  C.  Lanceolata,  etc.  Cassia  Acutifolia  is  a  perennial  shrub,  growing
from  two  to  ten  feet  high,  with  an  erect,  woody,  smooth,  branching,
whitish  stem.  The  leaves  are  alternate  and  pinnate,  with  glandless  foot-
stalks, and  two  small,  narrow,  pointed  stipules  at  the  base.  The  leaflets
from  four  to  eight  pairs  to  each  leaf,  are  nearly  sessile,  oval-lanceolate,
acute,  oblique  at  their  base,  nerved,  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  long,
and  of  a  yellowish-green  color.  The  flowers  are  bright  yellow,  and  in
axillary  spikes.  The  ovary  is  linear,  downy,  falcate,  with  a  smooth,
recurved  style.  The  fruit  or  legume  is  pendulous,  flat,  elliptical,  obtuse,
membranous,  smooth,  grayish-brown,  bivalved;  quite  straight,  about  an
inch  long,  and  half  an  inch  broad,  and  divided  into  six  or  seven  cells
each  containing  a  hard,  heart-shaped,  ash-colored  seed.  It  grows  in
great  abundance  in  Upper  Egypt,  and  furnishes  the  greater  part  of  the
Alexandria  Senna  of  commerce.

Cassia  Obovata,  a  perennial,  is  smaller  than  the  above,  growing  to  the
hight  of  about  eighteen  inches ;  with  a  stem  pubescent  at  the  base,  and
cylindrical.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  equally  pinnate,  smooth,  with  two
subulate,  entire,  persistent  stipules  at  the  base,  and  with  from  four  to
seven  pairs  of  opposite,  nearly  sessile,  obovate,  cuneiform  leaflets,  obtuse
but  mucronate  at  the  apex,  unequal  at  the  base  ;  the  uppermost  gradu-
ally the  largest,  slightly  pubescent.  The  flowers  are  pale-yellow,  and  in
erect,  rather  loose  axillary  racemes.  The  legumes  oblong,  falcate,  mem-
branous, smooth,  rounded  at  each  end,  with  an  elevated,  interrupted
ridge  along  the  middle.  The  seeds  are  from  six  to  eight,  and  heart-
shaped.  This  species  grows  wild  in  Egypt,  Nubia,  Syria,  and  Sene-
gambia  ;  and  has  been  cultivated  in  the  West  Indies,  and  many  parts  of
southern  Europe.  It  is  very  nearly  identical  with  the  C.  Obtusata  of
Heyne.  This  plant  furnishes  an  inferior  senna,  known  as  the  Italian  or
Aleppo  Senna.

Cassia  Elongata,  is  an  annual,  but  with  care  it  may  be  made  to  live
through  the  year,  and  to  assume  a  suffruticose  character.  It  has  a
smooth,  erect  stem,  and  narrow,  equally  pinnated  leaves  with  from  four  to
eight  pairs  of  lanceolate  leaflets,  which  are  nearly  sessile,  slightly  mucro-
nate, smooth  above,  rather  downy  beneath,  oblique  at  the  base,  with  the
veins  turned  inward  so  as  to  form  a  wavy  line  immediately  within  the
margin  of  the  leaflet ;  petioles  glandless  ;  stipules  softly  spinescent,  semi-
hastate,  spreading,  minute.  The  flowers  are  bright  yellow,  and  arranged
on  erect,  stalked,  axillary  and  terminal  racemes,  rather  longer,  than  the
leaves.  The  legume  is  pendulous,  oblong,  membranous,  tapering
abruptly  at  the  base,  rounded  at  the  apex,  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  and
about  half  an  inch  broad,  with  many  deep-brown  seeds.  It  is  supposed
to  grow  in  southern  Arabia,  and  in  the  interior  of  India,  and  is  cultivated
at  Tinnivelly.


Cassia  Acutifolia.  309

Cassia  Lanceolaia  resembles  the  above,  having,  however,  never  more
than  four  or  five  pairs  of  leaflets,  oblong,  and  either  acute  or  obtuse,  not
at  all  ovate  or  lanceolate,  and  perfectly  free  from  downiness  even  when
younc  ;  the  petioles  have  constantly  a  small,  round,  brown  gland  a  little
above  the  base.  The  pods  are  erect,  oblong,  tapering  to  the  base,  obtuse,
turgid,  mucronate,  rather  falcate,  especially  when  young,  at  which  time
they  are  sparingly  covered  with  coarse,  scattered  hairs.  It  grows  in
Arabia,  and  was  considered  by  Forskhal  as  the  true  Mecca  Senna.

History. — These  are  supposed  to  be  the  principal  species  which  yield
the  Senna,  though  much  uncertainty  exists  with  regard  to  them,  arising
from  the  want  of  correct  specimens,  the  difficulty  attending  the  investi-
gation of  the  plants  in  their  places  of  growth,  the  ignorance  of  the  influ-
ences which  a  change  of  locality  may  exert  upon  them,  and  whether  the
presence  or  absence  of  the  glands  on  the  petioles  are  to  be  assumed  as
specific  characters.  Although  this  confusion  exists  in  the  botanical  his-
tory of  senna,  yet,  in  commerce,  but  three  varieties  of  the  drug  are
found,  or  which  are  ever  imported  into  this  country,  these  are,  the  Alex-
andrian or  Egyptian,  which  is  the  finest  and  most  valuable  article,  the
Indian,  and  the  Tripoli  Senna.

Alexandria  Senna  is  collected  from  Sennaar,  Nubia,  and  Upper
Egypt,  and  made  up  at  Boulak,  not  far  from  Cairo,  under  the  superin-
tendence of  the  Egyptian  government,  from  which  place  it  is  forwarded
to  Alexandria,  for  the  European  markets.  It  consists  of  the  leaflets  of
C.  Acutifolia,  C.  Obovata,  pods,  broken  leafstalks,  flowers,  etc.,  likewise
the  leaves  of  Cynanchum  Olecefolium,  or  Solenostemma  argel.  The  harvest
for  collecting  commences  in  September,  at  which  time  the  branches  of
the  shrub  are  cut,  and  exposed  to  the  sun,  until  the  leaves  begin  to  fade ;
they  are  then  collected  into  bundles,  and  placed  on  rocks  and  high
grounds,  in  order  to  have  full  benefit  of  the  air  and  of  the  sun's  rays.
When  the  leaves  are  quite  dry,  the  branches  are  threshed,  and  the  leaves
separated  from  them,  they  are  then  packed  in  sacks  and  sent  to  Boulak,
at  which  place  their  adulteration  with  other  leaves  is  said  to  take  place.

As  received  in  this  country,  Alexandria  Senna  is  generally  in  bales
and  barrels,  and  is  considered  the  finest  and  most  valuable  variety  ;  the
best  and  most  esteemed  is  that  which  contains  the  least  quantity  of  cy-
nanchum leaves,  senna  leafstalks  and  pods,  where  the  entire  lanceolate
leaves  are  numerous,  and  where  the  odor  and  taste  is  strong  and  pure.
It  has  a  peculiar  but  not  disagreeable  odor,  with  an  unpleasant,  nauseous,
mucilaginous,  and  sweetish  taste,  with  hardly  any  perceptible  bitterness,
unless  it  be  adulterated  with  the  leaves  of  the  Argel  or  Cynanchum  olece-
folium which  impart  bitterness  to  the  powder  or  infusion,  and  which  is
the  most  important  impurity  to  remove.  They  may  be  recognized  by
having  no  visible  lateral  nerves  on  their  under-surface  ;  by  being  longer,
thicker  and  firmer  than  senna  leaves,-  by  the  greater  regularity  of  their


310  Materia  Medica.

base,  being-  of  a  lighter  color,  of  a  bitter  taste,  and  often  spotted  with  a
yellow,  bitter,  gummy-resinous  inci-ustation.

Tripoli  Senna  somewhat  resembles  the  Alexandrian,  but  is  considered
much  inferior  to  it ;  the  leaves  are  more  broken  down,  and  the  leafstalks
more  numerous.  It  seems  to  consist  of  one  of  the  acute  leaved  species
and  a  slight  admixture  of  C.  Obovata,  and  very  seldom  contains  any
adulteration  with  the  argel  leaves.  Tfcere  is  much  uncertainty  as  to  the
place  from  which  it  is  derived.

India  or  Mocha  Senna  is  of  three  kinds,  the  Bombay,  the  Madras,
and  the  Tinnivelly,  of  which  the  first, is  usually  imported  from  Bombay,
though  it  comes  in  the  first  instance  from  Mocha  and  other  ports  of  the
Red  Sea ;  the  second  and  third  from  Madras ;  of  these,  the  Tinnivelly  is
esteemed  the  best.  India  Senna  consists  mainly  of  large,  thin,  unbroken,
acute,  yellowish-green  leaves,  seldom  adulterated,  and  when  good,  is
fully  equal  to  the  Alexandrian.  There  are  other  varieties,  but  they  sel-
dom reach  this  market.

Good  Senna  may  be  known  by  the  bright,  fresh,  yellowish-green  color
of  the  leaves,  with  a  faint  and  sickly  odor  somewhat  similar  to  green  lea,
and  a  nauseous,  mucilaginous,  sweetish,  and  slightly  bitter  taste ;  and
the  fewer  the  stalks,  seed  pods,  broken  leaves,  and  dirt,  the  better  is  the
senna.  Its  active  principles  are  taken  up  by  cold  or  warm  water,  alco-
hol, and  proof  spirits  ;  boiling  destroys  its  virtues  unless  it  be  in  vacuo,
or  in  a  covered  vessel.  Various  analyses  have  been  made  of  senna,  but
there  are  none  on  which  we  can  satisfactorily  rely.  M.  M.  Lassaigne
and  Feneulle  found  it  to  contain  a  peculiar  bitter  principle  called  Cathar-
tin,  chlorophylle,  fixed  oil,  a  small  quantity  of  volatile  oil,  albumen,  yel-
low coloring  matter,  mucilage,  malate  and  tartrate  of  lime,  and  acetate
of  potassa,  and  some  mineral  salts.  The  cathartin  is  a  yellowish-red,
uncrystallizable  substance,  of  a  peculiar  odor,  and  a  bitter,  nauseous
taste,  very  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,  but  insoluble  in  ether.  It  is
considered  to  be  the  purgative  principle  of  the  drug,  yet  this  is  not  uni-
versally admitted,  as  several  experimenters  deny  that  it  possesses  any
purgative  power  whatever.  The  infusion  or  decoction  of  senna  is  incom-
pat'Me  with  strong  acids,  alkaline  carbonates,  lime-water,  tartar  emetic,
acetate  of  lead  and  tannin,  or  astringent  plants  containing  tannin.  The
tartarized  antimony  and  acetate  of  lead  do  not  precipitate  the  cathartin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Senna  is  r,  certain,  manageable,  and  convenient
cathartic,  very  useful  in  all  forms  of  febrile  disease,  and  other  diseases
where  a  violent  impression  on  the  bowels  is  not  desired.  Its  influence
is  chiefly  exerted  on  the  small  intestines,  augmenting  their  mucous  secre-
tions, exciting  increased  peristaltic  motion,  and  producing  loose  brown
evacuations.  It  does  not  act  as  a  sedative,  as  is  the  case  with  some
cathartics,  nor  as  a  refrigerant ;  but  has  a  slight  stimulating  influence,
insufficient  however,  to  contra-indicate  its  use  in  cases  of  general  excite-


Castoreum.  311

ment,  or  reaction.  Beside  the  nauseating  taste  of  senna,  it  is  apt  to
cause  sickness  at  stomach,  and  very  few  persons  can  use  it  alone,  with-
out experiencing  more  or  less  griping  pains.  The  addition  of  cloves,
gin<>-cr,  cinnamon,  or  other  aromatics  are  excellent  correctives  of  these
unpleasant  effects.  A  teaspoonful  of  cream  of  tartar  to  a  teacupful  of
the  decoction  or  infusion  of  senna,  is  a  mild  and  pleasant  cathartic,  par-
ticularly suited  for  females  where  it  may  be  required  soon  after  delivery.
The  addition  of  neutral  laxative  salts  is  another  mode,  adopted  by  a  cer-
tain class  of  practitioners,  of  preventing  the  tormina,  and  at  the  same
time  of  increasing  the  activity  of  the  infusion  of  senna,  as,  phosphate
of  soda,  Epsom,  or  Rochelle  salts ;  these  are,  however,  rarely  used  by
Eclectics.  Saccharine  and  aromatic  substances  are  also  sometimes  com-
bined for  this  purpose,  as  sugar,  manna,  aromatic  seeds,  electuary  of
senna,  etc.  The  purgative  effect  of  senna  is  much  increased  by  the
addition  of  the  pure  bitters ;  the  decoction  of  guaiacum  is  said  to  answer
a  similar  purpose.  Senna  is  contra-indicated  in  an  inflammatory  condi-
tion of  the  alimentary  canal,  hemorrhoids,  prolapsus  ani,  etc.  The  dose
in  powder  is  from  thirty  to  fifty  grains ;  in  tincture,  from  half  a  fluidounce
to  two  fluidounces  ;  electuary,  two  drachms ;  and  of  the  infusion,  which
is  the  most  usual  mode  of  administration,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.

A  preparation  termed  Cassine,  said  to  be  the  active  principle  of  the
Alexandria  Senna,  is  advertised  as  a  preparation  of  an  eastern  manufac-
turing establishment.  It  is  stated  to  be  a  whitish-brown  powder,  of  a
slightly  bitter  taste,  a  senna-like  odor,  soluble  in  water  and  insoluble  in
alcohol.  I  hare  not  seen  it,  nor  have  I  been  able  to  obtain  its  mode  of
preparation.

Of.  Prep. — Enema  Sennae  Composita;  Extractum  Rhei  et  Sennae
Fluidum ;  Extractum  Spigeliae  et  Sennae  Fluidum  ;  Extractum  Sennae  et
Jalapee  Fluidum  ;  Infusum  Sennae  ;  Pulvis  Jalapae  Compositus ;  Tinc-
tura  Sennae  Composita.

CASTOREUM.

Castor.

History. — This  drug  is  a  peculiar  concrete  substance  obtained  from
the  preputial  follicles  of  the  Castor  Fiber,  or  Beaver.  These  follicles  are
filled  with  a  thick  fluid  secretion,  which  slowly  concretes  when  they  are
removed  from  the  animal.  Most  of  the  castor  of  the  present  day  is
derived  from  the  beaver  of  North  America.  It  has  much  the  appear-
ance of  a  pair  of  dried  testicles  united  by  their  spermatic  chords,  dark
liver  brown  and  wrinkled  externally,  paler  liver  brown  internally,
resinous  in  fracture,  when  perfectly  dried  of  a  strong,  peculiar  heavy
odor,  and  of  an  aromatic,  bitter,  offensive  taste.  Rectified  spirit  is  its
best  solvent ;  though  ether  extracts  a  good  part  of  its  virtues.


312  Materia  Medica.

The  Russian  castor,  from  the  Russian  dominions,  is  seldom  seen  in  this
country  ;  it  may  be  distinguished  from  the  American  by  being  larger,
fuller,  heavier,  and  less  tenacious,  and  by  its  stronger  taste  and  smell.
Treated  with  distilled  water  and  ammonia,  M.  Kohli  states  that  it  affords
a  white  precipitate,  while  the  American  throws  down  an  orange-colored
matter.  Good  castor  has  a  strong,  fetid,  peculiar  odor  ;  a  bitter,  acrid,
and  nauseous  taste,  and  a  color  more  or  less  tinged  with  red.  It  is
composed  of  numerous  salts,  mucus,  a  volatile  oil,  a  resinous  substance,
a  horny  matter,  osmazome,  and  a  peculiar  crystalline,  non-saponifiable
principle  called  castorin.  Age  impairs  the  virtues  of  castor,  which  is
hastened  in  an  elevated  temperature  ;  moisture  promotes  its  rapid  decom-
position. It  should  always  be  kept  in  a  dry  cool  place.  It  is  not  good
if  quite  black,  tasteless  and  inodorous.  A  factitious  preparation  is  often
sold,  consisting  of  a  mixture  of  various  drugs,  scented  with  genuine
castor,  intermixed  with  membrane,  and  stuffed  into  the  scrotum  of  a
goat.  The  feeble  odor,  want  of  other  characteristic  sensible  properties,
and  the  want  of  the  smaller  follicles  containing  fatty  matter,  and  which
are  always  attached  to  the  genuine  bags  of  castor,  will  enable  one  to
detect  the  fraud.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Moderately  stimulant,  antispasmodic,  and
emmenagogue.  Used  in  hysteria,  amenorrhea,  epilepsy,  and  many
anomalous  nervous  affections.  Dose  of  the  substance,  from  ten  to  twenty
grains  ;  of  the  tincture,  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Castorei ;  Tinctura  Castorei  Ammoniata.


CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES. (Leontice  Thalictroides.)

Blue  Cohosh.

Nat.  Ord. — Berberidaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.


Description. — This  plant,  likewise  known  as  Squaw  root,  Pappoose  root,
is  a  smooth,  glaucous  plant,  purple  when  young,  with  a  high,  round
stem  from  one  to  three  feet  in  hight,  simple  from  knotted  and  matted
rootstocks,  and  dividing  above  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  is  a  tri-
ternate  leaf-stalk,  the  other  bears  a  biternate  leaf  and  a  racemose  pani-
cle of  small  yellowish-green  flowers.  The  leaves  are  biternate  and
triternate  ;  petiole  trifid,  and  supporting  nine  leaflets.  Leaflets  oval,
petiolate,  unequally  lobed,  the  terminal  one  equally  three-lobed,  paler
beneath,  and  from  two  to  three  inches  long.  The  flowers  appear  in  May
and  June.  Panicle  small,  shorter  than  the  leaves.  Pericarp  thin,  cadu-
cous, dark-blue,  resembling  berries  on  thick  stipes.  Seeds  one  or  two,
erect,  globose,  about  the  size  of  a  large  pea.


Caulophyllin.  313

History. — A  handsome  perennial  plant  growing  all  over  the  United
States,  in  low,  moist,  rich  grounds,  near  running  streams,  in  swamps,
and  on  islands  that  have  been  overflowed  with  water.  The  seeds  ripen
in  the  latter  part  of  the  summer,  and  are  said  to  form  an  excellent  sub-
stitute for  coffee,  when  roasted.  The  fruit  is  dry,  sweetish,  insipid,  and
resembles  that  of  the  Vaccinium.  The  officinal  part  is  the  root,  which
is  sweetish,  somewhat  pungent  and  aromatic,  and  affords  a  yellow  infu-
sion or  tincture.  No  chemical  analysis  of  the  root  has  been  made,
though  it  affords  a  resinous  principle,  to  which  I  have  given  the  name
of  Caulophyllin.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  essentially  an  agent  peculiar  to  Eclec-
tics not  being  employed  by  any  other  class  of  practitioners.  It  is
principally  used  as  an  emmenagogue,  parturient,  and  antispasmodic  ;
but  it  likewise  possesses  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  and  anthelmintic  proper-
ties. It  has  been  successfully  employed  in  rheumatism,  dropsy,  colic,
cramps,  hiccough,  epilepsy,  hysteria,  uterine  inflammation,  etc.  It  is  a
valuable  agent  in  all  chronic  uterine  diseases,  appearing  to  exert  an
especial  influence  upon  the  uterus,  and  has  been  found  serviceable  in
uterine  leucorrhea,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  etc.  When  used  in
decoction  for  several  weeks  previous  to  the  parturient  period,  it  is  said
to  facilitate  that  process,  acting  as  a  preparatory  parturient,  and  it  is
sometimes  combined  with  the  Mitchell  a  Pcpens,  and  Eupatoria  Aroma-
tica,  for  this  purpose.  Combined  with  equal  parts  of  powdered  Hydras-
tis Can.,  made  into  an  infusion,  and  sweetened  with  honey,  it  forms  an
elegant  and  effectual  wash  for  aphthous  sore-mouth  and  throat.  In
decoction,  blue  cohosh  is  preferable  to  ergot  for  expediting  delivery,
in  all  those  cases  where  the  delay  is  owing  to  debility,  or  want  of  uterine
nervous  energy,  or  is  the  result  of  fatigue.  The  decoction  or  infusion
may  be  made  by  adding  an  ounce  of  the  root  to  a  jint  of  boiling  water,
and  boiling  or  macerating  for  a  short  time  ;  the  dose  of  either  is  from
two  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  daily.  The  tincture  should
be  made  by  adding  three  ounces  of  the  finely  powdered  root  to  a  pint
of  alcohol,  and  allow  it  to  macerate  for  fourteen  days  ;  then  filter.  The
dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms.

Of.  Prep. — Caulophyllin  ;  Extractum  Caulophylli  Hydro-alcoholi-
cum  ;  Tinctura  Caulophylli  Composita.


CAULOPHYLLIN.

THE  ACTIVE PRINCIPLE  OF THE  ROOT  OF  CAULOPHYLLUM THALICTROTDES.'

Preparation. — Caulophyllin  is  the  name  I  have  given  to  the  active
principle  of  the  root  of  Caulophyllum  Thalictroides.  It  is  an  Eclectic
remedy,  not  known  or  used  by  any  other  class"  of  practitioners,  and  was


314  Materia  Medica.

first  manufactured  by  W.  S.  Merrell  of  Cincinnati.  He  prepares  it  by-
precipitation  from  the  saturated  tincture,  similar  to  the  preparation  of
cimicifugin,  using,  however,  as  small  a  quantity  of  water  as  possible  to
prevent  waste,  as  the  precipitate  is  soluble  in  water.

Chemical  Properties. —  Caulophyllin  thus  prepared  is  a  resinous  sub-
stance of  a  light-brown  color,  with  a  peculiar,  not  unpleasant  odor,
somewhat  similar  to  podophyllin,  and  leptandrin,  and  a  slightly  bitter
taste  with  some  degree  of  pungency.  Its  chemical  reactions  have  not
been  thoroughly  investigated ;  it  appears,  however,  to  be  a  neutral  sub-
stance, like  salicin,  exhibiting  neither  acid  nor  alkaline  principles.  It  is
insoluble  in  ether.  In  water  it  is  partially  soluble,  in  alcohol  more  so ;
the  addition  of  aqua  ammonia  renders  it  completely  soluble  in  either
menstruum,  and  the  solution  becomes  of  a  dark-reddish  wine  color.
Its  aqueous  solution  is  also  rendered  perfect  by  the  addition  of  liquor
potassa,  nitric,  or  muriatic  acids. Acetic  acid  does  not  solve  it.  •

The  N.  Y.  Journal  of  Organic  and  Medical  Chemistry,  vol.  i,  p.  12,
states  that  Caulophyllin  may  be  obtained  by  treating  the  root  of  Cau-
lophyllum  with  distilled  water,  and  obtaining  an  aqueous  solution  by
percolation.  This  solution  is  to  be  decolorized  by  animal  charcoal,  then
evaporated  in  vacuo,  and  precipitated  with  an  infusion  of  nutgalls,  or,
what  is  still  better,  96  per  cent,  alcohol.  A  white  precipitate  is  obtained,
which  can  be  dried  on  filter-cloth  and  powdered.  The  properties  of  the
caulophyllin  thus  obtained,  are  similar  to  those  detailed  above,  being
soluble  in  water,  partly  so  in  alcohol,  and  possessing  similar  therapeutic
influences  ;  yet,  it  is  there  termed  an  alkaloid.  It  is  to  be  regretted
that  in  our  eagerness  to  discover  concentrated  medicinal  principles  and
their  therapeutic  advantages,  but  little  attention  is  bestowed  upon  their
chemical  relations.

Properties  and  Uses. — Caulophyllin  appears  to  exert  a  direct  influence
upon  the  uterus,  acting  as  an  alterative,  uterine  tonic,  and  parturient,
according  to  the  periods  in  which  it  is  employed.  In  the  more  common
unhealthy  conditions  of  this  organ  and  its  appendages,  known  as  amen-
orrhea, dysmenorrhea,  passive  menorrhagia,  leucorrhea,  congested  cer-
vix, etc.,  it  is  equal  to,  if  not  surpassing  the  cimicifugin.  A  combina-
tion of  equal  parts  of  caulophyllin,  cimicifugin,  and  carbonate  of  ammo-
nia, will  be  found  especially  valuable  not  only  in  the  above-named
affections  but  likewise  in  epilepsy,  hysteria,  rheumatism  and  dropsy,  in
which  diseases  it  has  been  recommended  as  an  antispasmodic.  It  may
also  be  advantageously  combined  with  aletrin,  asclepidin,  senecin,  etc.,
in  many  forms  of  disease  of  the  female  generative  organs.  It  has  been
spoken  of  as  a  parturient,  but  we  have  no  knowledge  of  its  influence
as  such — though  we  are  aware  that  the  root  from  which  it  is  prepared
does  exert  a  parturient  effect ;  which  property,  if  retained  by  the  caulo-
phyllin will  no  doubt  render  it  valuable  to  the  accoucheur. Added  to


Ceanothus  Americanus.  315

podophyllin or other  active purgatives,  it  prevents tormina,  and  is,
probably,  the  best  agent  that  can  be  employed  for  this  purpose.

Dr.  T.  J.  Kindleberger  of  Springfield,  0.,  writes  that  he  has  used  it
with  much  advantage  in  after-pains,  in  menstrual  suppression,  and  in
dysmenorrhea.  He  closes  his  letter,  by  observing,  "  In  my  opinion
it  far  surpasses  ergot,  both  in  its  acting  more  mildly,  and  with  more
certain  results.  It  will,  no  doubt,  occupy  a  very  elevated  position
among  remedial  agents,  when  it  becomes  fully  known  to  the  profession."
The  ordinary  dose  of  the  article  is  from  one-fourth  of  a  grain  to  one
grain,  two,  three,  or  four  times  a  day.  As  a  parturient  it  should  be  given
in  doses  of  from  two  to  four  grains,  and  repeated  at  intervals  of  from
fifteen  to  thirty  or  sixty  minutes,  after  actual  labor  has  commenced.  In
one  case,  reported,  where  labor  had  lasted  five  days,  the  patient  much
enfeebled,  and  the  labor  complicated  with  artificial  pains,  caulophyllin
was  given  in  two  grain  doses  every  half  hour  ;  but  three  doses  were
given,  labor  having  commenced  soon  after  the  second  was  taken,  and
terminated  successfully  in  one  hour  and  forty  minutes  from  the  time  the
first  powder  was  given.  Caulophyllin  may  be  advantageously  combined
with  dioscorein  in  bilious  colic  and  flatulence.  With  podophyllin  and
muriate  of  ammonia,  it  forms  an  excellent  combination  for  some  nephritic
diseases,  accompanied  with  pains  of  a  spasmodic  character.


CEANOTHUS  AMERICANUS.
Redroot.

Nat  Ord. — Rhamnaceas. Sex.  Syst — Pentandria  Monogynia.

BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  likewise  called  New  Jersey  Tea,  Wild  Snow-
ball, has  a  large  root,  with  a  red  or  brown  epidermis,  containing  many
small  white  veins,  and  tolerably  thick ;  body  of  the  root  dark-red.  The
stems  are  from  two  to  four  feet  high,  slender,  suffruticose,  with  many
reddish,  round,  smooth  branches,  the  younger  of  which  are  pubescent.
The  leaves  are  ovate  or  oblong-ovate,  somewhat  acuminate  at  the  apex,
rounded,  or  slightly  cordate  at  the  base,  serrated,  three-nerved,  nearly
smooth  above,  and  whitish,  tomentose  beneath,  the  pubescence  of  the
veins  and  petioles  somewhat  reddish.  The  flowers  are  white,  in  lono-,
crowded  panicles  from  the  axils  of  the  upper  leaves.  Calyx  white,  five-
cleft,  and  the  upper  portion  separates  by  a  transverse  line,  leaving  the
tube  adhering  to  the  fruit.  The  corolla  is  formed  of  five-saccate,  arched
petals,  which  are  longer  than  the  calyx,  and  with  filiform  claws  at  base.
The  stamens  are  five,  exserted,  and  bearing  ovate,  two-celled  anthers.
The  ovary  is  three-angled,  and  surrounded  with  a  ten-toothed  disk.


316  Materia Medica.

The  styles  are  three,  united  to  the  middle,  but  diverging  above.  The
fruit  is  dry  and  coriaceous,  obtusely  triangular,  three-celled  and  three-
seeded.  The  seeds  are  convex  externally,  concave  internally,  the  cavity
marked  with  a  longitudinal  line.

History. — C.  Americanus  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  in
copses  and  dry  woods,  and  flowering  from  June  until  September.  The
leaves,  when  dried,  have  an  odor  and  taste  resembling  black  tea,  and
were  used  during  the  revolutionary  war  as  a  substitute  for  the  Chinese
tea  ;  they  are  slightly  bitter  and  astringent.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,
and  has  a  taste  and  smell  somewhat  resembling  those  of  the  peach  leaf.
It  has  been  occasionally  used  for  coloring.  Water  extracts  its  active
principle.  The  leaves  are  said  to  contain  tannin,  a  soft  resin,  a  bitter
extractive,  a  greenish  coloring  matter  almost  identical  in  color  and  taste
with  green  tea,  gum,  a  volatile  substance,  lignin,  and  an  active  principle
called  Ceanothine.

This  principle,  as  stated  in  the  New  York  Journal  of  Organic  and
Medical  Chemistry,  vol.  1,  p.  43,  is  obtained  by  first  removing  the  resin-
ous extractive,  and  most  of  the  coloring  matter  from  the  leaves,  by
treating  them  with  alcohol.  The  mass  is  then  placed  in  an  alembic
apparatus,  and  the  alcohol  remaining  in  the  leaves  displaced,  after  which
the  mass  is  submitted  to  the  percolating  process  with  hot  distilled  water,
until  the  active  principle  is  displaced.  The  aqueous  solution  is  then
evaporated  in  vacuo  to  the  consistency  of  thick  syrup,  and  precipitated
and  purified  in  alcohol  nearly  absolute.  The  precipitate  is  then  placed
in  vacuo  at  a  temperature  of  about  100°  F.  By  this  means  the  alcohol
remaining  in  the  precipitate  is  gradually  removed,  and  the  Ceanothine
remains  in  a  dried  mass  partially  in  the  form  of  crystals,  after  which  it
is  reduced  to  a  fine  powder.  When  purified  it  is  white;  its  odor  and
taste  is  similar  to  that  of  green  tea ;  it  is  soluble  in  water,  but  insoluble
in  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Astringent,  expectorant,  sedative,  antispas-
modic, and  antisyphilitic.  Used  in  gonorrhea,  dysentery,  asthma,
chronic  bronchitis,  hooping-cough,  and  other  pulmonary  affections.
Dose  of  a  strong  decoction,  one  tablespoonful  three  or  four  times  a  day.
It  has  likewise  been  successfully  used  as  awash  and  gargle  in  the  aphthae
of  children,  sore  mouth  subsequent  to  fever,  and  in  ulceration  of  the
fauces  attendant  on  scarlatina.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Ceanothi.


Celastrus  Scandens  —  Centaurea  Benedicta.  317

CELASTRUS  SCANDENS.

False  Bittersweet.

Nat. Ord. — Celastracea?. Sex. Si/st. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  likewise  known  by  various  other  names,  as
Staff-vine,  Waxwork,  Climbing  Bittersweet,  Climbing  Staff-tree,  etc.,  is  a
climbing,  indigenous  shrub,  with  a  woody,  twining  stem,  without  thorns
or  prickles  ;  the  leaves  are  thin,  oblong,  acuminate,  serrate,  alternate,
stipulate,  petiolate  and  smooth  ;  the  racemes  are  small,  terminal,  and  axil-
lary;  the  flowers  are  greenish-white,  or  yellowish-white,  fragrant  and
dioecious.  Calyx  flat,  five-lobed  ;  corolla  spreading,  of  rive  sessile  petals  ;
capsvle  obtusely  three-angled,  three-celled,  berry  like;  valves  bearing
the  partitions  on  their  centers  ;  stamens  standing  around  a  glandular  five-
toothed  disk;  .style  thick;  stigma  three-cleft.  Seeds  covered  with  a
scarlet  aril,  one  or  two  in  each  cell.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  woods  and  thickets,  from  Canada  to
Carolina,  creeping  on  hedges  and  rocks,  or  twining  about  other  trees,  or
each  other,  and  ascending  to  a  great  Light.  It.  flowers  in  June,  and  bears
ascarlet  berry  wHich  remains  through  the  winter.  The  plant  thrives  most
luxuriously  in  a  rich,  damp  soil.  The  root  is  very  long,  creeping,  woody,
of  a  bright  orange  color,  about  'half  an  inch  in  thickness,  with  a  thick,
red,  or  yellowish-red  bark,  which  is  the  officinal  part.  On  account  of
the  similarity  of  name,  Bittersweet,  the  plant  has  been  confounded  with
the  Solatium  Dulcamara,  from  which,  however,  it  essentially  differs  in
appearance  and  therapeutic  action.  The  bark  has  a  sweetish,  rather
nauseous  taste,  and  imparts  its  medicinal  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Alterative,  diaphoretic,  and  diuretic,  with
some  narcotic  powers.  Used  in  scrofula,  secondary  syphilis,  chronic
hepatic  affections,  cutaneous  affections,  leucorrhea,  rheumatism,  and
obstructed  menstruation.  Externally,  an  ointment  has  been  successfully
employed  in  inflamed  and  indurated  breasts  of  nurses.  Dose  of  the
decoction,  from  two  to  four  ounces,  three  times  a  day ;  of  the  extract,
from  five  to  ten  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Celastri ;  Syrupus  Rumicis  Compositus.


CENTAUREA  BENEDICTA.

Blessed  Thistle.
Nat. Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Frustranea.


Description.  —  Centaurea Benedicta, or Cnicus Benediclus of  De
Candolle,  also  known as  Holy  Thistle,  is  an  annual,  herbaceous  plant,


318  Materia  Medica.

with  a  whitish,  fibrous,  branched,  tapering  root,  with  several  stems,  about
two  feet  high,  and  which  are  trailing,  roundish,  furrowed,  reddish,
woolly,  and  branching  toward  the  top.  The  lower  leaves  are  petiolate,
but  the  upper  are  sessile,  alternate,  and  somewhat  decurrent;  the  whole
are  oblong,  rough,  aculeate,  sinuate  or  almost  ruminate,  and  armed  with
many  sharp  spines ;  of  a  green  color  above,  and  paler  and  reticulated
beneath.  The  flowers  are  large,  of  a  bright-yellow  color,  solitary  at  the
ends  of  the  branches,  inclosed  by  a  bracteate  involucrum  of  ten  leaves,
the  five  exterior  of  which  are  largest.  True  involucrum  ovoid,  imbri-
cated, smooth,  woolly,  each  scale  being  terminated  by  pinnate  spines,
connected  with  the  bracts  by  fine  threads.  Ray-florets  small  and  sterile,
those  of  the  disk  perfect,  tubular,  and  toothed.  Stamens  five,  downy,
with  linear-oblong  united  anthers.  The  style  is  filiform  with  a  cleft
stigma. The  achenia  are  oblong,  brown,  striated,  on  a  bristly  receptacle.

History. — This  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe,  and  naturalized  in
the  United  States.  It  flowers  in  June,  when  its  medicinal  virtues  are  in
the  greatest  perfection.  The  leaves  should  be  gathered  while  the  plant
is  in  flower,  quickly  dried,  and  kept  in  a  dry  place.  They  have  a  feeble,
unpleasant  odor,  and  an  intensely  bitter  taste.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts
their  virtues.  The  infusion  with  cold  water  is  a  pleasant  bitter;  the
decoction  is  nauseous  and  offensive  to  the  stomach.  The  leaves  contain
volatile  oil,  a  bitter  principle,  resin,  a  fixed  oil,  gum,  sugar,  albumen,
some  salts,  etc.  The  bitter  principle  is  supposed  to  be  the  active  one  of
the  plant,  and  is  named  Cnicin;  it  is  crystallizable,  inodorous,  very
bitter,  neutral,  hardly  soluble  in  cold  water,  more  so  in  boiling,  and
soluble  in  alcohol.  It  is  analogous  to  salicin  in  composition,  and  consists
of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen.  In  doses  of  from  four  to  eight  grains
it  often  vomits  and  has  proved  useful  in  intermittent  fevers.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  A  cold  infusion  is  tonic  ;  a  warm  infusion
diaphoretic,  and  if  strong,  emetic.  Used  as  a  tonic  in  loss  of  appetite,
dyspepsia,  and  intermittent  diseases.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  ten  to
sixty  grains  ;  of  the  infusion  two  fluidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Centaureae.


CEPHAELIS  IPECACUANHA.

Ipecacuanha.

Nat. Ord. — Cinchonaceje. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.


Description. — Cephaelis  Ipecacuanha  is  a  small  shrubby  plant,  with  a
perennial  root,  descending  obliquely  into  the  ground,  from  four  to  six


Cephaelis  Ipecacuanha.  319

inches  long,  about  as  thick  as  a  goosequill,  simple,  or  divided  into  a  few
divergent  branches,  marked  with  annular  rugse,  flexuose,  contorted,
epidermous,  glabrous,  of  a  pale-brown  color  in  the  recent  root,  and
umber  or  blackish-brown  in  the  dry ;  the  cortex  is  soft,  white,  and  sub-
amylaceous  in  the  fresh  root,  and  pale-reddish,  or  rose-colored  in  the
dried  state,  of  a  shining  and  resinous  fracture,  and  readily  separable
from  a  central  woody  axis.  The  stem  is  suffruticose,  from  two  to
three  feet  long,  ascending,  often  rooting  near  the  ground,  smooth  and
cinereous  at  the  base,  downy  and  green  near  the  apex.  The  leaves  are
rarely  more  than  four  or  six  on  a  stem,  oblong-ovate,  acute,  roughish
with  hairs,  from  three  to  four  inches  long,  and  from  one  to  two  broad;
those  at  the  top  of  the  stem  are  opposite,  and  those  toward  the  base
alternate.  Petioles  short,  downy.  Stijwles  erect,  appressed,  membran-
ous, deciduous,  four  to  six  cleft.  Peduncles  solitary,  axillary,  downy,
erect  when  in  flower,  reflexed  when  in  fruit,  about  one  inch  and  a  half
Ion"-.  Flowers  small,  white,  in  semigflobose  heads,  of  eight,  twelve  or
more ;  involucre  one-leafed,  spreading,  deeply  four  to  six-parted,  with
obovate  acuminate,  ciliated  segments.  Bracts  to  each  flower  one,
obovate-oblong,  acute,  downy.  Calyx  minute,  obovate  ;  whitish,  adher-
ing to  the  ovary,  with  five-bluntish,  short  teeth.  Corolla  white,  funnel-
shaped  ;  tube  cylindrical,  downy  on  the  outside  and  at  the  orifice ;  limb
shorter  than  the  tube,  with  five  ovate  reflexed  segments.  Stamens  five;
filaments  filiform,  white,  smooth  ;  anthers  linear,  longer  than  the  fila-
ments, projecting  a  little  beyond  the  corolla.  Ovary  with  a  fleshy  disk
at  the  apex;  style  filiform;  stigmas  two,  linear.  Berry  ovate,  obtuse,
about  the  size  of  a  kidney-bean,  at  first  purple,  subsequently  violet-
black,  two-celled,  two-seeded,  with  a  longitudinal  fleshy  partition.
Xucules  plano-convex,  furrowed  on  the  flat  side.

History. — This  is  a  small,  scrubby,  perennial  plant,  found  in  the  moist
shady  woods  of  Brazil,  and  other  sections  of  South  America,  but  mostly
between  the  eighth  and  twentieth  degree  of  south  latitude.  It  flowers
in  January  and  February,  and  ripens  its  fruit  in  May.  The  root,  which
is  the  officinal  part,  is  collected  during  the  flowering  season  by  the  Indi-
ans, who  after  plucking  it  from  the  ground,  separate  it  from  the  stem,
clean  it,  and  hang  it  up  in  small  parcels  in  the  sun  for  the  purpose  of
drying.  It  is  principally  imported  from  Rio  Janerio,  Bahia,  and  Pernam-
buco,  in  large  bags  or  bales.

As  imported  into  this  country,  ipecacuanha  is  in  pieces  two  or  three
lines  in  thickness,  contorted,  simple  or  branched,  tapering  from  the
center  toward  both  ends,  irregular  rings  or  rugae,  separated  by  narrow
fissures  frequently  extending  nearly  down  to  the  central  fiber.  The
internal  meditullium  or  woody  part  is  slender,  and  light  straw-colored  ;
the  cortex  or  bark  is  hard,  horny,  translucent,  breaking  with  a  resinous
fracture,  and  easily  separating  from  the  central  ligneous  cord. It  is  not


320  Matekia Medica.

very  readily  pulverized,  and  is  the  most  active  part  of  the  root.  Phar-
macologists have  divided  ipecacuanha  into  three  varieties,  the  grayish-
black,  the  grayish-red,  and  the  grayish-white,  which  are  so  named  from
the  relative  color  of  the  surface  of  the  roots.  But  as  they  are  derived
from  the  same  plant,  and  are  essentially  the  same  in  properties  and  com-
position, the  division  is  of  no  practical  utility,  especially  as  they  are
received  into  this  country  often  so  intermingled,  as  to  render  a  separation
of  them  almost  impossible.

Ipecacuanha  root  is  seldom  seen  by  the  druggist  or  practitioner  of  this
country,  except  in  powder,  from  which  circumstance  it  is  much  liable  to
adulteration.  The  powder  of  the  genuine  article  is  of  a  grayish-yellow
color,  with  a  faint,  bitterish,  obscurely  acrid  taste,  and  a  weak,  musty,
peculiar  odor,  which  becomes  stronger  and  nauseating  during  the  process
of  pulverization  ;  in  some  persons  it  excites  violent  sneezing,  in  others  a
difficulty  of  breathing  resembling  asthma.  It  yields  its  properties  to
water,  and  still  better  to  alcohol,  spirits  or  wines.  Boiling  impairs  its
virtues.  The  bark  of  the  grayish-black,  or  dark-brown  variety,  consists
of  an  odorous  concrete  oil,  wax,  gum,  starch,  lignin,  and  emetia.  The
woody  part  contains  but  little  emetia.  The  grayish-black  variety  is  sup-
posed to  contain  more  emetia  than  the  grayish-red.

Emetia  or  emetine  which  is  the  active  principle  of  the  root,  is  prepared
by  removing  the  odorous  fatty  matter  from  the  powder  with  ether,  then
exhausting  the  residue  with  boiling  alcohol,  then  evaporating  the  alco-
holic solution  to  dryness,  and  finally  subjecting  the  extract  to  the  action
of  cold  water,  which  dissolves  the  emetia  with  some  free  acid,  and  leaves
the  wax  and  other  matters.  To  separate  the  acid,  and  obtain  pure
emetia,  treat  the  watery  solution  with  magnesia,  filter,  and  evaporate.
The  salt  is  thus  decomposed,  and  the  organic  alkali  being  insoluble  is
precipitated  with  the  excess  of  the  magnesia.  This  precipitate  is  then
to  be  washed  with  cold  water,  and  digested  in  alcohol,  which  dissolves
the  emetia  ;  finally  the  alcoholic  solution  is  evaporated,  the  residue  redis-
solved  in  a  dilute  acid,  decolorizing  the  solution  with  animal  charcoal,
and  precipitating  the  emetia  by  magnesia.  Or  it  may  be  obtained  by
treating  the  powdered  root  with  very  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  precipita-
ting with  magnesia,  and  treating  the  precipitate  in  the  manner  above
directed.

Pure  emetia  is  whitish,  without  odor,  very  slightly  bitter,  pulverulent,
permanent  in  the  air,  uncrystallizable,  fusible  at  about  120°,  decidedly
alkaline,  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water  and  ether,  more  soluble  in  hot
water,  and  very  soluble  in  alcohol.  It  contains  nitrogen  among  its  con-
stituents. With  acids  it  forms  neutral,  soluble,  bitter,  acrid,  and  for  the
most  part,  uncrystallizable  salts,  whose  solutions  are  precipitated  by  gallic
and  tannic  acids.  It  is  supposed  to  consist  of  35  equivalents  of  carbon,
25  of  hydrogen,  9  of  oxygen,  and  1  of  azote,  (C35  H25  09  N).  The  root
furnishes  but  a  very  small  proportion  of  pure  emetia.


Cephaelis Ipecacuanha.  321

Tannin,  all  astringents  containing  tannin  or  gallic  acid,  iodine,  salts
of  iron,  and  acetate  of  lead,  are  incompatible  with  ipecacuanha.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emetic  in  large  doses  ;  nauseant  and  expectorant
in  smaller ;  and  in  still  smaller  doses,  tonic,  stimulant,  carminative  and  dia-
phoretic. Some  authors  suppose  it  to  possess  narcotic  properties.  Given  in
scrupledoses.it  operates  as  an  activeemetic,  causing  much  nausea,  comin-
ued  muscular  straining,  with  a  free  secretion  of  mucus;  vomiting,  however,
seldom  takes  place,  until  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  after  its  administra-
tion. It  is  inferior  to  no  other  emetic,  being  safe  even  in  large  doses,
seldom  producing  painful  spasms  of  the  stomach  or  bowels,  and  causing
less  prostration  of  the  vital  forces  than  tartar-emetic  ;  it  is  best  employed
in  combination  with  other  emetics,  as  in  the  Compound  Powder  of  Lobe-
lia, which  is  much  used  among  Eclectics,  and  is  preferred  to  any  other
emetic  in  the  early  stage  of  febrile  diseases,  and  in  other  instances  where
a  severe  succussion  of  the  system  is  indicated.  In  spasmodic  asthma,
hysteria,  pertussis,  sore-throat,  common  catarrh,  and  stricture  of  the
chest  common  in  phthisis,  ipecacuanha  as  an  emetic  will  be  found  very
benelicial.  In  menorrhagia,  a  scruple  of  the  powder  at  bedtime  followed
by  a  saline  cathartic  in  the  morning,  has,  in  the  hands  of  several  prac-
titioners, promptly  checked  the  discharge.  In  fevers  and  inflammatory
affections,  small  diaphoretic  doses  have  been  highly  beneficial.  It  will
likewise  act  as  a  nauseant  sedative  in  all  local  inflammatory  diseases,  for
which  purpose  it  may  be  extensively  used,  and  will  be  found  extremely
valuable  in  peritonitis,  even  the  worst  form  occurring  in  puerperal
women,  in  pneumonia,  in  which  it  will  assist  expectoration,  also  in  hem-
orrhages, especially  uterine  hemorrhages.  From  three  to  ten  grains  will
produce  nausea,  which  may  be  continued  for  any  length  of  time,  and
which  is  attended  with  more  or  less  depression  of  the  pulse,  languor,
moisture  of  the  skin,  and  an  increased  mucus  discharge  from  all  the
mucous  tissues  of  the  system,  which  renders  it  very  useful  in  pulmonary
and  hepatic  diseases.

In  doses  of  one  quarter  of  a  grain  to  one-half,  it  acts  as  a  tonic,  im-
proving digestion,  increasing  the  appetite,  and  is  valuable  in  some  forms
of  dyspepsia.  In  doses  of  half  a  grain  to  two  grains,  administered  every
three  or  four  hours,  it  produces  perspiration,  and  is  beneficial  in  febrile
and  inflammatory  diseases  ;  combined  with  opium,  its  diaphoretic  influ-
ence is  greatly  augmented,  as  seen  in  the  Powder  of  Ipecacuanha  and
Opium.  In  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  both  acute  and  chronic,  it  has  been
regarded  as  a  valuable  remedy,  free  vomiting  being  first  induced,  after
which,  two  or  three  grains,  with  occasionally  one-eighth  of  a  grain  of
sulphate  of  morphia,  may  be  given  every  four  hours.  Combined  with
podophyllin,  it  increases  the  activity  of  that  resinoid,  and  induces  perspi-
ration. An  excellent  remedy  for  dysentery  is,  one  grain  each  of  leptan-
drin  and  ipecacuanha,  and  half  a  grain  of  podophyllin,  to  be  given  every
three  hours  until  it  operates  freely.  Sometimes  ipecacuanha  may  be
21


322  Materia  Medica.

advantageously  combined  with  other  emetic  agents,  as  bloodroot,  lobelia,
etc.,  to  render  emesis  more  prompt,  certain,  and  effectual.  In  all  cases
where  this  drug  cannot,  be  given  by  the  mouth,  it  may  be  used  in  injec-
tion, adding  two  drachms  of  the  powder  to  one.pint  of  warm  water,  for
an  adult, — it  will  operate  kindly  and  thoroughly  as  an  emetic.

Recently,  a  liniment  of  ipecacuanha  has  been  introduced  into  practice,
for  the  treatment  of  incipient  phthisis,  certain  rheumatic  affections,
chronic  hydrocephalus,  chronic  inflammation  of  the  synovial  membrane
of  the  knee,  and  infantile  convulsions.  As  soon  as  the  pustular  eruption
appears,  the  symptoms  improve  more  or  less  rapidly,  until  a  cure  is
effected.  It  is  made  of  powdered  ipecacuanha,  sweet  oil,  of  each,  two
drachms,  lard  half  an  ounce  ;  mix  them  well  together.  To  be  rubbed
into  the  part  affected,  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  at  a  time,  and  to  be
repeated  three  or  four  times  daily,  covering  the  part  after  each  rubbing
with  flannel  ;  in  from  24  to  48  hours  the  eruption  appears.  It  is  stated,
that  an  infusion  of  two  drachms  of  ipecacuanha  in  a  gill  of  hot  water,
and  strained,  will,  if  drank  warm,  prove  emetic  ;  then  if  the  same  quan-
tity of  hot  water  is  again  added  to  the  residue,  strained,  and  drank  cold,
it  will  prove  purgative  ;  and  the  same  process  repeated  the  third  time,
and  used  cold,  becomes  a  valuable  tonic.

Emetia,  the  active  principle  of  this  drug,  is  so  severe  and  uncertain
in  its  action,  that  it  is  not  used  in  medicine.  Two  grains  of  it  will  kill  a
large  dog. A  sixteenth  of  a  grain  vomited  an  old  man  severely.

Off.  Prep. — Pulvis  Ipecacuanhas  Compositus ;  Pulvis  Ipecacuanha
et  Opii ;  Tinctura  Serpentariae  Composita;  Unguentum  Ipecacuanhas;
Vinum  Ipecacuanhas.


CEPHALANTHUS OCCIDENTALS.

Button  Bush.

Nat.  Ord. — Rubiaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description.  —  This  plant,  sometimes  called  Pond  Dogwood,  Globe
Flower,  etc.,  is  a  handsome  shrub  growing  from  three  to  fifteen  feet
high,  much  branched,  bark  smooth  on  the  branches,  rough  on  the  stems.
The  leaves  are  opposite,  ternate,  with  red  petioles,  oval,  base  acute,
apex  acuminate,  margin  sometimes  undulate,  smooth  on  both  sides,
sometimes  slightly  pubescent,  entire,  from  three  to  five  inches  long,  and
two  to  three  broad.  The  flowers  are  terminal,  forming  round  balls  of  a
cream- white  color,  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  resembling  the  globular
inflorescence  of  the  sycamore  (Platanus  Occidental),  and  are  on
peduncles  about  two  inches  long.  Calyx  tube  produced  above' the  ovary,
teeth  obtuse,  persistent. Corolla  with  a  somewhat  funnel-shaped  tube,


Cera  Alba  —  Cera  Flava.  323

with  four  ovate  segments.  Stamens  not  much  longer  than  the  corolla,
with  yellow  anthers.  Style  filiform,  much  exserted,  wiih  a  yellow
stigma.  Capsules  small,  crowded,  formed  of  two  half  bivalve  cells,
with  the  valves  opposite,  each  containing  one  seed.

History. — This  plant  is  found  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States  and

•  Canada, -by  the  banks  of  streams  and  ponds,  and  in  low,  wet  situations,

flowering  in  July  and  August,  having  a  peculiar  and  heavy  odor. The

wood  is  light  and  spongy. The  bark  is  the  part  used,  and  possesses

much  bitterness. Water  or  alcohol  takes  up  its  virtues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  febrifuge,  aperient,  and  diuretic.  The
bark  has  been  used  with  much  success  in  intermittent  and  remittent
fevers ;  and  the  inner  bark  of  the  root  forms  an  agreeable  bitter,  which
is  often  employed  in  coughs,  and  as  a  diuretic  in  gravel.  The  plant
deserves  further  investigation.  It  has  never  been  analyzed,  but  con-
tains some  volatile  oil,  and  much  bitter  extractive.


CERA  ALBA.

White  Wax.

CERA  FLAVA.

Yellow  Wax.

History. — Wax  is  a  peculiar  concrete  substance,  which  exists  in  small
quantities  in  various  plants;  it  is  likewise  a  product  of  the  common  bee,
Apis  Mellifica  of  naturalists,  which  constructs  with  it  the  cells  for  food
and  ova.  It  is  a  proper  secretion  of  the  insect,  discharged  in  the  form
of  scales  under  the  wings  of  the  belly.  The  wax  produced  by  the  bee
is  the  officinal  article,  of  which  there  are  two  kinds,  Yellow  wax  and
White  wax.

Yellow  Wax  is  obtained  directly  from  the  comb,  which,  after  having
been  deprived  of  its  honey,  is  melted  in  boiling  water,  strained,  again
melted  and  poured  into  suitable  vessels;  as  the  liquid  cools  the  wax
concretes,  forming  the  yellow  wax  of  commerce.  Our  markets  are
chiefly  supplied  from  the  Western  States  and  North  Carolina,  also  from
Cuba.  It  has  a  grayish-yellow  color,  a  peculiar  rather  agreeable  odor,
and  a  slight  peculiar  taste.  It  possesses  considerable  firmness  and
tenacity,  though  rather  soft  and  unctuous  to  the  touch,  but  no  greasi-
ness,  has  a  granular  fracture,  is  smooth  and  glossy  when  cut  with  a
knife,  does  not  adhere  to  the  fingers,  nor  to  the  teeth  when  chewed,  is
softened  by  a  moderate  heat,  and  melts  at  142°;  its  specific  gravity  is
0.960  to  0.965.  Its  odor,  color,  and  taste,  depend  upon  some  associated
principle  not  forming  any  of  its  essential  constituents.


324  Materia Medica.

White  Wax  is  prepared  by  exposing  thin  layers  of  yellow  wax  to  air,
sunshine,  and  moisture,  when  it  loses  its  color,  nearly  all  of  its  odor,
and  becomes  yellowish-white.  In  factories  where  this  bleaching  process
is  carried  on  to  a  considerable  extent,  the  melted  wax  is  made  to  fall
upon  a  revolving  cylinder,  kept  constantly  wet,  upon  which  it  concretes,
forming  thin  ribbon-like  layers,  which  are  removed  from  the  cylinders,
6pread  upon  linen  cloths  stretched  on  frames,  and  exposed  to  the  air,
and  light;  being  occasionally  watered  and  turned.  To  render  it  per-
fectly white,  this  process  has  to  be  repeated  two  or  three  times,  when  it
is  melted  and  cast  into  small  circular  cakes.  Chlorine  will  also  decolor-
ize it,  but  the  wax  becomes  somewhat  changed  in  its  character.  Pure
white  wax  is  white,  shining,  diaphanous  in  thin  layers,  inodorous,
insipid,  harder  and  less  unctuous  to  the  touch  than  the  yellow,  soft  and
ductile  at  95°  F.,  melts  at  155°  F.,  and  of  specific  gravity  0.966.  At
a  high  temperature  it  boils,  and  in  close  vessels  distils  over  with  little
alteration  ;  at  a  red  heat  its  vapor  inflames,  burning  with  a  dense  white
brightness.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  cold  alcohol,  or  ether,  but  is
slightly  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol  or  ether,  which  deposits  it  upon  cooling.
It  readily  dissolves  in  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  and  combines  by  fusion
with  fats  and  resins ;  boiled  with  caustic  alkaline  solutions  it  is  imper-
fectly saponified.  The  ultimate  constituents  of  wax  are  twenty  equiva-
lents of  carbon,  twenty  of  hydrogen,  and  one  of  oxygen,  (Cm  H20  0).
When  treated  with  nitric  acid,  wax  is  almost  entirely  converted  into
succinic  acid.  According  to  Dr.  John,  wax  consists  of  two  proximate
principles,  Cerin  and  Myricin,  the  former  constituting  about  70  per  cent.
of  the  wax,  fusible  at  143°,  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol,  partly  saponifi-
able  by  boiling  with  caustic  potassa,  and  yielding  margaric  acid,  a  little
oleic  acid,  and  an  unsaponifiable  fatty  matter  called  Cerain;  the  latter
fusible  at  149°,  sparingly  soluble  even  in  boiling  alcohol,  and  incapable
of  undergoing  saponification.  Lewy  and  Ettling  consider  cerin,  myricin,
and  cerain  to  be  isomeric,  but  Hess  affirms  they  are  not  distinct  princi-
ples at  all,  and  that  wax  is  essentially  a  single  proximate  principle.  Mr.
B.  C.  Brodie  considers  cerin,  when  pure,  as  an  acid  having  the  constitu-
tion Cj4  H54  O4,  and  which  he  terms  Cerotic  acid,  which  is  fusible  at
172°  F.,  and  on  cooling  concretes  into  a  very  crystalline  mass.
Myricin,  when  entirely  freed  from  cerotic  acid,  is  saponifiable  with
difficulty,  and  from  the  results  of  saponification  he  isolated  Palmitic
acid  (C 12  H3i  Oi)  and  a  peculiar  substance,  Melissine  (CooHiaO*),
which  he  views  as  a  wax-alcohol,  convertible  into  mellissic  acid  by  the
loss  of  two  equivalents  of  hydrogen,  and  the  gain  of  two  of  oxygen.

Both  yellow  and  white  wax  are  liable  to  adulterations.  Resin  may
be  suspected  by  the  fracture  being  smooth  and  shining  instead  of  granu-
lar, also  by  its  solubility  in  cold  alcohol.  Insoluble  substances  may  be
discovered  and  separated  by  melting  and  straining  the  wax.  Tallow
and  suet,  by  the  greasiness  imparted,  by  the  softness  they  communi-


Cerevisije  Feementum.  325

cate  to  the  wax,  and  its  greater  fusibility,  also  by  its  unpleasant  odor
when  melted.  Fatty  matters  may  also  be  detected  by  their  rendering
hot  lime-water  turbid,  when  agitated  with  chips  of  the  suspected  wax,
and  then  allowed  to  rest.  Chloroform  dissolves  stearin  and  stearic  acid
completely,  but  only  25  per  cent,  of  wax;  then,  if  wax,  treated  with
six  or  eight  parts  of  chloroform,  loses  more  than  one-fourth  of  its  weight,
it  is  impure.  If  the  wax  contains  starch,  boil  it  in  water  and  add  tinc-
ture of  iodine  to  it,  which  will  produce  a  blue  color.  Pereira  states
that  the  whiteness  of  the  circular  cakes  of  wax  is  owing  to  the  presence
of  spermaceti,  and  that  pure  wax  is  yellowish-white.  (For  Myrtle  wax
see  Myrica  Cerifera.)

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Wax  has  but  little  effect  upon  the  system,
though  it  has  been  recommended  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  inflamma-
tion of  the  alimentary  mucous  membrane  combined  with  olive  oil,  and
the  yelk  of  egg.  Its  principal  employment  is  in  the  formation  of  oint-
ments, cerates,  and  plasters,  of  which  it  forms  an  ingredient  imparting
to  them  due  consistence  and  tenacity.


CEREVISI^E  FERMENTUM.

Yeast.

Preparation. — When  an  infusion  of  malt,  (barley  steeped  in  water,
fermented,  and  dried  in  a  kiln,)  technically  called  Wort,  is  subjected  to
the  process  of  fermentation,  a  dirty,  grayish-brown  substance,  gradually
separates,  forming  in  part  a  frothy  scum,  and  partly  a  sediment ;  this  is
yeast,  or  barm.

History. — Yeast  is  a  floceulent,  frothy,  somewhat  viscid  semifluid,  of
a  sour,  vinous  odor,  and  a  bitter  taste  ;  it  is  a  very  mixed  substance,
containing  water,  alcohol,  carbonic,  acetic  and  malic  acids,  potassa,  lime,
and  saccharo-mucilaginous  extract.  At  60°  or  in  a  damp  atmosphere,
it  soon  undergoes  putrefaction,  and  exposed  to  a  moderate  heat,  it  be-
comes dry,  hard,  and  brittle,  and  may  then  be  preserved  for  a  long  time,
though  with  the  loss  of  much  of  its  peculiar  power.  Yeast  is  insoluble
in  alcohol  or  water.  Its  most  important  property  is,  that  when  placed
in  contact  with  saccharine  solutions  at  a  temperature  between  50°  and
80°,  it  excites  vinous  fermentation  in  them,  converting  their  su'^ar  into
carbonic  acid  and  alcohol.  This  property  it  owes  to  its  azotized  globules
or  cells,  which  may  be  seen  in  it,  when  examined  with  a  microscope,
appearing  as  minute  transparent  vesicles,  containing  one  or  more  granules.
This  property  is  much  impaired  by  drying  the  yeast,  and  destroyed  by  a
heat  of  212°,  the  addition  of  strong  alcohol,  of  several  of  the  acids,  or
by  continued  trituration  until  all  the  vesicles  have  burst  and  lost  their


326  Materia Medica.

structure. It  is  also  destroyed  by  boiling  water,  pyroligneous acid,
salts  of  mercury,  essential  oils,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  tonic,  nutritious,  antiseptic,  and
laxative.  Used  in  typhoid  fevers  by  mouth  and  injection,  and  in  tym-
panitis by  enema.  In  all  malignant  ulcerations  of  the  throat  and  mouth,
in  diseases  where  there  is  a  disposition  to  putridity,  in  scarlatina,  and
low  stao-es  of  fever,  with  or  without  the  addition  of  olive  oil,  which
renders  it  more  laxative,  it  will  be  found  highly  beneficial.  Externally,
in  combination  with  elm  bark  and  charcoal  it  forms  an  excellent  emol-
lient and  antiseptic  poultice  in  sloughing  ulcers,  stimulating  the  vessels,
removing  the  tendency  to  gangrene,  and  correcting  the  fetor.

In  the  recent  furunculoid  epidemic  which  existed  in  this  country  and
Europe,  given  internally,  in  conjunction  with  quinia,  yeast  was  found
effectual  in  the  treatment  of  boils,  carbuncles,  and  felons.  The  dose  of
yeast  is  from  half  an  ounce  to  an  ounce,  every  two  or  three  hours.

Yeast  has  been  advised  in  diabetes  mellitus  in  doses  of  a  fluidrachm
three  or  four  times  a  day,  taken  immediately  before  meals.  It  has  in
some  instances  proved  efficacious,  and  is  supposed  to  act  by  decomposing
sugar  or  preventing  its  abnormal  production  in  the  stomach.

Off.  Prep. — Cataplasma  Fermenti.


CETACEUM.
Spermaceti.

A PECULIAR CONCRETE SUBSTANCE OBTAINED FROM THE SPERMACETI

WHALE.

Preparation. — Spermaceti  is  obtained  from  the  Cachalot  or  Sperm
whale,  the  Physeter  Macrocephalus  of  naturalists,  a  species  of  the  family
Cetacea;  it  is  a  gregarious  animal,  inhabiting  the  Pacific  ocean,  the
waters  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  and  the  Chinese  seas.  It  varies  in
size,  being  from  fifty  to  eighty  feet  in  length,  with  a  huge,  quadrangular
head,  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet,  or  more,  in  circumference,  and  which
constitutes  about  a  third  of  its  whole  length.  Spermaceti  is  found  in
various  parts  of  its  body,  in  small  proportions,  dissolved  in  its  blubber,
but  that  which  is  met  with  in  commerce,  is  obtained  from  large  cavities
in  the  upper  part  of  the  head;  these  are  divided  into  numerous  cells,
which  are  filled  with  a  milky,  oleaginous  solution  of  spermaceti.  From
a  large  whale  forty  to  sixty  hundred  weight  of  this  fluid  may  be  collected.
It  is  removed  from  the  cavities  and  boiled  to  separate  the  oleaginous
matter  from  the  solid  substance,  and  as  it  cools,  the  spermaceti  crystal-
lizes. The  oil  is  then  drained  off  as  much  as  possible,  and  the  remainder
is  removed from the spermaceti  by  powerful  pressure. The crude


Cetaceum.  327

spermaceti  is  subsequently  purified  by  fusing  and  skimming  it,  then  fusing
it  in  weak  ley  of  potassa,  and  finally  by  a  third  fusion  at  a  gentle  heat;
after  which  it  is  solidified  in  tin  molds.

History. — Spermaceti  is  concrete,  crystalline  and  foliaceous  in  texture,
white,  pearly,  tasteless,  inodorous,  friable,  soft,  and  somewhat  unctuous
to  the  touch  ;  pulverizable  on  the  addition  of  a  little  alcohol  or  almond-
oil,  of  specific  gravity  0.943,  fusible  at  112°  F.,  combustible,  insoluble
in  water,  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  alcohol,  more  soluble  in  boiling  alco-
hol, ether,  and  oil  of  turpentine,  but  deposited  as  the  liquids  cool,  and
readily  soluble  in  volatile  oils,  fixed  oils,  or  fused  fats.  The  mineral
acids  do  not  affect  it,  except  the  sulphuric,  which  decomposes  and  dis-
solves it.  Long  exposure  to  the  air  renders  it  yellow  and  rancid,  in
consequence  of  its  containing  a  little  oil,  but  it  may  again  be  purified  by
washing  it  with  a  warm  ley  of  potassa,  or  by  boiling  in  alcohol,  which
deposits  the  pure  spermaceti  as  it  cools.  Spermaceti,  when  deprived  of
oil  by  means  of  an  alkali,  becomes  a  pure  proximate  principle,  interme-
diate between  wax  and  the  concrete  oils,  and  presenting  all  the  leading
properties  of  the  ordinary  article,  but  less  unctuous,  rather  harder,  and
fusible  only  at  120°;  it  is  then  termed  Cetin,  and  is  soluble  in  forly  parts
of  boiling  alcohol  of  sp.  gr.  0.821.  When  boiled  in  a  solution  of  caustic
potassa,  cetin  is  partially  saponified,  forming  a  brittle  soap,  composed
chiefly  of  margarate  of  potassa,  oleate  of  potassa,  and  a  crystalline
principle  called  Ethal,  and  which  soap  is  not  wholly  soluble  in  water.
Cetin  is  a  compound  of  ethal,  (hydrated  oxide  of  cetyle,)  with  ethalic
or  cetylic  acid,  (C32  Hsi  Oi  HO).  When  melted  or  dissolved  in  hot
alcohol  it  crystallizes  beautifully ;  when  acted  on  by  nitric  acid,  it  yields
first,  pimelic  acid,  (C7  Ho  O4);  which  is  then  oxidized  into  adipic
acid,  (Cu  H12  Oin);  which  is  finally  converted  into  succinic  acid,
(Ch  H-i  Oj,  HO=S,  HO).  Cetin  or  pure  spermaceti  consists  of  81.66
per  cent,  of  carbon,  12.86  hydrogen,  and  5.48  oxygen.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Demulcent,  much  used  among  children  in
domestic  practice  in  coughs,  colds,  and  catarrhal  affections,  combined
with  equal  parts  of  loaf  sugar,  and  in  irritations  of  the  intestinal  mucous
membranes.  An  emulsion  may  be  made  by  first  mixing  it  wilh  half
its  weight  of  olive  oil,  then  with  powdered  Gum  Arabic,  and  lastly  with
water  gradually  added.  Spermaceti  forms  a  useful  ingredient  of  several
cerates  and  ointments.  Spermaceti  enters  into  the  formation  of  a  crayon
which  is  of  much  value  to  chemists,  druggists,  and  others,  inasmuch  as
it  enables  them  to  write  upon  clean  glass,  the  contents  of  bottles,  etc.,
as  labels  or  otherwise.  It  is  made  by  fusing  in  a  cup  four  drachms  of
spermaceti,  (or  stearine)  three  drachms  of  tallow,  and  two  drachms  of
wax  ;  after  which,  six  drachms  of  red-lead,  and  one  drachm  of  potassa
are  !o  be  stirred  into  it,  keeping  the  whole  mass  warm  for  half  an  hour,
and  then  pour  it  into  glass  tubes  the  thickness  of  a  lead-pencil. After


32S  Materia  Medica.

rapid  cooling,  the  mass  may  be  screwed  up  and  down  in  the  tube,  and
cut  to  the  finest  point  with  a  knife.

Off.  Prep. — Ceratum  Cetacei ;  Unguentum  Aquae  Rosae  ;  Unguentum
Cetacei.


CETRARIA  ISLANDICA.

Iceland  Moss.

Nat. Ord. — Lichenacece. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Lichenes.

Description. — Iceland  Moss  is  a  perennial,  foliaceous  plant,  from  two
to  four  inches  high  ;  thallus  erect,  tufted,  olive-brown,  paler  on  one  side,
laciniated,  channeled,  and  dentato-ciliate,  the  fertile  laciniae  very  broad.
Shields  brown,  appressed,  flat,  with  an  elevated  border.

History. — This  lichen  is  a  native  of  Britain  and  the  northern  countries
of  Europe,  particularly  Iceland.  It  is  of  various  colors,  being  grayish-
white,  brown,  and  red  in  different  parts  ;  has  a  bitter,  mucilaginous,
somewhat  astringent  taste  ;  is  inodorous,  absorbs  more  than  its  weight
of  water  when  steeped,  rendering  the  water  bitter  if  warmed,  is  converted
into  a  mucilaginous  pulp  by  long  chewing,  and  when  boiled  in  water  the
decoction  becomes  a  firm  jelly  on  cooling.  The  bitter  principle,  winch
may  be  removed  by  weak  alkaline  solutions,  is  called  Cetrarin,  and  is
used  in  Italy  instead  of  Cinchona.  It  may  be  obtained  by  boiling  the
coarsely-powdered  moss  for  half  an  hour  in  four  times  its  weight  of  aleo^
hoi  of  0.883.  When  tepid,  the  solution  is  to  be  filtered,  and  treated  with
diluted  muriatic  acid,  in  the  proportion  of  three  drachms  to  every  pound
of  moss  employed.  Water,  to  the  amount  of  four  times  the  volume  of
the  liquid,  is  then  to  be  added,  and  the  mixture  left  for  a  night  in  a
closed  matrass.  The  deposit  which  forms,  is  collected  on  a  filter,  allowed
to  drain  as  much  as  possible,  and  submitted  to  the  press.  To  purify  it,
break  the  mass  into  small  pieces,  and  while  still  moist,  wash  it  with  alco-
hol or  ether,  then  treat  it  with  two  hundred  times  its  weight  of  boiling
alcohol,  which  dissolves  only  the  cetrarin;  as  the  liquid  cools,  this  is,
for  the  greater  part  deposited,  and  the  remainder  may  be  obtained  by
evaporation.  One  pound  of  moss  will  thus  yield  about  133  grains  of
cetrarin.  It  is  white,  uncrystalline,  light,  permanent  in  the  air,  inodor-
ous, and  very  bitter,  especially  in  tincture.  It  is  soluble  in  absolute
alcohol,  ether,  and  slightly  so  in  water;  alkalies  form  permanent  com-
pounds with  it,  from  which  it  may  be  separated  by  acids  with  its  original
properties  unchanged.  Acids  do  not  unite  with  it,  and  its  solutions  are
neutral  to  test-paper.  Concentrated  hydrochloric  acid  converts  it  into  a
bright-blue  coloring  matter.  It  precipitates  the  salts  of  iron,  copper,
lead,  and  silver,  and  has  been  used  in  two-grain  doses,  repeated  every
two  hours,  with  much  success  in  intermittents.  It  is  supposed  to  consist
of  cetraric  acid,  lichstearic  acid,  and  thallocor.


Chelidonium  Majus.  329

The  most  important  part  of  Iceland  moss,  is  its  nutritive  principle,  to
which  the  name  of  Lichenin  has  been  given.  It  may  be  obtained  by
macerating  the  chopped  lichen  for  twenty-four  hours,  in  eighteen  parts
of  water,  containing  a  250th  of  its  weight  of  carbonate  of  potassa — strain
off  the  bitter  solution  without  pressure;,  and  remove  the  rest  of  it  from
the  residuum  by  maceration  with  cold  water,  and  simple  straining.
Boil  the  residuum  in  nine  parts  of  water  down  to  six,  strain  the  decoc-
tion, and  squeeze  what  is  left  in  the  cloth,  and  then  allow  the  strained
liquor  to  cool.  A  firm  jelly  is  formed,  which  cracks  and  throws  out
much  of  the  water,  and  then  dries  into  a  hard,  black,  glassy-like  sub-
stance. The  black  coloring  matter  may  be  removed  by  boiling  again,
straining,  cooling,  and  drying;  upon  which  the  lichenin  is  obtained  in
thin,  transparent,  and  tough  plates  of  a  yellowish  color.  Cold  water
renders  it  gelatinous,  boiling  water  dissolves  it,  forming  a  jelly  on  cool-
ing ;  alcohol  and  ether  do  not  affect  it.  Iodine  renders  its  watery  solu-
tion blue,  and  it  is  converted  into  sugar  by  sulphuric  acid,  and  into
oxalic  acid  by  nitric  acid.  It  consists  of  carbon,  oxygen,  and  hydro-
gen, and  in  some  respects  resembles  amidin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Demulcent,  tonic,  and  nutritious.  Used  as  a
demulcent  in  chronic  catarrhs,  chronic  dysentery,  and  diarrhea,  and  as
a  tonic  in  dyspepsia,  convalescence,  and  exhausting  diseases.  Boiled
with  milk  it  forms  an  excellent  nutritive  and  tonic  in  phthisis,  and  gen-
eral debility.  Its  tonic  virtues  depend  upon  its  cetrarin,  which,  if
removed,  renders  the  lichen  merely  nutritious.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Cetrariee.


CHELIDONIUM MAJUS.

Great  Celandine.

Nat.  Orel. — Papaveracea?. Sex.  Si/st. — Polyandria  Monogynia.

HERB AND ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  known  as  Tetterwort,  is  an  ever-
green perennial,  with  a  stem  from  one  to  two  feet  in  Light,  branched,
swelled  at  the  joints,  leafy,  round,  smooth.  The  leaves  are  smooth,
spreading,  very  deeply  pinnatifid  ;  leaflets,  in  from  two  to  four  pairs,
from  one  and  a  half  to  two  and  a  half  inches  long,  and  about  two-thirds
as  broad,  the  terminal  one  largest,  all  ovate,  cuneately  incised  or
lobed  ;  the  lateral  ones  sometimes  dilated  at  their  lower  mar<>in  near
the  base,  almost  as  if  auricled  ;  color  of  all  a  deep  shining  green.
Flowers  bright-yellow,  umbellate,  on  long,  often  hairy  stalks.  Umbels
thin,  axillary,  pedunculate.  Calyx  tawny,  often  hairy.  Petals  four,
entire,  yellow,  and  very  fugacious. Stamens  numerous. Capsules  long,


330  Materia Medica.

torulose,  two-valved,  one  celled. Seeds  black  and  shining,  each  with  a
whitish  deciduous  crest.

History.  —  Celandine  is  indigenous  to  Europe,  and  is  extensively
naturalized  in  the  United  States,  growing  in  waste  places,  and  flower-
ing throughout  the  summer.  The  whole  plant  is  very  brittle,  and  ex-
udes when  broken,  an  orange-colored,  fetid  juice,  the  taste  of  which
is  intensely  bitter  and  acrid,  occasioning  a  sense  of  burning  in  the
mouth  and  fauces,  which  lasts  for  some  time.  The  root  is  more  power-
ful than  the  stems,  and  is  usually  preferred.  Drying  diminishes  its
activity.  It  yields  its  virtues  to  alcohol  or  water.  Analysis  has
detected  in  this  plant,  a  deep-yellow,  bitter,  resinous  substance,  an
orange  colored,  nauseous,  and  bitter  gum-resin,  mucilage,  albumen,
free  malic  acid,  silica,  and  various  salts.  More  recently  a  peculiar  acid
has  been  detected  in  it,  termed  Ckelidunic  acid ;  an  alkaline  principle,
forming  neutral  red  salts  with  acids,  which  are  narcotic  and  poisonous,
denominated  Chelerythine ;  it  is  a  gray  powder,  and  excites  violent
sneezing  when  snuffed  into  the  nostrils  ;  another  alkaline  principle,
bitter,  insoluble  in  water,  and  forming  crystallizable  salts,  called  C/ieli-
donin,  (Cio  fLo  N3  0);  and  lastly  a  neuter,  yellow,  crystallizable,
bitter  principle,  termed  Chelidoxanthin.

Chelerythin  may  be  obtained  by  forming  a  strong  ethereal  tincture  of
the  celandine  root ;  through  this  pass  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  dry  the
precipitated  muriate  which  is  insoluble  in  ether.  Then  dissolve  it  in  hot
water,  filter,  precipitate  by  ammonia,  dry  the  precipitate,  dissolve  it  in
ether,  decolorize  by  animal  charcoal,  again  precipitate  by  muriatic  acid
gas,  and  decompose  the  muriate,  by  ammonia,  as  before.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  acrid,  alterative,  diuretic,  diapho-
retic, and  purgative.  Used  internally  in  decoction  or  tincture,  and
externally  in  poultice  or  ointment,  for  scrofula,  cutaneous  diseases,  and
piles.  Likewise  useful  in  hepatic  affections,  and  is  supposed  to  exert  a
special  influence  on  the  spleen.  As  a  drastic  hydragogue  it  is  fully
equal  to  gamboge.  The  juice  when  applied  to  the  skin  produces  inflam-
mation and  even  vesication,  and  has  long  been  known  as  a  caustic  for
the  removal  of  warts,  also  applied  to  indolent  ulcers,  fungous  growths,
etc.,  and  is  useful  in  removing  specks  and  opacities  of  the  cornea,  and
in  curing  ringworms.  Dose  of  the  powdered  root,  from  half  a  drachm
to  one  drachm  ;  of  the  fresh  juice,  from  thirty  to  forty  drops,  in  some
bland  liquid  ;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  two  drachms  ;  of  the  aqueous
extract,  from  five  to  ten  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Chelidonii.


Chelone  Glabra.  331

CHELONE  GLABRA.

Balmony.

Nat.  Ord.— Scrophulariaceae. Sex.  Si/st. — Didynamia  Angiospermia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  likewise  known  by  the  names  of  Snakehead,
Turllebloom,  Turtlehead,  Sult-rheum  weed,  etc.,  is  a  herbaceous  plant,
with  a  perennial  root,  and  erect,  somewhat  quadrangular,  branching
stems,  from  two  to  four  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  smooth,
oblong-lanceolate,  acuminate,  serrate,  short-petioled,  and  of  a  dark,
shining  green  above.  The  flowers  are  large,  inodorous,  terminal  in  a
dense  short  spike,  somewhat  resembling  the  head  of  a  tortoise  ;  each
flower  is  sessile  and  furnished  with  three  ovate,  acute  and  entire  bracts.
Corolla  ringent,  white,  often  tinged  with  red  or  purple,  ventricose,  con-
vex above,  five-lobed,  two-lipped,  the  lower  lip  bearded  within.  Calyx
with  five  unequal  imbricated  segments,  oblong  and  obtuse.  Stamens
didynamous,  with  woolly  anthers  ;  and  a  short  sterile,  hairy  filament.
Ovary  ovate,  with  a  long,  exsert  style,  bending  downward.  Capsule
oval,  tw  '-celled,  two-valved,  with  numerous  small,  winged  seeds,  with
membranaceous  margins.

History. — This  valuable  medicinal  plant  is  found  in  the  United  States
in  wet  situations,  and  blossoms  from  July  until  late  in  the  autumn;  the
flowers  are  large  and  ornamental,  varying  in  color,  in  the  numerous
varieties,  from  pure  white  to  purplish,  and  resemble  in  form  the  head
of  a  snake  or  turtle.  The  leaves  are  exceedingly  bitter,  but  inodorous,
and  communicate  their  properties  to  both  water  and  alcohol.  No  ana-
lysis has  been  made  of  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  cathartic,  and  anthelmintic.  Especially
valuable  in  jaundice  and  hepatic  diseases,  likewise  for  the  removal  of
worms,  for  which  it  may  be  used  in  powder  or  decoction,  internally,  and
also  in  injection.  Used  as  a  tonic  in  small  doses,  in  dyspepsia,  debility
of  the  digestive  organs,  and  during  convalescence  from  febrile  and
inflammatory  diseases.  Recommended  in  form  of  ointment  as  an  appli-
cation to  painful  and  inflamed  tumors,  irritable  and  painful  ulcers,
inflamed  breasts,  piles,  etc.  Dose  of  the  powder  one  drachm  ;  of  the
tincture,  one  or  two  fluidrachms  ;  of  the  decoction,  one  or  two  fluid-
ounces.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Chelonis.


332  Matkria Medica.

CHENOPODIUM  ANTHELMINTICUM.

Wormseed.
Nat. Ord. — Chenopodiacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.


Description. — This  plant,  known  also  by  the  name  of  Jerusalem  Oak,
has  a  perennial  and  branched  root,  with  an  upright,  herbaceous,  much
branched,  deeply-grooved  stem,  rising  from  two  to  five  feet  in  hight.
The  leaves  are  alternate  or  scattered,  oblong-lanceolate,  deeply  sinuate,
or  dentate,  nearly  sessile,  conspicuously  veined,  attenuated  at  both  ends,
of  a  yellowish-green  color,  and  studded  beneath  with  small,  globular,
oily  dots.  The  flowers  are  very  numerous,  small,  of  the  same  color  as
the  leaves,  and  arranged  in  long,  slender,  axillary,  or  terminal  racemes.
Calyx  with  five  oval,  concave  segments.  Stamens  opposite  the  lobes  of
the  calyx,  and  about  as  long.  Styles  three,  sometimes  two,  longer  than
the  stamens. Seed  small,  lenticular,  covered  by  the  persistent  calyx.

History. — Chenopodium  is  found  growing  in  waste  places  in  almost  all
parts  of  the  United  States,  flowering  from  July  to  September,  and
ripening  its  seeds  throughout  the  autumn,  at  which  time  they  should  be
collected.  The  whole  plant  has  a  strong,  heavy,  disagreeable  odor,
depending  on  the  presence  of  a  volatile  oil,  which  is  most  abundant  in
the  seeds.  This  oil  is  at  first  light-yellow  in  color,  but  becomes  darker
by  age  and  exposure  to  light.  The  whole  plant  is  occasionally  employed,
but  the  seeds  only  are  officinal.  When  dried,  they  are  of  a  greenish-
yellow  or  brownish  color,  irregularly  spherical,  very  small,  very  light,
and  have  a  bitterish,  warm,  pungent  taste,  with  the  peculiar  odor  of  the
plant. Wormseed  oil  is  obtained  from  them  by  distillation.

Properties  and  Uses. — Anthelmintic  and  antispasmodic.  It  is  used  in
various  forms  to  expel  the  lumbrici  in  children,  in  various  forms,  as  the
expressed  juice,  electuary,  or  decoction.  The  dose  of  the  juice,  is  a
tablespoonful  repeated  night  and  morning  ;  of  the  decoction,  prepared
by  boiling  an  ounce  of  the  fresh  plant  in  a  pint  of  milk,  with  the  addi-
tion of  some  aromatic,  a  wineglassful  ;  of  the  electuary,  made  by  tho-
roughly mixing  the  pulverized  seed  in  honey  or  syrup,  one  or  two
scruples.  But  the  essential  oil,  on  which  the  vermifuge  properties
depend,  is  the  best  form,  and  is  more  generally  employed.  Its  dose  is
from  four  to  eight  drops  mixed  with  sugar,  or  in  emulsion,  to  be  given
morning  and  evening,  for  four  or  five  days  successively,  and  then,  as
with  the  other  forms  of  administration,  it  should  always  be  followed  by
a  purgative.  Among  Eclectics  it  is  used  in  various  combinations.  Take
of  oil  of  Wormseed  and  Tansy,  of  each  one  ounce,  Spirits  of  Turpen-
tine one  ounce  and  a  half,  Castor  Oil,  one  pound. Mix. Dose,  for  a


Chimaphila Umbellata.  333

child,  a  teaspoonful  every  hour,  until  it  operates;  for  an  adult,  a  table-
spoonful. The  oil  has  likewise  been  reputed  beneficial  in  amenorrhea.

The  C.  Ambrosoides,  which  has  been  successfully  used  in  chorea,  and
the  C.  Bolrys,  which  has  been  used  with  advantage  in  catarrh  and
humoral  asthma,  as  an  expectorant,  are  both  indigenous,  and  though
less  powerful,  possess  somewhat  similar  properties  ;  and,  indeed,  from
the  superior  powers  of  the  C.  Anthelminticum,  it  might  possibly  be  found
of  more  benefit  in  these  affections,  than  the  above.

Off.  Prep. — Oleum  Chenopodii ;  Mistura  Chenopodii  Composita  ;
Mistura  Olei  Composita.


CHIMAPHILA  UMBELLATA. (Pyrola  Umbellata.)

Pipsissewa.

Nat.  Ord. — Ericaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.


THE WHOLE PLANT.


Description. — This  plant  is  known  by  various  other  names,  as  Winter-
green,  Prince's  Pine,  Ground-Holly,  etc.  ;  it  is  a  small  evergreen,  nearly
herbaceous,  perennial  herb,  with  a  creeping,  yellowish  rhizoma,  from
which  are  sent  several  simple,  erect,  or  semi-procumbent  sterns,  some-
what angular,  marked  with  the  scars  of  former  leaves,  and  ligneous  at
their  base  ;  they  grow  from  four  to  eight  inches  in  night.  The  leaves
are  in  two  or  more  irregular  whorls,  from  two  to  three  inches  long,  and
about  one-fourth  as  wide,  cuneate-lanceolate,  acute  at  the  base,  sharply
serrate,  on  short  petioles,  coriaceous,  shining,  of  a  uniform  dark-green
color,  paler  below,  and  not  spotted.  The  flowers  are  corymbose,  nod-
ding, of  a  light-purple  color ;  the  pedicels  with  linear-subulate  bracts
about  their  middle,  one-sixth  of  an  inch  long.  Calyx  small,  consisting
of  five  roundish,  acute  teeth  or  segments,  much  shorter  than  the  corolla.
Corolla  is  composed  of  five  roundish,  concave,  spreading,  cream-colored
petals,  exhaling  a  fragrant  odor,  and  tinged  at  the  base  with  purple.
Stamens  ten,  hypogynous ;  filaments  sigmoid,  the  lower  half  fleshy,  tri-
angular, dilated,  and  slightly  pubescent  at  the  edges  ;  the  upper  half
filiform.  Anthers  two-celled,  each  cell  opening  by  a  short,  round,  tubu-
lar orifice,  which  points  downward  in  the  bud,  but  upward  in  the  flower.
Pollen  white.  Ovary  globular,  depressed,  furrowed,  obscurely  five-
lobed,  with  a  funnel-shaped  cavity  at  top,  and  supporting  a  large,  pel-
tate, convex,  obscurely  five-rayed  stigma.  Style  short,  straight,  half  as
long  as  the  ovary,  inversely  conical,  inserted  in  the  cavity  of  the  ovary,
and  concealed  by  the stigma. Capsule  erect,  depressed,  five-celled,


334  Materia  Medica.

five-valved,  the  partitions  from  the  middle  of  the  valves. Seeds  numer-
ous, linear,  and  chaffy.

History. — This  beautiful  evergreen  is  a  native  of  the  northern  lati-
tudes of  America,  Europe,  and  Asia,  and  is  found  in  the  United  States
growing  under  the  shade  of  woods,  and  prefers  a  loose,  sandy  soil,
enriched  by  decaying  leaves.  It  flowers  in  June  and  July.  The  fresh
leaves  have  a  fragrant  odor  when  bruised,  but  when  dried  have  scarcely
any  smell,  with  a  pleasantly  bitter,  astringent  and  sweetish  taste.  The
whole  plant  is  officinal.  Boiling  water,  or  alcohol  extracts  the  active
properties.  The  plant  contains  a  large  proportion  of  bitter  extractive,
an  acrid  and  volatile  principle,  resin,  gum,  lignin,  and  saline  substances.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diuretic,  tonic,  alterative,  and  astringent.
The  fresh  leaves  when  bruised  and  applied  to  the  skin,  act  as  vesicants
and  rubefacients.  It  is  especially  useful  in  scrofula,  and  chronic  rheu-
matic and  nephritic  affections.  The  decoction  alone  has  cured  ascites,
and  has  been  advantageous  in  strangury,  chronic  gonorrhea,  and
catarrh  of  the  bladder ;  and  as  an  antilithic  it  is  said  to  diminish  lithic
acid  in  the  urine.  In  dropsy  it  cannot  always  be  relied  on  to  the  exclu-
sion of  other  more  active  measures,  and  is  better  adapted  to  cases
accompanied  with  much  debility  and  loss  of  appetite.  In  urinary  dis-
orders, it  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  the  uva  ursi,  to  which  it  is
preferable  on  account  of  being  less  offensive  to  the  stomach.  In  many
cutaneous  diseases,  it  has  proved  very  efficacious.  Dose  of  the  decoction,
from  one  to  four  fluidounces  three  times  a  day;  of  the  extract,  from  ten  to
twenty  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  a  syrup  may  be  prepared,  by
macerating  four  ounces  of  the  finely-bruised  leaves,  in  eight  fluidounces
of  water  for  thirty-six  hours,  then  subject  the  whole  to  percolation  till
a  pint  of  fluid  is  obtained,  evaporate  to  half  a  pint,  and  add  twelve
ounces  of  sugar. Dose,  one  or  two  tablespoonfuls.

The  Chimctphila  Macvlata,  or  Spotted  Winter  green,  may  be  known
from  the  above  by  its  leaves,  which  are  opposite,  or  in  threes,  lanceolate,
acuminate,  rounded  at  the  base,  where  they  are  broader  than  near  the
summit,  remotely  serrate,  of  a  deep  olive-green  color,  and  veined  with
greenish-white.  The  C.  Umbellata  leaves  are  broader  near  the  summit,
tapering  toward  the  base,  of  a  uniform  shining  green  color,  serrated,
and  not  marked  with  the  whitish  line  along  the  midvein  and  veinlets.

The  C.  Maculata  is  probably  possessed  of  similar  powers  with  the
officinal  article  and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute.  An  extract  of  it  is
reputed  to  have  cured  epilepsy.

Off.  Prep.— Decoctum  Chimaphilse; Syrupus  Stillingiae  Compositus.


Chiococca  Racemosa  —  Chloroformum.  335

CHIOCOCCA RACEMOSA.

Cahinca.

Nat.  Orel.  —  Cinchonaceas. Sex. Syst.  —  Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — A  subscandent  shrub,  somewhat  resembling  the  Jas-
mine, with  opposite  branches.  Leaves  oval,  acuminate,  or  sometimes
obtuse,  on  a  short  petiole  ;  they  are  entire,  very  smooth,  and  furnished
with  two  short,  acuminate  stipules,  which  are  connate  at  their  edges.
The fioivers  are  in  axillary  racemes,  generally  shorter  than  the  leaves;
thev  are  usually  secund  ;  at  first  they  are  white  and  inodorous,  and
afterward  yellow  and  fragrant.  The  fruit  is  a  small,  white,  compressed
berry.  There  are  several  varieties,  differing  in  the  form  of  the  leaves,
and  more  or  less  scandent  character  of  the  shrub.

Bistort/.  — This  plant,  sometimes  called  Snowherry,  is  a  native  of  the
West  Indies,  South  America,  and  also  of  the  sea-coast  of  Florida.  The
root,  as  found  in  commerce,  is  of  a  reddish-brown  color,  in  cylindrical
pieces  of  various  sizes  and  lengths,  somewhat  contorted,  slightly
wrinkled  longitudinally,  with  occasional  small  asperities,  and  having  a
thin,  brittle,  reddish-brown  bark  externally,  and  an  internal  ligneous
portion.  The  cortical  part,  which  contains  the  medical  virtues,  is  of  a
bitter,  disagreeable  taste,  somewhat  acrid  and  astringent,  and  possesses
an  unpleasant  odor. Water  or  alcohol  extracts  its  active  principles.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic,  diuretic,  purgative,  and  emetic.  In
moderate  doses  it  gently  excites  the  circulation,  increases  the  discharge
of  urine,  and  produces  evacuations  from  the  bowels,  but  is  rather  slow
in  its  operation.  If  warm  drinks  are  used,  and  the  surface  of  the  body
kept  warm,  it  will  produce  diaphoresis,  and  not  purge.  In  large  doses
it  operates  powerfully  as  an  emetic  and  cathartic.  It  has  been  found
efficient  in  dropsy,  amenorrhea,  rheumatism,  syphilis,  and  osteocopus.
In  Brazil  it  is  used  by  the  natives  as  a  remedy  for  the  bites  of  poisonous
snakes.  It  may  be  used  in  substance,  decoction,  tincture,  or  extract.
Dose  of  the  powdered  bark  of  the  root,  as  a  diuretic  and  purgative,
from  twenty  to  sixty  grains  ;  of  the  aqueous  or  spirituous  extract,  which
is  preferred,  from  ten  to  twenty  grains.


CHLOROFORMUM.
Terchloride  of  Formyle.

CHLOROFORM.

Preparation.  —  Mix  Chlorinated  Lime  ten  pounds ;  first  with  Water,
three  gallons  and  a  half,  and  then  with  Alcohol,  two  pints,  in  a  distillatory


336  Materia  Medica.

vessel  having  the  capacity  of  about  six  gallons.  Distil  with  a  brisk
heat  into  a  refrigerated  receiver,  and  when  the  temperature  approaches
to  176°,  withdraw  the  fire,  in  order  that  the  distillation  may  proceed  by
the  heat  derived  solely  from  the  reaction  of  the  materials.  When  the
distillation  slackens,  hasten  it  by  a  fresh  application  of  heat,  and  con-
tinue to  distil  until  the  liquid  ceases  to  come  over  with  a  sweet  taste.
Separate  the  heavier  layer  of  liquid  in  the  receiver  from  the  lighter  by
decantation,  and,  having  washed  it  first  with  water,  and  then  with  a
weak  solution  of  carbonate  of  soda,  agitate  it  thoroughly  with  powdered
chloride  of  calcium,  and  distil  it  off  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  stopping
the  distillation  when  eleven-twelfths  of  the  liquid  have  come  over.  The
residue,  together  with  the  light  liquid  of  the  first  distillation,  may  be
reserved  for  use  in  a  second  operation.

History. — Chloroform  was  discovered  in  1831  by  Mr.  Samuel  Guthrie,
of  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  and  also  by  Leibig  in  Germany,  and  Soube-
rain  in  France,  at  about  the  same  time.  Guthrie  obtained  it  by  distilling
a  gallon  from  a  mixture  of  three  pounds  of  chlorinated  lime,  and  two
gallons  of  alcohol,  sp.  gr.  0.844,  and  rectifying  the  product  by  redistil-
lation, first,  from  a  great  excess  of  chlorinated  lime,  and  afterward  from
carbonate  of  potassa.  He  thus  obtained  pure  chloroform,  sp.  gr.  1.486,
free  from  alcohol,  and  rendered  pure  by  washing  it  with  a  strong  solu-
tion of  carbonate  of  potassa.

Chloroform  is  a  limpid,  colorless,  volatile,  neuter  liquid,  having  a
bland  ethereal  odor,  and  a  hot,  aromatic,  sweetish  taste.  Litmus  paper
is  not  bleached  nor  reddened  by  it.  It  is  not  inflammable,  but  renders
the  flame  of  an  alcohol  lamp  yellow  and  fuliginous.  Its  density  is  from
1.48  to  1.5,  and  it  boils  at  142°.  It  dissolves  readily  in  ether  or  alco-
hol, but  is  scarcely  soluble  in  water  or  sulphuric  acid;  its  alcoholic
solution  when  moderately  diluted  with  water  forms  an  aromatic  saccha-
rine liquid  of  a  very  grateful  taste.  An  abundance  of  water  decomposes
a  strong  alcoholic  solution,  the  chloroform  separating  and  subsiding,  and
the  alcohol  uniting  with  the  water.  When  pure,  it  has  no  action  on
potassium,  sulphur,  or  phosphorus,  but  is  capable  of  dissolving  amber,
shell-lac,  copal,  caoutchouc,  gutta  percha,  iodine,  bromine,  resins,  wax,
fats,  volatile  oils,  the  organic  alkalies,  and  large  proportions  of  camphor ;
and  as  a  general  solvent,  its  non-inflammability  renders  it  superior  to
alcohol  or  ether.  It  is  composed  of  three  equivalents  of  chlorine,  and
one  of  formyle.

Chloroform  has  an  extensive  range  of  solvent  power,  and  will  prove
a  most  valuable  auxiliary  to  the  chemist  and  pharmaceutist.  According
to  M.  Lepage  the  following  is  the  solvent  power  of  chloroform  in  rela-
tion to  various  bodies :  Mastic,  colophony,  elemi,  tolu,  and  benzoin,  are
dissolved  in  all  proportions,  forming  solutions,  some  of  which  might
prove  useful  as  varnishes.  Copal  and  caoutchouc  also  dissolve,  but
more  readily  hot  than  cold. Amber,  sandarac,  and  shell-lac  are  only


Chlorofoemum.  337

partially  dissolved,  either  with  or  without  heat.  Their  constituent  resins
may  be  thus  separated.  Olibanum  dissolves  but  slightly,  hot  or  cold.
Guaiacum  and  scammony  resin  dissolve  readily,  while  jalap  resin  is
insoluble ;  it  merely  softens  and  floats  on  the  surface  like  pitch.  Gam-
boge and  dragon's-blood  yield  some  substance  and  their  fine  color  to  the
solvent,  and  might  be  advantageously  used  as  varnishes.  Fixed  oils
and  fats,  dissolve  readily,  in  all  proportions.  Wax  yields  25  per  cent.
of  soluble  matter  to  this  solvent.  All  volatile  oils  are  soluble.  Iodine,
bromine,  phosphorus,  and  sulphur  are  soluble,  the  two  last  only  slightly.
Styracin,  piperin,  naphthalin,  cholesterin,  and  cantharidin  are  very
soluble;  picrotoxin,  slightly  so;  paraffin  only  when  hot,  separating  as
the  liquid  cools;  while  amygdaline,  phloridzin,  salicin,  digitalin,  cytisin,
urea,  hematin,  gluten,  and  sugar  are  insoluble.  Benzoic  and  hippuric
acids  are  very  soluble,  tannic  but  slightly,  and  tartaric,  citric,  oxalic,

and  gallic  acids  are  insoluble. Quinia,  veratria,  emetia,  narcotina,  niec-
es , .

tina,  conia,  and  atropia  are  easily  soluble,  strychnia  with  less  readiness,
and  appears  to  undergo  a  change  in  its  morphic  condition;  brucia  is
moderately  soluble,  but  morphia  and  cinchonia  are  insoluble.  Tartar
emetic,  citrate  and  lactate  of  iron,  the  acetates  of  soda  and  potassa,
valerianate  of  zinc,  and  acetate  of  lead  are  all  insoluble.  Sulphate  and
muriate  of  strychnia  are  soluble,  while  sulphates  of  quinia,  and  of  mor-
phia, and  muriate  of  morphia,  are  insoluble.  Corrosive  sublimate  dis-
solves very  readily,  but  the  iodide,  bromide,  chloride,  and  ferrocyanuret
of  potassium,  the  chloride  of  sodium,  muriate  of  ammonia  and  the
iodides  of  mercury  and  potassium  are  all  insoluble.  The  iodates,  chlo-
rates, nitrates,  phosphates,  sulphates,  chromates,  borates,  arseniates,
and  alkaline  hyposulphates,  are  insoluble,  as  are  also  nitrate  of  silver,
sulphate  of  copper,  and  probably  all  the  metallic  oxysalts.  This  article
thus  affords  a  most  valuable  means  of  readily  separating  resin  of  guaia-
cum from  jalap  resin,  cinchonia  from  quinia,  and  narcotine  from
morphia.  One  per  cent  of  chloroform  added  to  milk,  preserved  it
unchanged  for  one  month,  so  that  it  was  boiled  without  coagulating.

When  chloroform  is  impure,  owing  to  the  presence  of  alcohol  or  ether,
its  specific  gravity  is  lower.  To  determine  its  purity,  it  has  been  recom-
mended to  let  fall  a  drop  of  the  suspected  chloroform  in  a  cool  mixture
of  equal  weights  of  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  and  water,  the  sp.  gr.
of  the  mixture  being  1.38;  good  chloroform  will  sink  in  it.  M.  Mialhe
recommends  for  detecting  the  presence  of  alcohol,  to  drop  a  small
quantity  of  the  chloroform  in  distilled  water;  it  remains  transparent  at
the  bottom  of  the  glass,  if  pure ;  but  the  smallest  proportion  of  alcohol
gives  a  milky  appearance  to  the  globules.  The  most  injurious  impuri-
ties are  the  chlorinated  pyrogenous  oils,  which  cause  distressing  sickness
and  headache,  when  inhaled,  or  even  smelt;  to  detect  these,  mix  the
chloroform  in  quantity,  say  several  ounces,  with  an  equal  volume  of
pure  and  strong  sulphuric  acid ;  if  pure,  the  mixture  is  not  colored,  but
22


338  Materia  Medica.

if  these  oils  be  present,  the  acid  is  colored  from  a  yellowish  to  a  reddish
brown,  according  to  the  amount  of  impurity  present.  Another  test,  is
to  pour  some  chloroform  on  the  hand,  when  pure,  it  quickly  evaporates,
and  leaves  scarcely  any  odor,  but  if  these  oils  are  present,  they  are
recognized  by  their  peculiar  offensive,  acrid,  and  penetrating  odor,  while
the  odor  of  the  chloroform  has  dissipated.

Properties  and  Uses. — Internally,  a  sedative  narcotic.  Has  been  used
successfully  in  asthma,  spasmodic  cough,  scarlatina,  atonic  quinsy,  hys-
teria, lead-colic,  cancer,  neuralgic  affections,  and  in  intermittents.  It
may  be  administered  in  doses  of  from  forty  to  eighty  drops,  suspended
in  water  by  means  of  gum  arabic  or  yelk  of  an  egg,  which  may  be
repeated,  if  necessary,  every  hour  or  two,  until  some  effect  is  produced
on  the  system.  When  the  pyrogenous  oils  are  present,  its  internal
administration  is  liable  to  produce  nausea.  The  solution  of  camphor  in
chloroform  is  an  elegant  form  of  administering  that  medicine.  Exter-
nally, it  has  been  used  as  a  local  application,  in  form  of  wash,  injection,
or  gargle,  in  cancer,  senile  gangrene,  sloughing  ulcers,  profuse  uterine
discharges,  and  foul  ulcers  of  the  throat;  it  lessens  pain,  corrects  fetor,
and  promotes  the  separation  of  diseased  parts.  It  may  be  used  for
these  purposes,  diluted  with  water,  in  the  proportion  of  one  or  two
drachms  of  the  chloroform  to  a  pint  of  water.  It  has  proved  successful
in  dysmenorrhea,  being  brought  into  contact  with  the  os  uteri  by  means
of  a  sponge ;  also  in  swelled  testicle  and  acute  spinal  tenderness,  neu-
ralgia, rheumatic  ophthalmia,  and  in  the  form  of  an  ointment  to  papu-
lous eruptions,  in  the  proportion  of  a  rluidrachm  of  chloroform  to  ten
drachms  of  lard.  When  applied  to  the  sound  skin,  it  is  generally  used
undiluted,  by  means  of  lint  or  soft  rags,  covered  with  oiled  silk  to  pre-
vent evaporation.  When  thus  used  it  should  always  be  pure,  as,  if  it
contains  absolute  alcohol,  it  acquires  caustic  properties.

Chloroform  is  also  used  by  inhalation  as  an  anaesthetic  agent,  and  is
considered  to  possess  some  advantages  over  ether,  from  the  smallness
of  the  dose,  its  more  prompt  action,  its  more  agreeable  effects,  its  less
tenacious  odor,  its  greater  cheapness,  and  the  readiness  with  which  it
may  be  exhibited.  As  an  anaesthetic  it  is  principally  used  in  surgery
and  midwifery,  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  pain,  and  facilitating  labor.
The  effects  usually  produced  by  the  inhalation  of  a  full  dose  of  chloro-
form, are :  the  rapid  production  of  coma,  relaxation  of  the  muscles,
slow  and  often  stertorous  breathing,  incoherent  talking  or  muttering,
upturning  of  the  eyes,  and  total  insensibility  to  pain,  from  whatever
cause.  This  insensibility  is  generally  produced  in  one  or  two  minutes,
and  continues  for  five  or  ten  minutes ;  but  it  may  be  kept  up  for  several
hours,  by  renewing  the  inhalation  from  time  to  time.  Sometimes  froth-
ing of  the  mouth  takes  place,  and  occasionally  twitches  of  the  face  and
limbs ;  at  other  times,  from  coughing  or  other  circumstances  it  may  be


Chloroformum.  339

a  long  time  before  its  effect  is  induced,  but  which  may  be  obviated  by-
holding  it,  at  first,  at  a  little  distance  from  the  nostrils,  that  it  may  be
mixed  with  atmospheric  air,  and  gradually  approach  it.  Its  immediate
effects  are  followed  by  a  drowsy  state,  sometimes  by  quiet  sleep,  and,
generally,  no  recollection  of  incidents  occurring  during  the  state  of  insen-
sibility is  retained.

Being  a  relaxing  agent  as  well  as  remedy  for  pain,  its  inhalation  has
been  successful  in  hiccough,  hysteria,  asthma,  nephritic  colic,  tetanus,
hydrophobia  and  neuralgia ;  it  has  also  been  employed  with  success  for
the  reduction  of  strangulated  hernia,  and  as  a  hypnotic  in  delirium  tre-
mens and  the  noisy  forms  of  chronic  insanity.

The  dose  for  inhalation  is  a  fluidrachm,  or  more,  which  should  be
repeated  in  three  or  four  minutes,  if  the  desired  effect  should  fail  to  be
produced.  The  best  inhaler  is  a  handkerchief,  closely  rolled  up,  and
held  in  the  hand,  having  a  concavity  which  is  to  be  imbued  with  the
chloroform,  and  then  held  to  the  mouth  and  nose.  The  moment  insen-
sibility is  produced,  the  inhalation  should  be  suspended,  and,  if  con-
sciousness return  too  soon,  it  should  be  cautiously  renewed.  Persons
affected  with  epilepsy  or  organic  disease  of  the  heart,  should  not  be
placed  under  its  anaesthetic  influence.  It  should  never  be  administered
after  a  full  meal,  as  it  may  cause  vomiting ;  and  an  impure  article  will
almost  always  produce  headache,  nausea  and  vomiting.

As  chloroform  may  and  has  produced  unfavorable  as  well  as  serious
effects,  the  operator  ought  always  to  be  provided  with  a  bottle  of  strong
aqua  ammonia,  and  whenever  these  unpleasant  symptoms  arise,  the
patient  should  be  made  to  inhale  it  from  another  handkerchief  imbued
with  it  in  the  same  manner  as  named  for  chloroform,  and  be  either
restored  to  sensibility  or  not,  as  the  case  may  require.  The  usual
remedies  when  the  effects  of  the  chloroform  inhalation  proceed  too  far,
are  the  horizontal  posture,  cold  air  fanned  upon  the  face,  cold  water  to
the  head  and  face,  frictions  and  heat  to  the  body  and  extremities,
and  ammonia  to  the  nostrils ;  and  if  these  fail,  artificial  respiration
must  be  resorted  to.  To  obviate  these  alarming  effects  it  has  been
proposed  to  employ  an  agent  composed  of  one-third  pure  chloroform
and  nearly  absolute  alcohol  two-thirds,  under  the  names  of  Tincture
of  Chloroform,  or  strong  Chloric  Ether.  This  is  considered  safer  than
chloroform,  and  more  agreeable  than  ether.  The  stimulating  properties
may  possibly  obviate  the  depressing  influence  of  the  chloroform ;  and
ether  has  sometimes  been  given  in  connection  with  chloroform,  with  a
view  to  the  same  effect.  A  chloroform  liniment  has  been  made  of  oil
of  almonds  two  fluidounces,  chloroform  two  and  a  half  fluidrachms;
mix  together  accurately.  Pieces  of  flannel  are  to  be  soaked  with  this
liniment,  and  applied  to  the  painful  part  in  cases  of  nervous  headache,
neuralgia,  rheumatic,  hepatic,  nephritic,  uterine,  or  intestinal  pains,
lead-colic,  etc. By  adding  double  the  quantity  of  oil,  it  may  be  used


340  Materia Medica.

for  vaginal  injections,  which  may  be  retained  by  a  plug  of  cotton,  in
cases  of  dysmenorrhea,  uterine  neuralgia,  or  other  painful  affections  of
the  uterus,  bladder,  or  rectum.

The  fumes  from  burning  the  common  Puff  Ball,  Lycoperdon  Proteus,
are  said  to  be  anaesthetic,  but  not  equal  to  ether  or  chloroform.  It  ap-
pears to  possess  a  volatile  narcotic  principle,  which  is  not  taken  up  by
alcohol,  water,  or  strong  alkaline  solution.


CHONDRUS  CRISPUS.
Irish  Moss.

Nat.  Orel. — Algaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogam!  a  Algas.

Description. — Irish  Moss,  or  Carrageen,  as  it  is  frequently  called,  has
a  root-disk  throwing  up  tufts  of  many  flat,  nerveless,  slender,  cartila-
ginous fronds,  from  two  to  twelve  inches  in  length,  subcylindrical  at
the  base,  but  immediately  becoming  flat,  generally  dilating  from  the
base  as  they  ascend,  until  they  become  three  or  four  lines  wide,  and
then  dividing  repeatedly  and  dichotomously,  each  division  spreading
and  becoming  narrower  than  the  preceding  one,  and  taking  place  at
shorter  and  shorter  intervals  :  the  summits  are  bifid,  the  segments
linear,  wedge-shaped,  varying  greatly  in  length,  rounded  or  acute,
straight  or  curved,  and  often  twisted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  the
curled  appearance  denoted  in  the  specific  name.  Fructification  round-
ish or  roundish-oval,  subhemispherical.  Capsules  imbedded  in  the
disk  of  the  frond,  prominent  on  one  side,  and  producing  a  concavity  on
the  other,  containing  a  mass  of  minute,  roundish,  red  seeds.  Substance
cartilaginous,  in  some  varieties  approaching  to  horny,  flexible  and
tough.  Color  a  deep  purple-brown,  often  tinged  with  purplish-red,  and
paler  at  the  summit,  becoming  greenish,  and  at  length  white  in  decay.

History. — This  plant  grows  upon  rocks  and  stones  on  the  coasts  of
Europe,  especially  on  the  southern  and  western  coasts  of  Ireland  ;  said
also  to  be  a  native  of  the  United  States.  When  collected,  it  is  washed
and  dried.  It  is  of  a  yellowish-white  color  when  dried,  translucent,  of
a  feeble  odor,  and  nearly  tasteless.  Boiling  water  dissolves  it,  forming
a  jelly  on  cooling.  Cold  water  does  not  dissolve  it,  but  swells  it  up.
It  contains  starch,  a  large  proportion  of  pectin  or  vegetable  jelly,  which
Pereira  proposes  to  call  Currageenin,  supposing  it  to  be  a  distinct  prox-
imate principle,  also  compounds  of  sulphur,  chlorine  and  bromine,  and
some  oxalate  of  lime,  etc.  Carrageenin  may  be  known  from  gum,  by
its  watery  solution  not  affording  a  precipitate  with  alcohol ;  from  starch,
by  not  becoming  blue  with  tincture  of  iodine  ;  and  from  pectin  by  giving
no  precipitate  with  acetate  of  lead,  and  no  mucic  acid  by  the  action  of
nitric  acid.


Chrysanthemum  Leucanthemum.  341

Properties  and  Uses. — Used  in  the  form  of  decoction,  with  water  or
milk,  as  a  nutriment,  and  as  a  demulcent  in  chronic  pectoral  affections,
dysentery,  diarrhea,  and  disorders  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder.  The
decoction  may  be  prepared  by  boiling  half  an  ounce  of  the  moss  in  a
pint  and  a  half  of  water,  down  to  half  a  pint.  Sugar  and  lemon-juice
may  be  added  to  improve  the  flavor.  It  may  be  boiled  in  milk,  when  a
more  nutritious  preparation  is  required.


CHRYSANTHEMUM  LEUCANTHEMUM.

Whiteweed.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteracese. Sex.  8yst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE LEAVES AND FLOWERS.

Description. — Chrysanthemum  Leucanthemum,  or  the  Leucanthemum
Vulgare  of  Lamark,  sometimes  known  as  Ox-eye  Daisy,  is  a  perennial
herb,  with  an  erect,  branching,  furrowed  stem,  growing  from  one  to  two
feet  high  ;  the  leaves  are  comparatively  few  and  small,  alternate,  am-
plexicaul,  lanceolate,  serrate,  cut-pinnatifid  at  base  ;  the  lower  ones
petiolate,  with  deep  and  irregular  teeth  ;  the  upper  ones  small  and  sub-
ulate, and  those  of  the  middle  sessile,  deeply  cut  at  base,  with  remote
teeth  above.  Heads  large,  terminal,  solitary.  Disk  yellow.  Rays
numerous  and  white.

History. — This  plant  was  introduced  into  this  country  from  Europe,
and  is  a  very  troublesome  weed  to  farmers,  in  nearly  every  section.
It  generally  grows  from  one  to  two  feet  high,  and  bears  white  flowers
in  June  and  July.  The  leaves  are  odorous  and  somewhat  acid ;  the
flowers  are  bitterish ;  they  impart  their  virtues  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic,  diuretic,  and  antispasmodic.  Large
doses  emetic.  Used  as  a  tonic  instead  of  chamomile  flowers,  and  has
been  found  serviceable  in  hooping-cough,  asthma,  and  nervous  excita-
bility. Very  beneficial  externally  and  internally  in  leucorrhea  ;  and  its
internal  use  has  been  highly  recommended  in  colliquative  perspiration.
Externally,  it  has  been  used  as  a  local  application  to  wounds,  ulcers,
scald-head,  and  some  other  cutaneous  diseases.  Dose  of  the  decoction,
from  two  to  four  ounces,  two  or  three  times  a  day.  Said  to  destroy,  or
drive  away  fleas.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Chrysanthemi.


342  Materia  Medica.

CICHORIUM  INTYBUS.

Succory.
Nat.  Ord. — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE  BOOT.

Description.  —  Succory,  Chicory,  or  Wild  Succory,  is  a  perennial
plant,  having  a  spindle-shaped,  fleshy,  whitish,  and  milky  root.  The
stem  is  solid,  round,  furrowed,  hispid,  very  tough,  growing  two  or  three
feet  high.  The  radical  leaves  are  spreading,  above  a  span  long,  numer-
ous, runcinate,  toothed,  roughish  ;  cauline  leaves,  smaller,  sessile,  less
lobed,  the  uppermost  cordate,  acuminate,  entire.  Flowers  large,  one  or
two  inches  in  diameter,  axillary,  in  pairs,  sessile,  placed  rather  remote
on  the  long  rather  naked  branches,  and  of  a  beautiful  bright-blue  color.
Corollas  flat,  five-toothed. Involucre  roughish.  Anthers  and  stigma  blue.

History. — Succory  is  a  native  of  Europe,  but  cultivated  in  this  coun-
try, where  it  grows  in  fields,  and  in  roads  along  the  fences,  in  neighbor-
hoods which  have  been  long  settled ;  it  bears  large,  compound,
beautiful  blue  flowers,  which  appear  in  July  and  August.  The  root
has  a  bitter  taste,  without  any  peculiar  flavor,  and  imparts  its  virtues  to
water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  diuretic,  and  laxative.  The  decoction,
used  freely,  is  said  to  have  proved  serviceable  in  hepatic  congestion,
jaundice,  and  other  visceral  obstructions  in  the  early  stages  ;  also  in
hemorrhage,  gout,  cutaneous  eruptions,  and  even  hectic  fever  and  other
febrile  diseases.

The  usual  form  of  administration  is  in  decoction,  an  ounce  or  two  of
the  root  in  a  pint  of  water.  When  young  and  tender,  the  leaves  are
sometimes  eaten  as  salad  ;  the  root,  when  dried  and  roasted  is  much
used  as  a  substitute  for  coffee  among  the  French,  which  it  resembles  in
taste  but  without  the  aroma.

The  Cichorium  Endivia,  or  Garden  Endive,  is  said,  by  some  French
physicians,  to  be  a  remedy  for  jaundice.


CIMICIFUGA  RACEMOSA. (Macrotys  Racemosa.)
Black  Cohosh.
Nat.  Ord. — Ranunculacese. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Di-Pentagynia.


THE  ROOT.


Description.  —  This  plant, likewise variously  known as Rattleroot,
Black  Snakeroot, Squawroot,  etc.,  is  a  tall stately plant, having a


Cimicifuga  Racemosa.  34.3

large  blackish,  perennial  root,  with  numerous  long  fibers,  and  a  simple,
herbaceous,  smooth,  furrowed  stem,  from  four  to  eight  feet  high.  The
leaves  are  few,  alternate,  one  nearly  radical,  large,  decompound,  and
tripinnate  ;  upper  one,  bipinnate.  The  leaflets  are  ovate,  oblong,  ses-
sile, opposite,  three  to  seven,  incised  and  toothed.  The  flowers  are
fetid,  small,  white,  in  a  long  terminal  raceme,  with  oftentimes  one  or
more  shorter  ones  at  base ;  this  raceme  is  at  first  bent,  but  gradually
becomes  erect ;  the  flowers  are  supported  on  short  pedicels ,  with  a
small  subulate  bract.  Calyx  white,  with  four  rounded  sepals.  Petals
small  and  shorter  than  the  sepals,  and  cleft  at  their  apex.  Stamens  very
numerous,  with  yellow  anthers.  Pistil  consists  of  an  oval  germ,  with  a
lateral,  sessile  stigma.  The  fruit  or  capsule  is  ovoid,  dry,  with  one  cell,
containing  numerous  flat,  smooth  seeds,  which  are  packed  horizontally
in  two  rows.

History. — Black  Cohosh  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,  growing  in
shady  and  rocky  woods,  rich  grounds,  and  on  the  sides  of  hills,  from
Maine  to  Florida,  flowering  in  June  and  July.  The  root  is  the  part  gen-
erally employed  in  medicine,  though  probably  the  seeds  will  be  found
as  active ;  the  root  should  be  gathered  early  in  the  autumn  and  dried  in
the  shade.  It  consists  of  a  thick,  irregularly-bent  or  contorted  body  or
caudex,  from  one-third  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  diameter,  often  several
inches  in  length,  furnished  with  many  slender  radicles,  and  rendered
extremely  rough  and  jagged  in  appearance  by  the  remains  of  the  stems
of  successive  years,  which,  to  the  length  of  an  inch  or  more,  are  fre-
quently attached  to  the  root.  The  color  is  externally,  dark-brown,
almost  black  ;  internally,  a  yellowish-white  ;  the  odor  is  feeble  and  dis-
agreeable, and  the  taste  bitter,  and  somewhat  astringent,  leaving  a
slight  sense  of  acrimony.  The  root  partially  yields  its  virtues  to  boiling
water,  but  wholly  to  alcohol  or  -ether.

The  root  contains  a  resin,  to  which  the  name,  Macrotin  or  Cimicifugin,
has  been  applied,  likewise  gum,  starch,  sugar,  wax,  fatty  matter,  tannic
and  gallic  acids,  a  black  coloring  matter,  a  green  coloring  matter,
lignin,  and  salts  of  potassa,  lime,  magnesia,  and  iron.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  active,  powerful,  and  useful
remedy,  and  appears  to  fulfil  a  great  number  of  indications.  It  pos-
sesses an  undoubted  influence  over  the  nervous  system,  and  has  been
successfully  used  in  chorea,  periodical  convulsions,  epilepsy,  nervous
excitability,  asthma,  pertussis,  delirium  tremens,  and  many  spasmodic
affections.  In  -chorea,  it  has  been  administered  in  teaspoonful  doses  of
the  powdered  root,  to  be  repeated  three  times  a  day;  I,  however,  prefer
the  hydro-alcoholic  extract,  which  I  have  used  successfully,  both  alone,
and  in  conjunction  with  the  extract  of  scullcap.  In  phthisis  pulmonalis,
cough,  acute  rheumatism,  neuralgia,  scrofula,  phlegmasia  dolens,  amen-
orrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  leucorrhea, and  other uterine affections, the


344  Materia  Medica.

saturated  tincture  is  the  best  mode  of  exhibition,  and  which  exerts  a
therapeutic  influence  not  to  be  obtained  from  the  cimicifugin.  Its  tonic
and  antiperiodic  virtues  are  well  marked  in  remittent  and  intermittent
fevers,  and  I  have  found  it  very  useful  in  other  febrile  and  exanthemat-
ous  diseases,  especially  among  children,  where  there  exists  a  strong  ten-
dency to  cerebral  difficulty.  It  uniformly  lessens  the  force  and  frequency
of  the  pulse,  soothes  pain,  allays  irritability,  and  lessens  the  disposition
to  cerelral  irritation  and  congestion.  In  febrile  diseases  especially,  it
frequently  produces  diaphoresis  and  diuresis.  In  doses  of  one  drachm
of  the  tincture,  repeated  every  hour,  it  has  effected  thorough  cures  of
ophthalmitis  conjunctiva,  without  the  aid  of  any  local  application.  As
a  partus  accelerator,  it  may  be  substituted  for  ergot ;  half  a  drachm  of
the  powdered  root,  may  be  given  in  warm  water,  every  fifteen  or  twenty
minutes,  until  the  expulsive  action  of  the  uterus  is  induced,  and  which
it  seldom  fails  to  bring  on  speedily  and  powerfully  ;  or  half  a  drachm  of
a  saturated  tincture  of  the  root  may  be  given  in  the  same  manner.
After  labor,  it  will  be  found  effectual  in  allaying  the  general  excitement
of  the  nervous  system,  and  relieving  after-pains.  In  large  doses  it  pro-
duces vertigo,  impaired  vision,  nausea,  vomiting,  and  a  reduction  of  the
circulation,  but  no  alarming  narcotic  effects.  I  have  known  three  drops
of  the  saturated  tincture  given  every  hour,  for  twenty  hours,  to  produce
symptoms  in  every  way  simulating  those  of  delirium  tremens.  Green
tea  is  said  to  counteract  its  narcotic  influences.

Dr.  C.  H.  Cleveland,  of  Waterbury,  Vt.,  recommends  the  saturated
tincture  of  the  root,  as  a  valuble  embrocation  in  all  cases  where  a  stimu-
lant, tonic,  anodyne,  and  alterative  combined,  is  required,  as — in  all
cases  of  inflammation  of  the  nerves, — tic-douloreux,  periodic  cephalic
pain,  inflammation  of  the  spine,  ovarian  inflammation,  spasm  of  the
broad  ligaments,  rheumatism,  crick  in  the  back  or  side,  inflammation  of
the  eyes,  old-  ulcers,  etc.  If  a  more  active  preparation  is  desired,  he
adds  tincture  of  grains  of  paradise  in  proper  quantity  ;  and  if  a  more
powerful  anodyne  would  be  useful,  he  adds  a  solution  of  sulphate  of
morphia.

Cimicifuga  exerts  a  tonic  influence  over  both  the  serous  and  mucous
tissues  of  the  system,  and  will  be  found  a  superior  remedy  in  the  major-
ity of  chronic  diseases.  In  all  cases  where  acidity  of  stomach  is  present,
this  must  first  be  removed,  or  some  mild  alkaline  preparation  be  admin-
istered in  conjuction  with  the  remedy,  before  any  beneficial  change  will
ensue.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  a  scruple  to  a  drachm,  three  times  a
day  ;  of  the  saturated  tincture,  from  five  to  sixty  drops  ;  of  the  decoction,
from  two  to  four  ounces.  The  saturated  tincture  of  this  artiele  was
recommended  by  me  in  acute  rheumatism,  in  the  New  York  Philosophi-
cal Journal,  as  early  as  in  the  year  1844;  to  be  given  in  doses  of
ten  drops  every  two  hours,  gradually  increasing  to  sixty  drops,  or
until  its  action  on  the  brain  is  observed,  which  action  must  he  kept  up


ClMICIFUGIN.  345

for  several  days ;  it  almost  always  removes the  disease  permanently,
especially  if  it  is  a  first  attack.

Off.  Prep. — Cimicifugin;  Decoctum  Cimicifugae;  Enema  Cimicifugae
Composita ;  Extractum  Cimicifugae  Hydro- Alcoholicum  ;  Extractum
Cimicifugae  Fluidum ;  Tinclura  Colchici  Composita ;  Tinctura  Cimici-
fugae; Tinctura  Cimicifugae  Composita.


CIMICIFUGIN. (Macrotin.)

THE  RESINOID  PRINCIPLE  OF THE  ROOT  OF  CIMICIFUGA  RACEMOSA.

Preparation. — Cimicifugin  is  prepared  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  for
obtaining  Podophyllin,  or  Leptandrin.  The  saturated  tincture  of  the
root,  is  diluted  with  its  bulk  of  water,  the  alcohol  is  distilled  off,  and
the  resinoid  precipitates  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  Or  it  may  be  pre-
cipitated by  alum,  acids,  etc.,  but  is  not  so  active  when  thus  prepared.

History.  —  It  is  a  dark-brown  substance,  sometimes  yellow,  being
lighter-colored  after  pulverization,  of  a  faint,  narcotic  odor,  and  a  slightly
bitter,  feebly  nauseous  taste,  soluble  in  alcohol.  This  valuable  and  useful
remedy  I  have  used  successfully  in  medicine  since  1835,  and  had  the
honor  of  calling  the  attention  of  practitioners  to  it  in  1844,  and  again  in
the  Western  Medical  Reformer,  of  1846;  but  it  was  not  received  into
general  use  among  practitioners  until  its  preparation  on  a  large  scale  by
our  indefatigable  pharmaceutist,  W.  S.  Merrell,  and  it  is  now  ranked
among  the  standard  and  most  important  Eclectic  agents.  As  I  have
dropped  the  name  of  Macrotys  in  this  work,  and  adopted  the  one  more
universally  used,  I  have  also  taken  the  liberty  of  substituting  the  name
Cimicifugin  for  that  of  Macrotin,  considering  it  more  correct,  and  fully
as  euphonious.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  alterative,  nervine,  antiperiodic,  with  an
especial  affinity  for  the  uterus.  It  does  not  possess  the  narcotic  proper-
ties of  the  root;  which,  however,  is  preserved  in  the  hydro-alcoholic
extract,  or  the  ethereal  extract.  Used  in  intermittent  fever,  periodic
diseases,  leucorrhea,  menorrhagia,  dysmenorrhea,  amenorrhea,  sterility,
rheumatism,  scrofula,  and  prolapsus  uteri  not  accompanied  with  an
inflammatory  condition  of  that  organ  or  its  ligaments.  It  has  also  been
used  with  success  in  gleet,  gonorrhea,  dyspepsia,  etc.,  and  the  tincture
has  been  found  an  excellent  application  in  chronic  ophthalmia.

Cimicifugin  may  be  advantageously  combined  with  any  of  the  uterine
tonics  and  alteratives,  as  aletrin,  caulophyllin,  senecin,  asclepidin,  etc.
in  diseases  of  the  uterus ;  it  forms  a  useful  combination,  with  dioscorein,
for  flatulency  and  to  remove  the  tendency  to  bilious  colic  ;  and  made


346  Materia Medica.

into  a  pill  with  equal  parts  of  dioscorein  and  aqueous  extract  of  Cramp
bark,  it  is  highly  beneficial  in  flatulency,  bilious  colic,  cramps  of  pregnant
women,  painful  dysmenorrhea,  spasmodic  affections,  borborygmi,  and  in
cholera  morbus  to  remove  the  cramps.  As  a  parturient,  it  is  inferior  to
the  caulophyllin.  Dose,  from  one  to  six  grains  three  times  a  day.— In
the  following,  Cimkifuga  and  Cimicifugin,  have  been  substituted  for
Macrotys  and  Macrotin.

The  late  Prof.  T.  V.  Morrow  says  of  this  article  :

For  several  months  past  I  have  used  the  cimicifugin  very  extensively,
in  the  treatment  of  a  numerous  class  of  female  diseases,  for  the  success-
ful treatment  of  which  I  had  for  many  years  previous  been  in  the  habit
of  depending  mainly  on  the  Cimicifuga  Racemosa,  either  in  the  form  of
infusion,  decoction,  or  tincture.  My  confidence  in  the  value  of  the
Cimicifuga  Racemosa,  I  am  free  to  confess,  has  been  such  as  to  induce
me  to  use  perhaps  a  larger  quantity  of  this  medicine,  for  the  last  sixteen
years,  than  any  practitioner  in  the  United  States,  giving  it  a  more  extend-
ed range  of  application  in  the  treatment  of  disease,  and  relying  with
more  confidence  on  its  ultimate  efficiency,  than  any  of  my  medical
friends.  My  experience  in  the  use  of  this  article,  during  the  period
named,  has  been  mostly  confined  to  cases  of  leucorrhea,  menorrhagia,
prolapsus  uteri,  threatened  miscarriage,  dysmenorrhea,  and  barrenness,
or  sterility,  in  all  of  which  cases  I  have  obtained  the  most  satisfactory
results  from  the  Cimicifuga ;  but  deeming  the  Cimicifugin  a  more  con-
venient form  of  the  medicine  for  practical  use,  and  believing  it  to  contain
the  virtues  of  the  article  from  which  it  is  obtained,  I  have  accordingly
used  it  in  similar  cases,  with  results  thus  far  which  justify  the  conclusion
that  it  will  be  found  a  satisfactory  substitute.

My  experience  in  the  use  of  the  Cimicifugin  has  demonstrated  to  my
mind  that  there  is  a  slight  difference  in  the  modus  operandi  of  this  form
of  the  medicine,  when  compared  with  the  usual  forms  in  which  the
Cimicifuga  Racemosa  has  been  used.  That  difference  principally  con-
sists in  the  increased  liability  of  the  latter  to  produce  a  heavy,  dull,  and
aching  sensation  in  the  forehead,  in  connection  with  a  feeling  of  dizzi-
ness, while  the  former  appears  to  manifest  a  greater  tendency  to  produce
aching,  and  somewhat  painful  sensations  in  the  joints  and  limbs  gener-
ally. I  have  usually  given  the  Cimicifugin  in  the  form  of  pills,  pre-
pared by  adding  a  small  quantity  of  pulverized  Castile  soap,  enough  to
make  the  mass  properly  adhesive,  and  forming  it  into  pills  of  the  ordi-
nary size,  and  giving  one  every  three  hours  during  the  day,  in  all  the
various  cases  above  mentioned,  whenever  they  have  come  under  my
care,  since  I  commenced  its  use.  In  nearly  all  these  cases,  it  has
proved  singularly  beneficial,  thus  affording  the  gratifying  evidence  that
it  will  soon  become  one  of  the  most  popular  and  valuable  articles  of  the
Materia  Medica.


Cinchona.  347

Another  Professor,  in  speaking  of  Cimicifugin,  remarks :

"  This  medicine  is,  in  its  effects,  essentially  the  same  as  the  Cimicifuga.
It  is  particularly  useful  in  chronic  rheumatic  affections,  and  in  female
diseases.  In  leucorrhea  and  dysmenorrhea,  as  well  as  menorrhagia,  it
is  invaluable.  It  should  be  used,  in  order  to  get  its  best  effects,  to  the
extent  of  producing  its  specific  constitutional  symptoms,  i.  e.  a  peculiar
dizziness,  fullness  and  dull  aching  of  the  head,  and  more  or  less  aching
in  the  joints.  This  effect  should  be  produced  every  day  (slightly)  during
the  treatment,  until  the  disease  is  removed.  By  this  treatment,  and  the
use  of  hip-baths,  leucorrhea  will  often  be  cured  in  a  week  or  ten  days,
without  any  other  remedy."

The  analogous  diseases,  gleets  and  gonorrheas,  are.  greatly  benefited,
if  not  speedily  cured  by  it,  either  alone  or  in  combination  with  other
appropriate  remedies.

The  Cimicifugin  is  also  a  most  valuable  medicine,  especially  as  an
adjunct  of  other  remedies,  in  all  pulmonary,  rheumatic  and  dyspeptic
affections,  where  there  is  a  want  of  tone  in  the  nervous  system.

"It  is  also  a  very  useful  agent  in  the  treatment  of  small-pox,  in  which
it  should  be  given  during  the  whole  course  of  the  disease.  It  seems  to
divest  it  of  its  malignant  character.  I  have  never  lost  a  case  of  small-
pox where  this  medicine  was  used  thoroughly  from  the  beginning  ;  and
during  the  winter  of  1849  and  1850,  I  treated  from  fifty  to  one  hundred
cases,  some  of  which  were  of  the  most  severe  confluent  kind.  The  dose
is  from  one-fourth  to  one  grain,  to  be  given  once  in  three  or  four  hours
until  the  proper  symptoms  of  the  medicine  appear."

Off.  Prep. — Pilulse  Leonurx  Compositee;  Pilulae  Polygoni  Compositae.


CINCHONA.

Peruvian  Bark.

Nat. Orel. — Cinchonaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description. —  Cinchona  Calisaya  according  to  Weddell,  is  a  lofty  tree,
with  a  trunk  two  or  more  feet  in  diameter,  and  a  summit  usually  rising
above  the  other  trees  of  the  forest.  The  leaves  are  oblong,  or  lanceolate-
obovate,  petiolate,  obtuse,  acute  or  slightly  attenuated  at  the  base,  soft-
ish,  from  three  to  six  inches  long,  and  one  or  two  in  breadth,  above
smooth,  of  a  velvety  aspect  and  obscurely  green,  beneath  smooth,  and
of  a  pale  emerald  hue,  with  scrobiculi  at  the  axils  of  the  veins,  but
scarcely  visible  on  the  upper  surface.  The  stipules  are  about  as  long  as
the  petioles,  or  somewhat  longer,  oblong,  very  obtuse,  and  very  smooth.
The  flowers  are  in  ovate  or  subcorymbose  panicles. The  calyx  is  pubes-


34:8  Materia Medica.

cent,  with  a  cup-shaped  limb,  and  short  triangular  teeth  ;  the  corolla  is
rose-colored,  with  a  cylindrical  tube  about  one-third  of  an  inch  long,  and
a  laciniate  limb  fringed  at  the  edges  ;  the  stamina  are  concealed  in  the
tube,  and  have  anthers  more  than  twice  as  long  as  the  filaments.  The
fruit  is  an  ovate  capsule  scarcely  as  long  as  the  flower,  inclosing  ellip-
tical lanceolate  seeds,  the  margin  of  which  is  irregularly  toothed,  so  as
to  have  a  fimbriated  appearance.  This  tree  grows  in  forests  upon  the
Andes  several  thousand  feet  above  the  ocean,  also  in  the  hottest  valleys
of  Bolivia,  and  in  the  south  of  Peru.  From  it  the  Calisaya  or  Yellow
Bark  is  obtained,  but,  as  stated  by  Weddell,  who  met  with  considerable
difficulty  before  he  could  obtain  a  sight  of  the  tree  in  its  full  vigor,  it  is
rapidly  disappearing,  on  account  of  the  careless  manner  in  which  the
bark-collectors  attend  to  it.  The  discovery  of  this  species  has  settled
the  inquiry  concerning  the  true  source  of  the  Calisaya  bark.

The  Cinchona  Boliviano,  discovered  and  named  by  Weddell,  inhabits
Peru  and  Bolivia,  but  is  found  further  to  the  north  than  the  C.  Calisaya;
and  in  the  northern  parts  of  Bolivia  the  two  species  frequently  grow
together.  The  bark  of  the  C.  Boliviana  is  frequently  mixed  with  the
Calisaya,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  distinguish  them ;  this,  however,  is  unim-
portant, as  the  two  barks  do  not  essentially  differ  in  their  properties.

Cinchona  Condaminea  is  a  tree  attaining  the  hight  of  eighteen  feet,
with  a  stem  a  foot  in  diameter.  The  branches  are  opposite,  the  lower
horizontal,  the  upper  rising  at  their  extremities  ;  the  bark  of  the  trunk
is  ash-gray,  with  clefts  or  fissures,  and  yields  when  wounded  a  bitter
astringent  juice  ;  that  of  the  small  branches  is  greenish,  smooth,  glossy  and
easily  separable  from  the  wood.  The  leaves  are  quite  smooth  at  all
periods  of  growth,  usually  ovate-lanceolate,  sometimes  narrower  and  only
lanceolate,  occasionally  ovate  ;  about  four  inches  long  and  less  than  two
broad,  rather  thin,  not  shining  on  the  upper  surface,  or  but  little  so  in  some
specimens  ;  mostly  with  a  pit  or  scrobicula  at  the  axils  of  the  veins
beneath,  when  full-grown ;  this  scrobicula  is  either  naked  or  ciliated,
but  the  young  leaves  are  indistinctly  or  not  at  all  scrobiculate.  Petioles
smooth,  about  one-fourth  the  length  of  the  leaves  ;  stipules  oblong,
obtuse,  membranous,  smooth.  The  flowers  are  in  corymbose  panicles,
pedunculated,  and  forming  a  loose,  large,  very  downy  thyrsus  in  the
axils  of  the  upper  leaves.  Tube  of  the  calyx  tomentose,  limb  shortly
urceolate,  five-toothed,  pubescent,  not  shining ;  the  teeth  acute,  round-
ish, triangular.  Tube  of  the  corolla  slender,  about  four  times  as  long  as
that  of  the  calyx,  tomentose;  limb  very  shaggy  within.  This  tree
inhabits  the  mountains  near  Loxa,  and  several  other  places  in  Peru,
always  in  micaceous  schist,  and  occupies  a  zone  of  1800  feet,  growing  at
elevations  between  5700  and  7500  feet.  It  furnishes  the  Crown,  or
Loxa  bark.

Cinchona  Micrantha  is  a  large  tree  attaining  the  hight  of  forty  feet,
with  quadrangular  branches,  smooth,  except  among  the  inflorescence.


Cinchona.  349

The  leaves  are  from  four  to  twelve  inches  long,  and  from  two  to  six
broad,  oblong,  obtuse,  or  hardly  acute,  rather  membranous,  very  large,
quite  smooth  on  both  sides,  shining  on  the  upper  surface,  and  distinctly
pitted  at  the  axils  of  veins  beneath,  and  either  smooth  or  hairy  there  ;
those  near  the  base  of  the  inflorescence,  shorter  and  blunter.  The  flowers
are  smaller  than  those  of  any  other  species,  except  C.  Lancifolia,  and
are  in  terminal,  loose,  leafless  panicles.  Calyx  tomentose,  with  a  short
five-toothed  limb,  scarcely  changed  in  the  fruit.  Corolla  tomentose,
woolly  inside  the  limb.  This  tree  grows  on  the  high,  cool,  and  wooded
mountains  of  Peru,  and  furnishes  the  pale  bark,  or  the  gray  or  silver
bark  of  British  commerce,  frequently  called  Huanuco  bark.

Cinchona  Lancifolia  has  quadrangular  branches,  except  when  very
young,  when  they  are  covered  with  short  spreading  hairs.  Leaves
oblong-lanceolate,  very  acute  at  both  ends,  revolute  at  the  edge  ;  some-
what coriaceous,  not  shining,  smooth  above,  thinly  beset  with  hairs  on
the  veins  beneath,  not  scrobiculate.  Peduncles  axillary,  hairy,  trifid,
shorter  than  the  leaves,  and  not  forming  a  panicle  or  thyrsus ;  the  divi-
sions cymose  and  about  five-flowered.  Tube  of  calyx  tomentose  ;  limb
smooth,  campanulate,  three  to  five-toothed,  teeth  revolute  at  the  apex.
Corolla  hairy,  the  smallest  in  the  genus,  with  a  tube  about  three  times
as  long  as  the  cup  of  the  calyx  ;  the  limb  on  each  side  smooth,  sur-
mounted by  an  enlarged  calyx.  This  tree  is  a  native  of  New  Grenada,
and  the  bark  which  it  affords  was  supposed  by  Lindley  to  be  the  best  pale
bark;  but  according  to  Pereira  it  is  the  spongy  Carthagena  bark  of  Gui-
bort,  a  new  spurious  yellow  bark.  Mutis,  the  discoverer  of  this  species,
termed  it  Orange  bark.

Cinchona  Cobdifolia  is  a  spreading  tree,  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  high,
with  a  single,  erect,  round  stem,  covered  with  a  smooth  bark,  of  a
brownish-gray  color.  Its  branches  are  smooth  and  quadrangular.
Leaves  roundish,  obtuse  at  both  ends,  especially  at  base,  or  roundish-
oblong  and  tapering  to  the  base,  strongly-veined,  thin,  smooth  above,
downy  beneath,  and  hairy  at  the  veins  and  axils  when  young,  becoming
nearly  smooth  when  old ;  never  pitted.  Panicle  contracted,  thyrsoid,
leafy  at  base,  or  formed  of  corymbose  peduncles,  axillary  to  the  upper
leaves,  with  the  ramifications  tomentose.  Calyx  tomentose,  with  a  large,
smooth,  campanulate,  five-toothed  cup,  the  lobes  of  which  become
quadrate  and  cuspidate ;  the  tube  subglobose  when  it  first  begins  to
enlarge  after  the  fall  of  the  corolla,  afterward  becoming  longer.  Corolla
tomentose,  with  a  thick  tube  whose  diameter  is  equal  to  the  length  of
the  shaggy  lobes.  This  tree  inhabits  the  mountains  about  Santa  Fe  de
Bogota  in  New  Grenada,  at  an  elevation  of  from  5000  to  9500  feet.  It
was  at  one  time  supposed  to  afford  the  officinal  yellow  bark.  The  Quina
Amarilla,  or  Yellow  bark  of  Santa  Fe  is  supposed  to  be  derived  from
this  tree,  and  which  has  been  ascertained  by  Bergen  and  Guibort,  to  be
identical  with  Hard  Carthagena  Bark.


350  Materia  Medica.

oblong  leaves,  sometimes  narrowed  toward  the  base,  obtuse,  often  a  foot
long,  coriaceous,  strongly-ribbed,  shining  on  both  sides,  perfectly  free
from  hairiness,  except  when  very  young,  unless  on  the  principal  veins,
and  at  their  axils.  Flowers  in  a  large  terminal,  leafless  thyrsus,  with
erect  branches,  merely  downy,  not  woolly.  Calyx-tube  clothed  with  a
very  short,  dense  tomentum  ;  limb  pubescent,  smooth  at  the  edges,  with
oval,  obtuse,  imbricating  teeth.  Corolla  externally  tomentose,  with  a
tube  hardly  four  times  as  long  as  that  of  the  calyx  ;  limb  quite  smooth
inside,  except  at  the  edges,  which  are  tomentose.  Fruit  smooth,  nar-
rower at  the  base  than  at  the  apex,  slightly  ribbed.  This  tree  is  found
in  abundance  on  the  mountains  Panatahuas,  in  low  land  near  torrents,  in
situations  fully  exposed  to  the  sun,  but  badly  ventilated.  It  was  formerly
supposed  to  be  the  source  of  the  officinal  red  bark,  which,  however,  is
incorrect.  The  bark  afforded  by  the  tree  is  red,  but  it  is  the  red  Car-
thagena  bark,  a  worthless  variety,  and  identical  with  the  Quina  Nova  or
New  bark  of  European  commerce.  Weddell  has  transferred  this  tree  to
his  new  genus  Cascarilla,  which  differs  from  the  true  Cinchona  or  Peru-
vian bark  trees,  in  not  yielding  any  cinchonia  or  quinia.

the  Pharmacopeias  of  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain  ;  the  others
have  contributed  more  or  less  to  furnish  the  bark  of  commerce,  but  are
not  viewed  as  officinal.  There  are  many  other  species  which  yield  barks
possessing  febrifuge  properties,  and  which  we  will  merely  name,  as : —
the  C.  Nitida,  found  in  cold  situations,  in  lofty  mountains  of  the  Andes,
and  furnishing  a  bark,  which,  though  unknown  as  a  distinct  variety  in
commerce,  is  yet  very  highly  esteemed  in  Huanuco,  Huamalies,  etc.,
bringing  a  veiy  high  price. — The  C.  Lucumaefolia,  growing  near  Loxa
in  Peru,  and  probably  contributing  to  the  Loxa  barks. —  C.  Lanceolata,
inhabiting  cold  elevated  situations  in  the  Andes  ;  its  bark  is  yellow,  and
resembles  the  calisaya  in  its  flavor. —  C.  Ovalifolia,  a  shrub  from  seven
to  ten  feet  high,  and  growing  in  the  province  of  Cuenca  ;  its  bark  is  of
an  inferior  quality,  and  according  to  Pereira,  it  is  the  White  cinchona  of
Mutis. —  C.  Ovata,  growing  in  close,  badly  ventilated  woods,  in  the
hottest  parts  at  the  foot  of  the  Andes,  about  ten  leagues  from  Huanuco.
The  bark  from  this  tree  varies  in  character  according  to  its  situation,
the  finer  kinds  passing  for  Calisaya  bark,  and  in  some  sections  it  is
employed  to  adulterate  the  true  Calisaya.  Weddell  states  that  this
species  is  widely  diffused  in  Peru  and  Bolivia.  Ruiz  calls  its  bark  Cos-
carillo  Pallido  or  Pale  bark,  and  states  that  an  extract  is  prepared  from
it  at  Panao. —  C.  Pubescens  inhabits  the  lower  parts  of  the  Andes  in  the
provinces  of  Loxa,  Jaen,  Panatahuas,  etc.,  and  is  likewise  found  in  New
Grenada.  It  is  a  large  tree  with  purple  flowers,  and  leaves  violet-tinted.
It  yields  an  inferior  bark,  which,  it  is  said,  is  employed  to  adulterate  the
better  kinds. Reichel  considers  it  the  Huamalies  bark  of  commerce,  and


Cinchona.


351


Weddell  states  it  to  be  the  Cusco  bark  of  French  commerce.  —  C.  Hirsuta,
occurring  in  high  and  cold  situations  on  the  Andes,  yields  a  good  bark,
formerly  called  Quina  Delgadilla  or  Delgada,  but  which  is  seldom  collected
at  present. —  C.  Glandulifera,  a  shrub  of  about  twelve  feet,  with  very
fragrant  blossoms,  and  found  on  the  high  mountains  N.  W.  of  Huanuco.
It  yields  an  excellent  bark,  not  met  with  in  commerce,  called  by  the
inhabitants  Cascarillo  Negrillo  from  its  blackish  epidermis. —  C.  Acutifolia,
growing  in  the  Peruvian  Andes,  and  yielding  a  worthless  bark,  called
according  to  Ruiz  and  Pavon,  Cascarilla  de  hoja  aguda  ;  Weddell  has
placed  this  species  in  his  new  genus  Cascarilla.  C.  Macrocarpa,  a  shrub
about  eight  feet  high,  found  in  the  provinces  of  Loxa  and  Cuenca,  and
in  New  Grenada.  Its  bark  is  called  Quina  Blanca,  or  White  Bark,  and  is
not  much  esteemed  ;  Weddell  has  transferred  it  to  his  Cascarilla. —  C.
Villosa,  growing  at  Jaen  of  Loxa. —  C.  Rotundi folia,  of  Loxa. —  C.  Ob-
longifolia,  of  St.  Jaen  de  Loxa,  of  which  three  nothing  is  known  respect-
ing their  barks. —  C.  Cadiiciflora,  growing  near  the  town  of  Jaen  de
Bracomoris ;  the  trunk  yields  considerable  resin,  and  the  bark  is  called
Cascarilla  bora.  C  Scrobiculata,  growing  in  the  Peruvian  provinces  of
Jaen,  Cuzco,  and  Carabaya  ;  the  bark  of  the  young  branches  has  been
placed  with  the  pale  or  gray  barks  in  quality  ;  that  of  the  larger  branches
and  stem  probably  among  the  red. —  C  Stenocarpa,  occurring  in  the
mountains  of  Loxa,  placed  among  the  Cascarillas  by  Weddell. —  C.  Cava,
found  in  Quito,  and  placed  by  Weddell  in  the  genus  Cascarilla.  To
these  may  be  added,  C.  Amygdalifolia,  C.  Purpurascens,  C.  Australia,
C.  Chomeliana,  C.  Asperifolia,  C.  Carabayensis,  all  of  which  were  dis-
C.  Dichotoma,  C.  Macrocalyx,  C.  Crassifolia,  C.  Pelaba,  and  C.  Muzo-
nensis.

History. — Peruvian  Bark  was  introduced  into  Europe  in  1640,  but  the
first  account  of  the  plant  was  given  by  Dr.  Arrott  in  1737.  About  the
same  time  La  Condamine,  and  in  1740  the  elder  Jussieu  obtained  speci-
mens from  near  Loxa.  In  1772,  Mutis,  a  Spanish  botanist,  having
official  charge  of  the  Cinchona  forests,  became  a  leading  authority
among  Botanists,  but,  unfortunately,  he  committed  many  errors,  and
misled  them,  causing  much  difficulty  in  determining  the  correct  botanical
history  of  the  trees  which  yielded  the  Peruvian  bark.  Since  then  Ruiz,
Pavon,  Humboldt,  and  Bonpland,  with  many  others,  have  furnished
more  or  less  accurate  information  relative  to  this  subject.  The  latest
investigations  have  been  made  by  Weddell,  whose  valuable  researches
have  settled  the  hitherto  vexatious  question  relative  to  the  Calisaya
bark,  he  having  discovered  its  true  source.

The  name,  Cinchona,  was  bestowed  upon  the  plant  by  Linneeus,  in
compliment  to  the  Countess  of  Cinchon,  the  wife  of  the  then  Viceroy  of
Peru,  who  was  cured  of  an  ague  by  it,  and  brought  some  of  it  to


352  Materia  Medica.

Europe  in  1640.  The  history  of  its  discovery  is  involved  in  much  obscu-
rity. The  genuine  Cinchonas  are  found  on  the  Andes,  principally  in
Columbia,  Bolivia,  and  Peru,  or  from  11°  N.  to  20°  S.  latitude.  They
are  found  in  the  greatest  abundance  west  of  the  Andes,  and  at  eleva-
tions varying  from  1200  to  10,000  feet ;  how  far  they  extend  eastward
has  not  been  thoroughly  ascertained.  The  best  kinds  are  found  in  dry
situations,  at  a  temperature  about  68°  F.,  and  situated  at  elevations
between  6000  and  8000  feet.  Much  confusion  has  resulted  from  the
too  great  importance  attached  to  the  study  of  particular  species,  and  to
the  attempt  to  divide  the  genus  into  numerous  species,  from  very  slight
differences.  It  is  now  well  known  that  the  same  tree  may  vary  in  its
foliage,  as  well  as  in  the  chemical  character  of  its  bark,  depending  on
peculiarities  of  situation  or  growth,  severity  or  mildness  of  climate,
degree  of  mountainous  elevation,  nature  of  the  soil,  and  various  other
circumstances.  Humboldt  considers  all  those  trees  with  hairy  and
woolly  blossoms,  as  the  true  Cinchonas,  possessing  febrifuge  virtues,
and  Weddell  has  transferred  all  those  with  smooth  corollas  into  his  new
genus,  Cascarilla.

The  gathering  of  the  bark  is  performed  by  persons  called  Cascarilleros,
who,  in  order  to  be  properly  qualified  for  the  business,  must  be  well
acquainted  with  the  trees,  the  proper  period  for  collection,  and  other  cir-
cumstances necessary  for  obtaining  good  bark.  They  usually  commence
operations  in  May,  when  the  dry  season  sets  in,  more  generally  cutting
down  the  tree,  and  then  stripping  off  the  bark;  sometimes  they  decorti-
cate the  tree  while  standing.  The  former  plan  is  viewed  as  the  best,  as
the  stump  pushes  up  shoots  which  eventually  become  fit  for  decortica-
tion, while,  in  the  latter  instance,  deprived  of  its  bark,  the  whole  plant
perishes.  After  the  bark  has  been  removed,  it  must  be  speedily  dried  in
the  sun,  or  else  it  becomes  impaired.  In  the  process  of  drying,  the
bark  rolls  itself  up,  becoming  quilled,  and  is  then  sent  to  the  coast  for
exportation,  and  is  packed  in  chests,  called  seroons,  formed  of  hides  and
coarse  cloth,  each  package  weighing  from  fifty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty
pounds,  and  usually  containing  several  sorts  in  the  same  seroon.

The  Cinchona  forests  occupy  regions  which  never  can  be  applied  to
agricultural  purposes,  and  which  extend  over  thirty  degrees  of  latitude,
thus  almost  precluding  the  idea  of  even  their  remote  extinction.  The
bitterness  of  the  tree  is  not  confined  to  its  bark,  but  exists  in  its  leaves,
flowers,  and  root-bark.  In  the  leaves  it  is  associated  with  an  acid,  and
in  the  flowers  with  a  delightful  fragrance  which  diffuses  itself  through-
out the  air  in  the  vicinity  of  the  trees.  •

Cinchona  is  divided  into  three  varieties,  the  Pale,  the  Yellow,  and  the
Bed — the  extra-officinal  or  inferior  kinds  are  termed  Carthagena  Barks.
This  division  is  founded  on  the  physical  characters  of  the  bark,  which
appear  to  be  very  distinct  in  the  officinal  varieties  above  alluded  to,  and


Cinchona.  353

which  is,  prohahly,  the  best  division  that  could  be  made  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge.

The  Pale  Bark  is  so  termed,  on  account  of  the  color  of  its  powder,
which  is  pale  or  grayish-fawn,  and  of  a  deeper  hue  in  the  inferior  sorts.
It  is  moderately  bitter  and  somewhat  astringent,  with  a  feeble,  agreeably
aromatic  odor.  The  bark  as  received  in  this  country  is  in  cylindrical
pieces,  varying  from  a  few  inches  to  two  feet  in  length,  singly  or  doubly
quilled,  from  two  lines  to  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  from  half  a  line,  to
three  or  four  lines  in  thickness.  The  best  kinds  are  about  the  size  of  a
goosequill.  They  have  a  rough  exterior,  with  circular  or  longitudinal
fibers,  and  a  grayish,  dull-brown,  or  grayish-fawn  color,  owing  to
adhering  lichens.  The  interior  or  internal  surface  is  smooth  in  the  finer
kinds,  but  rough  and  somewhat  ligneous  in  the  coarser ;  its  color  is  a
brownish-orange,  sometimes  inclining  to  red,  sometimes  to  yellow,  and
in  the  poorer  specimens  of  a  dusky  hue.  The  fracture  of  the  bark  is
generally  smooth,  with  some  short  filaments  on  the  internal  part  only  ;
it  is  more  fibrous  in  the  coarser  barks.  The  pale  bark  is  collected,  pro-
bably, from  C.  Condaminea  and  C.  Micrantha,  and  its  appearance  indi-
cates it  to  have  been  taken  from  the  smaller  branches.  All  the  pale
barks  contain  a  much  greater  quantity  of  cinchonia  than  quinia.;  and  solu-
tion of  sulphate  of  soda  is  not  precipitated  with  their  infusion.  In  this
country  it  is  but  little  employed,  in  consequence  of  the  little  quinia
which  it  yields.  There  are  several  varieties  of  pale  bark,  differing
more  or  less  in  their  properties,  as  the  Crown  or  Loza,  the  Gray,  Silver,
Lima,  or  Huanuco,  the  Ash  or  Jaen,  and  the  White  Loxa,  among  which
the  first  named  is  esteemed  the  finest.

Yellow  Bark,  is  the  term  applied  to  those  barks  of  this  color  only,
which  possess  the  valuable  chemical  properties  of  the  drug,  and  which
are  known  by  the  name  of  Calisaya  ;  they  are  arranged  into  two  divi-
sions, the  quilled  and  the  flat.  The  quilled  Calisaya  is  in  pieces  varying
from  a  few  inches  to  two  feet  in  length,  from  a  quarter  of  an  inch  to
three  inches  in  diameter,  and  of  equally  variable  thickness.  The  epi-
dermis is  of  a  brownish  color,  diversified  or  concealed  by  whitish  or  yel-
lowish lichens,  rough,  being  much  traversed  by  longitudinal  wrinkles
and  transverse  fissures,  and  is  generally  easily  separable  from  the  proper
bark.  It  yields  a  dark-red,  tasteless,  and  inactive  powder,  and  should,
therefore,  always  be  removed  before  the  bark  is  powdered.  When  the
epidermis  is  removed,  the  bark  is  one  or  two  lines  in  thickness,  compact,
of  a  short-fibrous  texture,  and  when  broken  presents  shining  points,
apparently  the  termination  of  small  fibers  running  longitudinally,  which,
examined  by  the  microscope,  are  found,  when  freed  from  a  salmon-
colored  powder  that  surrounds  them,  to  be  yellow  and  transparent.  They
readily  separate,  when  the  bark  is  powdered,  in  the  form  of  spiculee,
which,  like  those  of  cowhage,  insinuate  themselves  into  the  skin,  and
23


354  Materia Medica.

produce  a  disagreeable  itching  and  irritation.  The  color  of  the  bark  is
brownish-yellow,  with  a  tinge  of  orange,  the  taste  less  astringent  than
that  of  the  pale  bark,  but  much  more  bitter.  The  external  portion  of
the  proper  bark  is  more  powerful  in  medicinal  virtue  than  the  internal ;
probably  from  the  longer  exposure  of  the  latter  to  the  action  of  the  air
and  moisture  ;  the  odor  is  faint,  but  resembles  that  of  the  pale  varieties,
when  the  bark  is  boiled  in  water.

The  Flat  Calisaya  bark  is  obtained  from  the  large  branches  and
trunk;  it  is  in  pieces  of  'various  lengths,  either  quite  flat,  or  but  slightly
curved,  generally  stripped  of  their  epidermis,  on  which  account  they  are
preferable  to  the  quilled  pieces.  Their  inner  surface  is  like  that  of  the
quilled  pieces  ;  the  outer  is  irregular,  marked  with  confluent  longitudinal
furrows  and  ridges,  and  somewhat  darker-colored  than  the  inner,  being
of  a  brownish-fawn,  frequently  diversified  with  darker  stains.  The  bark
is  of  uniform  fracture  throughout,  generally  thicker  than  the  quilled,
more  fibrous  in  its  texture,  less  compact,  less  bitter,  and  possessed  of
less  medicinal  power.  The  best  yellow  bark  is  very  bitter,  with  a  slight
astringency,  of  a  brownish-yellow  color  with  a  tinge  of  orange,  which
is  still  brighter  in  the  powder,  and  contains  a  much  greater  quantity  of
quinia  than  cinchonia ;  the  salts  of  quinia  and  lime  are  so  abundant  in
its  composition,  that  a  strong  infusion  of  it  instantly  precipitates  a  solu-
tion of  sulphate  of  soda.  This  variety  of  bark  is  principally  derived
from  the  Cinchona  Calisaya,  and  a  portion  from  the  C.  Boliviano,,  both
duced exclusively  in  Bolivia,  and  in  the  southern  part  of  the  province
of  Carabaya,  and  is  imported  principally  from  the  ports  on  the  Pacific
Ocean.

The  Red  Bark,  always  comes  to  this  country  in  quilled  or  flat  pieces,
and  packed  in  chests.  The  quills  are  from  two  lines  to  an  inch  and  a
quarter  in  diameter,  from  one-third  of  a  line  to  two  lines  thick,  and  from
two  to  twelve  inches  or  more  in  length.  The  flat  pieces,  which  are  the
more  common  of  the  two,  are  seldom  absolutely  flat,  but  are  somewhat
curved  ;  they  are  from  two  inches  to  two  feet  in  length,  from  one  to  five
inches  in  breadth,  and  from  three  to  nine  lines  in  thickness.  They  are
generally  covered  with  the  epidermis,  which  is  rough,  wrinkled  longi-
tudinally, often  warty,  little  fissured,  of  a  reddish-brown  color,  with  a
grayish  efflorescence  in  the  hollows  from  adhering  lichens.  Beneath
the  epidermis  is  a  dark-red,  brittle,  and  compact  layer,  possessing  some
bitterness  and  astringency,  but  much  less  so  than  the  fibrous  and  woody
interior  parts,  which  have  a  lively  brownish -red  color,  and  the  odor  of
other  good  barks.  Its  powder  is  of  a  reddish-brown  color,  and  contains
considerable  quantities  both  of  quinia  and  of  cinchonia.  Its  decoction  is
of  a  turbid  salmon  color.  The  species  of  Cinchona  which  yields  the
red  bark  is  unknown,  although  supposed  to  be  taken  from  the  same


Cinchona.  355

trees  which  furnish  the  pale  bark.  Weddell  observed  that  the  pale
barks  are  almost  constantly  nothing  else  than  the  young  barks  of  the
same  trees  which  yield  the  yellow  and  red  barks.  The  red  and  yellow
barks  are  preferred  in  medicine  to  the  pale  variety.

The  Carthagena  Barks  are  all  those  barks  brought  from  the
northern  Atlantic  ports  of  South  America,  and  known  as  Carthagena,
Maracaybo,  and  Santa  Martha  barks.  They  all  have  a  soft,  whitish,
micaceous  epidermis,  which  may  be  readily  removed  by  the  nail,  and
some  contain  small  quantities  of  quinia  and  cinchonia  ;  there  are  several
varieties  of  them,  as, — 1.  Hard-yellow  Carthagena  Bark,  the  China  fiava
dura  of  Von  Bergen,  supposed  to  be  derived  from  the  Cinchona  Cordi-
folia,  and  imported  from  Carthagena.  It  is  obtained  generally  in  quilled
pieces,  or  in  sections  of  cylinders,  and  often  in  fiat  pieces.  It  may  be
known  from  the  true  yellow  bark,  by  having  scarcely  any  transverse
fissures,  and  by  presenting  uniformly  a  velvety,  grayish-white,  or  pale-
yellowish-white,  glistening  epidermis,  except  in  places  where  it  has
been  rubbed,  and  which  color  is  essential  and  not  dependent  upon
lichens,  as  with  the  true  bark.  Its  fracture  is  abrupt  and  splintery.
Its  taste  is  bitter  and  nauseous,  but  not  so  bitter  as  in  the  officinal
article.

2.  Fibrous,  or  Woody-yellow  Carthagena  Bark,  the  China  fiava  fibrosa
of  Von  Bergen  ;  its  botanical  source  is  not  positively  known.  It  gen-
erally occurs  in  flat  or  slightly-curved  pieces,  sometimes  in  quills.  Its
epidermis  is  generally  wanting  in  part  or  altogether,  but  when  present,
resembles  in  consistence  that  of  the  former  variety.  Its  color  is  rather
brighter  than  in  the  preceding  kind,  it  is  less  compact,  its  fracture  is
more  fibrous,  causing  it  to  exhibit  long  splinters  when  broken  trans-
versely, and  often  to  hang  together  by  connecting  fibers  when  broken
longitudinally,  and  its  taste  is  more  feebly  bitter  and  slowly  developed.

The  powder  of  these  Yellow  barks  is  of  a  yellowish-cinnamon  color,
with  less  of  the  reddish  tint  than  the  calisaya,  for  which  it  is  not  unfre-
quently  sold.  It  may  be  detected  by  its  feeble  bitterness,  but  with  still
more  certainty  by  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  soda,  which  causes  no  pre-
cipitate with  its  infusion.

3.  The  Red  Carthagena  Bark,  the  Quinquina  Nova  or  New  Bark  of
Guibort,  and  the  Red  Bark  of  Santa  Fe\  of  Mutis  ;  said  to  be  derived
from  the  Cinchona  Magnifolia.  It  is  widely  different  from  every  other
true  cinchona  bark,  and  has  no  resemblance  whatever  to  the  true  officinal
red  bark  ;  and  is  seldom  seen,  except  as  an  adulteration  of  this  latter
article.  When  large  the  bark  is  flat  or  open,  when  small  and  cylindri-
cal, quilled  ;  its  epidermis  is  whitish,  micaceous,  thin,  uniform,  with  a
very  few  transverse  rents,  apparently  caused  by  drying.  The  bark,
stripped  of  its  epidermis,  is  of  a  pale  reddish-brown  color,  becoming
deeper  externally  where  it  is  exposed  to  the  air,  thick,  spongy,  of  a  flat


356  Materia  Medica.

astringent  taste  with  scarcely  any  bitterness  ;  its  fracture  is  foliaceous
externally,  and  short-fibrous  internally  ;  its  powder  is  fibrous  and  red,
and  said  to  contain  neither  quinia  nor  cinchonia.

4.  The  Orange  Carthagena  Bark,  the  Spongy  Carthagena  Bark  of
Guibourt,  and  the  Orange  Cinchona  of  Santa  Fe,  of  Mutis,  derived
from  the  Cinchona  Lancifolia.  It  occurs  in  quills,  flat  and  semicylindri-
cal  pieces  of  various  sizes,  covered  with  a  velvety,  pale  grayish-white,
micaceous  surface,  marked  with  longitudinal  and  sometimes  transverse
fissures.  The  substance  of  the  bark  is  orange-colored,  fibrous  exter-
nally, light,  spongy  under  the  teeth,  feebly  bitter,  and  of  but  little  value.
Its  powder  is  of  a  beautiful  orange  color.  This  bark  is  seldom  met
with  in  commerce.

of  an  orange-brown  color  when  freshly  cut,  and  a  chocolate  color  on  its
inner  surface,  very  bitter  and  disagreeable,  but  sometimes  spongy  and
nearly  tasteless  ;  its  epidermis  is  soft,  velvety,  white,  and  micaceous.
Its  origin  is  unknown,  and  it  is  worthless.

Several  barks  have  occasionally  been  found  in  commerce,  possessing
none  of  the  physical  characteristics  of  the  officinal  varieties,  and  which
are  termed  False  Barks.  Among  them  are,  the  Caribwan  Bark  from
the  Exostemma  Caribaea  ;  the  St.  Lucia  Bark  from  the  Exostemma
Floribunda,  and  the  Pitaya  Bark  of  uncertain  origin.  This  last  only
is  known  in  this  country  ;  it  is  in  quills,  the  bark  being  hard,  compact,
thin,  and  with  a  short,  rough  fracture.  The  outer  surface  is  of  a  dull
grayish-olive  color,  with  irregular  lighter  or  whitish  spots  ;  the  internal
surface  is  deep-brown  or  blackish  ;  the  fresh  fracture,  brownish-red  or
orange.  It  has  a  very  bitter  taste,  and  is  inodorous.  It  contains  a
new  crystallizable  alkaline,  tasteless  salt,  forming  bitter  salts  with  the
acids,  termed  Pitania.  The  bark  has  cured  ague  in  the  quantity  of
half  an  ounce.  Neither  quinia  nor  cinchonia  exist  in  the  false
barks.

The  Cinchona  barks  have  often  been  analysed,  and  with  various
results.  Dr.  Westring  was  the  first  who  attempted  the  discovery  of  an
active,  febrifuge  principle  in  the  bark  ;  subsequently  Seguin,  Deschamps,
Vauquelin,  Duncan,  Gomez,  Lambert,  and  others  pursued  a  similar  un-
dertaking, but  the  honor  of  first  making  the  great  discovery  of  the  alka-
loid principles  termed  Cinchonia  and  Quinia  was  reserved  to  Pelletier  and
Caventou,  who  announced  it  in  the  year  1820.  According  to  their  ana-
lysis, the  several  barks  contain,  as  follows  : —

Pale  Loxa  Bark  contains  a  fatty  matter,  a  red  coloring  matter,  very
slightly  soluble,  identical  with  the  cinchonic  red  of  Reuss,  a  yellow
coloring  matter,  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,  and  capable  of  being  pre-
cipitated by  the  subacetate  of  lead,  tannin,  gum,  starch,  lignin,  kinate  of
lime,  kinate  of  cinchonia,  and  a  minute  quantity  of  kinate  of  quinia.


Cinchona.  357

Yellow  Calisaya  Bark  contains  the  same  as  the  above,  with  the  excep-
tion of  gum,  and  a  larger  proportion  of  kinate  of  quinia,  and  much  less
kinate  of  cinchonia.

Red  Bark  also  contains  the  same  as  the  Pale  Loxa,  with  the  exception
of  gum,  and  a  large  proportion  both  of  kinate  of  quinia,  and  of  kinate
of  cinchonia.

The  only  appreciable  difference  therefore  in  the  officinal  barks,  is  in
the  proportions  they  contain  of  quinia  and  cinchonia.  The  odor  of  the
bark  depends  upon  a  thick,  bitterish  acrid,  volatile  oil,  which  is  present
in  minute  quantity.

The  fatty  matter  existing  in  the  bark  is  of  a  greenish  color  when  ob-
tained from  the  pale  bark,  and  orange-yellow  from  the  yellow.  Boiling
alcohol  dissolves  it,  but  deposits  a  portion  of  it  on  cooling  ;  ether  dis-
solves it  readily  ;  alkalies  form  soaps  with  it,  and  in  water  it  is  insolu-
ble. The  red  coloring  matter  is  a  reddish-brown,  amorphous  substance,
insipid,  inodorous,  soluble  in  alcohol,  alkaline  solutions,  or  their  carbon-
ates, and  insoluble  in  ether  or  water,  though  slightly  soluble  in  the  latter
at  the  boiling  point.  Its  solubility  in  water  is  augmented  by  the  addi-
tion of  acids.  It  precipitates  tartar  emetic,  but  not  gelatin  ;  if  treated
with  a  cold  solution  of  potassa  or  soda,  or  by  ammonia,  lime,  or  baryta
with  heat,  and  precipitated,  from  the  solution  thus  formed,  by  acids,  it
is  converted  into  a  species  of  tannin,  and  forms  an  insoluble  compound
with  gelatin.  Subacetate  of  lead  precipitates  it.  The  red  bark  con-
tains the  greatest  proportion  of  it,  the  pale  the  least.  The  yellow  color-
ing matter  has  little  taste,  is  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,  and  ether,  does
not  precipitate  gelatin  nor  tartar-emetic,  and  is  itself  precipitated  by
subacetate  of  lead.

The  Tannin  or  Soluble  red  coloring  matter  of  Pelletier  and  Caventou,
has  a  brownish-red  color,  and  austere  taste,  is  soluble  in  water  or  alco-
hol, combines  with  metallic  oxides,  like  the  tannin  in  catechu,  produces
precipitates  with  the  salts  of  iron,  which  are  deep-green  with  the  pale
bark,  blackish-brown  with  the  yellow,  and  reddish-brown  with  the  red.
With  gelatin  and  tartar-emetic  it  forms  white  precipitates,  and  readily
absorbs  the  atmospheric  oxygen,  becoming  red  and  insoluble.  Although
considered  to  possess  all  the  properties  of  tannic  acid,  yet  it  must  differ
materially  from  that  found  in  galls,  which  forms  insoluble  compounds
with  quinia  and  cinchonia.

Kinic  acid,  likewise  called  Quinic,  or  Cinchonic  acid,  may  be  obtained
by  evaporating  the  infusion  of  bark  to  a  solid  consistence,  and  then
treating  the  solid  extract  with  alcohol,  which  gives  a  residue  consisting
of  mucilage  with  kinate  of  lime,  which  is  insoluble  in  alcohol.  Dissolve
this  residue  in  water,  and  evaporate  with  a  moderate  heat,  and  crystals
of  the  kinate  will  be  deposited,  which  may  be  purified  by  a  second  solu-
tion and  crystallization. The  salt  thus obtained,  being  dissolved  in


358  Materia  Medica.

water,  is  decomposed  by  means  of  oxalic  acid,  which  precipitates  the
lime,  and  leaves  the  kink  acid  in  solution.  This  may  be  procured  in
the  crystalline  state  by  spontaneous  evaporation,  though  as  usually  pre-
pared, it  is  in  the  form  of  a  thick,  syrupy  liquid.  The  crystals  are
transparent,  colorless,  acid,  and  readily  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  in  water.
The  kinates  of  cinchonia  and  quinia  may  be  obtained  either  by  the  direct
combination  of  their  constituents,  or  by  the  mutual  decomposition  of  the
sulphates  of  those  alkaloids  and  the  kinate  of  lime.  Kinate  of  cinchonia
crystallizes  with  difficulty,  is  very  soluble  in  water,  soluble  in  alcohol,
and  has  a  bitter  and  astringent  taste.  Kinate  of  quinia  crystallizes  in
opake  or  translucent  crusts  of  a  mammillated  form  ;  it  is  soluble  in
water,  less  so  in  rectified  alcohol,  and  has  a  very  bitter  taste.

The  most  important  constituents  of  Cinchona  bark  are  the  Cinchonia
and  Quinia,  the  mode  of  preparing  which,  with  their  history,  etc.,  will
be  found  under  their  appropriate  heads.

The  different  kinds  of  Cinchona  bark,  yield  their  active  constituents
to  boiling  water,  rectified  spirit,  proof  spirit,  and  diluted  acids.  In  pre-
paring a  decoction  or  infusion  of  bark,  the  addition  of  muriatic  or  sul-
phuric acid  in  small  quantity  would  be  advantageous  in  retaining  the
alkaloids  in  the  solution ;  because,  without  the  infusion  is  thus  acidulated,
the  cinchonic-red  unites  with  the  alkaloids,  producing  compounds  not
readily  soluble  in  hot  water,  and  still  less  soluble  when  cold,  so  that  as
the  infusion  cools,  the  active  constituents  are  thrown  partly  down  insol-
uble, forming  part  of  a  deposit  of  a  reddish  powder.  Proof  spirit,  from
its  ready  solubility  of  the  principal  constituents,  is  a  much  better  solvent
than  water,  and  should  be  used  in  preparing  officinal  tinctures.  Perco-
lation exhausts  more  of  the  alkaloid  principles  than  maceration;  and  the
extract  prepared  from  the  tincture  is  vastly  superior  to  that  obtained
from  the  aqueous  decoction.

Water  acidulated  with  muriatic,  sulphuric,  nitric,  acetic,  or  tartaric
acid,  but  especially  with  the  first-named  acid,  effects  exhaustion  com-
pletely, either  by  decoction  or  by  percolation.  Diluted  alkalies,  as  well
as  their  carbonates,  do  not  act  on  the  alkaloids,  but  decompose  their
natural  salts,  leaving  the  bases  undissolved,  and  dissolving  cinchonic-red,
cinchonic-yellow,  tannin  and  fatty  matter.

In  infusions  of  the  true  barks,  ammonia  and  potassa  precipitate  chiefly
the  alkaloids;  bichloride  of  mercury,  and  neutral  chloride  of  platinum
produce  insoluble  double  salts  of  the  alkaloids  ;  astringent  solutions  pro-
duce insoluble  tannates  of  the  alkaloids;  tartar  emetic,  sulphate  of  iron,
and  gelatin,  owing  to  the  presence  of  tannin,  precipitate  tannates  of  anti-
mony, iron,  and  of  gelatin,  and  sometimes  throw  down  cinchonic-red
also ;  oxalate  of  ammonia,  and  in  strong  infusions  sulphate  of  soda,
throw  down  oxalate  or  sulphate  of  lime;  and  iodide  of  potassium  causes
precipitates  of  a  complex  nature.


Cinchona.  359

In  order  to  determine  the  genuineness  of  Peruvian  bark,  or  to  detect
adulterations,  many  druggists  judge  of  the  color  of  the  powde" ,  which
is  the  form  in  which  they  more  usually  obtain  it,  its  pure,  strong,  aroma-
tic, evanescent  bitterness,  and  the  peculiarity  and  strength  of  its  aroma ;
but  this  method  is  extremely  fallacious.  The  best  methods  of  testing  it
are  by  chemical  reactions,  among  which  ammonia,  iodide  of  potassium,  in-
fusion of  galls,  and  solution  of  isinglass  are  the  best.  Ammonia  causes  a
more  or  less  abundant  precipitate  with  the  true  bark,  soluble  in  an  excess
of  the  reagent,  but  throws  down  no  precipitate  with  the  infusions  of  the
Carthagena  and  of  the  false  barks.  Iodide  of  potassium  causes  sooner
or  later  a  yellowish-white  or  yellowish-red  precipitate  with  the  true  barks,
but  not  with  the  others.  Infusion  of  galls  causes  no  precipitate,  except
with  the  true  barks;  hence,  no  bark  can  be  considered  good  which  does
not  afford  a  precipitate  with  the  infusion  of  this  substance.  Gelatin
causes  a  precipitate  only  with  the  Carthagena  barks.  It  must  be  remem-
bered that  all  the  substances  which  precipitate  the  infusion  of  bark,  do
not  by  any  means,  necessarily  impair  its  virtues,  as  it  contains  several
inert  ingredients  which  form  insoluble  compounds  with  bodies  that  do
not  disturb  its  active  principles.

In  preparing  a  decoction  of  Cinchona,  it  should  be  boiled  for  ten  min-
utes in  a  covered  vessel,  and  strained  while  hot;  long  boiling,  or  the
action  of  atmospheric  oxygen,  or  both  combined  materially  impair  its
virtues.  By  acidulating  the  water  employed,  say  a  fluidrachm  of  muri-
atic or  sulphuric  acid  to  a  pint  of  the  water,  we  will  be  able  to  extract
all  the  virtues  of  the  bark.  Tannic,  gallic,  oxalic  and  tartaric  acids,  or
substances  containing  them  should  be  excluded  from  the  decoction,  as
they  form  insoluble,  or  nearly  insoluble  salts  with  the  alkaline  principles
of  the  bark.  The  alkalies,  alkaline  earths,  and  salifiable  bases  generally
should  also  be  excluded,  because,  uniting  with  the  Kinic  acid,  they  pre-
cipitate the  quiuia  and  cinchonia.

The  following  mode  of  estimating  the  value  of  bark  by  the  quantity
of  alkaline  matter  it  contains,  we  copy  from  a  communication  of  M.
Tilloy  of  Dijon,  published  in  the  13th  vol.  of  the  Journ.  de  Pharmacie,
p.  530.  "  Take  an  ounce  of  the  bark  coarsely  powdered,  introduce  it
into  about  12  ounces  of  alcohol  of  30°  B.  (sp.  gr.  0.8748),  expose  the
mixture  for  half  an  hour  to  a  temperature  of  from  105°  to  120°  F.,  draw
off  the  alcohol,  add  a  fresh  portion,  and  act  as  before  ;  unite  the  liquors,
and  throw  into  them  a  sufficient  quantity  of  acetate  or  subacetate  of  lead
to  precipitate  the  coloring  matter  and  kinic  acid,  then  allow  the  insoluble
matter  to  subside,  and  filter.  Add  to  the  filtered  liquor  a  few  drops  of
sulphuric  acid  to  separate  the  excess  of  acetate  of  lead,  filter,  and  distil
off  the  alcohol.  There  remains  an  acetate  or  sulphate  of  quinia,  accord-
ing to  the  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid  employed,  together  with  a  fatty
matter  which  will  adhere  to  the  vessel.  Decant  the  liquor,  and  add
ammonia,  which  will  instantaneously  precipitate  the  quinia. Too  much


360  Materia  Medica.

ammonia  will  retain  it  in  solution  ;  but  in  this  case  a  few  drops  of  sul-
phuric acid  will  cause  it  to  precipitate.  The  quinia  washed  with  warm
water,  and  then  treated  with  sulphuric  acid,  water,  and  a  little  animal
charcoal,  yields  very  white  sulphate  of  quinia.  I  have  thus  obtained  in
six  hours  nine  grains  of  the  sulphate  from  an  ounce  of  bark  [576  grains
French],  which  is  a  large  proportion  when  allowances  are  made  for  the
loss  during  the  process."

The  Edinburgh  Pharmacopoeia  gives  the  following  mode  of  testing
the  value  of  yellow  bark:  "A  filtered  decoction  of  one  hundred  grains
of  the  powder  in  two  fluidounces  of  distilled  water,  gives,  with  a  fluid-
ounce  of  concentrated  solution  of  carbonate  of  soda,  a  precipitate,  which,
when  heated  in  the  fluid  becomes  a  fused  mass,  weighing  when  cold  two
grains,  or  more,  and  easily  soluble  in  solution  of  oxalic  acid."

Properties  and  Uses. — Cinchona  bark  is  tonic,  antiperiodic,  slightly
astringent,  and  topically  antiseptic.  When  received  into  the  stomach  it
generally  causes  a  sense  .of  heat,  which  often  diffuses  itself  gradually
over  the  whole  trunk ;  occasionally  it  causes  gastric  and  intestinal  irrita-
tion, and  even  nausea  and  vomiting,  particularly  if  the  stomach  is  in  an
irritable  or  inflamed  condition.  The  circulation  finally  becomes  influ-
enced by  it,  as  manifested  in  the  increased  frequency  of  the  pulse,  with
a  slight  excitement  of  all  the  functions  of  the  system,  especially  when
given  in  large  doses.  In  many  persons  its  action  upon  the  nervous  sys-
tem is  accompanied  with  a  sense  of  tension,  fullness,  or  slight  pain  in  the
head,  tinnitus  aurium  or  singing  in  the  ears,  and  partial  deafness.  It  is
valuable  in  functional  derangements  of  the  stomach,  improving  digestion,
and  invigorating  the  nervous  and  muscular  systems  in  diseases  of  general
debility,  and  in  convalescence  from  exhausting  diseases.  As  a  tonic,  it
will  be  found  of  advantage  in  the  latter  stages  of  typhus  gravior,  also
in  measles,  small-pox,  malignant  scarlatina,  during  the  absence  of  fever
or  inflammation  ;  likewise  in  carbuncle,  gangrenous  erysipelas,  and  in  all
cases  in  which  the  system  is  exhausted  under  large  purulent  discharges,
and  where  there  is  a  tendency  to  recovery,  supporting  the  powers  of  the
constitution  until  all  abnormal  action  is  removed.  It  may  likewise  be
used  in  all  chronic  diseases  attended  with  debility,  as  in  scrofula,  dropsy,
passive  hemorrhages,  certain  forms  of  dyspepsia,  obstinate  cutaneous
affections,  amenorrhea,  chorea,  and  hysteria.  Its  use  is  contra-indicated
where  any  local  irritation  or  inflammation  is  present ;  profuse  sweats
during  sleep  may  be  considered  one  indication  for  its  employment.

Cinchona  bark,  however,  exhibits  its  most  important  therapeutical
powers,  as  an  antiperiodic,  and  in  the  consequent  influence  it  exerts  in
almost  invariably  curing  remittent  and  intermittent  fevers,  and  the  gen-
erality of  diseases  which  are  accompanied  by  symptoms  of  marked  peri-
odicity, as  neuralgia,  hemicrania,  epilepsy,  diarrhea  and  dysentery  when
epidemic,  etc. Its  use  should  in  most  cases  be  preceded  by  a  mild


ClNCHONIA.  361

laxative,  after  the  action  of  which  the  powder  may  be  given  in  doses  of
from  ten  to  sixty  grains,  and  repeated  according  to  circumstances,  every
one,  two  or  four  hours,  until  one  or  two  ounces  have  been  taken  during
the  periods  of  intermission,  and  continue  thus  until  a  cure  is  effected,  or
the  remedy  is  found  insufficient  for  the  cure  of  the  disease.  In  the  use
of  the  barks,  to  obtain  their  antiperiodic  influence,  the  red  and  yellow
are  considered  superior  to  the  pale,  and  of  which  the  red  is  preferred.
The  pale  bark  is  preferable  as  a  tonic,  being  less  apt  to  offend  the  stom-
ach, or  irritate  the  bowels.  Quinia,  or  its  salts,  especially  the  sulphate,
is  usually  employed  as  a  tonic  and  antiperiodic  in  place  of  the  bark  itself,
but  there  have  been  many  instances  in  which  the  bark  in  powder  has
succeeded  in  effecting  a  cure,  when  its  alkaloidal  salts  failed;  the  cause
of  this  is  not  well  understood.  In  such  cases,  when  the  powder  from
its  bulk  or  otherwise,  offends  the  stomach,  the  infusion,  decoction,  tinc-
ture, or  extract  may  be  administered.  Sometimes  bark  or  its  preparations
occasions  purging,  which  may  be  obviated  by  small  portions  of  opium  or
laudanum.

Externally,  a  poultice  of  the  bark  has  been  found  an  excellent  appli-
cation to  felons,  fetid  and  gangrenous  ulcers,  etc.,  also  as  an  injection
with  opium,  when  the  stomach  rejects  it;  and  quilted  between  two
pieces  of  muslin  or  flannel,  and  made  into  jackets,  it  has  been  of  utility
in  obstinate  intermittents,  to  be  worn  next  the  skin.  Dose  of  Cinchona
as  an  antiperiodic,  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm;  as  a  tonic,  from  ten
to  sixty  grains ;  of  the  infusion  or  decoction  two  fluidounces,  to  be  re-
peated two  or  three  times  a  day;  of  the  extract  from  five  to  thirty  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Cinchonia;  Decoctum  Cinchonae;  Extractum  Cinchonae;
Extractum  Cinchonae  Fluidum;  Infusum  Cinchonae;  Quiniae  Sulphas;
Tinctura  Cinchonae;  Vinum  Cinchonae  Compositum.


CINCHONIA.

ONE OF THE ALKALOIDS OF CINCHONA BARK.

Preparation. — Several  processes  have  been  employed  for  the  prepara-
tion of  Cinchonia.  One  of  the  simplest  is  the  following:  Powdered
pale  bark  is  submitted  to  the  action  of  sulphuric  or  muriatic  acid  very
much  diluted,  and  the  solution  thus  obtained  is  precipitated  by  an  excess
of  lime.  The  precipitate  is  collected  on  a  filter,  washed  with  water,
and  treated  with  boiling  alcohol.  The  alcoholic  solution  is  filtered  while
hot,  and  deposits  the  cinchonia  when  it  cools.  A  further  quantity  is
obtained  by  evaporation.  If  not  perfectly  white,  it  may  be  freed  from
color  by  first  converting  it  into  a  sulphate  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,
then  treating  the  solution  with  animal  charcoal,  filtering,  precipitating
by  an  alkali,  and  redissolving  by  alcohol  in  the  manner  already  men-


362  Materia Medica.

tioned.  It  may  also  be  obtained  from  the  mother- waters  of  sulphate
of  quinia,  by  diluting  them  with  water,  precipitating  with  ammonia,  col-
lecting the  precipitate  on  a  filter,  washing  and  drying  it,  and  then  dis-
solving it  in  boiling  alcohol,  which  deposits  the  cinchonia  in  a  crystalline
form  upon  cooling.  It  may  be  still  further  purified  by  a  second  solution
and  crystallization.

History. — When  pure,  cinchonia  is  a  white,  crystalline  substance,
soluble  in  2,500  parts  of  boiling  water,  almost  insoluble  in  cold  water,
insoluble  in  chloroform,  very  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol,  which  deposits  a
portion  in  the  crystalline  state  upon  cooling,  and  slightly  soluble  in  ether
and  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils.  Its  bitter  taste,  at  first  not  very  obvious
in  consequence  Of  its  difficult  solubility,  is  developed  after  a  short  time
by  the  solution  of  a  minute  portion  in  the  saliva.  Its  alcoholic,  ethereal,
and  oleaginous  solutions  are  very  bitter.  Its  alkaline  character  is  very
decided,  as  it  neutralizes  the  strongest  acids,  forming  with  them  saline
compounds.  Of  the  salts  of  cinchonia,  the  sulphate,  nitrate,  muriate,
phosphate,  and  acetate  are  soluble  in  water.  The  neutral  tartrate,  oxa-
late, and  gallate  are  insoluble  in  cold  water,  but  may  be  dissolved  in
hot  water,  in  alcohol,  or  in  an  excess  of  acid.

Heat  fuses  and  decomposes  it,  disengaging  ammonia.  Sulphuric  acid
in  excess,  aided  by  heat,  renders  crystallizable  cinchonia  amorphous.
Exposed  to  the  air  it  slowly  absorbs  carbonic  acid,  and  acquires  the
property  of  effervescing  slightly  with  acids,  but  does  not  become  decom-
posed. When  dissolved  in  water  in  the  saline  state,  it  may  be  known
from  any  other  vegetable  alkali,  by  a  reddish,  somewhat  orange  color,
produced  by  the  addition  first  of  a  solution  of  chlorine,  and  then  of  am-
monia to  the  solution.  Perchloride  of  gold  precipitates  it  of  a  sulphur-
yellow.  Cinchonia  consists  of  1  equivalent  of  nitrogen,  20  of  carbon,
12  of  hydrogen,  and  1  of  oxygen,  (N  C20  H12  0).  When  distilled  with
potassa  it  yields  quinolein.

The  sulphate  or  disulphate  of  cinchonia  may  be  prepared  by  heating
cinchonia  with  a  little  water,  adding  dilute  sulphuric  acid  gradually  till
the  alkali  is  dissolved,  then  boiling  with  animal  charcoal  previously
washed  with  muriatic  acid,  filtering  the  solution  while  hot,  and  setting
it  aside  to  crystallize.  By  alternate  evaporation  and  crystallization,  the
whole  of  the  sulphate  may  be  obtained  from  the  solution.  It  is  a  white,
very  bitter  salt,  crystallizing  in  flexible,  somewhat  shining,  four-sided,
flattened  prisms,  terminated  by  an  inclined  face,  and  generally  collected
in  fasciculi.  It  is  soluble  in  fifty-four  parts  of  water  at  60°  F.,  and  in  a
smaller  quantity  of  boiling  water.  It  consists  of  100  parts  of  cinchonia,
and  13.021  of  sulphuric  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Pure  cinchonia,  the  acetate  and  disulphate  are
which  see. Dose,  from  one  to  four  grains,  three  times  a  day.


CiNNAMOMUM ZEYLANICUM.  363

CINNAMOMUM ZEYLANICUM. (Laurus  Cinnamomum.)

Cinnamon.

Nat.  Ord. — Lauraceje. Sex.  Syst. — Enncandria  Monogynia.

THE BAKK.

Description. — Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum  is  a  tree  growing  from  twenty
to  thirty  feet  high,  with  a  trunk  from  a  foot  to  a  foot  and  a  half  in  diame-
ter, and  covered  with  a  thick,  scahrous  bark.  The  branches  are  nume-
rous, smooth,  strong,  horizontal,  declining,  and  somewhat  quadrangular;
and  the  young  shoots  are  speckled  with  dark-green,  and  light-orange
colors.  The  leaves  are  for  the  most  part  opposite,  coriaceous,  entire,
ovate  or  ovate-oblong,  tapering  into  an  obtuse  point,  three-nerved,  with
the  lateral  nerves  vanishing  as  they  approach  the  point,  reticulated  on
the  under  side,  smooth,  the  upper  leaves  being  the  smallest.  Panicles
terminal  or  axillary,  stalked.  The  flowers  are  small,  Avhite,  hoary,  and
silky;  segments  oblong,  deciduous  in  the  middle.  The  fruit  is  an  oval
berry,  which  adheres  to  the  receptacle  similar  to  the  acorn,  it  is  larger
than  the  black  currant,  and  when  ripe  has  a  bluish-brown  surface  diver-
sified with  numerous  white  spots.

Cinnamomum  Aromaticum  is  a  tree  similar  to  the  above,  with  angular
branches,  and  petioles  covered  with  broken  downiness.  The  leaves  also
resemble  the  above,  but  differ  in  being  oblong-lanceolate  and  pointed,
and  in  having  a  very  fine  down  on  their  under-surface  which  may  be
seen  by  the  aid  of  the  microscope.  The  flowers  are  in  narrow,  silky
panicles.

History. — The  C.  Zeylanicum  is  a  native  of  Ceylon,  the  Malabar
coast,  Sumatra,  Borneo,  etc.  The  bark  of  the  root  has  the  odor  of  cin-
namon with  the  pungency  of  camphor,  which  latter  is  obtained  from  it
by  distillation.  The  leaves  have  a  hot  taste,  and  when  rubbed  a  spicy
odor  resembling  cloves,  owing  to  an  oil  which  they  yield  on  distillation.
The  flowers  have  a  disagreeable  odor,  said  to  be  similar  to  that  exhaled
from  freshly-sawn  bones.  The  tree  throws  out  no  fragrance  beyond  its
immediate  sphere.  The  bark  furnishes  the  cinnamon  of  commerce.  It
is  usually  collected  from  trees  about  nine  years  old.  The  peeling  of  the
shoots  and  branches  commences  in  May,  and  lasts  until  the  latter  part
of  September,  and  merely  consists  in  slitting  the  bark  longitudinally,
cutting  it  across  at  certain  intervals,  and  then  turning  it  back.  The
epidermis  is  then  removed  by  scraping,  and  the  bark,  as  it  dries,
assumes  the  form  of  quills,  the  smaller  of  which  are  introduced  into  the
larger  ones.  The  drying  is  always  performed  in  the  shade  first,  and
finished  in  the  sun.  The  best  bark  comes  from  Ceylon,  which  is  in  the
form  of  rolls  about  half  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  thirty  to  forty  inches
long,  and  composed  of  many  quills  within  each  other. They  have  a


364  Materia  Medica.

light  yellowish-brown  color,  are  thin,  smooth,  and  break  readily  with  a
splintery  fracture,  being  easily  pulverizable.  They  possess  a  rich,  pure,
peculiar  odor,  and  a  sweetish,  aromatic,  slightly  astringent,  pungent  and
peculiar  taste ;  are  easily  pulverized,  and  yield  their  virtues  to  water,
but  more  readily  to  alcohol  or  spirit.  They  yield,  when  distilled,  a  small
quantity  of  essential  oil,  of  an  agreeable  flavor.  The  inferior  barks  are
browner,  thicker,  less  splintery,  and  of  a  less  agreeable  flavor.  The
Cinnamon  brought  to  this  country  is  imported  from  England.  It  con-
tains an  essential  oil,  tannin,  mucilage,  a  coloring  matter,  cinnamic  acid,
resin,  and  lignin.  The  tannin  is  of  the  nature  of  catechu-tannin,  as  it
gives  a  dark-green  precipitate  with  the  salts  of  iron.

The  0.  Aromaticum  is  a  native  of  China,  and  furnishes  the  cassia  of
this  country,  which  is  in  fact,  a  mixture  of  a  variety  of  different  qualities
of  cinnamon.  It  is  usually  found  in  our  markets  in  single  tubes  of  vari-
ous sizes,  from  the  eighth  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  diameter,  of  a  redder
or  darker  color  than  the  best  Ceylon,  also  thicker,  rougher,  denser,  and
breaks  with  a  shorter  fracture.  It  has  a  stronger,  more  pungent  and
astringent,  but  less  agreeable  taste  and  odor.  It  is  the  kind  usually
kept  in  the  shops,  and  formsa  good  substitute  for  the  Ceylon  cinnamon
in  forming  tinctures,  etc.,  into  which  cinnamon  enters  as  an  ingredient.

There  are  several  other  species  of  cinnamon,  as  the  C.  Nitidum,  C.
Tarnala^  C.  Loureirii,  C.  Culilawan,  etc.,  but  they  are  not  recognized  as
officinale

Cinnamon  is  often  adulterated  with  the  poorer  sorts,  and  likewise  with
the  bark  after  having  been  deprived  of  its  oil.  These  adulterations  must
be  detected  by  the  taste^and  odor  of  the  article.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  tonic,  stomachic,  carminative,  and
astringent ;  also  reputed  emmenagogue,  and  capable  of  diminishing  the
secretion  of  milk.  The  tincture  of  the  bark  is  useful  in  uterine  hemor-
rhage and  Menorrhagia,  given  in  drachm  doses  in  sweetened  water,  and
repeated  every  five,  ten,  or  twenty  minutes,  or  as  may  be  required.
Cinnamon  is  generally  used  to  correct  the  effects,  or  improve  the  flavor  of
other  drugs,  and  is  one  of  the  best  additions  to  cinchona  bark  for  correct-
ing the  nausea  or  vomiting  sometimes  occasioned  by  that  drug.  Inter-
nally, it  is  very  useful  in  diarrhea,  colic  and  cramp  of  the  stomach,  flatu-
lency, and  to  allay  nausea  and  vomiting.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from
five  to  twenty  grains  ;  of  the  tincture,  from  ten  to  sixty  drops.  (See
Oil  of  Cinnamon.')

Off.  Prep.  —  Acidum  Sulphuricum  Aromaticum;  Aqua  Cinnamomi;
Oleum  Cinnamomi ;  Tinctura  Cinnamomi ;  Tinctura  Cardamomi  Com-
posita  ;  Tinctura  Catechu  ;  Tinctura  Guaiaci  Aromatica  ;  Tinctura  Olei
Cinnamomum  ;  Vinum  Cinchonae  Compositum.


Cirsium  Arvense.  3^5

CIRSIUM  ARVENSE. (Gnicus  Arvensis.)

Canada  Thistle.

Nat. Orel. — Asteracea?. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualia.

THE BOOT.

Description. — This  plant,  called  in  England  Cursed  Thistle,  has  a  per-
ennial, creeping,  very  long  root,  extremely  tenacious  of  life,  with  a  stem
three  or  four  feet  in  hight,  having  a  branching  panicle  at  top.  The
leaves  are  alternate,  oblong  or  lanceolate,  sessile,  smooth,  or  slightly
woolly  beneath,  sinuate-pinnatifid,  and  prickly  margined.  Heads  rather
small  and  numerous,  imperfectly  dioecious  ;  flowers,  rose-purple ;  invo-
lucre round  or  ovate,  with  minute  spines,  scales  close  pressed,  ovate-
lanceolate.

History. — Canada  Thistle  grows  in  various  sections  of  the  United
States,  in  cultivated  fields  and  pastures,  roadsides  and  waste  places,  flow-
ering from  June  to  August.  It  is  an  extremely  troublesome  plant  to  the
farmer,  requiring  his  utmost  vigilance  to  extirpate  it  from  his  fields.
The  involucre  is  the  only  part  of  the  plant  that  can  be  handled  with
safety.  The  root  is  the  part  employed,  which  yields  its  properties  to
water.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic  and  astringent.  Used  principally  in
diarrhea  and  dysentery,  boiled  with  milk;  some  recommend  the  addition
of  dried  codfish  skin  to  the  decoction.  Also,  used  as  a  local  application
to  some  cutaneous  diseases,  ulcers  and  leucorrhea.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Cirsium.


CISSAMPELOS  PAREIRA.

Pareira  Brava.

Nat.  Ord. — Menispermaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Dicecia  Monadelphia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Pareira  Brava,  also  termed  Velvet-Leaf,  Ice-  Vine,  is  a
climbing  shrub,  attaining  a  great  size  and  covering  even  the  tallest  trees
with  its  foliage.  The  root  is  branching  and  woody,  with  numerous
slender,  round  stems,  smooth  or  with  a  closely  appressed  tomentum.
The  leaves  are  large,  nearly  orbicular,  peltate,  subcordate,  entire,  aris-
tate  at  the  point,  smooth  above,  silky  pubescent  beneath,  and  of  a  dark-
green  color  ;  they  are  supported  on  downy  footstalks,  which  are  inserted
into  the  back  of  the  leaf.  The  flowers  are  very  small,  hispid,  unisexual
and  disposed  in  racemes. The  male  flowers  with  four  sepals  in  a  double


366  Materia Medica.

range,  and  four  petals  forming  a  cup-like  corolla,  with  an  entire  margin ;
the  female  flowers  have  but  a  single  sepal  and  petal ;  stamens  united,
bearing  connate  anthers  opening  horizontally  ;  peduncles  solitary  or  in
pairs,  branching  from  the  base,  as  long  as  the  petiole  or  longer,  race-
mose-corymbose, with  divaricating  downy  ramifications.  Racemes,  in
the  female  plant,  longer  than  the  leaves,  bearing  the  flowers  in  spiked
fascicles.  Bracts  sessile,  somewhat  orbicular,  scarcely  mucronate.
Ovary  solitary,  and  surmounted  with  three  stigmas.  Berries  scarlet,
round,  reniform,  compressed,  shriveled,  thinned  to  the  edge,  all  over
hispid  with  long  hairs.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  South  America,  and  the  West  Indies.
The  root  is  the  officinal  part.  It  is  in  pieces  or  billets  from  half  an  inch
to  four  or  five  inches  in  diameter,  and  from  a  few  inches  to  two  or  more
feet  in  length,  cylindrical,  sometimes  forked  or  contorted,  and  covered
with  a  thin,  firmly  adhering,  grayish-brown-bark ;  it  is  often  split  lon-
gitudinally. The  outer  surface  is  marked  with  longitudinal  and  annular
wrinkles,  and  sometimes  with  knotty  excrescences.  The  interior  is  of  a
yellowish  hue,  ligneous,  very  porous,  and  displaying  a  number  of  con-
centric circles  traversed  by  many  radiating  lines,  inodorous,  and  of  a
sweetish,  nauseous,  intensely  bitter,  and  somewhat  aromatic  taste.  It
readily  imparts  its  taste  and  active  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.  It
contains  a  soft  resin,  a  yellow  bitter  principle,  a  brown  substance,  an
azotized  matter,  fecula,  acidulous  malate  of  lime,  nitrate  of  potassa,  and
various  other  salts.  The  active  property  of  the  root  depends  upon  an
alkaloid,  which  is  called  Cissampelin,  or  Pelosin,  said  to  be  a  white
powder,  uncrystallizable,  insoluble  in  water,  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,
and  the  acids,  of  an  intensely  bitter  and  sweetish  taste,  and  forming
soluble  salts  of  which  the  hydrochlorate  crystallizes.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  diuretic  and  aperient.  Used  in  chronic
inflammation'of  the  bladder,  and  various  disorders  of  the  urinary  organs.
Also  recommended  in  calculous  affections,  leucorrhea,  dropsy,  rheuma-
tism and  jaundice.  Dose,  of  the  infusion,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces  ;
of  the  extract,  from  ten  to  twenty  grains.

The  Cissampelos  Olaberrima,  growing  in  Brazil,  a  species  of  this  plant,
appears  to  possess  similar  properties.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Pareirae.


CITRUS  AURANTIUM.

Orange.

Nat. Ord.— Aurantiaceaj. Sex.  SysL— Polyadelphia  Icosandria.

THE PEEL OR OUTER RIND

Description.  —  Citrus  Aurantium  is  a  middle-sized evergreen  tree,
much  branched,  and  covered  with  a  smooth,  shining,  greenish-brown


Citrus  Aurantium.  3(57

bark.  Branches  generally  with  axillary  spines.  Leaves  alternate,  entire,
ovate-oblong,  acute,  a  little  serrulated,  of  a  shining-green  color,  and  with
footstalks  more  or  less  winged.  The  flowers  are  large,  white,  and  very
fragrant,  and  arise  from  the  smaller  branches  on  simple  and  divided
peduncles.  The  calyx  is  saucer-shaped,  and  divided  into  five  pointed
sepals.  The  petals  are  five,  oblong,  concave,  white,  and  beset  with
numerous  small  glands.  The  stamens  are  twenty  or  more,  united  at  their
base  into  three  or  more  sets,  and  support  vertical,  yellow  anthers.  The
ovary  is  superior,  roundish,  bearing  a  cylindrical  style,  terminating  with
a  globose  stigma.  The  fruit  is  globose,  depressed,  of  a  reddish-yellow
color  externally,  and  internally  divided  into  several  cells,  filled  with  a
mucilaginous  pulp ;  each  cell  containing  from  two  to  four  white  seeds,
with  a  cartilaginous  skin.  The  rind  of  the  fruit  is  double,  consisting  of
an  external  thin  and  glandular  layer,  tilled  with  a  fragrant  essential  oil,
and  of  an  internal  one,  thick,  white,  spongy,  insipid,  and  inodorous.

History. — The  orange  is  a  native  of  China  and  India,  and  is  cultivated
in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe  and  America,  and  in  the  West  Indies.
Its  varieties  are  numerous.  The  fruit  likewise  differs  in  its  character,
that  of  the  C.  Aurantium  being  sweet,  while  that  of  the  C.  Vulgaris,  or
C.  Bigaradio,  the  Seville  orange,  is  sour  and  bitterish.  The  leaves  are
studded  with  vesicles  containing  an  essential  oil,  and  have  a  bitter  aro-
matic taste,  and  when  rubbed  between  the  fingers  are  highly  fragrant.
They  yield  by  distillation  an  oil  termed  Essence  de  Petit  Grain.

An  infusion  of  them  is  sometimes  employed  as  a  gently  stimulant
diaphoretic.  The  flowers  have  a  delicious  fragrance,  which  is  im-
parted to  the  surrounding  atmosphere,  but  which  is  lost  by  drying ;
those  of  the  bitter  orange  are  considered  the  most  delicate.  They  owe
their  aroma  to  an  essential  oil,  which  may  be  obtained  by  distillation;  it
is  termed  Oil  of  Neroli,  and  is  much  used  in  perfumery.  An  orange
flower  water  is  prepared  in  Italy  and  France,  which  is  nearly  colorless,
has  a  rich  odor  of  the  flowers,  and  a  bitterish,  aromatic  taste  ;  it  is  used
exclusively  as  a  perfume,  although  reputed  to  possess  antispasmodic  vir-
tues. The  peculiar  fragrance  of  the  flowers  may  be  preserved  for  a
long  time  by  beating  them  into  a  pulp  with  one-fourth  their  weight  of
common  salt.  The  juice  of  the  orange  consists  chiefly  of  sugar,  muci-
lage and  citric  acid.  The  outer  rind  of  the  mature  fruit  is  the  officinal
part,  the  inner  being  destitute  of  useful  properties,  and  the  two  should
always  be  separated  from  each  other  when  drying  the  rind  for  medical
purposes,  as  the  spongy,  inner  rind  by  its  affinity  for  moisture  produces
a  disposition  in  the  peel  to  become  moldy.  Orange  peel  has  a  deep
orange  color,  a  grateful  aroma,  and  a  pleasant  bitter  taste,  that  of  the
Seville  orange  being  much  more  bitter  than  that  of  the  other  variety.
It  contains  a  volatile  oil  in  visible  vesicles,  and  which  is  lost  in  drying,
a  saccharine  principle,  a  bitter  principle,  and  ligneous  fiber.  The  volatile
oil  may  be  obtained  by  expression  from  the fresh-grated  rind,  or  by


368  Materia  Medica.

distillation  with  water.  Water  or  alcohol  takes  up  the  sensible  properties
of  the  rind.  The  finest  Orange  oil,  which  must  not  be  confounded  with
the  Oil  of  Neroli,  is  obtained  from  Portugal,  and  is  prepared  from  the
rind  of  the  sweet  orange.  It  has  a  pale  straw  tint,  and  a  rich  fragrance
of  the  rind.  It  is  imported  in  tinned  copper  cans,  and  is  much  used  in
perfumery  and  for  other  purposes.  On  exposure  it  spoils  rapidly,
acquiring  a  terebinthinate  odor.  When  about  the  size  of  a  pea  or  cherry,
the  fruit  is  sold  under  the  name  of  Orangettes  or  Curacoa  Oranges ;
and  the  small  ones  are  sometimes  used  to  maintain  the  discharge  from
issues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Orange  peel  is  a  mild  bitter  tonic,  carminative
and  stomachic.  It  is  seldom  used  alone,  but  is  employed  generally  to
flavor  other  medicines,  or  to  correct  their  nauseating  tendency.  It  thus
forms  a  very  useful  addition  to  bitter  tinctures,  infusions,  or  decoctions,
as  of  cinchona  bark,  quassia,  columbo,  etc. ;  though  care  should  be
taken  not  to  subject  it  to  long  boiling,  on  account  of  its  oil,  which  will
thus  be  driven  off.  As  a  tonic  the  rind  of  the  Seville  orange  is  preferred;
its  dose  in  substance  is  from  thirty  to  sixty  grains,  three  times  a  day.
Large  quantities  of  it  have  caused  violent  colic,  convulsions,  and  even
death.  The  juice  of  the  orange  is  not  only  a  light  refrigerant  article  of  diet,
but  has  a  direct  beneficial  medicinal  influence  in  several  diseases;  as  in
all  fevers  and  exanthematous  diseases,  where  acids  are  craved,  and  the
patient's  tongue  is  coated  brown,  black,  or  any  intermediate  color;  in  such
cases  its  free  use  may  be  allowed  with  advantage ;  it  is  also  useful  as  an
antiscorbutic  in  scurvy.  In  administering  the  juice,  the  membranous
portion  should  always  be  carefully  rejected.  The  distilled  water  of  the
flowers  are  said  to  have  proved  beneficial  in  chorea,  hysteria,  epilepsy,
and  many  other  nervous  disorders,  in  doses  of  one  or  two  ounces.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Florum  Aurantii.


CITRUS  LIMONUM.
Lemon.

THE OUTER RIND AND JUICE.

CITRUS  ACIDA.
Lime.

THE JUICE.


Nat.  Ord. — Aurantiaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Polyadelphia  Icosandria.

Description. — The  Lemon  tree  is  an  evergreen,  about  twenty  feet  in
hight,  with  flexible  branches. The  leaves  are  firm,  alternate,  ovate-oblong,


Citrus  Limonum.  369

crenate  or  serrulate,  smooth,  shining,  pale-green,  with  a  winged  petiole.
The  flowers  are  large,  white,  with  a  tinge  of  pink  on  the  outside,  and
arise  from  the  smaller  branches.  The  calyx  and  petals  resemble  those  of
the  orange,  which  see.  The  stamens  are  from  twenty-five  to  thirty.  The
ovary  is  ovate.  The  fruit  is  ovate-oblong,  uneven,  and  terminated  by  a
more  or  less  elongated  knob,  or  nipple-like  protuberance ;  the  rind  is  of
a  straw-yellow  color,  and  consists,  similar  to  the  orange,  of  two  coats,  an
outer  thin  and  yellow,  abounding  in  a  fragrant  oil,  and  an  internal  thick,
whitish  and  coriaceous.  Cysts  in  the  rind  concave.  Pulp  juicy,  very
acid.

The  Lime,  Citrus  Acida,  (or  Citrus  Limetta,  Risso,)  is  a  tree  about
eight  feet  in  hight,  with  a  crooked  trunk  and  diffuse  branches  with
prickles.  The  leaves  are  ovate,  obovate,  oblong  and  serrate,  being
placed  upon  petioles  not  winged  as  in  the  orange  and  lemon.  The
flowers  are  small  and  white.  Stamens  thirty.  Fruit  ovate  or  roundish,
pale-yellow,  with  a  boss  at  the  point,  and  about  an  inch  and  half
in  diameter.  Cysts  in  the  rind  concave.  Pulp  subacid,  flat,  slightly
bitter.

History. — These  plants  are  of  Asiatic  origin,  and  cultivated  in  the
West  Indies,  and  some  other  tropical  countries ;  this  market  is  supplied
chiefly  from  the  West  Indies  and  the  Mediterranean.  The  exterior  rind
of  the  lemon,  and  the  juice  of  its  pulp,  are  officinal.  The  rind  or  lemon
peel  has  a  fragrant  odor,  and  a  warm,  bitter,  aromatic  taste,  which
depend  upon  a  volatile  oil  contained  in  the  minute  vesicles  with  which
it  is  filled,  and  which,  when  obtained  by  distillation  with  water,  or
expression,  forms  the  oil  of  lemon,  of  commerce.  (See  Oil  of  Lemon.)
Lemon  peel  yields  its  virtues  to  water,  wine,  and  alcohol.

Lemon  juice  has  an  intense,  grateful,  acid  taste,  and  a  slight  odor
of  the  rind.  It  is  often  kept  in  a  separate  state  by  adding  a  tenth
of  strong  brandy,  or  a  tenth  of  alcohol,  and  then  filtering  off  the  muci-
lage which  separates ;  it  becomes  slightly  bitterish  after  a  time,  but
retains  its  strong  aciditj7  undiminished.  Lemon  syrup  is  another  form
in  which  the  juice  is  preferred.  However,  it  is  very  liable  to  sponta-
neous decomposition,  becoming  unfit  for  medical  use,  hence,  citric  acid
in  solution,  is  its  best  medicinal  substitute ;  nine  drachms  and  a  half  of
this  acid  dissolved  in  a  pint  of  water,  form  a  solution  of  the  average
strength  of  lemon  juice,  to  which  a  few  drops  of  oil  or  essence  of  lemon
may  be  added.  Lemon  juice  contains  2.5  per  cent,  of  solid  matter,  of
which  1.77  is  citric  acid,  and  the  rest  chiefly  mucilage  and  malic  acid.
The  finest  lemons  are  those  which  are  smoothest  and  thinnest  in  the
skin.

The  lime  is  smaller  than  the  lemon,  with  a  smoother  and  thinner
rind,  oval,  rounded  at  the  extremities,  of  a  pale  or  greenish-yellow  color,
and  abounding  in  an  acid  juice,  which  is  chiefly  used  in  the  manufacture
24


370  Materia Medica.

of  citric  acid. A variety of the  lime  tree, C.  Limetta, furnishes a
fruit  from  the  rind  of  which  is  obtained  the  Oil  of  Bergamot.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Lemon  peel  is  used  in  cookery  and  confec-
tionary, and  also  in  medicine  to  qualify  the  taste  and  increase  the
power  of  bitter  infusions  and  tinctures,  its  virtues  are  similar  to  that  of
the  orange  peel.  The  juice  of  lemon  is  tonic,  refrigerant  and  antiscor-
butic, forming  a  refreshing  and  agreeable  drink,  possessing  some  medi-
cinal influence,  called  Lemonade,  and  which,  as  with  orange  juice,  may
be  used  freely  and  advantageously  in  the  febrile  and  inflammatory
diseases,  for  which  this  last  has  been  recommended.  It  may  also  be
added  to  the  nutritive  drinks  of  the  sick,  as  gum  water,  gruel,  barley-
water,  etc.  Its  power  of  preventing  and  arresting  scurvy  is  unequaled
by  any  other  remedy,  except  a  liberal  supply  of  fresh  vegetables  of  the
Cruciform  family.  In  scurvy,  an  ounce  or  an  ounce  and  a  half  of  the
juice  per  day,  is  a  preventive  dose,  and  when  the  disease  manifests
itself,  four  or  six  ounces  per  day  will  arrest  it.  Occasionally,  but  rarely,
it  fails  to  effect  any  benefit  in  this  disease.  Ships  destined  for  long
voyages  should  always  be  provided  with  a  supply  of  lemon  syrup,  or
citric  acid  with  oil  of  lemon.  Lemon  juice  has  been  used  as  an  external
application  in  pruritus  of  the  scrotum,  and  in  uterine  hemorrhage  after
delivery.

Off.  Prep.  —  Acidum  Citricum  ;  Liquor  Potassae  Citratis;  Syrupus
Limonis.


CLEMATIS  VIRGINIANA.

Virgin's Bower.

Nat.  Ord. — Ranunculacea?. Sex. Sysl. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE BARK, LEAVES AND BLOSSOMS.

Description. — Clematis  Virginiana  is  a  perennial,  climbing  plant,  with
a  stem  from  eight  to  fifteen  feet  or  more  in  length,  supporting  itself  on
shrubs,  fences  and  brushwood,  by  means  of  its  long  petioles.  The  leaves
are  deep-green,  ternate  ;  leaflets  ovate,  cordate,  acuminate,  lobed,  cut-
dentate,  and  from  two  to  three  inches  in  length  by  one  or  two  in  breadth  ;
flowers  in  clusters,  paniculate,  often  dioecious  ;  pa?iicles  large,  axillary,
dichotomous.  Sepals  four,  white,  spreading,  oval-oblon<>-,  obtuse.  Sta-
mens from  twenty-eight  to  thirty-six.  Fruit  furnished  with  long,  plu-
mose tails,  appearing  in  large,  downy  tufts ;  seeds  compressed.

History. — The  Clematis  Virginiana  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,
and  grows  by  river-banks,  in  hedges  and  thickets,  from  Canada  to
Georgia  and  the  Mississippi. It  flowers  in  July  and  August. The  parts


Clematis  Virginiana.  371

used  are  the  bark,  leaves,  and  blossoms,  which  yield  their  virtues  to
water  or  alcohol.  The  leaves  should  be  gathered  when  they  are  fully
grown,  say  in  August,  spread  in  the  shade,  and  after  drying  thoroughly,
should  be  closely  pressed  and  packed  in  firm  papers  to  exclude  the  air  as
much  as  possible,  or  what  is  better,  should  be  placed  into  well  closed
glass  jars,  whose  mouths  are  sealed,  or  covered  with  oiled  silk,  bladder,
or  other  impervious  material.

The  C.  Viorna  or  Leather  Flower,  which  is  more  common  in  the
western  States,  and  may  be  found  growing  in  woods  from  Pennsylvania
to  the  Mississippi,  may,  probably,  be  employed  as  a  substitute  for  the
above.  It  differs  from  it  in  having  a  cylindrical,  striate  stem  ;  with
opposite,  decompound,  pinnately  divided  leaves,  consisting  of  from  nine
to  twelve  ovate-lanceolate  leaflets,  acute  at  each  end,  entire  or  three-
lobed  ;  flowers  large,  purple,  nodding,  solitary  axillary,  campanulate  ;
sepals  thick,  leathery,  acuminate,  and  peduncles  from  three  to  six  inches
long,  with  a  pair  of  small,  simple,  entire  leaves  near  the  middle.

Properties  and  Uses. — When  applied  to  the  skin  in  a  fresh  state,  they
blister  it ;  and  if  taken  internally,  act  as  a  corrosive  poison.  Both  dry-
ing and  boiling  destroy  the  virulent  property.  They  have  been  used
externally  in  the  treatment  of  several  cutaneous  affections,  and  in  the  form
of  a  liniment  made  with  oil  for  the  cure  of  itch ;  internally,  as  diu-
retics and  sudorifics  in  chronic  rheumatism,  palsy,  etc.,  in  minute  doses.
The  extract,  in  doses  of  one  or  two  grains,  is  recommended  for  osteo-
copic  pains.  The  green  leaves  bruised  are  sometimes  employed  to  pro-
duce vesication,  also,  as  an  escharotic  and  detergent  for  venereal  and
other  foul  and  indolent  ulcers.

Dr.  C.  H.  Cleveland,  of  Waterbury,  Vt.,  speaks  highly  of  the  C.  Vir-
giniana as  a  nervine  in  uterine  diseases;  he  places  two  drachms  of  the
dried  leaf  into  a  cup  filled  with  hot  water,  covers  it,  and  allows  it  to
stand  until  the  liquid  is  cool  enough  to  drink;  strain,  sweeten  with  sugar
if  desired,  and  let  the  patient  drink  it  at  once.  Repeated  as  often  as
may  be  required,  the  doses  being  regulated  by  its  effects  upon  the  system.
The  root  of  the  C.  Dioica,  a  native  of  Jamaica,  boiled  with  sea-water,
acts  as  a  powerful  hydragogue  cathartic,  and  is  useful  in  dropsy;  and  an
infusion  of  the  leaves  and  flowers,  removes  spots  and  freckles  from  the
skin.  The  roots  of  the  C.  Vitalba  boiled  for  a  short  time  to  diminish
their  acrimony,  and  then  infused  in  boiling  oil,  were  applied  to  the  skin
several  times  a  day,  in  itch,  and  a  cure  was  effected  in  twelve  or  fifteen
applications.


372  Materia  Medica.

COCCULUS PALMATUS.

Colombo.

Nat. Orel. — Menispermacese. Sex.  Syst, — Dioecia  Hexandria.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  Colombo  is  a  climbing  plant,  with  a  perennial  root,
formed  of  a  number  of  fasciculated,  fusiform,  somewhat  branched,  fleshy,
curved,  and  descending  tubers,  of  the  thickness  of  an  infant's  arm,
covered  with  a  thin,  brown  epidermis,  marked,  especially  toward  the
upper  part,  with  transverse  warts  ;  internally  they  are  deep  yellow,  inodo-
rous, very  bitter,  and  filled  with  numerous,  parallel,  longitudinal  fibers
or  vessels.  The  stems,  of  which  one  or  two  proceed  from  the  same  root,
are  annual,  herbaceous,  about  as  thick  as  the  little  finger,  simple  in  the
male  plant,  twining,  branched  in  the  female,rounded,  green  ;  in  the  full-
grown  plant,  below,  thickly  clothed  with  succulent,  longitudinal  hairs,
which  are  tipped  with  a  gland.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  large,  the
younger  ones  thin,  pellucid,  bright-green,  generally  three-lobed,  upward
gradually  more  numerous  ;  older  ones  remote,  a  span  in  breadth,  nearly
orbicular,  deeply  cordate,  five  to  seven-lobed,  the  lobes  entire,  often
deflexed,  wavy  on  the  surface  and  margin,  dark-green  above,  paler
beneath  ;  hairy  on  both  sides  ;  the  nerves  according  to  the  number  of
lobes,  are  three,  seven,  or  nine,  pale,  connected  by  veins  which,  in  them-
selves, are  reticulated,  prominent  beneath.  Petioles  about  as  long  as
the  leaves,  rounded,  glandulosopilose,  thickened  below.  The  flowers  are
small  and  inconspicuous,  and  are  arranged  in  the  male  plant  in  solitary,
axillary,  drooping,  compound  racemes,  covered  with  glandular  hairs,  and
with  small  caducous  bracts  at  the  base  ;  in  the  female  also  axillary,  soli-
tary, simple,  spreading,  shorter  than  those  of  the  male.  The  calyx  is
glabrous,  of  six  sepals,  arranged  in  a  double  series.  The  corolla  consists
of  six  pale-green  petals  in  a  single  row;  The  stamens  are  six,  with  ter-
minal, truncate,  four-celled  anthers.  The  pistils  are  three,  of  which  two
are  often  abortive  ;  stigma  spreading.  The  fruit  is  drupaceous  or  ber-
ried, about  the  size  of  a  hazelnut,  densely  clothed  with  long  spreading
hairs,  tipped  with  a  black,  oblong  gland.  The  seeds  are  somewhat  reni-
form,  of  a  black  color,  and  transversely  striate.

History. — This  plant  inhabits  the  forests  near  the  coast  of  Mozam-
bique, and  Oibo  in  East  Africa,  and  has  been  cultivated  at  Madras,  and
permum  Palmatum,  and  has  only  recently  been  properly  investigated
and  classified.  It  grows  abundantly  on  the  south-eastern  coast  of  Africa,
in  the  neighborhood  of  Mozambique,  where  it  is  known  by  the  name  of
Kalumb. The  root  is  dug  up  in  the  dry  season  in  the  month  of  March,


Cocculus  Palmatus.  373

and  only  the  fusiform  offsets  are  taken,  as  the  main  root  is  too  fihrous
and  woody ;  these  are  transversely  sliced,  strung  on  cords,  and  dried  in
the  shade.  As  met  with  in  the  shops,  the  roots  consist  of  transverse
sections,  from  half  an  inch  to  three  inches  in  diameter,  and  from  one-eighth
of  an  inch  to  one  inch  in  thickness.  These  sections  are  flat,  circular,  or
oval,  and  composed  of  a  thin,  outer  epidermis,  brown  and  wrinkled, — a
thick,  bright-yellow  inner  bark,  of  a  slightly-greenish  color  internally, —
and  a  light,  spongy,  yellowish,  ligneous  internal  or  medullary  portion,
usually  more  or  less  shrunk,  so  that  the  center  of  the  sections  are  the
thinnest,  and  frequently  marked  with  concentric  circles  and  radiating
lines.  Those  pieces  are  the  finest  which  are  the  most  compact  and  uni-
form in  their  texture,  least  worm-eaten,  and  have  the  brightest  color.
The  root  is  brittle  and  easily  pulverized,  the  powder  having  a  pale  green-
ish-yellow tint,  becoming  darker  by  age,  a  faint  aromatic  odor,  a  strong
bitter  taste,  without  acrimony  or  astringency.  The  cortical  portion  of
the  root  possesses  the  greatest  intensity  of  bitterness.  It  readily  imparts
its  bitterness  to  water,  alcohol,  or  ether.  The  powder  undergoes  decom-
position by  attracting  moisture  from  the  air,  and  should,  in  consequence,
be  prepared  in  small  quantities  at  a  time,  and  kept  in  well-corked  bottles.
Colombo  contains  an  azotized  substance,  in  large  quantity,  a  bitter  yel-
low substance  not  precipitated  by  metallic  salts,  one-third  its  weight  of
starch,  a  small  proportion  of  volatile  oil,  salts  of  lime  and  potassa,  oxide
of  iron,  and  silica,  beside  colombin  and  berberin.  It  ma}7  be  known
from  American  Colombo,  by  an  infusion  of  the  latter  becoming  dark-
green  with  the  sesquichloride  of  iron,  and  not  being  affected  by  the
tincture  of  galls  ;  while  the  imported  is  not  affected  by  the  iron,  and
yields  a  copious  grayish  precipitate  with  galls.

Colombin  may  be  obtained  by  exhausting  Colombo  by  means  of  alco-
hol of  sp.  gr.  0.835,  distilling  off  three-fourths  of  the  alcohol,  allowing
the  residue  to  stand  for  some  days  till  crystals  are  deposited,  and  lastly,
treating  these  crystals  with  alcohol  and  animal  charcoal.  The  mother
waters  still  contain  a  considerable  quantity  of  colombin,  which  may  be
separated  by  evaporating  with  coarsely-powdered  glass  to  dryness,
exhausting  the  residue  with  ether,  filtering,  distilling  off  the  ether,  treat-
ing the  residue  with  boiling  acetic  acid,  and  evaporating  the  solution  so
that  crystals  may  form.  The  crystals  are  in  beautiful  transparent  qua-
drilateral prisms,  inodorous,  and  extremely  bitter.  They  are  soluble  in
boiling  alcohol,  which  deposits  them  on  cooling,  and  but  slightly  soluble
in  water,  alcohol,  or  ether,  at  60°,  although  the  bitter  taste  is  imparted
to  these  fluids.  Diluted  acetic  acid  is  the  best  solvent.  Alkaline  solu-
tions take  up  colombin,  and  from  which  acids  precipitate  it.  It  has
neither  acid  nor  alkaline  reactions.

Berberin  exists  more  largely  in  the  Colombo  root,  than  Colombin,  it
exists in combination  with Colombic Acid  forming  a Colombate of


374  Matekia  Hedica.

Berberin,  which  exists  in  the  thick  layers  of  the  cell  membranes,  while
colombin  occurs  in  the  cells  of  the  root  in  a  crystalline  state.  It  may  be
obtained  by  exhausting  Colombo  with  alcohol  of  0.889,  distilling  off  the
alcohol,  allowing  the  residual  liquor  to  stand  for  three  days  so  as  to
deposit  its  colombin,  then  evaporating  the  supernatant  liquid,  together
with  the  aqueous  washings  of  the  colombin,  to  dryness,  exhausting  the
residue  with  boiling  alcohol  of  0.863,  treating  the  solution  thus  obtained
as  the  former  one,  submitting  the  residue  to  the  action  of  boiling  water,
filtering  and  adding  muriatic  acid,  collecting  the  precipitated  muriate  of
berberin  thus  formed,  on  a  filter,  drying  it  with  bibulous  paper,  and
finally,  to  separate  adhering  acid,  dissolving  it  in  alcohol,  and  precipi-
tating with  ether.  The  precipitate  will  be  a  bright  yellow  powder,
imperfectly  crystalline,  and  disagreeably  bitter.

Precipitates  of  the  solutions  of  Colombo  are  caused  by  infusion  of
galls,  acetate  of  lead,  corrosive  sublimate,  and  lime-water,  but  which  do
not  affect  its  bitter  principle.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  A  pure,  bitter  tonic.  Used  in  dyspepsia,
chronic  diarrhea,  and  dysentery ;  in  convalescence  from  febrile  and
inflammatory  diseases,  hectic  fever,  and  in  the  muscular  debility  of
young  children.  It  has  been  recommended  in  sympathetic  vomiting,
not  connected  with  inflammation  of  the  stomach,  as  in  that  of  pregnant
women.  Like  other  strong  bitters,  it  occasionally  checks  the  remittent
and  intermittent  fevers  of  hot  climates.  A  powerful  tonic  may  be
formed  of  the  alcoholic  extract  of  the  root.  In  dyspepsia,  and  vomit-
ing it  may  be  advantageously  combined  with  the  alkaline  bicarbonates,
as  well  as  in  debility  with  acidity  of  the  stomach.  It  is  used  in  various
combinations,  with  aromatics,  antacids,  cathartics,  or  other  tonics.  Dose
of  the  powder,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  of
the  infusion,  from  one  to  two  fluidounces  ;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to
two  fluidrachms.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Colombae  ;  Tinctura  Colombee ;  Vinum  Sym-
phyti  Compositum.


COCCUS  CACTI.

Cochineal.

History. — The  cochineal  insect,  Coccus  Cacti,  belongs  to  the  class
Insecta,  order  Hemiptera  ;  it  is  characterized  by  its  depressed,  downy,
transversely  wrinkled  body,  its  purplish  abdomen,  its  short  and  black
legs,  and  its  subulate  antennae,  which  are  about  one-third  of  the  length
of  the  body.  It  is  found  wild  in  Mexico  and  the  adjoining  countries,
where  it  feeds  on  the  different  species  of  Cactus  and  the  allied  genera,
but  especially  the  Opuntia  Cochenillifera,  on  which  it  thrives  best.  They
are  collected  at  various  seasons. The  best  are  the  product  of  the  first


Coccus  Cacti.  375

collection,  which  consists  of  the  impregnated  females  ;  the  males  are  not
collected.  Those  killed  by  the  heat  of  a  stove,  are  said  to  be  superior
to  those  destroyed  by  boiling  water.  As  obtained  in  the  shops,  Cochi-
neal is  in  irreoularly-circular  or  oval,  somewhat  angular  grains,  about
one-eighth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  convex  on  one  side,  concave  or  flat
on  the  other,  and  marked  with  several  transverse  wrinkles.  There  are
two  varieties,  one  of  a  reddish-gray  color,  silver  grains,  the  other  almost
black,  black  grains  ;  there  is  no  difference  in  their  quality.

The  Silver  Cochineal  is  said  to  consist  of  the  female  insect  killed
before  it  has  laid  its  eggs  ;  Black  Cochineal,  of  the  female  after  having
laid  its  eggs ;  the  first  is  the  most  esteemed.  There  is  also  an  inferior
sort,  consisting  chiefly  of  young  insects,  called  Grunilla.

Cochineal  has  a  faint  heavy  odor,  and  a  bitter,  slightly  acidulous  taste ;
its  powder  is  of  a  purplish-carmine  color.  It  consists  of  carmine,  ani-
mal matter,  stearin,  olein,  etc.  The  coloring  matter  of  cochineal  is  dis-
solved out  by  water,  alcohol,  and  proof  spirit.

Carmine  may  be  prepared  by  boiling  one  pound  of  powdered  cochi-
neal and  three  drachms  and  a  half  of  subcarbonate  of  potassa,  in  a
boiler  containing  seven  gallons  of  water.  After  boiling  for  a  few  minutes,
take  the  boiler  off  the  fire,  and  place  it  on  a  table,  inclined  to  one  side  so
as  to  facilitate  decantation.  Add  powdered  alum,  eight  drachms,  and
stir  the  solution.  The  liquor  changes  color  and  assumes  a  more  bril-
liant tint.  After  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  the  cochineal  will  have  deposited,
and  the  liquor  have  become  as  clear  as  if  it  had  been  filtered.  It  con-
tains the  carmine  in  suspension.  The  liquor  is  then  decanted  into  a
similar  pan,  and  placed  on  the  fire,  adding  three  drachms  and  a  half  of
isinglass,  which  has  been  previously  dissolved  in  two  quarts  of  water
and  strained.  At  the  moment  of  ebullition  the  carmine  rises  to  the  sur-
face, and  a  coagulum  forms  as  in  clarification  with  white  of  egg.  The
pan  is  then  removed  from  the  fire,  and  the  liquor  stirred  with  a  spatula.
After  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  carmine  will  be  deposited,  when  the
liquor  is  to  be  decanted,  and  the  deposit  drained  on  a  strained  filter,  and
then  dried  in  a  stove  at  a  temperature  from  82°  to  86°.  If  dried  in  the
open  air  it  will  become  moldy.  This  makes  a  very  fine  carmine.  The
remaining  solution  will  make  fine  carminated  lake.  A  fine  red  ink  may
be  made  as  follows :  Take  of  cochineal  in  powder  eight  scruples,  car-
bonate of  potassa  sixteen  scruples,  distilled  water  eight  fluidounces,  mix
together  and  boil ;  then  add  of  alum  four  scruples,  bitartrate  of  potassa
two  ounces;  let  them  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  filter,  and  add  of
powdered  gum  Arabic  half  an  ounce.

Properties  and  Uses. — Anodyne.  Used  in  hooping-cough,  and  neural-
gic affections.  Also  used  to  color  tinctures  and  ointments.  Dose,  from
five  to  ten  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Of.  Prep. — Tinctura  Cardamomi  Composita.


376  Materia  Medica.

COCHLEAR! A  ARMORACIA.

Horseradish.
Nat.  Orel. — Brassicaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Tetradynamia  Siliculosa.

FRESH  ROOT.

Description. — Horseradish  root  is  perennial,  thick,  tapering,  white,
long,  acrid,  and  very  tenacious  of  life,  sending  up  numerous  very  large
leaves,  from  the  midst  of  which  a  round  or  angular,  smooth,  erect
branching  stem  rises,  two  or  three  feet  in  hight ;  those  branches  which
flower  are  corymbose,  smooth,  angular.  The  radical  leaves  are  near  a
foot  long,  half  as  wide,  oblong,  crenate-toothed,  waved,  sometimes  pin-
natifid,  of  a  dark-green  color,  and  stand  upon  long,  channeled  petioles;
the  cauline  leaves  are  smaller,  lanceolate,  dentate  or  incised,  sessile,
sometimes  entire,  and  without  footstalks  ;  the  lower  ones  often  pinnati-
fid.  The  flowers  are  numerous,  small,  white,  peduncled,  and  in  terminal
corymbose  racemes.  The  calyx  spreading  with  four  ovate,  concave,  and
deciduous  sepals.  The  corolla  consists  of  four  obovate,  unguiculate  petals,
twice  as  long  as  the  sepals.  The  stamens  are  as  long  as  the  calyx,  in-
curved, and  supporting  heart-shaped  anthers.  The  ovary  is  oblong,  with
a  short  style,  bearing  a  short  capitate  stigma,  and  changing  into  an
elliptical,  compressed,  bilocular  pod  or  silicle,  containing  about  four
seeds  in  each  cell,  many  of  which  are  abortive.

History. — This  is  a  well-known  succulent  plant,  a  native  of  Europe,
and  extensively  cultivated  for  the  use  of  its  roots  as  a  condiment.  Its
flowers  appear  in  June.  The  fresh  root  is  the  officinal  part  and  should
be  dug  up  in  the  autumn,  as  its  acrimony  is  then  the  strongest;  it  may
be  preserved  for  some  time  fresh,  by  burying  it  in  a  cool  place  in
sand.  The  root  is  whitish  externally,  very  white  within,  fleshy,  fibrous,
of  a  strong,  pungent  odor  when  bruised  or  scraped,  exciting  violent
sneezing  and  secretion  of  tears,  and  of  an  exceedingly  pungent,  some-
what sweetish  taste.  Water,  alcohol,  or  vinegar  extracts  its  properties,
which  depend  upon  the  presence  of  a  volatile  oil,  and  which  is  dissipated
by  heat  or  desiccation.

The  oil  may  be  obtained  by  distillation  with  water,  but  not  with  alco-
hol ;  it  is  colorless  or  pale  yellow,  heavier  than  water,  very  volatile,
excessively  pungent,  acrid,  and  corrosive,  exciting  inflammation  and
even  vesication  when  applied  to  the  skin.  It  is  supposed  to  be  perfectly
identical  with  the  volatile  oil  of  mustard,  and  is  obtained  in  minute  pro-
portion, six  parts  only  of  the  oil  being  procured  from  ten  thousand  of
the  root.  It  is  believed  not  to  exist  already-formed  in  the  unbroken
root,  but  to  be  developed  by  the  mutual  reaction  of  its  constituents  when
the  root  is  bruised. The  dried  root  possesses  no  pungency,  and  yields


COFFEA ARABICA.


377


no  volatile  oil  when  distilled  with  water,  unless  white  mustard  be  added  ;
the  myrosine  of  the  mustard  supplying  some  necessary  principle  de-
stroyed by  desiccation.  In  addition,  the  root  contains  a  bitter  resin,
sugar,  gum,  starch,  extractive,  albumen,  acetic  acid,  acetate  and  sul-
phate of  lime,  water  and  lignin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  diuretic,  antiscorbutic,  and  rubefa-
cient. It  excites  the  stomach  when  swallowed,  and  promotes  the  secre-
tions, especially  that  of  urine.  The  infusion  is  emetic.  It  has  been
used  with  advantage  in  chronic  affections  attended  with  debility  of  the
digestive  organs,  and  of  the  system  in  general,  as  in  paralysis,  rheuma-
tism, dropsy,  and  as  an  antiscorbutic  in  scurvy.  In  dropsy,  an  infusion
of  the  root  in  cider  and  drank  as  warm  as  could  be  borne,  in  large
quantities  and  freely,  the  patient  being  warmly  covered  up,  has  caused
copious  diuresis  and  diaphoresis,  and  cured  the  disease  in  a  few  weeks;
the  operation  being  repeated  nightly,  or  as  the  strength  of  the  patient
would  permit.  It  enters  into  the  following  excellent  preparation,  which
has  often  cured  dropsy  alone,  but  the  use  of  which  is  generally  preceded
by  active  hydragogues  ; — Take  of  Parsley  roots  and  tops,  Carbonate  of
Iron,  of  each  four  ounces  ;  Juniper  berries,  Squills,  White  Mustard  seed,
Mandrake,  Queen  of  the  meadow  root,  of  each,  one  ounce,  Horseradish
two  ounces  ;  good  Cider,  not  new  or  too  hard,  six  quarts.  Place  the
whole  in  an  unglazed  earthen  vessel,  cover,  and  digest  with  heat  for
twenty-four  hours.  Dose,  a  wineglassful  three  or  four  times  a  day.
The  grated  root  with  sugar  to  form  a  syrup  with  water,  is  excellent  for
hoarseness,  a  spoonful  or  two  may  be  swallowed  as  occasion  requires.
It  has  been  also  used  externally,  as  a  rubefacient.  Dose  of  the  root
grated,  from  one  to  two  drachms.

The  Cochlearia  Officinalis,  or  scurvy  grass  is  seldom  used  in  medi-
cine ;  it  possesses  similar  properties.
Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Armoraciae.


COFFEA  ARABICA.

Coffee.

Nat Orel. — Cinchonacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE SEEDS.

Description. — Coffee  tree  is  an  evergreen  shrub,  growing  from  twenty
to  thirty  feet  in  night,  with  an  erect  stem,  covered  with  a  brownish  bark.
The  branches  are  opposite,  the  lower  spreading,  the  upper  somewhat
declining,  and  gradually  diminishing  in  length  as  they  ascend,  so  as  to
form  a  pyramidal  summit,  which  is  covered  with  a  green  foliage  through-


378  Materia Medica.

out  the  year.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  ovate-lanceolate,  entire,  acumi-
nate, smooth  and  shining,  bright-green  above  and  paler  below,  four  or
five  inches  long,  on  short  petioles,  and  accompanied  with  a  pair  of
small,  undivided,  subulate  stipules.  The  flowers  are  white,  having  an
odor  similar  to  jasmine,  sessile,  and  are  in  clusters  of  four  or  five  toge-
ther, in  the  axils  of  the  upper  leaves  ;  peduncles  short.  The  calyx  is
very  small,  superior,  five-toothed.  The  corolla  is  funnel-shaped,  with  a
flat  border  divided  into  five  spreading,  lanceolate,  pointed  segments.
The  stamens  are  inserted  into  the  tube  of  the  corolla,  and  have  yellow,
linear  anthers.  The  ovary  is  inferior,  ovate,  and  supports  a  simple
style,  with  two  awl-shaped,  refiexed  stigmas.  The  fruit  or  berry  is  glo-
bular, about  the  size  of  a  cherry,  umbilicated  at  the  summit,  deep-pur-
ple, two-celled,  two-seeded,  and  containing  a  yellowish  pulpy  matter.
The  seeds  are  hemispherical,  convex  on  one  side,  and  flat  on  the  other
with  a  longitudinal  furrow,  of  a  pale  glaucous  color,  and  invested  in  a
thin,  elastic,  somewhat  translucent  arillus  ;  they  constitute  the  coffee  of
commerce.

History. — Coffee  is  a  native  of  Southern  Arabia  and  Africa,  and  is
cultivated  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  between  the  latitudes  of  55°
north  and  south.  The  tree  is  raised  from  the  seeds,  which  are  sown  in
proper  soil,  and  germinate  in  less  than  a  month,  producing  plants  which
are  sufficiently  large  for  transplanting  at  the  end  of  the  year.  They
are  then  placed  in  rows,  and  begin  to  bear  fruit  in  three  or  four  years.
The  seeds  are  known  to  be  ripe  when  the  berries  assume  a  dark-red
color,  and  if  not  gathered  will  drop  spontaneously.  When  gathered,
they  are  dried,  and  their  papyraceous  envelope  removed.

There  are  many  varieties  of  coffee  in  commerce,  the  characters  of
which  depend  upon  the  soil,  the  climate,  and  the  mode  of  culture.  The
Mocha  Coffee  is  esteemed  the  best,  and  the  Java  next ;  but  the  principal
supply  in  this  country  is  from  the  West  Indies  and  South  America.
Good  coffee  should  be  hard,  and  so  heavy  as  to  readily  sink  in  water;
age  improves  its  flavor  ;  soft,  light,  black  or  dark-colored,  or  musty
grains  are  of  inferior  quality.

Coffee  has  a  faint,  peculiar  odor,  and  a  slightly-sweetish,  somewhat
austere  taste.  It  contains  cellulose,  hygroscopic  water,  fatty  matter,
glucose,  dextrine  and  a  vegetable  acid,  legumin,  chlorogenate  of  potassa
and  caffein,  free  caffein,  concrete  volatile  oil,  fluid  volatile  oil,  and  min-
eral substances.  Caffein  may  be  obtained  in  the  following  manner:
Exhaust  bruised  coffee  by  two  successive  portions  of  boiling  water,
unite  the  infusions,  add  acetate  of  lead  in  order  to  precipitate  the  prin-
ciples which  accompany  the  caffein,  filter,  decompose  the  excess  of  ace-
tate of  lead  in  the  filtered  liquor  by  sulphureted  hydrogen,  and  evaporate
to  the  point  of  crystallization.  Concentrate  by  evaporation,  and  neu-
tralize with  ammonia. The  crystals  which  form  upon  cooling,  may  ho


COFFEA ArABICA.  379

redissolved  in  water,  treated  with  auimal  charcoal,  and  the  solution  be
again  evaporated.

H.  J.  Versman  states  the  following  to  be  the  most  profitable  and  sim-
ple mode  of  obtaining  caffein  :  "  Ten  parts  of  bruised  coffee  are  mized
with  two  parts  of  caustic  lime,  previously  converted  into  hydrate  of
lime.  This  mixture  is  placed  in  a  displacement  apparatus,  with  alcohol
of  80°,  until  the  fluid  which  passes  through  no  longer  furnishes  evi-
dence of  the  presence  of  caffein.  The  coffee  is  then  roughly  ground,
and  brought  nearly  to  the  state  of  a  powder,  and  the  refuse  of  the
already  once  digested  mixture  from  the  displacement  apparatus  dried,
and  ground  again,  and,  mixed  with  hydrate  of  lime,  is  once  more
macerated.  The  grinding  is  more  easily  effected  after  the  coffee  has
been  subjected  to  the  operation  of  the  alcohol,  having  lost  its  horny
quality,  and  the  caffein  is  thus  certainly  extracted.  The  clear  alcoholic
fluid  thus  obtained  is  then  to  be  distilled,  and  the  refuse  in  the  retort
to  be  washed  with  warm  water  to  separate  the  oil.  The  resulting  fluid
is  then  evaporated  until  it  forms  a  crystalline  mass,  which  is  to  be
placed  on  a  thick  Biter,  and  the  moisture  expressed.  The  moisture,
after  evaporation,  still  furnishes  some  caffein.  The  impure  caffein  is
freed  from  oil  by  pressure  between  folds  of  blotting-paper,  and  purified
by  solution  in  water  with  animal  charcoal,  and  then  crystallized  by  eva-
poration. Good  Brazilian  coffee,  thus  yields  0.57  per  cent,  of  caffein.

Caffein  crystallizes  by  the  cooling  of  its  concentrated  solution,  in
white,  opake,  silky,  flexible  needles  ;  by  slow  and  spontaneous  evapora-
tion, in  long,  transparent  prisms.  It  has  a  feebly  bitter  and  disagreeable
taste,  is  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,  and  ether,  melts  when  exposed  to
heat,  and  at  a  higher  temperature  sublimes,  without  residue,  into
needles  analogous  to  those  formed  by  benzoic  acid.  It  is  precipitated
from  its  aqueous  solution  by  no  reagent  except  tannic  acid,  and  is
remarkable  for  containing  a  larger  proportion  of  nitrogen  than  any
other  proximate  vegetable  principle  ;  and  in  this  respect  equals  some  of
the  most  highly  animalized  products.  It  is  a  feeble  base,  but  forms
very  large  crystalline  salts  with  sulphuric  and  muriatic  acids.  Its
composition  is  considered  to  be  Cs  N2  Hs  O2,  and  it  is  believed  to  be
identical  with  thein,  the  peculiar  principle  of  tea.

Notwithstanding  the  quantity  of  nitrogen  in  its  composition,  caffein
does  not  putrefy,  even  when  its  solution  is  kept  for  some  time  in  a
warm  place.

The  Hanoverian  Pharmacopoeia  directs  caffein  to  be  made  by  preci-
pitating a  decoction  of  coffee  with  acetate  of  lead,  filtering  and  washing
the  precipitate,  evaporate  the  liquids  to  dryness,  and  after  mixing  the
powdered  extract  with  sand,  the  mass  is  sublimed  in  a  Mohr's  apparatus,
just  as  in  making  benzoic  acid.

Coffee  undergoes  considerable  change  during  the  roasting  process.  It
swells  up  very  much,  acquiring  almost  double  its  original  volume,  while


380  Materia Medica.

it  loses  about  20  per  cent,  of  its  weight.  It  acquires,  at  the  same  time,
a  peculiar  odor  entirely  different  from  that  of  the  unaltered  grains,  and
a  decidedly  bitter  taste.  A  volatile  oil  is  developed  during  the  process,
and  according  to  Chenevix,  a  portion  of  tannin.  The  caffein  does  not
appear  to  undergo  material  change,  as,  according  to  Garot,  it  may  be
extracted  unaltered  from  the  roasted  coffee.  The  excellence  of  the
flavor  of  roasted  coffee  depends  much  upon  the  manner  in  which  the
process  is  conducted,  and  the  extent  to  which  it  is  carried.  It  should  be
performed  in  a  covered  vessel,  over  a  moderate  fire,  and  the  grains
should  be  kept  in  constant  motion.  When  these  have  acquired  a  chest-
nut-brown color,  the  process  should  cease.  If  too  long  continued,  it
renders  the  coffee  unpleasantly  bitter  and  acrid,  or  by  reducing  it  to
charcoal,  deprives  it  entirely  of  flavor.  The  coffee  should  not  be  burnt
long  before  it  is  used,  and  should  never  be  kept  in  the  ground  state,  as
it  loses  much  of  its  agreeable  flavor  and  activity.

Properties  and  Uses. — An  infusion  of  roasted  coffee  is  an  agreeable
stimulant,  antisoporific,  and  antiemetic.  It  moderately  excites  the  circu-
latory system,  and  stimulates  the  digestive  function;  though  if  taken  in
large  quantities  it  produces  troublesome  nervous  and  dyspeptic  affections.
A  cup  of  strong  coffee  will  cause  a  degree  of  wakefulness  for  several
hours,  and  it  may  be  administered  for  the  purpose  of  resisting,  to  a  cer-
tain extent,  the  intoxicating  and  soporific  influence  of  opium  and  alcohol.
In  poisoning  from  opium,  it  should  always  be  given.  It  has  also  proved
temporarily  useful  in  light  nervous  headaches,  asthma,  hysteria,  obstinate
chronic  diarrhea,  and  also  calculous  nephritis.  It  is  contra-indicated  in
all  inflammatory  affections  of  a  high  grade.  Dr.  A.  Brown,  of  Cincin-
nati, has  found  a  strong  decoction  of  the  pulverized,  unroasted  coffee,  a
superior  remedy  in  some  forms  of  chlorosis  and  amenorrhea.  When
fullness  of  the  head,  and  pain  in  the  back  are  present,  he  gives  a  gentle
purgative,  then  uses  the  warm  foot-bath,  and  administers  the  decoction
in  wineglassful  doses  every  half  hour  or  hour.

Coffee  has  also  been  used  with  much  success  in  hooping-cough,  in  the
form  of  syrup,  made  with  the  extract  of  coffee  prepared  without  heat,
or  a  strong  infusion  by  percolation,  given  in  small  and  repeated  doses.
Dr.  L.  Delahage  gives  the  following  formulee  as  almost  infallible  :  Take
of  syrup  of  extract  of  coffee  four  pounds,  extract  of  belladonna,  ex-
tract of  ipecacuanha,  of  each  two  scruples.  Mix  together.  Dose,  two
fluidrachms  or  a  dessertspoonful,  morning  and  noon,  and  double  this  dose
at  night  on  going  to  bed,  for  children  of  three  to  five  years  old;  it  should
be  taken  in  two  or  three  tablespoonfuls  of  warm  water.

The  Citrate  of  Caffein,  recommended  as  a  remedy  for  the  idiopathic
headache,  called  migraine,  (pain  in  the  forehead),  may  be  obtained  by
two  processes ;  the  most  simple  consists  in  infusing  finely-ground  raw
coffee  in  a  very  weak  solution  of  citric  acid,  at  the  temperature  of  176°  F.,


COLCHICUM AtJTUMNALE.  381

filtering  the  liquid  while  yet  hot,  adding  two-thirds  of  its  volume  of  ether,
and  agitating  the  mixture  strongly,  to  remove  the  chlorogenic  acid  from
the  watery  solution.  The  latter  is  separated  from  the  supernatant  ether,
and  is  carefully  evaporated  with  a  gentle  heat.  The  citrate  of  caffein
crystallizes  in  long  needles,  which,  when  redissolved  in  distilled  water
and  again  evaporated,  are  obtained  in  beautiful,  long  acicular  white  silky
crystals,  in  radiating  groups.

The  second  process  consists  in  making  the  compound  by  the  direct
union  of  its  constituents,  the  caffein  being  dissolved  in  a  weak  solution
of  citric  acid  at  the  temperature  of  112°  F.,  and  the  solution  evaporated
till  the  citrate  crystallizes.

This  salt  is  very  soluble  in  water,  and  is  assimilated  much  more
readily  than  pure  caffein  when  taken  into  the  stomach.  It  consists  of
one  equivalent  of  caffein,  three  of  citric  acid,  and  two  of  water.  It  may
be  made  into  a  pill  mass  with  some  simple  extract,  say  eight  grains  of
the  salt  to  fifteen  of  the  extract,  and  divided  into  ten  pills,  of  which  one
pill  may  be  given  every  hour  or  two.  Or,  two  drachms  and  a  half  of
the  salt  may  be  dissolved  in  four  ounces  of  simple  syrup,  of  which  one
tablespoonful  may  be  given  as  above,  according  to  the  violence  of  the
attack.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

Colchicum.

Nat.  Ord. — Melanthacese. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Trigynia.

CORMUS OR BULB,  AND SEEDS.

Description. — This  plant,  also  called  Meadow  Saffron,  is  a  perennial
bulbous  plant.  The  corm  is  large,  ovate,  solid,  fleshy.  The  leaves  are
dark-green,  very  smooth,  obtuse,  above  a  foot  long,  an  inch  and  a  half
broad,  carinated,  produced  in  the  spring,  along  with  the  capsules.
Flowers  several,  radical,  leafless,  bright  purple,  with  a  long  white  tube
appearing  in  the  autumn  without  the  leaves.  Capsules  three,  distinct,
though  forming  together  a  single,  oblong,  elliptical  fruit,  with  interme-
diate fissures. Seeds  whitish,  polished.

History. — Colchicum  grows  in  meadows,  and  low,  rich  situations  in
many  parts  of  Europe,  and  is  common  to  England.  The  herb  is  annual,
but  the  root  is  annual  or  perennial  according  to  the  manner  in  which  the
plant  is  propagated,  which  may  be  from  the  seed,  by  the  formation  of  a  sin-
gle mature  bulb  from  a  parent  bulb,  or  by  the  separation  of  several  imma-
ture bulbs  from  the  parent.  The  manner  of  growth  of  the  plant  deserves
a  brief  notice.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  summer,  a  new  bulb  or  cormus
commences  forming  at  the  lateral  inferior  portion  of  the  old  one,  which
receives  the  young  offshoot  in  its  bosom,  and  embraces  it  half  round.


382  Materia  Medica.

The  new  plant  sends  out  fibers  from  its  base,  and  is  furnished  with  a
radical,  cylindrical,  tubular  spathe,  cloven  at  top  on  one  side,  and  half
under-ground. In  September  from  two  to  six  lilac  or  purple  flowers
emerge  from  the  spathe,  and  unaccompanied  with  leaves  ;  by  the  end
of  October  these  flowers  perish,  and  the  rudiments  of  the  fruit  remain
under-ground  until  the  next  spring,  when  the  leaves  rise  upon  a  stem
above  the  surface,  elevating  along  with  them  the  germ  en  consisting  of
three  many-seeded  capsules,  which  ripen  their  seed  about  midsummer;
after  this  the  plant  speedily  dies  and  withers. While  the  flower  is  rising
in  the  autumn,  the  bulb  is  very  small,  but  in  the  winter  it  grows  rapidly,
being  in  April  as  large  as  a  chestnut,  and  attaining  its  greatest  size,
about  that  of  a  small  apricot,  in  July. It  is  now  a  year  old,  and  the
herb  having  matured  its  seed,  is  withering  away,  but  a  new  bulb  begins
to  appear  at  its  lower  end,  close  to  its  junction  with  the  radicles  or  root
proper,  which  passes  through  a  similar  succession  of  changes  ;  while  the
old  parent  bulb,  gradually  becomes  more  spongy  and  watery,  but  retains
its  size  until  the  following  April,  the  second  spring  of  its  own  existence,
when  it  quickly  decays. The  seeds  and  the  bulb  are  the  officinal  parts
of  the  plant. The  bulb  attains  its  greatest  perfection  about  the'  begin-
ning of  July,  at  which  time  it  should  be  gathered  for  medical  use. It
resembles  a  small  tulip  root,  rounded  on  one  side,  flattened  on  the  other,
being  brown  externally,  white  internally,  and  containing  an  acrid,  milky
juice. The  odor  is  kircine,  and  the  taste  unpleasant,  bitter  and  acrid.
In  drying,  the  bulb  is  usually  cut  into  thin  transverse  slices,  having  first
been  stripped  of  its  external  dark  brownish-black  membranous  tegument,
and  is  dried  quickly ;  sometimes  it  is  dried  entire.

Good  colchicum  bulbs  when  dried  are  of  an  oval-rounded  form,  with
a  notch  or  deep  groove  on  one  side,  of  a  grayish-white  color,  an  amyla-
ceous appearance,  firm,  dry,  and  capable  of  changing  their  color  to  blue
when  softened  with  distilled  vinegar,  and  then  touched  with  tincture  of
guaiacum.  Its  odor  is  much  less  than  in  the  fresh  bulb,  and  its  taste
bitter,  hot  and  acrid.  Alcohol,  wine,  or  vinegar  extracts  its  virtues.
The  acetic  tincture  is  generally  preferred  to  the  vinous,  as  it  is  not  so
liable  to  change  or  decomposition.  Acids  render  the  vinous  tincture
drastic,  while  alkalies  render  its  operation  milder.  It  contains  a  vege-
table alkali  combined  with  an  excess  of  gallic  acid ;  a  fatty  matter  com-
posed of  olein,  stearin,  and  a  peculiar  volatile  acid  analogous  to  the
cevadic;  a  yellow  coloring  matter;  gum  ;  starch  ;  inulin  in  large  quan-
tity, and  lignin.  The  alkaline  principle,  formerly  supposed  to  be  identical
with  veratria,  has  been  found  to  be  peculiar,  and  has  received  the  name
of  Colchicia.  Solution  of  iodine  causes  a  blue  precipitate  with  the
decoction  of  the  bulb  ;  the  acetate  of  lead,  nitrate  of  protoxide  of  mer-
cury, and  nitrate  of  silver  cause  white  precipitates ;  and  the  tincture  of
galls  a  slight  precipitate.


COLCHICUM AUTUMNALE.  383

Colchicum  seeds  should  be  gathered  about  the  beginning  of  August,
when  they  are  fully  ripe;  they  are  rough,  roundish,  dark-brown  exter-
nally, white  within,  about  the  eighth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  of  a
bitter,  acrid  taste.  It  was  formerly  supposed  that  their  active  properties
resided  in  the  husk  or  testa,  and  it  was  advised  not  to  bruise  them  in
making  the  tincture,  but  recent  experiments  have  proved  that  the  bruised
seeds  yield  the  strongest  tincture.  Their  properties  are  similar  with
those  of  the  bulb,  and  as  they  are  considered  more  uniform  in  strength
than  the  bulb,  they  are  usually  preferred  to  it.

Colchicia  may  be  obtained  by  a  process  similar  to  that  employed  in
the  preparation  of  hyoscyamia  from  hyoscyamus.  (See  the  article  Hyos-
cyamus).  A  simpler  process  is  to  digest  the  seeds  of  colchicum  in  boil-
ing alcohol,  precipitate  the  tincture  with  magnesia,  treat  the  precipitated
matter  with  boiling  alcohol,  and  finally  filter  and  evaporate.  It  is  crys-
tallizable,  bitter,  and  very  poisonous,  and  does  not,  like  veratria,  cause
sneezing  when  applied  to  the  nostrils,  is  more  soluble  in  water,  and  has
less  poisonous  influence  on  the  system.  It  is  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,
and  ether;  nitric  acid  colors  it  blue  or  violet ;  its  salts  are  crystallizable,
acrid,  bitter,  and  poisonous.  In  a  very  small  dose  it  causes  purging
and  vomiting.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  an  acro-narcotic  poison.  Medi-
cinally, sedative,  cathartic,  diuretic,  and  emetic.  Used  in  gout  and
gouty  rheumatism,  dropsy,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  gonorrhea,  enlarged
prostate,  etc.  Care  must  be  used  in  its  employment.  It  sometimes
increases  the  uric  acid  in  the  urine  of  arthritic  patients;  and  has  been
beneficially  employed  in  febrile,  inflammatory  and  nervous  affections,
and  in  chronic  bronchial  complaints.  A  good  acetic  tincture  may  be
made  by  macerating  an  ounce  and  a  half  of  the  dried  bulb,  or  seeds,  in
twelve  fiuidounces  of  the  strongest  vinegar  for  fourteen  days.  Then
filter,  and  keep  in  well-stopped  bottles.  The  dose  for  an  adult  is  from
thirty  to  sixty  drops,  as  often  as  may  be  required.  An  acetic  extract  may
be  prepared,  containing  all  the  powers  of  the  plant,  by  rubbing  the  bulbs
to  a  pulp  to  the  quantity  of  a  pound,  and  gradually  adding  acetic  or  pyro-
ligneous  acid  three  fiuidounces.  Express  the  liquid,  and  evaporate  it  in  an
earthen  vessel  not  glazed  with  lead,  to  the  proper  consistence ;  the  dose
is  from  one  to  three  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day.  Dose  of  the
dried  bulb,  from  one  to  eight  grains,  gradually  increased  every  four  or
six  hours,  till  the  effects  of  the  medicine  are  obtained.

Of.  Prep. — Tinctura  Colchici  Composita;  Tinctura  Colchici  Seminis ;
Vinum  Colchici  Radicis;  Vinum  Colchici  Seminis.


384  Materia  Medica.

COLLINSONIA CANADENSIS.

Hardhack.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceje. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant,  known  likewise  by  various  other  names,  as
Horseweed,  Heal-all,  Ricliweed,  Ox-balm,  etc.,  is  indigenous  with  a  peren-
nial knotty  root,  and  a  herbaceous,  simple  stem,  about  two  feet  high,
furnished  with  two  or  three  pairs  of  broad,  cordate,  ovate,  serrate,
petioled,  and  smooth  leaves,  and  terminating  in  a  panicle  of  yellow
flowers  in  branched  racemes ;  the  flowers  are  diandrous  and  monogy-
nous.  Calyx  bilabiate,  upper  lip  three-toothed,  the  teeth  short,  subu-
late. Corolla  funnel-form  somewhat  bilabiate,  the  lower  lip  fringed.
Stamens  two ;  seeds  four,  often  two  or  three  of  them  are  abortive.

History.  —  Hardhack  is  found  growing  in  rich  moist  woods,  from
Canada  to  Carolina,  and  flowering  from  July  to  September.  The  whole
plant  has  a  peculiar,  lemon-like,  balsamic  odor,  rather  disagreeable  in
the  root,  and  a  warm,  pungent  taste.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  its  vir-
tues ;  boiling  destroys  it,  as  the  active  principle  is  volatile.  The  fresh
root  is  the  part  used.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic,  astringent,  diaphoretic,  and  diuretic.
Used  in  infusion  for  headache,  colic,  cramp,  dropsy,  indigestion,  catarrh
of  the  bladder,  leucorrhea,  gravel,  and  urinary  disorders.  The  fresh
root,  in  substance,  irritates  the  stomach,  causing  vomiting  even  in  small
doses.  Externally,  the  leaves  are  used  as  a  poultice  or  in  fomentation
to  bruises,  ulcers,  blows,  wounds,  sprains,  contusions,  etc.  The  Collins-
onia  Verna,  C.  Cordata,  C.  Ovata,  C.  Scabra,  and  other  species,  proba-
bly, possess  similar  virtues.  Dose  of  the  infusion,  from  half  a  fluidounce
to  two  fluidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Collinsonise.


COLLODION.

ETHEREAL SOLUTION OF GUN-COTTON.

Preparation. — Add  Sulphuric  Acid  eight  fluidounces  and  a  half  to
Nitrate  of  Potassa,  in  powder,  ten  ounces,  in  a  Wedgwood  mortar,  and
triturate  them  until  uniformly  mixed ;  then  add  of  Cotton,  freed  from
impurities  and  finely-carded,  half  an  ounce,  and  by  means  of  the  pestle
and  a  glass  rod,  imbue  it  thoroughly  with  the  mixture  for  four  minutes.
Transfer  the  cotton  to  a  vessel  containing  water,  and  wash  it,  in  succes-


Collodion.  385

sive  portions,  by  agitation  and  pressure,  until  the  washings  cease  to  have
an  acid  taste,  or  to  be  precipitated  on  the  addition  of  chloride  of  barium.
Having  separated  the  fibers  by  picking,  dry  the  cotton  with  a  gentle
heat;  dissolve  it  by  agitation  in  a  mixture  of  Ether  two  pints  and  a  half,
and  Alcohol  a  fluidounce,  and  strain.  On  account  of  the  great  volatility
of  the  ether,  Collodion  should  be  kept  in  closely  glass-stopped  and  well-
dried  bottles.

History. — Cotton  acted  upon  by  nitric  acid  is  changed  into  an  explo-
sive substance  called  Gun-cotton  or  Pyroxylin.  The  nitric  acid  prepared
as  above,  by  the  action  of  the  sulphuric  acid  on  the  nitrate  of  potassa,
affords  a  gun-cotton  which  readily  dissolves  in  ether.  Gun-cotton  is
very  liable  to  undergo  spontaneous  decomposition.

Collodion  is  a  transparent,  colorless  liquid,  of  the  consistence  of  syrup,
with  an  ethereal  smell ;  when  not  kept  properly  secured,  it  thickens  and
becomes  unfit  for  surgical  use,  frequently  depositing  acicular  crystals
of  gun-cotton.

Properties  and  Uses. — When  applied  to  any  part  of  the  surface  of  the
body  it  quickly  evaporates,  leaving  the  solid  adhesive  material,  or  an
artificial  epidermis,  and  its  contraction  in  drying  produces  local  pressure.
Used  for  holding  together  the  edges  of  incised  wounds,  for  covering
ulcers  or  abraded  surfaces  with  an  impervious  film  not  acted  upon  by
water,  also  used  for  chapped  nipples,  leech-bites,  erysipelas,  and  several
cutaneous  diseases.  It  may  be  applied  with  a  brush,  or  by  means  of
strips  of  muslin.  It  has  been  beneficially  used  to  form  an  artificial  cover-
ing to  ulcers  of  the  os  and  cervix  uteri,  thereby  allowing  the  healing  process
to  go  on  underneath.  In  burns  it  has  also  proved  of  utility.  The  strong
contractile  power  of  the  collodion  is  often  an  objection  to  its  employ-
ment ;  this  may  be  obviated  by  dissolving  first  one  part  of  gun-cotton,
and  then  one  part  of  Venice  turpentine  in  twenty  parts  of  ether.  Or  to
give  more  flexibility  to  the  film,  one  part  of  elemi  may  be  added  to
twelve  of  collodion.  Opacity  and  elasticity  may  be  imparted  to  collo-
dion by  adding  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm  of  lard,  or  similar  fatty
matter,  previously  dissolved  in  ether,  to  an  ounce  of  collodion.  An
ethereal  tincture  of  saffron  or  turmeric  may  be  added  in  sufficient  quan-
tity, when  desired,  to  produce  a  color  resembling  that  of  the  skin.  Col-
lodion may  likewise  be  prepared  pliable  and  without  any  tendency  to
crack  or  break  by  the  following  formula:  Take  of  Collodion  thirty
grammes,  Castor  oil,  and  Soft  Turpentine,  of  each  fifty  centigrammes.
Collodion  is  said  to  have  given  instant  relief  in  chilblains.

A  Cantharidal  Collodion  has  recently  been  brought  into  use,  for  the
purpose  of  vesicating,  it  may  be  made  as  follows :  Exhaust,  by  percola-
tion, a  pound  of  cantharides,  with  a  mixture  consisting  of  a  pound  of
sulphuric  ether  and  three  ounces  of  acetic  ether ;  and  in  two  ounces  of
this  liquid  dissolve  twenty-five  grains  of  gun-cotton.  It  may  be  kept  in
25


386  Materia  Medica.

a  glass-stoppered  bottle  without  change,  for  an  indefinite  time.  It  should
be  applied  to  the  surface  by  means  of  a  camel's  hair  brush,  and  after
the  evaporation  of  the  ether,  another  coat  may  be  given  if  the  surface
be  not  well  covered.  It  produces  a  blister  in  three  to  six  hours,  and
may  be  applied  with  greater  facility  than  the  ordinary  cerate,  and  is
better  adapted  to  cover  uneven  surfaces.  If  the  evaporation  of  the
ether  be  restrained  by  a  piece  of  oiled  silk  immediately  after  its  applica-
tion, it  will  act  much  more  speedily.  One  per  cent,  of  Venice  turpen-
tine added  to  the  above,  prevents  the  disagreeable  contraction  of  the
preparation  when  drying.


COMPTONIA  ASPLENIFOLIA.

Sweet  Fern.

Nat.  Ord. — Myricaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Triandria.

THE  PLANT.

Description. — Sweet  Fern  is  a  low,  indigenous  shrub,  with  a  long,
horizontal  root,  and  growing  from  two  to  four  feet  high,  the  main  stem
being  covered  with  a  rusty,  brown  bark,  which  becomes  reddish  in  the
branches,  and  white  downy  in  the  young  shoots.  The  leaves  are  numer-
ous, on  short  peduncles,  from  three  to  four  inches  in  length,  and  half  an
inch  broad,  alternate,  linear-lanceolate,  sinuate-pinnatifid,  resembling
the  leaves  of  the  spleenwort  fern,  brown,  and  rather  downy  on  the  un-
derside, shining  on  the  upper ;  stipules  in  pairs,  acuminate.  Flowers
green,  monoecious,  amentaceous,  and  appearing  before  the  leaves ;  bar-
ren ones  in  long,  erect,  cylindrical,  loosely  imbricated  catkins,  terminal
and  lateral,  with  deciduous,  one-flowered  bracts ;  fertile  ones  in  ovate,
densely  imbricated  catkins,  situated  below  the  barren  ones,  with  one-
flowered  bracts.  Stamens  six,  adhering  in  pairs.  Sepals  six,  larger
than  the  bracts  ;  styles  two,  capillary.  Fruit  a  small,  ovate,  brown,  one-
celled  nut.

History.  — This  plant  is  found  growing  in  thin  sandy  soils,  or  dry,
stony  woods,  from  New  England  to  Virginia.  All  parts  of  it  possess  a
resinous,  spicy,  aromatic  odor,  when  rubbed  or  bruised  between  the
fingers. The  whole  herb  is  used.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic,  astringent,  and  alterative.  Used  in
diarrhea,  dysentery,  hemoptysis,  leucorrhea,  rheumatism,  debility  suc-
ceeding fevers,  and  in  rachitis.  A  decoction  of  it  is  very  useful  in  the
summer-complaint  of  children,  when  given  as  an  auxiliary.  A  pillow
of  the  leaves  is  beneficial  to  rachitic  children,  and  they  may  be  used  as
a  fomentation  in  contusions  and  rheumatism.  Dose  of  the  decoction,
from  one  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.
Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Comptonise.


Conium  Maculatum.  387

CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Poison-Hemlock.

Nat. Ord. — Apiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

LEAVES AND SEEDS.

Description. — Poison  Hemlock,  or  Poison  Parsley,  as  it  is  sometimes
called,  is  an  umbelliferous  plant,  having  a  biennial,  fusiform,  whitish,
fleshy  root,  and  a  herbaceous,  branching  stem,  from  three  to  six  feet
high,  erect,  round,  hollow,  smooth,  shining,  glaucous,  slightly  striated,
and  copiously  marked  with  brownish-purple  spots.  The  leaves  are  tri-
pinnate  ;  the  lower  ones  very  large,  and  attached  to  the  joints  of  the
stem  by  sheathing  petioles  ;  the  upper  are  smaller,  and  inserted  at  the
divisions  of  the  branches  ;  both  have  channeled  footstalks.  The  leaflets  are
ovate,  closely  and  sharply  pinnatifid,  with  the  lower  lobes  incised,  deep-
green  on  their  upper  surface  and  paler  beneath.  The  flowers  are  numer-
ous, small,  white,  all  fertile,  the  outermost  very  slightly  irregular,  they
are  arranged  in  erect,  terminal,  compound,  many-rayed  and  smooth
umbels.  General  involucre  ovate,  cuspidate,  with  membranous  edges,
consisting  of  from  three  to  seven  lanceolate,  reflected  bracts,  with
whitish  edges ;  partial  involucre  of  three  or  four,  oval,  pointed,  spread-
ing bracts,  and  with  the  inner  side  wanting.  Petals  obcordate,  with
acute,  inflected  points,  and  five  in  number.  The  fruit  is  about  a  line
and  a  half,  or  rather  less  in  length,  by  a  line  in  breadth,  roundish-ovate,
compressed,  of  a  pale-green  color ;  primary  ridges  elevated,  sharp,
undulated  ;  commissures  and  channels  finely  wrinkled.  The  whole  plant
has  a  disagreeable,  virose  smell,  which  is  more  powerful  when  it  is
bruised  or  broken.

History. — Hemlock  is  a  native  of  Europe  and  Asia,  and  is  naturalized
in  many  parts  of  the  United  States.  It  flowers  in  June  and  July.  The
leaves  and  seeds  are  the  officinal  parts.  The  proper  time  for  collecting
the  leaves  is  when  the  flowers  begin  to  fade  ;  the  footstalks  should  be
rejected,  and  the  leaflets  dried  quickly,  and  kept  excluded  as  much  as
possible  from  the  light  and  air.  The  fruit,  commonly  called  seeds,  retains
its  activity  much  longer  than  the  leaves.

Dried  hemlock  leaves  are  of  a  dark-green  color,  and  have  a  strong,
heavy,  narcotic  odor,  and  a  nauseous  and  bitterish  taste.  The  seeds  have
a  yellowish-gray  color,  a  feeble  odor,  and  a  somewhat  bitterish  taste.
Alcohol  or  ether  takes  up  the  medicinal  properties,  and  the  ethereal
extract,  which  is  of  a  rich,  dark-green  color,  possesses  the  full  virtues  of
the  plant,  producing  headache  and  vertigo  in  a  half  grain  dose.  The
aqueous  extract  is  uncertain ;  the  alcoholic  extract  is  the  best.  There
has  been  no  satisfactory  analysis  of  this  plant,  a  volatile  oil,  albu-
men, resin,  coloring  matter,  a  poisonous  oil,  conia,  and  salts,  have  been


388  Materia  Medica.

found  in  it.  The  poisonous  empyreumatic  oil  is  obtained  by  destructive
distillation  of  the  leaves.  A  volatile,  alkaline  principle  termed  Conia  or
Conicine,  is  the  active  agent  of  the  plant ;  it  may  be  obtained  by
cautiously  distilling  from  a  muriate  of  lime  bath,  a  mixture  of  strong
solution  of  potassa  -with  the  alcoholic  extract  of  the  unripe  fruit.  The
alkaloid  passes  over  into  the  receiver  with  the  water,  and  floats  upon  it
like  an  oil.  Or,  the  full  grown,  but  still  green  fruit,  may  be  distilled
with  water,  caustic  potassa,  and  slaked  lime,  from  a  muriate  of  lime
bath,  then  neutralize  the  distilled  fluid  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  concen-
trate it  by  evaporation  to  the  consistence  of  syrup ;  act  on  this  with  a
mixture  of  two  parts  of  rectified  alcohol  and  one  of  sulphuric  ether,  and
again  obtain  an  extract  by  evaporation,  and  finally  distil  the  extract  with
a  strong  solution  of  caustic  potassa.  As  obtained  in  either  of  these
ways,  conia  contains, — some  water,  which  may  be  removed  by  chloride
of  calcium, — and  also  a  little  ammonia  which  is  separated  by  exposing
it  under  an  exhausted  receiver  till  it  ceases  to  emit  bubbles  of  gas.  In
the  preparation  of  conia,  the  fresh  leaves  or  seeds  should  always  be
employed,  as  the  alkali  undergoes  decomposition,  by  time  and  exposure.
The  seeds  contain  the  most  of  it.  Eight  pounds  of  green  fruit  or  seeds,
will  yield  half  an  ounce  of  hydrate  of  conia.

Conia  is  a  yellowish,  oily  liquid,  lighter  than  water,  colorless  at  first,
but  becoming  brown  by  oxidation,  of  an  intense,  peculiar,  suffocating
odor,  like  the  urine  of  mice,  and  an  extremely  acrid,  benumbing  taste.
Its  density  is  .878 ;  it  is  volatile  at  ordinary  temperatures,  disengaging
ammonia,  and  depositing  a  resinous  matter,  and  loses  its  activity.  It  is
sparingly  soluble  in  water;  but  forms  a  hydrate  by  uniting  with  about  a
fourth  part  of  water.  It  is  very  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  the  fixed  and
volatile  oils,  and  also  in  weak  acids,  which  it  neutralizes.  It  boils  at
370°,  and  distils  over  with  water  at  212°.  It  strono-lv  blues  reddened
litmus  paper;  it  forms  soluble  salts  with  acids  which  are  difficult  to
crystallize.  Weak  tincture  of  iodine  yields  a  white  precipitate,  which
acquires  an  olive  color  with  an  excess  of  the  tincture.  Tannic  acid  gives  a
white,  insoluble  precipitate ;  corrosive  sublimate  gives  a  white  precipi-
tate ;  chloride  of  zinc  gives  a  white  gelatinous  precipitate,  soluble  in
excess  of  the  conia.  Sulphate  of  sesquioxide  of  iron  and  chloride  of
platinum  yield  yellow  precipitates  ;  chloride  of  gold  a  light  yellow.
Chloride  of  cobalt  yields  a  blue  precipitate  which  changes  to  green,  and
which  forms  with  ammonia  a  red  solution.  Acetate  of  copper  gives  a
gelatinous  blue  precipitate.  The  red  permanganate  of  potassa  is  imme-
diately decolorized.  Hydrochloric  acid  yields  white  clouds  as  ammonia
does,  and  renders  it  violet,  especially  when  heated.  Nitric  acid  imparts
to  it  a  topaz  color,  unchanged  by  heat.  Pure  and  concentrated  sul-
phuric acid  does  not  alter  it ;  but  if  heated  produces  a  greenish-brown
color,  which  becomes  blood-red,  and  finally  black,  if  the  heat  be  con-
tinued. It  coagulates albumen,  and  precipitates  the  salts  of  copper,


Conium  Maculatum.  3§9

lead,  zinc,  aluminum,  manganese,  and  iron.  It  also  precipitates  nitrate
of  silver,  but  in  excess  redissolves  the  precipitate.  Its  salts  are  mostly
decomposed  by  evaporation.  The  actions  of  conia  upon  the  system
closely  resemble  those  of  the  hemlock  itself.  A  drop  of  it  injected  into
the  eye  of  a  rabbit,  caused  death  in  nine  minutes,  and  three  drops  killed
a  strong  cat  in  a  minute  and  a  half;  its  effects  are  gradual  paralysis,
slight  convulsive  tremors,  and  death  from  suspension  of  the  breathing,
without  any  change  in  the  appearance  of  the  blood,  and  without  any
depression  of  the  heart's  action.  It  acts  on  the  spinal  marrow.  It  con-
sists of  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  nitrogen. (N  C17  Hi7.)

Properties  and  Uses. — Narcotic.  When  given  in  doses  sufficient  to
affect  the  system,  it  causes  more  or  less  vertigo,  dimness  of  vision,  nau-
sea, faintness,  sensations  of  numbness,  and  general  muscular  debility.
In  larger  doses  it  occasions  dilated  pupils,  difficulty  of  speech,  delirium,
or  stupor,  tremors  and  paralysis,  and  frequently  convulsions  and  even
death.  Its  operation  usually  commences  in  less  than  half  an  hour,  and
continues  for  from  twelve  to  thirty-six  hours.  It  is  supposed  to  effect  its
results  by  exhausting  the  nervous  energy  of  the  spinal  cord,  and  volun-
tary muscles.  It  is  used  for  promoting  sleep,  and  will  be  found
extremely  useful  in  allaying  excessive  action  of  the  heart  in  hypertrophy
of  this  organ  ;  a  pill  of  one  or  two  grains  of  the  extract  producing  a
calm,  soothing  influence,  followed  by  a  diminution  or  removal  of  the
palpitation  or  augmented  action.  Indeed,  all  affections  attended  with  an
excited  or  excitable  condition  of  the  nervous  and  vascular  systems,  will
be  benefited  by  its  use.  I  have  used  a  preparation  which  I  call  the
Conium  Mixture,  with  much  advantage  in  several  diseases  ;  it  is  prepared
as  follows  :  Take  of  Precipitated  Carbonate  of  Iron  ten  drachms  ;  inspis-
sated juice  of  Conium  five  drachms ;  Tincture  of  Balsam  Tolu  six
ounces;  Oils  of  Cinnamon  and  Wintergreen,  of  each  twelve  drops;
White  Sugar  two  ounces  ;  Madeira  Wine,  Water,  of  each  half  a  pint.
Mix  together,  in  a  week  the  mixture  will  be  ready  for  use.  In  dyspep-
sia attended  with  irritation  of  the  stomach,  pyrosis,  or  with  an  excitable
state  of  the  system  from  debility,  this  mixture  will  be  found  very  bene-
ficial ;  it  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  a  drachm  to  half  an  ounce,  from
three  to  six  times  a  day  before  eating.  Laxatives  should  be  occasionally
employed.  In  cough,  conium  will  be  found  of  much  utility ;  I  have  used
the  following  preparation  in  the  cough  attending  phthisis,  also  in  other
coughs,  with  benefit :  Take  of  Tincture  of  Cyanuret  of  Potassium,
(made  by  adding  twenty-two  grains  of  the  Cyanuret  to  nine  fluidounces
of  Proof  Alcohol,)  six  drachms  ;  Conium  Mixture  three  ounces  ;  Tinc-
ture of  Opium  four  drachms.  Mix.  Dose  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm,
three  or  four  times  a  day.  In  intermittent  fever  I  have  frequently
derived  a  happy  effect  from  the  following  pill,  when  quinia  alone  failed  ;
Take  of  sulphate  of  quinia  ten  grains; inspissated juice  of  conium


390  Materia Medica.

fifteen  grains.  Mix,  and  divide  into  twenty  pills,  of  which  one  pill  may
be  given  every  hour  or  two,  until  the  effects  of  the  conium  have  com-
menced, after  which  give  one  pill  every  four  or  five  hours,  according  to
its  influence.  In  consequence  of  the  action  of  conium  on  the  spinal
marrow  it  lessens  the  venereal  appetite.  It  likewise  lessens  the  secre-
tion of  milk.  In  the  neuralgic  pains  attending  carcinomatous  affections
it  usually  gives  relief ;  sometimes,  however,  it  has  exerted  no  influence
whatever,  in  palliating  them.  In  scrofula,  goitre,  and  indeed  in  all
tuberculous  affections,  it  will  be  found  very  effectual  given  in  combi-
nation with  the  iodide  of  iron.  It  enters  into  the  Compound  Plaster  of
Belladonna,  an  excellent  preparation,  which  I  have  been  in  the  habit
of  using  for  many  years.  The  leaves  have  likewise  been  employed
externally  as  a  poultice  to  painful  tumors,  ulcers,  neuralgic  and  rheu-
matic pains,  etc.  The  aqueous  extract  of  this  plant  is  worthless ;  the
inspissated  juice,  or  the  ethereal  extract,  are  alone  valuable.  A  strong
solution  of  the  inspissated  juice,  or  the  juice  of  the  fresh  leaves,  coated
over  the  parts  daily,  for  five  or  six  days,  will  cure  the  itch.  Dose  of  the
leaves  and  inspissated  juice,  from  one  to  three  grains,  three  or  four  times
a  day ;  of  the  ethereal  extract,  which  is  an  elegant  extract  of  a  rich
dark-green  color,  from  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  one-half  of  a  grain.
Conia,  the  active  principle,  is  not  used  in  medicine.

The  Cicuta  Maculata,  Water  Hemlock,  is  seldom  used,  being  super-
seded by  the  Conium,  which  is  deemed  the  safer  article.

Off.  Prep.  —  Extractum Conii Alcoholicum ; Emplastrum Bella-
donnee  Compositum  ;  Unguentum  Conii.


CONVALLARIA  MULTIFLORA. (Polygonatum  Multifiorum.
Desfontaines.)

Giant  Solomon's  Seal.
Nat.  Ord. — Liliaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

%  THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  has  a  perennial  root  with  a  terete,  recurved,
smooth  stem,  growing  from  one  to  four  feet  high ;  the  leaves  alternate,
distichous,  lanceolate,  amplexicaul,  smooth  and  glossy  above,  paler  and
generally  pubescent  beneath,  from  two  and  a  half  to  six  inches  long,  by
one  to  two  and  a  half  broad.  Flowers  five  to  eight  lines  long,  pendu-
lous, greenish-white,  subcylindric.  Peduncles  axillary,  filiform,  branch-
ing, scarcely  a  fifth  as  long  as  the  leaves,  and  from  one  to  six-flowered.
Berry  globose,  three-celled,  dark-blue  or  blackish  when  ripe  ;  cells  two-
seeded.


Convolvulus  Panduratus.  391

Convallaria  Racemosa,  the  Srnilacina  Racemosa  of  Desfontaines,  has
a  thick  rhizoma,  sweet  to  the  taste,  with  a  stem  from  one  to  two  feet  high,
downy,  and  recurved  at  top.  The  leaves  are  from  four  to  six  inches
lono-.  and  about  one-third  as  broad,  oval,  acuminate,  veined,  minutely
pubescent,  on  petioles  not  exceeding  two  lines  in  length,  and  often  ses-
sile. The  flowers  are  very  numerous,  small,  white,  on  white  pedicels,
and  with  white,  exserted,  tapering  filaments,  constituting  a  large,  com-
pound, terminal  raceme.  Berry  three-celled,  pale-red,  speckled  with
purple,  aromatic.

History. — These  plants  grow  on  the  sides  of  meadows,  high  banks,
woods,  and  mountains,  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  especially
in  the  northern  and  eastern  States,  and  Canada,  and  are  in  blossom  from
May  to  August.  The  roots,  which  are  the  officinal  parts,  are  inodorous,
but  of  a  sweetish,  mucilaginous  taste,  followed  by  a  slight  degree  of
bitterness  and  acrimony.  There  are  several  varieties  of  this  plant,  some
of  which  have  been  transferred  to  other  families,  as  Srnilacina,  and  Poly-
gonatum,  but  the  roots  of  which,  probably,  possess  similar  medical  vir-
tues. Although  used  with  much  benefit  in  many  diseases  by  nearly  all
Eclectics,  yet  this  plant  has  received  but  little  attention  as  to  its  true
therapeutical,  as  well  as  physical  characteristics.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic,  mucilaginous,  and  mildly  astringent.
Found  of  much  value  in  leucorrhea,  menorrhagia,  female  debility,  and  pec-
toral affections.  In  piles,  the  root  chewed  and  swallowed,  or  a  decoction
drank  as  freely  as  the  stomach  will  bear,  will  be  found  to  give  prompt  relief,
or  the  root  may  be  applied  to  the  part,  with  a  similar  result.  An  infusion  of
the  root  will  be  found  of  great  efficacy  in  irritable  conditions  of  the  intes-
tines, as  well  as  in  chronic  inflammations  of  these  parts,  especially  when
attended  with  burning  sensations,  pain,  etc.  In  erysipelas,  and  cutane-
ous affections  of  an  erysipelatous  nature,  as  well  as  those  maladies  of  the
skin  produced  by  the  poison-vine,  or  resulting  from  the  poisonous  exha-
lations of  other  plants,  the  decoction  of  Solomon's  Seal  Root  will  afford
direct  relief,  and  an  ultimate  cure ;  it  may  also  be  applied  externally,
with  advantage,  to  local  inflammations.  A  large  dose  of  the  decoction
will  often  provoke  emesis  or  nausea,  and  act  as  a  cathartic.  Dose  of  the
decoction,  from  one  to  four  ounces,  three  times  daily.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Convallariae  ;  Vinum  Symphyti  Compositum.


CONVOLVULUS  PANDURATUS.

Wild  Potato.
Nat.  Ord. — Convolvulaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  likewise  known  as  Wild  Jalap,  Man  in  the
Ground,  Mechameck,  Man  of  the  Earth,  etc.,  has  a  perennial,  very  large


392  Materia Medica.

cylindrical  or  fusiform  root,  with  a  round,  purplish,  downy,  procumbent,
or  climbing  stem,  several  stems  from  the  same  root.  The  leaves  are  two
or  three  inches  long,  and  about  the  same  width,  broadly  cordate  at  base,
acuminate,  entire,  or  undulate,  alternate,  sometimes  panduriform,  smooth
dark-green  above,  paler  beneath,  and  on  long  petioles.  The  flowers  are
in  fascicles  of  from  two  to  five,  opening  in  the  forenoon,  on  axillary
peduncles,  longer  than  the  petioles,  generally  branching  at  the  top.
Corolla  large,  two  or  three  inches  long,  funnel-shaped,  or  campanulate,
white,  purplish-red  toward  the  base  or  tube.  Calyx  smooth,  five-parted,
unequal,  ovate-obtuse,  two  larger  sepals  external.  Stamens  white,  the
length  of  the  tube  ;  anthers  oblong.  Style  white,  filiform,  with  a  bilo-
bate  stigma.  Capsule  oblong,  two-celled,  four-seeded,  and  without
intermediate  partitions.

History.  — Wild  Potato  is  indigenous  to  the  United  States,  growing  in
light  and  sandy  soils,  from  Connecticut  and  West  New  York,  southward
and  westward,  and  flowering  from  June  to  August ;  it  rarely  grows
north,  but  is  found  in  some  parts  of  South  America.  The  root  is  the
officinal  part ;  it  is  very  large  being  from  two  to  eight  feet  in  length,  and
from  two  to  four  or  five  inches  in  diameter,  branched  at  the  bottom,
externally  of  a  brownish -yellow  color  and  full  of  longitudinal  fissures,
internally  whitish  and  milky,  of  an  unpleasant  odor,  and  a  bitter  acrid
taste.  In  drying,  the  root  loses  about  three-fourths  of  its  weight.  As
found  in  the  shops  the  root  is  usually  in  circular  pieces,  of  various  sizes,
being  transverse  sections,  the  color  somewhat  brown  externally,  and
whitish  within,  with  radiating  striae  or  lines.  It  pulverizes  with  difficulty
the  powder  being  light  and  gray.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  its  active
properties,  but  diluted  alcohol  or  spirits  are  its  best  solvents.  It  con-
tains resin,  bitter-extractive,  starch,  gum,  gallic  acid,  etc.  Probably
the  active  principle  of  this  plant  would  prove  more  energetic  than  the
crude  root,  and  become  a  valuable  agent.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  real  properties  of  this  plant  are  unknown.
It  possesses  feebly  cathartic  properties,  acting  gently  in  doses  of  from
forty  to  sixty  grains  of  the  powdered  root.  The  infusion,  taken  in  wine-
glassful  doses  every  hour,  has  been  effectual  in  dropsy,  strangury  and
calculous  affections.  It  seems  to  exert  an  influence  over  the  lungs,  liver,
and  kidneys,  without  excessive  diuresis  or  catharsis.  The  saturated
tincture  is  more  energetic  than  the  powdered  root,  decoction,  or  extract.
It  is  asserted  that  the  Indians  can  handle  rattlesnakes  with  impunity,
after  wetting  their  hands  with  the  milky  juice  of  this  root.


Convolvulus  Scammonia.  393

CONVOLVULUS  SCAMMONIA..

Scammony.

Nat.  Ord.  —  Convolvulaceas. Sex. Syst. —  Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE OF THE ROOT GUM RESIN.

Description. — This  plant  has  a  perennial,  fleshy,  fusiform  root,  from
three  to  five  feet  long,  and  from  three  to  five  inches  in  diameter,  branch-
ing toward  its  lower  extremity,  covered  with  a  light-gray  epidermis,  and
abounding  in  a  milky  juice.  The  stems  are  annual,  numerous,  slender,
round,  smooth,  branching,  twining,  very  slightly  angular  near  the  ends,
and  extending  from  twelve  to  twenty  feet  upon  the  ground,  or  on
neighboring  plants.  The  leaves  are  on  long  petioles,  alternate,  sagittate,
oblong,  acute,  entire,  quite  smooth,  truncate  and  angular  at  the  base,
with  acute  spreading  lobes,  and  of  a  bright-green  color.  The  flowers
are  pale-yellow,  and  are  placed  in  pairs,  or  three  together  upon  solitary,
axillary  and  round  peduncles,  which  are  nearly  twice  the  length  of  the
leaf.  Sepals  five,  rather  lax,  smooth,  ovate,  repand,  obtuse  with  a
reflexcd  point,  colored  at  the  edge.  Corolla,  funnel-shaped,  very  much
expanded,  pale  sulphur-yellow,  thrice  as  long  as  the  calyx,  an  inch  or
more  in  length  ;  limb  entire,  somewhat  reflexed.  Stamens  five,  erect,
converging,  thrice  as  short  as  the  corolla.  Ovary  two-celled,  four-
seeded,  supporting  a  slender  style  as  long  as  the  stamens,  with  two
linear-cylindrical,  erect,  oblong,  parallel,  distant  and  white  stigmas.
Capsule  two-celled,  with  small  pyramidal  seeds.

History. — Scammony  plant  is  a  native  of  Turkey,  Syria,  Greece,
Persia,  etc.,  and  somewhat  resembles  the  Convolvulus  Panduratus.
The  officinal  portion  is  the  concrete  juice  of  the  root,  the  other  parts
of  the  plant  yielding  no  milky  juice  whatever.  It  is  collected  in  the
month  of  June,  at  which  time  the  earth  is  cleared  away  from  about
the  root,  which  is  obliquely  cut  across  near  its  crown,  and  a  shell,  or
other  convenient  receptacle  is  fixed  under  the  most  depending  part  of
the  slope,  into  which  the  milky  juice  gradually  flows.  This  soon  con-
cretes under  exposure  to  the  air  and  evaporation,  forming  the  gum-
resin  of  commerce,  Scammony  ;  of  which  but  a  few  drachms  are  ob-
tained from  a  single  root.  It  is  seldom  had  in  a  pure  state,  being
more  or  less  adulterated  with  flour,  ashes,  meal,  chalk,  sand,  etc.  It
is  imported  directly  from  Smyrna,  or  from  some  of  the  Mediterranean
ports.  There  were  several  varieties  of  scammony  formerly  known,  as
the  Aleppo,  Smyrna,  and  Montpelier,  of  which  the  first-named  was  the
best,  but,  owing  to  the  adulteration  of  the  drag,  it  is  impossible  to  keep
up  these  distinctions  any  longer,  and  consequently  the  article  is  now
recognized  as  genuine  or  factitious  scammony.


394  Materia Medica.

Genuine  Scammony,  called  pure  or  virgin  Scammony,  is  ranked
among  the  gum-resins,  containing,  however,  but  a  small  proportion  of
gum;  it  is  in  irregular  pieces,  often  covered  with  a  whitish-gray  pow-
der, compact,  light,  very  brittle,  and  easily  pulverizable  ;  with  a  some-
what conchoidal,  shining  grayish-green  fracture,  soon  passing  to  dark
greenish-black,  and  exhibiting  under  the  microscope  minute  air-cells
and  numerous  gray  semi-transparent  splinters.  It  exhales  a  strong,
peculiar  odor,  especially  if  breathed  upon,  and  has  a  feeble  taste  when
chewed,  succeeded  by  acridity  in  the  back  of  the  throat.  Its  powder  is
of  a  pale  ash-gray  color.  It  is  nearly  wholly  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol,
and  sulphuric  ether  takes  up  from  77  to  83  per  cent,  of  it.  With  water
it  forms  a  smooth  emulsion,  which  is  not  permanent.  Alcohol,  however,
is  its  best  solvent.  Analysis  has  detected  in  it  a  large  proportion  of
resin,  from  77  to  83  per  cent.,  and  small  quantities  of  gum,  fiber,  sand,
starch  and  water ;  the  starch  is  an  accidental  ingredient,  probably
derived  from  the  root.

As  found  in  the  shops,  scammony  is  in  compressed  circular  cakes,
sometimes  flat  on  both  sides,  at  others  convex  on  one  side,  about
five  or  six  inches  in  diameter,  from  half  an  inch  to  two  inches  thick,  of
a  dark-ash  or  slate  color,  somewhat  lighter  internally,  but  darkening  on
exposure  to  the  air,  of  a  smell  similar  to  that  of  the  genuine  article,  as
well  as  the  taste  ;  it  is  easily  pulverized,  affording  a  light-gray  powder,
and  when  triturated  with  water  forms  a  greenish  milky  emulsion.  These
cakes  are  often  broken  and  met  with  in  fragments,  with  a  faintly
shining  roughish  fracture,  hard,  heavj",  exhibiting  a  finely  porous  struc-
ture, and  sometimes  slightly  translucent  at  the  edges.  This  kind  of
scammony  is  always  more  or  less  adulterated  with  carbonate  of  lime,
guaiacum,  cowdung,  starch,  etc.

A  factitious  scammony  called  Montpelier  Scammony  is  manufactured
in  the  South  of  France  from  the  expressed  juice  of  the  Cynanchum
Monspeliacum  mixed  with  various  resins  and  other  purgative  substances.
It  has  been  sold  as  Smyrna  scammony.  It  is  in  black,  hard,  compact,
flat,  semicircular  cakes,  about  five  or  six  inches  in  diameter,  and  half
an  inch  or  more  in  thickness,  of  a  somewhat  shining  and  resinous  frac-
ture, a  weak,  balsamic,  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  very  bitter  nauseous
taste.  When  rubbed  with  the  moistened  finger,  it  becomes  dark-gray,
unctuous  and  tenacious.  It  is  more  irritating  and  less  purgative  than
the  other  varieties.  There  are  several  other  kinds  of  scammony
occasionally  met  with,  but  which  may  be  detected  by  the  proper
tests.

Pure  scammony  may  be  known  by  being  light,  of  a  glistening  almost
resinous  fracture  if  it  be  old  and  dry,  friable,  always  of  a  brownish-
gray  color,  and  not  subject  to  the  results  of  the  tests  given  below  for
detecting  its  adulterations.  Sulphuric  ether  separates  at  least  eighty
per  cent,  of  resin  dried  at  280°.


Convolvulus  Scammonia.  395

Pure  scammony  maybe  obtained  by  boiling  the  finely-powdered  arti-
cle of  commerce  in  successive  portions  of  proof  spirit,  till  the  spirit
ceases  to  dissolve  anything  ;  filter,  and  distil  the  liquid  until  little  but
water  passes  over.  Then  pour  away  the  watery  solution  from  the  resin
at  the  bottom  ;  agitate  the  resin  with  successive  portions  of  boiling  water
till  it  is  well  washed,  and  finally  dry  it  at  a  temperature  not  exceeding
240°.  This  separates  the  active  matter  of  scammony  from  its  impuri-
ties, and  is  called  the  Extract  of  Scammony.  It  forms  with  unskimmed
milk,  a  uniform  emulsion,  scarcely  distinguished  from  rich  milk  itself.

The  addition  of  carbonate  of  lime  as  an  adulteration,  may  be  detected
by  its  effervescing  with  muriatic  acid  ;  starch,  may  be  known  by  the
tincture  of  iodine  forming  a  blue  precipitate  with  an  aqueous  solution
of  the  drug ;  guaiacum,  may  be  detected  by  an  application  of  some  of
the  tincture  of  the  suspected  article  on  the  fresh-cut  surface  of  a  raw
potato ;  if  guaiacum  be  present,  it  turns  it  quickly  to  a  bright  blue
color.

Colophony  may  be  detected  in  the  resin  of  scammony,  by  the  oil  of
turpentine,  which  dissolves  it  at  common  temperatures,  leaving  the
scammony  resin  almost  wholly  unacted  upon.  But  the  best  reagent  for
this  purpose  is  sulphuric  acid,  which  possesses  the  property  of  dissolving
many  resins,  and  of  modifying,  more  or  less,  their  composition.  If  a
little  of  this  acid  be  poured  over  colophony,  it  immediately,  and  by  sim-
ple contact,  develops  an  intense  red  color.  The  same  acid,  when
poured  over  pure  resin  of  scammony,  produces,  on  the  contrary,  no
immediate  change  ;  it  is  only,  after  the  lapse  of  some  minutes,  and  with
contact  of  the  air,  that  it  becomes  colored,  and  then  but  slightly,  the
color  being  wine  dregs.  For  this  purpose,  four  or  five  grains  of  the
resin  may  be  placed  into  a  glass  or  porcelain  mortar ;  and  sixty  or
eighty  grains  of  the  sulphuric  acid  of  commerce  added.  Upon  rubbing
it  with  the  pestle,  it  will  become  red  at  once,  if  colophony  be  present.
This  method  will  detect  the  one-twentieth  part  of  the  adulteration.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Scammony  is  a  powerful,  drastic  cathartic,
operating  with  harshness  and  griping.  It  was  a  favorite  internal  and
external  remedy  with  the  Arabians.  It  does  not  appear  to  be  poisonous
even  in  large  doses,  but  is  seldom  used  alone,  except  in  cases  where  a
powerful  impression  upon  the  bowels  is  desired  ;  most  commonly  it  is
combined  with  other  cathartics,  whose  action  it  promotes,  while  its
own  harshness  is  diminished.  Scammony  is  usually  given  in  the  form
of  an  emulsion  with  sugar  or  sweet  almonds.  But  when  triturated
with  milk  it  is  considered  a  superior  preparation,  as  follows  :  Seven
grains  of  pure  scammony  to  be  gradually  triturated  with  three  ounces
of  unskimmed  milk,  to  which  a  few  grains  of  ginger  may  be  added,
forms  a  safe  purgative.  Another  form  of  using  this  gum-resin,  is  that
of  biscuit. A  paste  is  made  of  scammony  one  drachm  ;  Venice  soap,


396  Materia.  Medica.

five  grains ;  sugar  nine  grains ;  biscuit  in  powder  one  ounce,  and  a  few
drops  of  water.  Mix  together,  divide  into  two  biscuits,  and  let  them
dry  ;  one  biscuit  acts  energetically.  The  dose  of  powdered  scammony
is  from  five  to  fifteen  grains  ;  of  the  pure  resin,  one  half  this  quantity.
Its  use  is  always  contra-indicated  by  intestinal  inflammation.

Off.  Prep. — Pilulae  Podophyllini  Compositse.  Pilulae  Gambogiae  Com-
posites.

COPAIFERA  OFFICINALIS.

Officinal  Copaiva  tree.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabacete,  Jussieu,  or  Amyridaceaa  Lindley.  Sex.  Syst. — Decan-
dria  Monogynia.

THE OLEO-RESINOUS JUICE.

Description. — Copaifera  Officinalis,  the  Gopaifera  Jacquini,  of  Desfon-
taines,  is  a  large  and  handsome  tree,  with  a  lofty  stem,  numerous,
crooked  and  small  branches  at  the  top,  a  nearly  smooth,  brownish-gray
bark,  and  crowned  by  a  thick  canopy  of  foliage.  The  leaves  are  alter-
nate, large,  equally  pinnated,  and  composed  of  from  two  to  five  pairs
of  ovate-lanceolate,  smooth,  entire,  incurved,  inequilateral,  coriaceous
leaflets,  two  or  three  inches  in  length,  pellucidly  punctate,  somewhat
shining  and  on  short  petioles.  The  flowers  are  white,  almost  sessile,
and  are  in  axillary  panicles  at  the  ends  of  the  branches,  and  divided  into
about  eight  alternate  common  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  composed  of
four  oblong,  acute,  spreading,  concave  sepals,  somewhat  united  at  base,
and  tomentose  within.  The  petals  are  wanting.  The  stamens  are
filiform,  incurved,  somewhat  longer  than  the  sepals,  and  bearing  oblong,
incumbent  anthers.  The  ovary  is  roundish,  compressed  and  hairy,
crowned  with  a  thin  incurved  style  furnished  with  an  obtuse  stigma.
The  legume  is  ovate,  subcompressed  and  coriaceous,  containing  a  single
elliptical  seed.

History. — There  are  several  species  of  the  Copaiba  tree,  which  fur-
nish the  oleo-resin  copaiba.  For  a  long  time  it  was  supposed  to  be  the
product  of  but  one  tree,  but  the  researches  of  Martius,  Hayne,  and
others,  have  shown  that  the  species  are  numerous,  and  that,  probably,
several  of  them  contribute  to  furnish  the  copaiba  of  commerce.  Beside
acea,  C.  Beyrichii,  C.  Martii,  C.  Bijuga,  0.  Nitida,  G.  Laxa,  C.  Cordi-
folia,  C.  Jussieui,  G.  Sellowii,  C.  Oblongifolia,  and  G.  Multijuga.  These
trees  are  all  peculiar  to  South  America,  growing  in  Brazil,  the  West
Indies,  and  other  parts.  It  is  principally  collected  in  the  provinces  of
Para  and  Maranham,  in  Brazil,  the  trees  of  which  yield  the  finer  quali-
ties of  juice.  It  is  imported  from  Para,  and  other  Brazilian  ports,  Car-
thagena,  Maracaibo,  etc.,  from  each  of  which  places  it  differs  in  quality.


Copaifera  Officinalis.  397

The  juice  is  obtained  by  deep  incisions  being  made  into  the  trunk  or
stems  of  the  trees,  during  or  immediately  following  the  wet  season  ;  the
balsam  flows  freely,  being  clear,  colorless,  and  thin,  but  soon  acquiring
more  consistency,  and  a  yellowish  tinge.  The  incisions  either  heal  spon-
taneously, or  are  closed  with  either  wax  or  clay.  Sometimes  the  opera-
tion is  performed  two  or  more  times  annually,  and  some  trees  so  abound
in  the  juice  as  to  yield  twelve  pounds  in  three  hours.  Although  Copaiba
differs  much  in  its  appearance,  owing  to  its  various  botanical  sources,
yet  but  two  kinds  are  usually  distinguished  in  commerce  ;  the  Brazil,
and  the  West  Indian.

The  Brazil  Copaiba,  which  is  the  most  common  in  use,  is  a  clear,
transparent  fluid,  rather  thinner  in  consistence  than  new  honey,  of  a
pale  wine-yellow  color,  of  a  peculiar,  resinous,  not  unpleasant  odor,  and
of  a  bitter,  nauseous,  somewhat  acrid,  aromatic,  persistent  taste.  Its
specific  gravity  varies  from  950  to  1,000.  When  long  kept,  it  becomes
darker,  more  dense,  and  of  greater  consistency  ;  and  after  some  years  its
resin  partly  crystallizes  in  minute  six-sided  prisms.  Water  does  not
dissolve  copaiba,  but  acquires  its  odor ;  it  is  moderately  soluble  in  recti-
fied spirit,  and  freely  so  in  alcohol,  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  and  sulphuric
ether.  With  the  aid  of  heat  it  dissolves  iodine  and  sulphur  ;  sulphuric
acid  unites  with  it,  rendering  it  reddish  brown  and  thicker.  Solution  of
potassa  forms  a  soap  with  it;  magnesia,  and  its  carbonate  are  freely
dissolved  by  it,  especially  with  the  aid  of  heat,  producing  a  honey-like
translucent  mass  which  gradually  hardens  ;  carbonic  acid  is  disengaged
with  the  latter.  Hydrate  of  lime  causes  a  similar  change.  It  is  com-
posed of  volatile  oil,  resin,  and  a  minute  proportion  of  acid.

The  West  Indian  Copaiba  is  of  a  thicker  consistence  than  the  above,
likewise  of  a  darker  yellow  color,  turbid  but  translucent,  of  a  less  agree-
able and  more  terebinthinate  odor,  and  more  bitter  and  acrid  in  taste.
Neither  of  these  varieties  contain  benzoic  acid;  hence  the  term  balsam,  as
applied  to  copaiba,  is  incorrect.

The  volatile  oil  constitutes  from  one-third  to  one-half  or  more  of  the
copaiba,  and  is  obtained  by  distillation.  (See  Oleum  Copaibai.)  The
resinous  matter  which  remains  after  the  oil  has  been  separated,  becomes
hard  and  brittle  in  cold,  but  continues  soft  in  warm  weather,  it  is  trans-
lucent, greenish-brown,  nearly  inodorous  and  tasteless.  When  treated
with  the  oil  of  petroleum,  it  becomes  separated  into  two  distinct  resins,
one  of  which  is  dissolved,  and  may  be  obtained  separate  by  evaporation,
the  other  is  left  behind.  The  first  is  hard,  brittle  and  yellowish,  consti-
tuting the  largest  proportion  of  the  resin  of  copaiba,  is  soluble  in  naphtha
alcohol,  ether,  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  possesses  acrid  properties,  and  in
termed  Copaivic  acid.  The  second  resin  is  soft,  brown,  unctuous,  pos-
sesses no  acid  reaction,  and  is  insoluble  in  naphtha.

Copaiba,  especially  in  the  European  markets,  is  often  adulterated  with
oil  of  turpentine,  or  fixed  oils. If  turpentine,  or  other  volatile  oil  be


398  Materia  Medica.

present  even  in  small  proportion,  it  may  be  detected  by  its  odor  on  the
application  of  gentle  heat.  Any  fixed  oil  except  castor  oil,  may  be  dis-
covered by  agitation  with  absolute  alcohol,  giving  a  turbid,  instead  of  a
clear  and  permanent  solution,  from  which  the  impurity  slowly  separates.
Carbonate  of  magnesia  added  to  the  suspected  article,  and  a  gentle  heat
applied,  is  a  better  test  for  all  fixed  oils.  Pure  copaiba  dissolves  one-
fourth  of  its  weight  of  the  carbonate,  and  remains  translucent ;  but  a
small  proportion  of  any  fixed  oil  renders  the  product  opake.

Various  plans  have  been  proposed  for  ascertaining  the  presence  of
castor  oil.  The  simplest  is  to  boil  one  drachm  of  the  copaiba  in  a  pint
of  water  till  the  liquid  is  wholly  evaporated.  If  the  copaiba  contain  a
fixed  oil,  the  residue  will  be  more  or  less  soft  according  to  the  quantity
present;  otherwise  it  will  be  hard.  Another  mode,  proposed  by  M.
Planche,  consists  in  shaking  together  in  a  bottle  one  part  of  aqua  ammo-
niae  of  the  sp.  gr.  0.9212  (22°  Baume)  with  two  and  a  half  parts  of
copaiba,  at  a  temperature  of  from  50°  to  60°  F.  The  mixture,  at  first
cloudy,  quickly  becomes  transparent  if  the  copaiba  is  pure,  but  remains
more  or  less  opake  if  it  is  adulterated  with  castor  oil ;  this  test,  how-
ever, is  said  to  fail  in  some  varieties  of  the  genuine  article.  If  pure
copaiba  be  triturated  with  sulphuric  acid,  it  reddens  it,  but  does  not
alter  its  color  if  any  fixed  oil  be  present.  All  these  tests,  however,
when  taken  singly,  are  open  to  sources  of  fallacy,  and  the  best  method
of  determining  the  purity  of  the  article,  is  to  ascertain  the  quantity  of
volatile  oil  it  affords  by  distillation.  Recent  copaiba  examined  by  Ger-
ber  yielded  41  per  cent,  of  volatile  oil,  51.38  of  the  hard  and  brittle
resin,  2.18  of  the  soft  resin,  and  5.44  of  water;  while  an  older  specimen
gave  31.07  per  cent,  of  oil,  53.68  of  hard  resin,  11.15  of  soft  resin,  and
4.10  of  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — When  given  in  large  doses,  copaiba  is  an  irri-
tant ;  in  medicinal  doses  it  is  stimulant,  cathartic,  and  diuretic ;  it  like-
wise exerts  an  especial  influence  on  the  mucous  tissues  of  the  system,
diminishing  their  secretions  when  excessive,  and  for  this  latter  purpose
it  is  principally  employed.  When  swallowed,  it  causes  a  sensation  of
heat  in  the  throat  and  stomach,  and  exerts  an  influence  throughout  the
alimentary  canal,  the  urinary  passages,  and  upon  all  the  mucous  mem-
branes. In  the  course  of  its  action  it  becomes  absorbed,  so  that  its  odor
and  bitter  taste  are  communicated  to  the  urine,  while  the  former  can
also  be  detected  in  the  breath.  Among  the  inconveniences  attending
its  use,  especially  when  used  in  large  doses,  the  most  frequent  are
nausea  and  vomiting,  occasionally  painful  purgation,  bloody  urine,  and
febrile  symptoms ;  these  effects  may  be  obviated  very  often,  by  adminis-
tering the  remedy  oftener,  but  in  smaller  doses,  and  by  combining  it
with  cinnamon,  nutmeg,  or  some  other  aromatic.  It  likewise  frequently
produces  a  transient  papular  eruption  on  the  skin,  resembling  that  of
measles,  and  accompanied  with  a  disagreeable  itching  and  tingling. It


Coptis  Trifolia.  399

has  been  found  most  beneficial  in  chronic  mucous  affections,  as  in
chronic  gonorrhea,  bronchitis,  irritable  conditions  of  the  bladder,  gleet,
leucorrhea,  chronic  catarrh,  chronic  dysentery,  and  painful  hemorrhoidal
affections.  Its  effects  in  gonorrhea  are  much  increased  by  the  addition
of  liquor  potassa ;  and  it  is  much  more  beneficial  in  the  gonorrhea  of
males  than  of  females,  because,  in  the  latter,  the  vagina  is  oftener
affected  than  the  urethra.  In  injection,  it  has  been  used  with  good
results ;  make  an  emulsion  of  two  drachms  of  copaiba  with  the  yelk  of
an  egg,  add  twenty  or  thirty  drops  of  laudanum  to  it,  in  order  to  prevent
its  too  speedy  discharge  from  the  rectum,  and  eight  fluidounces  of
water.  This  may  be  used  as  an  injection,  and  repeated  three  or  four
times  a  day.  Locally,  it  forms  an  excellent  application  to  chilblains,
old  ulcers,  and  fistulous  ulcers,  in  which  it  serves  to  speedily  soften  the
callosity  of  the  walls  of  the  fistulous  canal.  The  dose  of  copaiba  is
from  twenty  to  sixty  drops,  two  or  three  times  a  day.  It  may  be  taken
in  emulsion,  made  by  triturating  each  dose  with  the  yelk  of  one  egg,
adding  half  an  ounce  of  mint,  cinnamon,  or  other  aromatic  water,  and
sweetening  with  sugar;  or  it  may  be  taken  in  the  form  of  pill  with  mag-
nesia; the  best  and  least  objectionable  form  in  which  it  can  be  taken  is
in  the  form  of  capsules.  (See  Article  "Ghee.")  The  oil  is  the  best  form
for  obtaining  the  effects  of  the  copaiba,  which  see.

Of.  Prep.  —  Mistura  Copaibas  Composita;  Oleum  Copaibae ;  Pilulae
Copaibae  Compositae;  Pilulae  Copaibae.


COPTIS TRIFOLIA.

Gold  Thread.

Nat. Orel. — RanunculaceEe. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  termed  Mouthroot,  has  a  small  and
creeping,  perennial  root,  of  a  bright-yellow  color ;  the  stems  are  round,
slender,  and  furnished  at  the  base  with  a  number  of  ovate,  acuminate,
yellowish,  imbricated  scales.  The  leaves  are  evergreen,  radical,  ternate,
on  long,  slender  petioles ;  the  leaflets  are  rounded  or  obovate,  sessile,
acute  at  base,  smooth,  firm,  much  veined,  with  a  lobed  and  acuminately
crenate  margin.  The  scape  or  flower-stem  is  slender,  round,  rather
longer  than  the  leaves,  bearing  one  small,  starry,  white  flower,  with  a
minute,  mucronated  bract  at  some  distance  below.  The  corolla  has
from  five  to  seven  white,  oblong,  concave,  nectariform  petals;  the  nec-
taries inversely  conical,  hollow,  and  yellow  at  the  top.  The  calyx  is
from  five  to  seven-sepalled ;  sepals  oblong,  concave,  white.  The
stamens  are  numerous,  white,  with  capillary  filaments,  and  adnate,  glo-
bose anthers.  The  ovaries  are  from  five  to  eight,  stipitate,  oblong,  com-
pressed ; styles short and recurved, with acute stigmas. Capsules


400  Materia  Medica.

stalked,  oblong,  rostrate,  compressed,  on  long  divaricate  pedicels,  and
containing  many  small,  black,  oval  seeds  attached  to  the  inner  side.

History. — Goldthread  is  found  growing  in  the  northern  parts  of  the
United  States,  and  in  Canada,  Greenland,  Iceland,  and  Siberia;  it  grows
in  dark  shady  swamps  and  boggy  woods,  flowering  from  early  in  the
spring  to  July.  The  root,  as  found  in  the  shops,  is  in  loosely -matted
masses,  consisting  of  long,  thread  like,  orange-yellow  roots,  frequently
mixed  with  the  leaves  and  stems  of  the  plant;  it  is  inodorous,  of  a  pure
bitter  taste,  without  aroma  or  astringency.  They  should  be  gathered
in  autumn,  and  carefully  dried.  Its  properties  are  imparted  to  water,
but  more  perfectly  to  alcohol,  and  the  solutions  are  precipitated  by
nitrate  of  silver,  and  acetate  of  lead.  It  does  not  appear  to  contain
resin,  gum,  or  tannin,  its  virtues  depending,  probably,  on  a  bitter  ex-
tractive substance.

Properties  and  Uses. — Goldthread  is  a  pure  and  poAverful  bitter  tonic,
somewhat  resembling  quassia,  gentian,  and  Colombo,  without  any  astrin-
gency. It  may  be  beneficially  used  in  all  cases  where  a  bitter  tonic  is
admissible,  and  is  decidedly  efficacious,  as  a  wash  or  gargle,  when  in
decoction,  in  aphthous  and  other  ulcerations  of  the  mouth.  In  dyspep-
sia, and  in  chronic  inflammation  of  the  stomach,  equal  parts  of  gold-
thread and  golden-seal  made  into  a  decoction,  with  elixir  vitriol  added
in  proper  quantity,  will  not  only  prove  effectual,  but  in  many  instances
of  the  latter  kind,  will  permanently  destroy  the  appetite  for  alcoholic
beverages.  Dose  of  the  powder  or  tincture  from  half  a  drachm  to  a
drachm  ;  of  the  decoction,  from  two  to  six  fluidrachms  ;  the  tincture
made  by  adding  an  ounce  of  the  powdered  root  to  a  pint  of  diluted  alco-
hol is  preferable  to  the  powder.
Of.  Prep.  —  Decoctum  Coptis.


CORIANDRUM SATIVUM.

Coriander.

Nat.  Ord. — Apiaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE FRUIT.

Description. — This  is  an  annual  plant  with  a  tapering  root,  and  an
erect,  round,  smooth,  more  or  less  branching,  striated  stem,  growing
from  one  to  two  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  compound,  the  lower  ones
pinnate,  on  long  slender  petioles,  their  leaflets  wedge-shaped  or  fan-
shaped,  and  acutely-notched,  somewhat  resembling  those  of  common
parsley ;  the  upper  ones  thrice  ternate,  with  five  linear-pointed  leaflets.
The  flowers  are  white,  often  with  a  reddish  tint,  and  are  disposed  in
compound,  terminal,  stalked  umbels,  of  rarely  more  than  four  or  five
rays;  the  partial  rays  more  numerous.  Calyx  five-toothed,  acute,
unequal,  permanent. Petals  obovate,  emarginate,  with  inflexed  lobes,  the


Cornu  Cervin^e  Calcinatum.  401

exterior  radiating  and  bifid.  The  fruit  is  spherical,  a  line  and  a  half  in
diameter,  somewhat  coriaceous,  carminative  and  aromatic.  Seed  exca-
vated in  front,  with  a  loose  skin.

History. —  Coriander  is  a  native  of  Italy,  but  found  growing  wild  in
most  parts  of  Europe.  It  flowers  in  June,  and  the  fruit  ripens  in
August.  When  bruised,  all  parts  of  the  fresh  plant  are  extremely  fetid,
resembling  the  odor  of  bugs,  while  the  fruit,  which  is  the  officinal  por-
tion, becomes  fragrant  by  drying;  the  smell  and  taste  being  gratefully
aromatic,  and  which  is  owing  to  a  volatile  oil,  which  may  be  obtained
by  distillation.  As  found  in  the  shops,  the  fruit  is  globular,  about  the
eighth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  obscurely  ribbed,  of  a  grayish  or  brown-
ish yellow  color,  and  separable  into  two  portions,  or  half  fruits.  Its
virtues  are  imparted  to  alcohol,  and  partially  to  water.

Properties  and Uses. — Stimulant  and  carminative. Used  principally
to  cover  the  taste  of  other  medicines,  or  to  correct  their  nauseous  or
griping  qualities. Dose,  from  a  scruple  to  a  drachm.
Off.  Prep.  —  Confectio  Sennae.


CORNU CERVIN^E CALCINATUM.

Calcined  Deer's  Horn.

Preparation. — Take  the  horns  of  the  deer — Cervus  Virginianus — any
time  from  the  months  of  August  to  December,  or  while  they  are  in  vel-
vet, (until  just  before  they  fall  off,)  and  when  dry  rasp  them  to  a  coarse
powder.  Place  this  in  an  iron  vessel,  cover  it  up  tightly,  and  put  it  in
an  oven,  or  other  situation,  where  a  heat,  not  equal  to  boiling  water,  say
195°  or  200°,  can  be  continuously  maintained  for  forty-eight  hours,  or
until  the  whole  becomes  of  a  light-brown  color,  like  roasted  coffee,  and  is
readily  pulverizable,  then,  when  cool,  pulverize  it,  and  keep  it  in  well-
stopped  bottles.  During  the  application  of  the  heat,  which  should  be
gradual,  the  powder  should  be  constantly  agitated,  on  which  account,  a
vessel  similar  to  a  coffee  roaster  would  be  a  very  suitable  one  in  which
to  calcine  it.  The  powder,  thus  prepared,  is  of  a  light  chocolate,  or
yellowish-brown  color,  of  a  peculiar,  slightly  aromatic,  animal  charcoal
odor,  and  a  very  faintly-astringent  taste.  Horns  which  have  fallen  from
the  deer  will  not  answer.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  A  powerful  styptic.  Especially  an  Eclectic
remedy,  of  much  value  in  uterine  hemorrhage  and  menorrhagia.  Has
also  been  found  beneficial  in  dysentery,  hemoptysis  and  other  hemor-
rhages. Dose  of  the  powder  one  drachm,  every  half  hour  until  the
hemorrhage  ceases  permanently,  which  is  usually  from  the  first  to  the
third  or  fourth  dose  ;  or  one  drachm  of  the  powder  may  be  placed  in  a
gill  of  hot  water,  and  a  tablespoonful  of  the  infusion  be  given  every  five
or  ten  minutes.  This  has  been  tested  in  numerous  cases,  and  as  yet,  no
failure  has  been  heard  of.  It  is  often  given  combined  with  the  compound
26


402  Materia Medica.

powder  of  ipecacuanha  and  opium,  or  with  other  agents, as  capsicum
and  opium,  etc.

CORNUS  CIRCINATA.

Round-leaved  Dogwood.
Nat. Ord. — Cornacese. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia,

THE BARK.

Description.  —  This  plant,  likewise  called  Broad-leaved  Dogwood,
Alder-leaved  Dogwood,  Round-leaved  Cornel,  etc.,  is  a  shrub  growing
from  six  to  ten  feet  high,  with  straight,  slender,  greenish  and  verrucose
branches.  The  leaves  are  large,  about  as  broad  as  long,  orbicular,  or
very  broadly  oval,  opposite,  acuminate,  waved  on  their  edges,  somewhat
rough  above,  but  lanuginous  beneath.  The  flowers  are  white,  in  small,
spreading,  depressed  cymes,  without  an  involucrum.  The  fruit  or  berries
are  a  bright  blue,  becoming  lighter  colored  as  they  mature,  small,  soft,
hollowed  at  base,  and  crowned  with  the  persistent  style.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,  growing  from
Canada  to  Virginia,  on  hill-sides  and  the  banks  of  rivers,  and  flowering
in  June  and  July.  The  dried  bark  is  usually  in  quills  of  a  whitish  or
ash -color,  and  affords  a  gray  powder,  somewhat  resembling  that  of  ipe-
cacuanha. Its  odor  is  slight,  and  its  taste  bitter,  astringent,  and  some-
what aromatic.  It  imparts  its  virtues  to  water,  and  in  chemical  character,
has  thus  far  been  found  analogous  with  the  Cornus  Florida.

Properties  and  Uses. — An  astringent  tonic,  which  may  be  employed
in  all  cases  where  such  agents  are  indicated.  An  infusion  of  it  may  be
made  by  infusing  an  ounce  of  the  coarsely-powdered  bark  in  a  pint  of
boiling  water,  and  may  be  given  in  doses  of  one  or  two  fluidounces,
several  times  a  day  ;  it  is  useful  in  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  and  also  as
a  gargle  in  sore-throat.  One  ounce  of  the  bark  affords  150  grains  of  an
astringent,  intensely  bitter  extract,  which  may  be  used  with  benefit.
The  medical  virtues  of  this  plant  are  similar  to  those  of  the  Cornus
Florida,  as  well  as  its  doses.


CORNUS  FLORIDA.
Dogwood.
Nat.  Ord. — Cornacese. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  as  Boxwood,  Flowering  Cornel,  etc.,
is  a  small  indigenous  tree,  from  twelve  to  thirty  feet  high,  with  a  very
hard  and  compact  wood,  covered  with  a  rough,  dark-brown  bark,  much
fissured.  It  is  a  tree  of  slow  growth.  The  branches  are  opposite,  spread-
ing, smooth,  covered  with  a  reddish  bark,  and  marked  with  rings  at  the
place of  the former leaves. The leaves are  opposite,  but  partially


Cornus  Florida.  403

expanded  at  the  flowering  time,  ovate,  acute,  entire,  petiolate,  nearly
smooth,  dark-green  and  sulcated  above,  paler  beneath  and  marked  with
strong  parallel  veins,  also  glaucous  or  whitish  beneath  ;  toward  the
close  of  summer,  they  are  speckled  with  black  spots,  and  on  the  approach
of  cold  weather  assume  a  red  color.  The  flowers  are  very  small,  of  a
greenish -yellow  color,  in  heads  or  sessile  umbels,  upon  peduncles  an  inch
or  more  in  length,  surrounded  by  a  large  involucre  of  a  white  or  pinkish
color,  constituting  the  chief  beauty  of  the  tree  when  in  flower.  Involucre
composed  of  four  white,  nerved,  obovate  leaves,  having  their  point
turned  abruptly  down  or  up,  so  as  to  give  them  an  obcordate  appearance.
Calyx  superior,  campanulate,  with  four  obtuse,  spreading  teeth.  The
corolla  is  composed  of  four  oblong,  obtuse,  reflexed  petals.  Stamens
four,  erect ;  anthers  oblong,  with  the  filaments  inserted  in  their  middle.
Style  shorter  than  the  stamens,  erect,  bearing  an  obtuse  stigma.  Fruit
an  oval  drupe  of  a  glossy  scarlet  color,  containing  a  nut  or  nucleus  with
two  cells  and  two  seeds.

History. — Cornus  Florida  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,
but  more  abundantly  in  the  middle  States  ;  it  flowers  from  February  to
June,  according  to  the  climate,  but  always  about  the  time  for  planting
Indian  corn,  and  ripens  its  fruit  in  the  fall.  The  wood  is  susceptible  of
a  high  polish,  and  may  be  used  for  a  variety  of  purposes  where  strength
and  hardness  are  required  ;  the  sap  is  white,  and  the  heart  chocolate-
color.  The  young  branches,  deprived  of  the  bark,  and  the  ends  chewed
or  pounded,  so  as  to  separate  the  fibers,  are  often  used  for  cleaning  the
teeth,  which  they  render  very  white.  The  bark  of  the  stem,  branches,
and  root,  is  the  officinal  part ;  that  from  the  root  is  to  be  preferred.  It
is  found  in  the  shops  in  pieces  of  various  sizes,  more  or  less  rolled,
sometimes  having  a  fawn-colored  epidermis,  at  other  times  partially
or  wholly  deprived  of  it,  of  a  reddish-gray  color,  very  brittle,  and
affording,  when  pulverized,  a  grayish  powder  tinged  with  red.  The  odor
is  feeble,  its  taste  bitter,  astringent,  and  slightly  aromatic.  Water  or
alcohol  extracts  its  virtues.  Analysis  has  detected  in  it  tannin,  gallic
acid,  a  bitter  extractive,  resin,  gum,  a  crystalline  substance,  etc.

Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell  prepares  an  article  from  dogwood  which  he  terms
Cornine,  and  supposes  it  to  be,  probably,  a  mixture  of  resin  and  insolu-
ble alkaloid.  It  is  prepared  by  precipitating  from  the  tincture  with
water,  after  distilling  off  the  alcohol,  in  the  same  manner  as  podophyllin
is  prepared.  It  is  a  light  grayish-brown  substance  of  a  peculiar  odor,
slightly  bitter  and  astringent  taste,  changed  to  a  dark-brownish  red  by
the  action  of  sulphuric  acid,  brownish-yellow  by  nitric  acid,  and  unchang-
ed by  muriatic  acid.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  in  diluted  mineral  acids,
in  volatile  oils  and  spirits  of  turpentine.  Ammonia  renders  it  partially
soluble  in  water ;  liquor  potassa  diluted  causes  a  dark  wine-colored
solution,  with  a  precipitate  which  dissolves  in  alcohol,  and  ether.  Chloro-
form becomes  colored  by  it,  the  cornine  floating  on  its  surface. Alcohol


404  Materia  Medica.

almost  wholly  dissolves  it,  and  ammonia  renders  the  solution  complete.
It  is  soluble  in  ether,  and  ammonia  added  removes  the  cornine  in  solu-
tion,  leaving  the  ether  floating  clear  and  transparent.  Liquor  potassa
added  to  the  ethereal  solution  does  not  completely  remove  the  cornine,
and  causes  a  precipitate  which  floats  between  the  two  liquids  when  they
separate.  An  article  termed  Cornine  is  prepared  in  New  York,  but  as
we  have  never  seen  it,  nor  met  with  any  account  of  its  mode  of  prepara-
tion, we  can  merely  refer  to  the  fact,  with  this  remark,  that  no  practi-
tioner should  use  any  agent  whatever,  the  mode  of  preparing  which  is
kept  a  secret  from  the  profession ;  as  well  may  we  employ  all  the  patent
medicines  so  highly  lauded  by  their  originators.

Properties  and  Uses. — Dogwood  bark  is  tonic,  astringent,  and  slightly
stimulant ;  it  is,  probably,  the  best  native  substitute  we  have  for  the  cin-
chona, having  often  succeeded  in  preventing  the  return  of  paroxysmal
fevers,  where  the  foreign  drug  proved  ineffectual.  It  may  be  used  in  all
cases  where  quinia  is  indicated  and  cannot  be  administered,  owing  to
idiosyncrasy,  etc.,  or  where  it  cannot  be  obtained  pure.  It  may  be  used
with  advantage  in  all  cases  where  tonics  are  required,  in  periodical  fevers,
typhoid  fevers,  etc.  Its  internal  employment  increases  the  force  and
frequency  of  the  pulse,  and  elevates  the  temperature  of  the  body.  It
should  be  used  in  the  dried  state,  as  the  recent  bark  is  apt  to  disorder
the  stomach,  and  produce  pains  in  the  bowels,  but  which  may  be  relieved
by  a  few  drops  of  laudanum.  The  cornine  prepared  by  Mr.  Merrell  is
much  used  as  a  substitute  for  quinia,  by  Eclectics,  and  is  frequently  pre-
ferred by  them  to  the  alkaloidal  salt.  It  may  be  variously  combined
with  xanthoxylin,  myricin,  salicin,  hydrastin,  podophyllin,  or  hydro-alco-
holic extract  of  cimicifuga,  in  the  different  affections  for  which  it  is  admin-
istered. An  extract  of  the  bark  prepared  by  boiling  it  in  water,  and
evaporating  to  the  proper  consistence,  will  be  found  the  best  form  in
which  to  administer  it.  Dose  of  the  powdered  bark,  from  twenty  to
six^y  grains,  as  often  as  required  ;  of  the  extract  from  five  to  ten  grains;
of  cornine  from  one  to  ten  grains  or  more.  The  ripe  berries,  infused  in
brandy,  are  used  in  some  sections  of  country  as  bitters  ;  and  an  infusion
of  the  flowers  forms  a  good  substitute  for  chamomile-flower  tea.

Off.  Prep. — Cornine;  Decoctum  Cornus  Floridse ;  Extractum  Cornus
Floridse ;  Extractum  Cornus  Floridse  Fluidum  ;  Pilulae  Quiniae  Composita?.


CORNUS  SERICEA.

Swamp  Dogwood.

Nat. Ord. — Cornacese. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — The  Cornus  Sericea,  known  likewise  by  the  names  of
Rose-willow,  Red-osier,  Silky  Cornel,  Red-willow,  etc.,  is  a  shrub  from


Cokvdalis  Formosa.  405

six  to  ten  feet  high,  with  numerous  erect  stems,  which  are  covered  with
a  greenish,  or  brownish-purple  bark,  of  a  brighter  color  on  the  younger
shoots,  and  sending  out  opposite,  spreading  branches,  with  pubescent
twigs.  The  leaves  are  pale-green,  opposite,  from  two  to  four  inches  long,
half  as  wide,  ovate  and  acuminate,  sometimes  almost  lanceolate,  at,
others  broadly  ovate,  petiolate,  entire,  nearly  smooth  above,  with  rather
prominent  veins,  covered  beneath  with  a  soft,  whitish,  or  rust-colored
pubescence.  The  flowers  are  yellowish-white,  small,  and  disposed  in
large,  terminal  cymes,  which  are  depressed  and  woolly.  Calyx-teeth
lanceolate  ;  stigma,  thick  and  capitate.  The  fruit  consists  of  globu-
lar, berry-formed  drupes,  collected  in  bunches,  of  a  beautiful  blue
color ;  stone  compressed.

History. — Swamp  Dogwood  is  found  in  wet  thickets,  and  on  the  mar-
gins of  water-courses,  from  Canada  to  Carolina,  flowering  in  June  and
July.  The  bark  is  the  officinal  part,  that  of  the  root  being  preferred  ;
it  possesses  similar  properties  with  the  Cornus  Florida.

Properties  and  Uses. — Similar  to  the  C.  Florida,  being  however  more
astringent  and  less  bitter.  It  has  been  found  useful  in  dyspepsia  and
diarrhea,  and  may  be  employed  as  a  substitute  for  the  C.  Florida  in  the
same  doses,  and  administered  in  a  similar  manner.  An  infusion  is  very
valuable  in  checking  vomiting,  especially  that  arising  from  pregnancy
and  diseased  uterus.  It  has  also  been  highly  recommended  in  dropsy,
ulcers,  malignant  fevers,  and  as  an  antiseptic.


CORYDALIS  FORMOSA. (Dielytra  Formosa.)

Turkey  Corn.

Nat. Ord. — Fumariaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Pentandria.


Description. — This  plant,  likewise  known  as  Wild  Turkey-pea,  Stag-
ger-weed, Choice  Dielytra,  is  an  indigenous  perennial  plant,  risino-  from
six  to  ten  inches  in  hight,  and  having  a  tuberous  root.  The  leaves  are
radical,  rising  from  ten  to  fifteen  inches  high,  somewhat  triternate,
with  incisely  pinnatifid  segments,  but  quite  variable.  The  scape  is
naked,  and  rises  from  eight  to  twelve  inches  in  hight,  with  from  four  to
eight  cymes,  each  with  from  six  to  ten  reddish-purple,  nodding  flowers  ;
racemes  compound,  the  branches  cymose  ;  corolla  from  eight  to  ten  lines
long,  broad  at  base ;  nectaries  or  spurs  very  short,  obtuse,  incurved ;
bracts  purplish,  at  base  of  pedicels  ;  style  extended  ;  stigma,  two-horned
at  apex  ;  sepals  two,  deciduous  ;  capsule  pod-shaped,  many  seeded.

History. — This  beautiful  little  plant  was  introduced  to  the  profession
by  Professor  Jones. It  flowers  very  early  in  the  spring,  in  this  section


406  Materia  Medica.

of  the  country  as  early  as  March  ;  and  the  root  or  tuber,  which  is  a
small  round  ball,  should  be  collected  only  while  the  plant  is  in  flower.
It  grows  in  rich  soil,  on  hills  and  mountains,  among  rocks,  and  old,
decayed  timber,  and  is  found  westward,  and  south  of  New  York  to  N.
Carolina.

It  must  be  distinguished  from  the  Corydalis  Cucullaria,  which  flowers
at  the  same  time,  and  very  much  resembles  it. The  root  or  bulb  of
the  C.  formosa,  when  fresh,  is  of  a darkish-yellow color throughout,
while  the  C.  cucullaria  has  a  black  cortex  or  rind,  and  is  white  inter-
nally. When dried the  external  covering of  the  root  is  of  a  light
grayish-yellow  color, about  the  fourth  of  a line thick,  inclosing  an
internal,  light-yellow  substance  ;  frequently  it  is  of  a  dark  color  exter-
nally, and  when  examined  under  a  microscope,  full  of  pores,  and  inter-
nally, yellow  or  brownish-yellow. It  has  a  faint,  peculiar  odor,  and  a
taste  at  first  slightly  bitter,  succeeded by  one  somewhat  penetrating,
peculiar  and  persistent, gently  influencing  the  fauces,  and  increasing
the  flow  of  saliva. The  cause  of  the  difference  of  appearance  in  dry-
ing is  not  known,  unless  it  be  owing  to  the  difference  in  the  age  of  the
root. Microscopic  examination  of  the  lighter  variety  gives  a  porous,
spongy,  resinous,  glistening  fracture  ;  and  of  the  darker,  a  fracture  very
much  resembling  honeycomb. Water  or  alcohol  extracts  its  virtues.
It has  not been analyzed, though  it  contains  an alkaloid principle
named  Corydalia. I  called  the  attention  of  Eclectics  to  this  principle
in  the  U.  S.  Eclectic  Dispensatory,  as  corydalin,  not  having  submitted
it  to  any  chemical  tests,  since  which,  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell  has  manufac-
tured it  for  the  profession,  and  ascertained  its  alkaline  character. When
in  powder,  corydalia  is  of  a  greenish-brown  color,  insoluble  in  water,
partially  soluble  in  ether,  and  completely  so  in  alcohol. Diluted  mu-
riatic and  sulphuric  acids  dissolve it. Nitric  acid  reddens  it,  and  it
forms  crystallizable  salts  with  acetic  and  sulphuric  acids. It  is  of  a
peculiar,  slightly  aloetic  odor,  of  a  weak  bitter,  sub-acrid,  and  nauseous
taste,  and  rather  tenacious. Four  pounds  of  the  Corydalis  root,  yields
little  more  than  an  ounce  of  this  alkaloid. It  is  obtained  by  adding
water  to  the  tincture  of  the  root,  a  portion  of  the  alkaloid  is  precipi-
tated ;  filter the supernatant liquid,  and  add  to  it ammonia,  which
causes  another  precipitate  of  the  alkaloid  ;  again  filter  the  supernatant
liquid,  and  add  to  it  muriatic  acid,  when  the  balance  of  the  alkaloid
remaining  in  the  solution  is  precipitated. Probably  it  may  be  obtained
by  adding  muriatic  acid  to  a  strong  infusion  of  the  root  and  precipita-
ting with  ammonia.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  agent  is  peculiar  to  Eclectics,  not  being
known  by  any  other  class  of  practitioners.  It  is  tonic,  diuretic,  and
alterative.  In  all  syphilitic  affections,  it  is  one  of  the  best  remedies
we  have ;  and  will  likewise  be  found  valuable  in  scrofula,  and  in  all


Creasotum.  407

cases  where  tonics  are  indicated.  As  a  tonic,  it  possesses  properties
similar  to  the  Gentian,  Colombo,  or  other  pure  bitters  ;  its  alterative
properties,  however,  render  it  of  immense  value.  In  syphilis  it  seems
to  be  possessed  of  magical  powers.  The  corydalia  possesses  all  the
alterative  properties  of  the  bulb  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  will  be
found  useful  in  all  scrofulous  and  syphilitic  affections,  as  well  as  in
many  cutaneous  diseases.

Dose  of  the  infusion,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four
times  a  day ;  of  the  saturated  tincture,  from  half  a  fiuidrachm  to  two
fiuidrachms  ;  of  corydalia,  from  one  half  of  a  grain  to  one  grain,  three
or  four  times  a  day.  The  infusion  to  be  made  by  adding  four  drachms  of
the  powdered  bulb  to  one  pint  of  boiling  water.

Corydalia  may  be  advantageously  combined  with  berberin,  hydrastin,
ptelein,  etc.,  as  a  tonic,  and  with  podophyllin,  xanthoxylin,  stillingin,
iridin,  and  phytolaccin,  etc.,  as  an  alterative.

Off.  Prep.  —  Corydalia;  Decoctum  Corydalis;  Extractum  Corydalis
Hydro-alcoholicum ;  Syrupus  Stillingise  Compositus  ;  Syrupus  Corydalis
Compositus ;  Tinctura  Corydalis.

CREASOTUM

Creosote.

A PECULIAR SUBSTANCE OBTAINED FROM TAR.

Preparation. — Creosote  is  obtained  either  from  tar  or  from  crude
pyroligneous  acid.  When  tar  is  used,  it  is  distilled  until  it  has  attained
the  consistence  of  pitch.  The  distilled  liquid  divides  itself  into  three
layers,  an  aqueous  between  two  oily  layers.  The  inferior  oily  layer,
which  alone  contains  the  creosote,  is  separated,  and  saturated  with  car-
bonate of  potassa,  to  remove  acetic  acid.  The  liquid  is  allowed  to  rest,
and  the  new  oil  which  separates  is  decanted  from  it.  This  oil  is  dis-
tilled, and  yields  products  lighter  than  water,  and  a  liquid  heavier.  The
latter  alone  is  preserved,  and  having  been  agitated  repeatedly  with
weak  phosphoric  acid,  to  neutralize  ammonia,  is  allowed  to  remain  at
rest  for  some  time.  It  is  next  washed  as  long  as  acidity  remains,  and
then  distilled  with  a  fresh  portion  of  weak  phosphoric  acid,  care  being
taken  to  cohobate  from  time  to  time.  The  oily  liquid  thus  rectified  is
colorless,  and  contains  much  creosote,  but  also  a  portion  of  eupione.
To  separate  these,  the  liquid  is  mixed  with  a  solution  of  caustic
potassa,  of  the  density  of  1.12,  which  dissolves  the  creosote,  but  not
the  eupione.  The  eupione,  which  swims  above  from  its  levity,  being
separated,  the  alkaline  solution  of  the  creosote  is  exposed  to  the  air
until  it  becomes  brown  in  consequence  of  the  destruction  of  a  foreign
matter,  and  is  then  saturated  with  sulphuric  acid.  This  sets  free  the
creosote,  which  is  decanted,  and  again  distilled.  The  treatment  by
solution of  potassa,  sulphuric acid,  etc.,  is  to  be  repeated  until  the


403  Materia  Medica.

creosote  no  longer  becomes  brown  by  exposure  to  the  air,  but  only  slightly
reddish.  It  is  then  dissolved  in  a  stronger  solution  of  potassa,  and
distilled  again,  and  finally  re-distilled  for  the  last  time,  rejecting  the
first  portion,  which  comes  over  on  account  of  containing  much  water,
collecting  the  next  portions,  and  avoiding  to  push  the  distillation  too
far.  The  product  collected  in  this  distillation  is  pure  creosote.  When
creosote  is  extracted  from  pyroligneous  acid,  the  first  step  is  to  dissolve
sulphate  of  soda  in  it  to  saturation.  The  oil  which  separates  and  swims
above  is  decanted,  and  having  been  allowed  to  remain  at  rest  for  a
few  days,  is  saturated  by  carbonate  of  potassa,  with  the  assistance  of
heat,  and  distilled  with  water.  The  oleaginous  liquid  obtained  is  of  a
pale-yellow  color,  and  is  to  be  treated  with  phosphoric  acid,  etc.,  etc.,
as  above  detailed  with  respect  to  the  treatment  of  the  corresponding  oil
obtained  from  tar.

Creosote  is  a  colorless  oleaginous  liquid,  or  as  found  in  the  shops,
with  a  brownish  tinge,  of  the  consistence  of  oil  of  almonds,  slightly
greasy  to  the  touch,  and  having  a  caustic  and  burning  taste,  and  a  pen-
etrating, disagreeable  odor,  like  that  of  smoked  meat.  It  burns  with
a  sooty  flame.  Applied  to  the  skin  in  a  concentrated  state,  it  quickly
destroys  the  cuticle.  On  paper  it  leaves  a  greasy  stain,  which  disap-
pears in  a  few  hours,  or  very  rapidly  when  exposed  to  a  gentle  heat.
Its  sp.  gr.  is  1.037.  It  boils  at  397°,  and  retains  its  fluidity  at  —  17°,
and  not  at  so  low  a  temperature  as  —  50°,  as  erroneously  stated  in  the
London  Pharmacopoeia.  It  is  a  non-conductor  of  electricity,  and  refracts
light  powerfully.  It  is  devoid  of  acid  or  alkaline  reaction.  Mixed  with
water,  it  forms  two  combinations — one  a  solution  of  1  part  of  creosote
with  about  80  of  water,  the  other  of  1  part  of  water  in  10  of  creosote.
It  unites  in  all  proportions  with  alcohol,  ether  and  naphtha.  It  is
capable  of  dissolving  a  large  quantity  of  iodine  and  phosphorus,  and  a
considerable  portion  of  sulphur,  especially  when  assisted  by  heat.  With
potassa,  creosote  forms  two  combinations  ;  one  anhydrous,  of  an  oleagi-
nous consistence  ;  the  other,  hydrated,  and  in  the  form  of  small,  white,
pearly  scales  ;  with  soda,  it  also  forms  similar  compounds.  It  dissolves
ammonia  instantly,  retaining  it  with  great  force.  It  is  decomposed  by
strong  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids.  Acetic  acid  dissolves  it  in  all  pro-
portions. It  acts  powerfully  in  coagulating  albumen.  It  preserves
meats  from  putrefaction  which  have  been  dipped  in  a  solution  of  it  for
fifteen  minutes.  It  consists  of  76.2  carbon,  7.8  hydrogen,  and  1G
oxygen.

It  is  sometimes  rendered  impure  by  the  presence  of  eupione,  picamar,
or  capnomer,  and  frequently  rectified  oil  of  tar,  as  well  as  fixed  and
volatile  oils  ;  these  may  be  detected  by  strong  acetic  acid,  which  dis-
solves the  creosote,  and  leaves  the  adulterations  floating  above  the
solution.  Fixed  oils  are  discovered  by  a  stain  on  paper,  not  discharged
by  heat.


Creta  Prjeparata.  409

Properties  and  Uses. — Irritant,  narcotic, -styptic,  antiseptic,  and  escha-
rotic.  Used  in  diabetes  mellitus,  epilepsy,  hysteria,  neuralgia*  chronic
catarrh,  hemoptysis,  hematemesis,  chronic  gonorrhea  and  gleet,  and  to
arrest  nausea  or  vomiting  occasioned  by  hysteria  or  pregnancy.  Exter-
nally, in  which  it  is  more  commonly  used,  it  has  been  found  efficacious
in  scalv  cutaneous  affections,  burns,  external  wounds,  capillary  hemor-
rhage, indolent  and  gangrenous  ulcers,  also,  scrofulous,  syphilitic  and
fistulous  ulcers  and  scrofulous  ophthalmia  ;  as  a  gargle,  in  putrid  sore-
throat  ;  as  an  injection,  diluted  with  oil  of  almonds,  in  chronic  suppu-
ration of  the  external  meatus  of  the  ear,  and  in  toothache,  depending
on  exposure  of  the  nerve.  It  should  most  usually  be  sufficiently  diluted,
and  used  in  the  form  of  mixture,  solution  or  ointment.  Dose,  from  one
to  three  drops,  diluted  with  two  or  three  fiuidounces  of  weak  mucilage,
three  or  four  times  a  day.  However,  it  is  seldom  used  internally  at  the
present  day,  the  pyroligneous  acid  answering  a  much  better  purpose  for
internal  administration.  In  an  overdose,  creosote  acts  as  a  poison,
causing  obscurity  of  vision,  giddiness,  depressed  action  of  the  heart,
convulsions,  and  coma.  The  treatment  must  be  the  use  of  ammonia
and  other  stimulants,  with  white  of  egg.  Creosote  water  may  be  used
with  advantage  as  a  preservative  of  anatomical  preparations,  without
hardening  them ;  and  three  or  four  drops  of  creosote  to  a  pint  of  ink
will  prevent  it  from  becoming  moldy.

Off.  Prep. — Unguentum  Creasoti.


CRETA  PR^EPARATA.

Prepared Chalk.

Preparation. — Rub  Chalk  (Carbonate  of  Lime)  very  fine,  with  a  little
water;  stir  this  into  a  large  quantity  of  water,  and  when  the  coarse  par-
ticles have  subsided,  pour  off  the  supernatant  turbid  liquor,  into  another
vessel,  and  let  it  settle. Pour  off  the  water,  and  dry  the  powder.

History. — Chalk  has  not  been  found  in  the  United  States,  but  is
obtained  in  abundance  in  the  south  of  England,  and  north  of  France.  It
occurs  in  the  newest  secondary  strata,  and  constitutes  with  its  subordi-
nate rocks  a  distinct  and  peculiar  formation.  It  is  scarcely  ever  a  per-
fectly pure  carbonate  of  lime,  always  containing  silica,  alumina,  iron,
and  fossil  remains  of  land  and  marine  animals.  It  is  a  carbonate  of
lime,  and  is  identical  with  marble  (tokich  see)  in  its  relations  to  water,
air,  alcohol,  heat  and  acids.

It  is  termed  in  the  U.  States  Dispensatory,  Native  Friable  Carbonate
of  Lime.  There  are  two  kinds  of  it,  Hard  and  Soft  Chalk  ;  the  latter  is
commonly  preferred  for  medical  purposes,  though  the  former  may  be
employed  as  well.  It  has  an  earthy  appearance,  pure  white  when  una-
dulterated,  grayish-white  when impure, inodorous,  tasteless, opake,


410  Materia Medica.

insoluble,  rough  to  the  touch,  very  friable,  breaking  with  an  earthy  frac-
ture, and  leaves  a  white  mark  when  drawn  across  a  resisting  surface.
Its  specific  gravity  varies  from  2.3  to  2.6.  When  pure,  muriatic  acid
completely  dissolves  it ;  if  the  solution  is  precipitated  by  ammonia,  it
contains  alumina  if  the  precipitate  be  white,  and  oxide  of  iron  if  it  be
in  yellow  flakes.  Chalk  is  unfit  for  medicinal  use,  until  it  has  been
divested  of  its  gritty  particles  by  levigation  and  elutriation,  as  above
sited, leaving  the  soft  chalk  floating  in  the  liquor,  which  being  poured
off,  the  impalpable  powder  is  collected  as  it  slowly  descends  ;  after  again
pouring  off  the  liquor,  as  soon  as  all  the  powder  has  subsided,  the  mass
left  behind,  is  made  to  fall  in  small  portions  upon  an  absorbent  surface,
and  which  when  dried  have  a  conical  shape,  and  are  termed  Prepared
Chalk.

Prop>erties  and  Uses. — Antacid,  astringent  and  absorbent.  Used  in
acidity  of  the  stomach  and  diarrhea,  combined  with  aromatics  and  opium;
externally,  to  ulcers  and  burns,  to  absorb  the  ichorous  discharge,  and  to
prevent  excoriations  from  pressure  or  friction.  Dose,  from  ten  grains  to
one  drachm.

Prepared  oyster  shell,  Testa  Prceparata,  has  the  same  properties,  but
is  now  out  of  use ;  it  is  prepared  by  freeing  the  shells  from  extraneous
matter,  by  washing  with  boiling  water,  then  powdering  and  proceeding
as  above.


CROCUS  SATIVUS.

Saffron.

Nat.  Ord. — Iridacese. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Monogynia.

THE STIGMAS.

Description.  —  Saffron  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  a  rounded  and
depressed  bulb  or  cormus,  the  integuments  of  which  consist  of  parallel
fibers,  which  are  distinct  at  the  upper  end.  The  leaves  are  radical,
linear,  long,  placid,  slightly  revolute  at  the  margins,  dark-green  upon
their  upper  surface,  with  a  white,  longitudinal  furrow  in  the  center,  paler
underneath  with  a  prominent,  flattened  midrib,  and  inclosed  at  their
base,  together  with  the  tube  of  the  corolla,  in  a  long  membranous  sheath
or  bract,  from  which  they  emerge  soon  after  the  appearance  of  the
flower.  The  flowers  are  large,  of  a  beautiful  lilac,  or  bluish-purple  color,
with  a  long,  slender,  campanulate  white  tube,  axillary,  striated,  with  a
two-valved,  membranous,  thin,  transparent,  radical  spathe,  and  appear-
ing with  the  leaves.  The  style  hangs  out  on  one  side  between  two  seg-
ments of  the  corolla,  and  terminates  in  three  long,  deeply-divided,  linear-
cuneiform,  emarginate,  fragrant  stigmas,  of  a  deep  orange  color.

History. — Saffron  is  a  native  of  Greece  and  Asia  Minor,  and  is  much
cultivated  in  some  parts  of  Europe. It  is  also  cultivated  as  a  garden


Crocus Sativus.  411

flower,  in  this  country.  It  is  liable  to  two  diseases,  which  occasionally
interfere  with  the  success  of  its  culture  ;  one  is  owing  to  a  parasitic  fun-
gus which  adheres  to  the  bulb  ;  the  other,  called  tacon  by  the  French,
converts  the  bulb  into  a  blackish  powder.  Saffron  flowers  in  the
autumn,  and  perfects  its  seed  the  succeeding  spring.  It  is  propagated
by  offsets  from  the  bulb.  The  part  used  in  medicine  is  the  stigmas  ;  to
obtain  these,  the  flowers  are  gathered  as  soon  as  they  unfold  themselves,
the  stigmas  are  separated,  and  dried  by  an  artificial  heat.  There  are
two  kinds  of  it  in  commerce,  called  Hay  and  Cake  Saffron.  The  Hay
Saffron,  which  is  the  best  kind,  consists  simply  of  the  stigmata  entangled
together,  and  retaining  their  original  deep  orange  color.  The  Cake  Saf-
fron is  in  flexible  cakes,  about  half  a  line  in  thickness,  and  of  a  dirty,
brownish-orange  tint,  made  by  beating  the  stigmata  together  before  they
are  quite  dry.  Saffron  has  a  powerful,  aromatic,  somewhat  stupefying
odor,  and  a  bitterish,  balsamic,  rather  acrid  taste.  It  imparts  its  proper-
ties to  water,  vinegar  or  spirit.  In  choosing  it,  it  should  not  be  very
moist  nor  very  dry,  nor  easily  pulverized,  nor  should  it  emit  an  offensive
odor  when  thrown  on  hot  coals.  The  freshest  is  the  best,  and  should
possess  an  oily  feel,  and  color  the  fingers  when  rubbed  between  them.
As  its  active  principle  is  volatile,  it  should  be  kept  in  well-stopped
vessels.

Saffron  yields,  on  analysis,  7.5  per  cent,  of  an  odorous,  volatile  oil,
wax,  gum,  albumen,  saline  matter,  water,  lignin,  and  6.5  per  cent,  of  a
peculiar  extractive  matter,  termed  polychroite,  on  account  of  the  changes
of  color  it  undergoes  by  the  reaction  of  agents.  It  may  be  obtained  by
evaporating  the  watery  infusion  of  saffron  to  the  consistence  of  honey,
digesting  the  residue  in  alcohol,  filtering  the  tincture,  and  evaporating  it
to  dryness.  It  is  a  reddish -yellow  mass,  of  an  agreeable  smell,  slightly
bitter,  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,  and  somewhat  deliquescent.  Nitric
acid  added  to  its  solution  renders  it  of  a  grass-green  color,  sulphuric  acid
changes  it  to  blue  and  then  violet,  and  on  exposure  to  light,  or  to  the
action  of  chlorine,  it  becomes  colorless.  It  contains  about  twenty  per
cent,  of  volatile  oil,  to  which  the  medicine  owes  its  activity,  and  which
can  be  separated  only  by  an  alkali.  When  pure,  polychroite  is  of  a
brilliant  red,  readily  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils,
and  difficultly  soluble  in  water,  which  it  renders  yellow.  The  volatile
oil  of  saffron  may  be  partially  separated  by  distillation  ;  it  is  yellow,  of
a  hot,  acrid,  bitterish  taste,  and  heavier  than  water,  in  which  it  is  slightly
soluble.

Saffron  is  very  liable  to  be  adulterated  with  water,  oil,  flowers  of  other
plants,  fibers  of  dried  beef,  etc.  Hot  water  will  detect  the  adulteration
with  flowers  by  their  expansion,  while  in  it ;  muscular  fibers  may  be
known  by  the  odor  of  burning  horn  emitted  on  burning  the  suspected
article.  When  rubbed  between  the  finger  and  thumb  without  staining
the  skin  yellow,  the  saffron  has  been  exhausted  by  water  or  spirit. A


412  Materia Medica.

certain  test  of  saffron  is  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  which  changes  the
color  of  pure  saffron  to  indigo  blue.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emmenagogue  and  diaphoretic.  Has  been  of
benefit  in  amennorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  chlorosis,  hysteria,  and  in  sup-
pression of  the  lochial  discharge.  As  a  diaphoretic,  used  in  febrile  and
exanthematous  diseases,  especially  of  children.  Many  consider  this
valuable  agent  as  inert.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  twelve  to  forty
gcains  ;  of  the  tincture  or  syrup,  from  one  to  two  fluidrachms  ;  of  the
decoction,  from  one  to  three  fiuidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Tinct.  Aloes  et  Myrrhse  ;  Tinctura  Serpentarise  Composita.


CROTON ELEUTERIA.

Cascarilla.
Nat.  Ord. — Euphorbiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

THE BARK.

Description. — Croton  Eleuteria  is  a  small  tree,  said  to  rise  to  the  hight
of  twenty  feet,  and  branching  thickly  at  the  top.  The  branches  and
twigs  are  angular,  rather  compressed,  striated,  downy,  ferruginous.  The
leaves  are  petiolated,  alternate,  ovate,  with  a  short  but  obtuse  point,
entire,  faintly  nerved,  bright-green  above,  with  a  few  scattered  grayish
dots,  silvery,  and  very  tomentose  beneath ;  petioles  short,  scurfy.
Racemes  axillary  and  terminal,  branched  or  compound  ;  the  branches
short,  divaricating,  covered  with  numerous,  closely-parted,  subsessile,
whitish,  monoecious  flowers.  Sterile  jiowers  above  and  smallest ;  fertile
ones  below,  few,  and  on  short  stalks.  Stamens  ten  to  twelve.  Capsule
roundish,  minutely  warted,  scurfy,  not  much  larger  than  a  pea,  with
three  furrows,  three  cells,  and  six  valves.

History. — The  tree  from  which  Cascarilla  is  obtained  is  a  native  of  the
West  Indies,  and  is  found  abundantly  in  the  small  island  of  Eleutheria,
from  which  it  derives  its  name.  It  was,  for  a  time,  supposed  to  have
been  derived  from  the  Croton  Cascarilla.  a  small  tree  growing  in  the
Bahamas,  Hayti,  Peru,  and  Paraguay,  but  this  is  now  ascertained  by
botanists  to  have  been  an  error.  Cascarilla  bark  comes  to  this  market
from  the  West  Indies,  in  bags  or  casks,  and  is  had  in  two  forms;  in  one,
it  is  in  rolled  fragments  of  various  sizes,  having  a  dull-whitish  or  whitish-
gray  epidermis,  which  is  frequently  more  or  less  removed,  and  beneath
which  it  is  of  a  dark-brown  color,  while  its  inner  surface  has  a  chocolate
tint,  and  its  fracture  is  reddish-brown.  In  the  other  variety,  it  is  in  very
thin  pieces,  an  inch  or  two  in  length,  not  covered  by  the  white  epider-
mis, curved  more  or  less  longitudinally,  and  often  with  laminae  of  wood
adhering  to  their  inner  surface,  as  if  the  bark  had  been  removed  from
the  tree  by  means  of  a  sharp  instrument. The  first  variety  is  obtained


Cucumis  Coloctnthis.  413

from  the  Croton  Eleuteria ;  the  source  of  the  second  is  not  so  well  ascer-
tained, though  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  Croton  Micans.

The  bark  is  dense,  brittle,  and  easily  pulverized,  the  powder  being  of
a  lio-ht-brown  color,  with  a  feeble  aromatic  odor,  increased  by  friction
and  much  more  so  by  burning,  and  having  a  strong,  aromatic,  bitterish,
acrid  taste.  On  account  of  its  delicate  and  agreeable  odor,  it  is  often
added  in  small  portions  to  tobacco,  by  smokers,  to  render  the  fumes
more  fragrant.  Water  or  spirit  readily  extracts  its  active  principles,  but
diluted  alcohol  is  the  proper  menstruum.  Analysis  has  detected  in  it,
albumen,  a  peculiar  kind  of  tannin,  a  bitter  crystallizable  principle  called
Cascarillin,  a  red  coloring  matter,  fatty  matter  of  a  nauseous  odor,  wax,
gum,  resin,  volatile  oil,  starch,  pectic  acid,  chloride  of  potassium,  a  salt
of  lime,  and  lignin.  The  Cascarillin  is  white,  crystallized,  inodorous,
of  a  bitter  taste,  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  but  readily  so  in  alcohol  or
ether,  neutral,  and  without  nitrogen.  It  may  be  obtained  by  treating
the  powdered  bark  with  water,  adding  acetate  of  lead  to  the  solution,
separating  the  lead  by  sulphureted  hydrogen,  filtering,  evaporating  with
the  addition  of  animal  charcoal,  filtering  again,  and  evaporating  at  a
low  temperature  to  the  consistence  of  a  syrup;  this  must  be  allowed  to
harden  by  cooling,  and  the  matter  thus  obtained  must  be  purified  by
twice  successively  treating  it,  first  with  a  little  cold  alcohol  to  separate
the  coloring  and  fatty  matters,  and  afterward  with  boiling  alcohol  and
animal  charcoal ;  allow  this  last  alcoholic  solution  to  evaporate  sponta-
neously. It  resembles  salicin  in  many  respects.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  and  stimulant.  Used  in  dyspepsia,  flatu-
lency, chronic  diarrhea,  in  debility  attending  chronic  diseases,  conva-
lescence from  acute  diseases,  and  to  arrest  vomiting.  When  cinchona
produces  nausea,  the  addition  of  cascarilla  will  prevent  it.  Dose  of  the
powder,  from  one  to  two  scruples  ;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  four  fluid-
drachms  ;  of  the  infusion,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces.  On  account  of
its  musky  odor,  it  is  a  common  ingredient  of  fumigating  pastilles.


CUCUMIS COLOCYNTHIS.
Colocynth.

Nat. Orel. — Cucurbitacere. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

THE FRUIT DEPRIVED OF ITS RIND.

Description.  —  Colocynth,  or  Bitter  Cucumber,  is  an  annual  plant,  bear-
ing some  resemblance  to  that  of  the  watermelon,  with  a  whitish  root,
and  herbaceous,  trailing,  angular,  branched,  rough  and  hispid  stem.
The  leaves  are  alternately  on  long  petioles,  of  a  triangular  form,  deeply
and  obtusely  sinuated,  of  a  bright  green  on  the  upper  surface,  paler
beneath  with  whitish  hairs;  tendrils  short;  the  flowers  are  solitary,  axil-
lary, pedunculate,  and  of  a  yellow  color. The  calyx  of  the  male  flower  is


414  Materia Medica.

bell-shaped;  the  corolla  is  monopetalous,  campanulate,  divided  at  the
margin  into  five  pointed  segments.  The  stamens  are  three,  short,  dis-
tinct; two  are  bifid  at  the  apex,  or  rather  have  two  anthers.  The
female  flower  is  like  the  male,  but  the  filaments  are  destitute  of  anthers.
The  ovary  is  inferior,  large,  with  a  very  short  cylindrical  style,  furnished
with  three  thick  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  a  round  pepo,  the  size  and  color
of  an  orange,  and  smooth  on  the  outside  when  ripe ;  the  rind  is
thin,  hard,  and  coriaceous ;  internally  it  is  trilocular,  each  cell  con-
taining numerous  ovate-acute,  compressed  seeds,  enveloped  by  a  white
spongy  pulp.

History.  —  The  Bitter  Apple,  or  Cucumber  is  a  native  of  Northern
Africa,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  "Western  Asia,  etc.,  and  is  cultivated  in
Italy  and  Spain.  The  fruit  is  collected  in  autumn  when  it  begins  to  turn
yellow,  and  after  having  been  peeled,  is  dried  quickly  either  in  a  stove,
or  by  the  sun.  The  colocynth  with  which  the  United  States  is  supplied,
is  chiefly  derived  from  the  ports  of  the  Levant.  That  which  is  deprived
of  its  rind,  is  very  white,  light,  spongy,  and  without  seeds,  is  considered
the  best  article  ;  that  which  contains  the  seeds  is  inferior ;  and  the  gray-
ish or  brownish  pith  of  the  larger  fruits  is  of  the  poorest  quality.  The
pulp  only  of  the  fruit  is  the  officinal  portion ;  the  fruit,  as  usually  met
with  in  the  shops,  is  about  the  size  of  a  small  orange.  The  pulp  is
tough,  pulverized  with  difficulty,  nearly  inodorous,  but  intensely  and  disa-
greeably bitter.  Water,  ether,  or  alcohol  acquires  its  active  properties;
water  forms  a  mucilaginous  solution,  from  which  the  extract  of  colocynth
is  obtained  by  evaporation ;  it  is  pale-brown,  translucent,  elastic,  and
intensely  bitter.  Analysis  has  detected  in  colocynth,  a  bitter  principle
called  Colocynthin,  extractive,  fixed  oil,  resin  insoluble  in  ether,  gum,
pectic  acid,  phosphates  of  lime  and  magnesia,  lignin,  and  a  little  water.
It  is  incompatible  with  the  fixed  alkalies,  sulphate  of  iron,  nitrate  of
silver,  acetate  of  lead,  and  vegetable  astringents,  containing  tannin  or
gallic  acid.

Colocynthin  may  be  obtained  by  exhausting  the  pulp  previously  freed
from  the  seeds,  with  successive  portions  of  cold  distilled  water,  until  it
is  deprived  of  its  bitterness ;  then  filtering  the  solution,  heating  it  to
boiling  point,  and  adding,  while  hot,  diacetate  of  lead,  as  long  as  any
precipitation  continues.  When  cold,  filter  the  supernatant  liquid,  and
gradually  add  to  it  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  until  it  no  longer  throws  down
a  precipitate ;  again  boil  to  remove  the  free  acetic  acid,  and  filter  to
separate  the  sulphate  of  lead.  By  this  means  all  the  organic  matter,
except  the  colocynthin,  is  removed.  Evaporate  the  filtered  liquor  cau-
tiously and  nearly  to  dryness,  and. dissolve  the  colocynthin  out  of  the
residuum  by  means  of  strong  alcohol,  which  leaves  the  salts  undissolved
as  sulphates.  By  evaporating  the  alcoholic  solution  the  colocynthin  is
obtained  pure.  Colocynthin  is  an  amorphous,  yellowish-brown,  some-
what translucent,  brittle,  and  friable  substance,  fusible  at  a  temperature


CuCURBITA ClTRULLUS.  415

below  212°,  inflammable,  more  soluble  in  alcohol  than  in  water,  but
imparting  to  the  latter  an  intense  bitterness.  It  is  neutral  ;  with  infusion
of  galls  its  aqueous  solution  gives  a  copious  white  precipitate.

Properties  and  Uses. — Colocynth  is  a  powerful  drastic,  hydragogue
cathartic,  exciting  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  intes-
tines, causing  severe  griping,  vomiting,  and  bloody  discharges.  In  small
doses  it  acts  powerfully  and  harshly,  and  is,  therefore,  never  used  alone,
but  generally  in  combination  with  other  cathartics,  which  tends  to  modify
its  irritating  influence.  The  addition  of  extract  of  hyoscyamus  will  like-
wise deprive  it  of  its  harsh  and  griping  effects.  Its  principal  employ-
ment is  in  passive  dropsy,  in  cerebral  derangements,  and  in  pills  with
other  cathartics  for  the  purpose  of  overcoming  torpid  conditions  of  the
biliary  and  digestive  systems.  Its  irritant  effect  upon  the  rectum  may
influence  the  uterus  by  sympathy  of  contiguity,  and  thus  provoke  men-
struation, and  on  the  same  principle,  dissolved  in  whisky,  it  has  cured
gonorrhea.  It  may  be  used  in  moderate  doses,  in  all  diseases  where
catharsis  is  indicated.  The  powder  applied  to  an  ulcer,  or  raw-surface,
affects  the  lower  bowels  in  the  same  manner  as  when  taken  internally.
It  is  said  that  Hippocrates  used  the  colocynth  as  a  pessary  for  the  pur-
pose of  exciting  menstruation.  The  oil  of  colocynth  has  been  recom-
mended as  an  external  remedy  for  neuralgia.  Dose  of  colocynth,  is
from  four  to  ten  grains,  either  in  powder,  or  aqueous  extract;  of  the
alcoholic  extract,  from  one  to  four  grains.  When  to  be  given  alone,  it
should  be  triturated  with  some  inert  or  insoluble  powders,  as  gum  or
farinaceous  matter,  in  order  to  diminish  its  severity  of  action.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Colocynthidis;  Extraction  Colocynthidis  Com-
positum.

CUCURBITA ClTRULLUS.

Watermelon.

CUCURBITA PEPO.

Pumpkin.
Nat. Ord. — Cucurbitaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

THE SEEDS.

Description.  —  The  Cucurbita  Citrullus  of  Linnaeus,  and  Cucumis
Citrullus  of  Seringe,  is  an  annual  plant  with  a  prostrate,  slender,  hairy
stem,  with  branching  tendrils.  The  leaves  are  palmately  five-lobed,  verv
glaucous  beneath,  lobes  mostly  sinuate-pinnatifid,  all  the  segments
obtuse.  The  flowers  are  yellow,  solitary,  on  hairy  peduncles,  and
bracted  at  the  base.  Calyx  tubular-campunulate,  five-toothed  ;  corolla
deeply  five-parted  ;  filaments  of  the  male  flower,  three;  pistils  of  the
female,  three-cleft;  style  short;  stigmas  three,  thick,  two-lobed ;  pepo


416  Materia  Medica.

or  fruit,  oval,  or  elliptical,  smooth,  discolored,  indehiscent,  subligneous,
and  light  or  dark-green  externally,  beneath  which  is  a  white,  juicy
substance,  and  in  the  center  a  red  or  yellow  edible  pulp,  sweet,  juicv  or
watery,  and  delicious;  it  is  from  three  to  five-celled,  and  contains  many
obovate,  smooth,  compressed  seeds,  thickened  at  the  margin,  and  of  a
black  or  yellowish-white  color.

Cucurbita  Pepo  is  also  an  annual  plant,  hispid  and  scabrous,  with  a
procumbent  stem  and  branching  tendrils.  The  leaves  are  large,  cordate,
palmately  five-lobed,  or  angled,  denticulate ;  the  flowers  are  yellow,
large,  axillary,  the  males  long-pedunculate.  Corolla  campanulate ;
petals  united  and  coherent  with  the  calyx.  Calyx  of  male  flowers,  live-
toothed  ;  of  females  the  same,  and  upper  part  deciduous  after  flowering;
stigmas  three,  thick,  two-lobed ;  pepo  or  fruit  sub-ligneous,  very  large,
roundish,  or  oblong,  smooth,  yellow  when  ripe,  furrowed  and  torulose,
containing  yellowish  seeds,  somewhat  resembling  those  of  the  water-
melon in  form.

History. — The  Watermelon  is  a  native  of  Africa  and  Southern  Asia,
and  is  cultivated  in  this  country  for  its  large  and  delicious  fruit  which  is
usually  ripened  in  August,  the  flowers  appearing  in  June  and  July.  The
pumpkin  flowers  in  July,  and  matures  its  fruit  in  September  and  Octo-
ber ;  it  is  a  native  of  the  Levant,  and  is  extensively  cultivated  as  a
kitchen  vegetable,  and  for  cattle.  The  seeds  of  these  plants  are  used
in  medicine;  their  virtues  reside  in  the  external  covering  which  contains
a  large  proportion  of  mucilage,  which  is  freely  imparted  to  water;  hence,
in  preparing  an  infusion  the  seeds  should  never  be  bruised.  An  oil  may
be  obtained  from  the  pumpkin  seeds,  and  probably  from  those  of  the
watermelon  also,  by  expression.

Properties  and  Uses. — Mucilaginous  and  diuretic,  and  of  service  in
strangury,  and  other  urinary  affections,  also  in  gastritis,  enteritis,  and
febrile  diseases.  The  infusion  may  be  drank  freely.  The  red,  fleshy,  juicy
pulp  of  the  watermelon  is  diuretic,  and  forms  a  grateful  article  of  diet
for  febrile  patients,  when  not  contra-indicated.  The  expressed  oil  of  the
pumpkin  seeds,  in  doses  of  from  six  to  twelve  drops  several  times  a  day,
is  said  to  be  a  most  certain  and  efficient  diuretic,  giving  quick  relief  in
scalding  of  urine,  spasmodic  affections  of  the  urinary  passages,  and  has
cured  gonorrhea.  The  seeds  of  the  Cucurbita  Lagenaria,  or  gourd,  the
Cucumis  Melo,  or  muskmelon,  and  the  Cucumis  Sativus,  or  cucumber,
possess  similar  properties,  but  in  a  milder  degree.

Off. Prep. — Infusum  Cucurbitse.


CUMINUM CYMINUM CuNILA MARIANA.  417

CUMINUM  CYMINUM.

Cumin  Seed.
Nat.  Ord. — Apiacea). Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia,

THE FRUIT.

Description. — This  is  an  annual,  herbaceous  plant,  about  six  or  eight
inches  high,  having  a  round,  slender,  branching  stem,  and  numerous
multifid  leaves,  with  long,  filiform,  deep-green  segments.  The  flowers
are  small,  white,  or  purple,  overtopped  by  the  bracts,  which  after  flow-
ering are  reflexed,  and  are  disposed  in  numerous  terminal  umbels,  which
have  very  few  rays,  partial  and  general  involucres,  consisting  of  two  or
three  filiform,  one-sided  bracts.  The  fruit  is  about  two  lines  long,
much  longer  than  the  pedicels,  nearly  taper,  but  little  contracted  at  the
sides,  fusiform,  crowned  by  the  short  teeth  of  the  calyx,  densely  covered
with  short  rough  hair  upon  the  channels,  less  densely  upon  the  ridges,
which  are  paler,  filiform,  and  a  little  raised ;  it  consists  of  two  oblong
plano-convex  half  fruits,  commonly  called  seeds,  united  by  their  flat
sides.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Egypt,  and  is  cultivated  for  its
fruit  in  many  parts  of  Europe.  The  seeds  are  elliptical,  flat  on  one  side,
convex,  furrowed,  and  rough  on  the  other,  about  one-sixth  of  an  inch  in
length,  and  of  a  light  brown  color.  Each  has  seven  longitudinal  ridges.
Two  seeds  are  sometimes  united  together  as  upon  the  plant.  Their  odor
is  peculiar,  strong  and  heavy ;  their  taste  warm,  bitterish,  aromatic,  and
disagreeable.  They  contain  much  essential  oil,  which  is  of  a  yellowish
color,  and  has  the  sensible  properties  of  the  seeds.

Properties  and  Uses. — Highly  stimulant,  and  carminative  ;  possessing
medical  properties  similar  to  the  other  aromatic  fruits  of  umbelliferous
plants,  but  more  stimulating.  They  are  seldom  used  in  the  United
States. Dose  is  from  fifteen  to  sixty  grains.


CUNILA  MARIANA.

Dittany.
Nat. Ord. — Lamiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE WHOLE HERB.

Description. — This  plant,  also  called  Stonemint,  Mountain  dittany,  etc.,
is  an  indigenous,  perennial  plant,  with  a  fibrous  root,  and  smooth,  slen-
der, four-angled,  mostly  purplish,  corymbosely  branched  stems,  growing
one  or  two  feet  high  ;  the  branches  opposite,  or  nearly  so.  The  leaves
are  opposite,  small,  smooth,  ovate,  subsessile,  rounded  or  cordate  at  the
base,  punctate  with  resinous  and  pellucid  dots,  of  a  dry  texture,  pale-
green  above,  glaucous  beneath,  and  margin  waved,  with  small,  acute
27


418  Materia Medica.

serratures.  The  flowers  are  numerous,  in  terminal  and  sometimes  axil-
lary dicbotomous  corymbs,  and  of  a  bluish-purple,  and  sometimes  -white
color.  Each  flower  is  pedunculate.  The  calyx  is  green,  with  ten  longi-
tudinal striae,  and  five  nearly  equal  teeth.  The  corolla  is  twice  as  long
as  the  calyx,  bilabiate,  pubescent ;  lower  lip  largest,  with  three  rounded
lobes  ;  upper  lip,  flat  and  emarginate.  Stamens  four;  two  of  them  long,
slender,  and  exserted,  bearing  small,  didymous  anthers;  the  other  two
sterile  and  very  short.  The  stigma  is  bifid,  exserted.  The  seeds  are
four,  small,  obovate,  at  the  base  of  the  persistent  calyx,  the  mouth  of
which  is  closed  by  rigid  hairs.

History. — Found  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  in  dry  soils,  shady
and  hilly  woods,  and  flowering  from  June  to  the  last  of  September.  It
has  a  warm,  pungent  taste,  and  a  powerful  aromatic  smell,  depending
on  the  presence  of  a  volatile  oil.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Stimulant,  carminative,  antispasmodic,  and
diaphoretic.  Used  freely  in  warm  infusion  to  promote  perspiration,  to
relieve  flatulency,  and  as  an  emmenagogue.  Said  to  be  useful  for  cold,
headaches,  and  fevers,  also  to  relieve  nervous  headache,  and  hysterical
disorders,  colic,  indigestion,  and  all  nervous  affections.  The  volatile  oil
possesses  all  the  medicinal  properties  of  the  herb,  and  may  be  given  in
doses  of  from  five  to  ten  drops.

CUPRI  SUBACETAS.

Subacetate  of  Copper.

Preparation. — Subacetate  of  Copper,  or  Verdigris  is  prepared  in  the
South  of  France,  and  is  imported  into  this  country  from  Bordeaux  and
Marseilles  principally.  It  is  formed  by  exposing  sheet-copper  to  the
action  of  the  acetous  fumes,  which  are  evolved  in  the  process  of  wine-
making.  The  refuse  of  the  grapes  placed  in  heaps  runs  into  the  acetous
fermentation,  whereby  the  copper  sheets  are  oxidized,  and  the  oxide  so
formed  unites  with  the  acid.  This  is  scraped  off,  usually  about  the  end
of  four  or  six  weeks,  and  the  plates  are  again  stratified  with  the  grape
refuse,  to  be  further  acted  on.  The  scrapings  which  are  in  the  form  of
a  paste,  are  well  beaten  with  wooden  mallets,  and  packed  in  leathern
sacks,  each  weighing  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  pounds.  Verdigris  may
also  be  formed  by  sprinkling  vinegar  over  the  copper;  and  in  England
it  is  prepared  by  alternating  copper  plates  with  woolen  cloths  steeped  in
pyroligneous  acid.

History. — Verdigris  is  obtained  in  loosely  aggregated  lumps,  or  in
powder;  it  has  a  pale-green,  or  blue  color,  according  to  the  process
employed  in  obtaining  it,  a  disagreeable,  acetous  odor  when  the  powder
is  conveyed  to  the  nostrils,  and  a  nauseous,  styptic,  coppery  taste.  It  is
insoluble  in alcohol, and  is  partially  soluble in  water,  undergoing  a


Cupri  Sulphas.  419

decomposition,  by  which  an  insoluble  tris-acetate  of  copper  is  precipi-
tated, of  a  dark-green  color,  gradually  changing  to  black ;  and  a  solu-
ble neutral  acetate  i6  dissolved.  This  neutral  acetate  may  be  obtained
by  evaporation  in  fine  rhomboidal  or  rhombic-octahedral  crystals  of  a
beautiful  bluish-green  color.  They  are  efflorescent,  soluble  in  five  parts
of  boiling  water,  partially  soluble  in  alcohol,  inflammable,  burning  in
the  open  air  with  a  beautiful  green  flame,  and  are  known  as  Crystals  of
Venus,  Crystallized  Acetate  of  Copper,  etc.  Verdigris  is  speedily  black-
ened by  sulphureted  hydrogen  ;  diluted  sulphuric  acid  dissolves  all
except  its  impurities,  forming  a  blue  solution,  from  which  sulphate  of
copper  may  be  crystallized  ;  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  decomposes  it,
evolving  acetous  fumes.  Ammonia  dissolves  all  but  its  impurities  form-
ing a  solution  of  an  intense  violet-blue ;  so  likewise  does  diluted  muriatic
acid,  forming  a  fine  green  solution.  Good  verdigris  has  a  lively  green
color,  is  free  from  white  or  black  spots,  is  dry,  and  difficult  to  break  ;  it
is  composed  of  two  equivalents  of  peroxide  of  copper,  one  equivalent
of  acetic  acid,  and  six  equivalents  of  water.  It  is  a  variable  mixture
of  the  subacetates  of  copper,  and  is  sometimes  called  the  Diacetate  of
copper.  The  green  rust  on  copper  culinary  vessels,  popularly  termed
Verdigris,  is  a  carbonate  of  copper.  Verdigris,  when  swallowed,  is
decomposed  by  zinc  and  copper  filings,  in  the  dose  of  from  half  a  drachm
to  two  drachms,  followed  by  the  free  use  of  warm  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Detergent  and  escharotic.  Never  used  inter-
nally, but  occasionally  employed  externally  by  some  practitioners  to
remove  warts  and  fungous  growths,  and  as  an  application  to  foul  ulcers,
ringworm,  ringworm  of  the  scalp,  ophthalmia  tarsi,  etc.  The  powder
may  be  sprinkled  on  the  surface,  or  it  may  be  used  in  the  form  of  oint-
ment. When  taken  internally  its  poisonous  influences  can  be  best  over-
come by  the  free  use  of  sugared  water,  and  white  of  eggs  ;  they  are  the
best  antidotes.  It  is  best  employed  as  an  escharotic  when  deprived  of
its  water  of  crystallization  by  heat,  which  leaves  an  efflorescent  mass.


CUPRI  SULPHAS.

Sulphate  of  Copper.

Preparation. — Sulphate  of  Copper,  or  Blue  Vitriol,  is  made  in  various
ways  :  by  dissolving  copper  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  evaporating  and
crystallizing ;  or  by  roasting  the  native  sulphuret  in  a  reverberatory  fur-
nace, whereby  it  is  made  to  pass  into  the  state  of  sulphate,  by  absorbing
oxygen.  The  roasted  mass  is  lixiviated,  and  the  solution  obtained  is
evaporated  that  crystals  may  form.  The  salt  procured  by  either  of  these
methods,  contains  a  little  sulphate  of  the  sesquioxide  of  iron,  from  which
it  may  be  freed  by  adding  an  excess  of  protoxide  of  copper,  which  has
the  effect  of  precipitating  the  sesquioxide  of  iron. The  third  method


420  Materia  Medica.

alluded  to  is  pursued  in  France.  It  consists  in  wetting,  and  then  sprink-
ling with  sulphur,  sheets  of  copper,  which  are  next  heated  to  redness
for  some  time,  and  afterward  plunged  into  water  while  yet  hot.  The
same  operation  is  repeated  until  the  sheets  are  entirely  corroded.  At
first  a  sulphuret  is  formed,  which  by  the  action  of  heat  and  air  gradually
passes  into  the  state  of  sulphate.  This  is  dissolved  in  the  water,  and  is
obtained  in  crystals  by  evaporation.

On  account  of  the  duty  upon  sulphate  of  copper,  none  of  it  is  at  pre-
sent imported  into  the  United  States,  the  whole  demand  being  supplied
from  our  own  laboratories.  The  process  for  making  it,  generally  pur-
sued in  this  country,  is  by  direct  combination  between  old  scrap  copper
and  sulphuric  acid.

History. — Sulphate  of  copper  crystallizes  in  large,  translucent,  oblique
rhombic  prisms,  of  a  beautiful  azure-blue  color,  which  slightly  effloresce
in  the  air,  and  are  soluble  in  two  parts  of  boiling  and  four  of  cold  water,
and  insoluble  in  alcohol.  The  salt  is  inodorous,  but  has  an  intense  styp-
tic metallic  disagreeable  taste.  When  heated  it  first  fuses  in  its  water
of  crystallization,  and  then  gradually  becomes  a  white  anhydrous  pow-
der ;  if  the  heat  be  increased,  it  undergoes  the  igneous  fusion  :  and  at
an  elevated  temperature  it  slowly  parts  with  its  acid,  leaving  the  brown
protoxide  of  copper.  The  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper  is  of  a  fine
blue  color  ;  sulphureted  hydrogen  causes  a  brownish-black  precipitate,
when  added  to  it ;  caustic  potassa,  a  bluish-green  precipitate,  but  if  added
in  slight  excess,  azure-blue  ;  ammonia,  an  azure-blue,  which  is  redis-
solved  if  an  excess  of  the  alkali  be  added ;  solution  of  arsenious  acid
with  the  addition  of  an  alkali,  a  grass-green  or  apple-green.  Aqua  sap-
phirina  is  the  deep-blue  solution  made  by  ammonia  redissolving  the
bluish-white  precipitate  of  hydrated  oxide  of  copper,  produced  by
potassa,  soda,  or  ammonia,  added  to  the  solution  of  blue  vitriol.  Sul-
phate of  copper  is  likewise  incompatible  with  alkaline  carbonates,  borax,
acetate  of  lead,  acetate  of  iron,  nitrate  of  silver,  corrosive  sublimate,
tartrate  of  potassa,  chloride  of  calcium,  and  all  astringent  vegetable
infusions.  If  sesquioxide  of  iron  be  present  it  will  become  very  green
on  the  surface  when  exposed  to  the  air ;  which  may  also  be  known  by
not  being  re-dissolved  with  the  precipitate  caused  by  ammonia,  on  adding
an  excess  of  the  alkali.  It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  sulphuric
acid,  one  of  protoxide  of  copper,  and  five  of  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Internally,  we  never  use  it.  Externally,  it  is
occasionally  employed  as  an  escharotic  or  stimulant ;  and  is  applied  by
some  practitioners  to  ill-conditioned  ulcers,  warts,  fungous  granulations,
chancres,  callous  edges,  as  a  styptic  to  capillary  hemorrhage,  and  as  a
collyrium  in  some  cases  of  chronic  ophthalmia ;  a  stimulant  wash  may
be  made  by  adding  from  two  to  eight  grains  of  the  salt  to  the  fluidounce
of water. In cases  of poisoning  by  sulphate  of  copper,  empty  the


Curcuma  Longa.  421

stomach,  and  give  white  of  eggs  freely  in  sugared  water. Treat  inflam-
matory symptoms  upon  general  principles.


CURCUMA  LONGA.
Turmeric.

Nat.  Ord. — Zingiberacese. Sex.  Syst. — Monandria  Monogynia.

THE RHIZOMA.

Description. — This  plant  has  a  perennial,  tuberous,  oblong,  palmate
root,  of  a  deep-orange  color  internally.  The  leaves  are  radical,  large,
lanceolate,  obliquely  nerved,  sheathing  at  their  base,  tapering  at  each
end,  smooth,  of  a  uniform  green  color,  and  closely  embracing  each  other.
The  scape  rises  from  the  center  of  the  leaves,  is  short,  thick,  smooth,
green,  and  constitutes  a  spike  of  numerous  imbricated  bracteal  scales,
between  which  the  flowers  successively  make  their  appearance.

History. — Turmeric  is  a  native  of  the  East  Indies  and  Cochin-China.
The  best  is  said  to  come  from  China.  The  dried  root  is  in  cylindrical  or
oblong  pieces,  about  as  thick  as  the  finger,  but  not  so  long,  tuberculated,
somewhat  contorted,  externally  yellowish-brown,  internally  deep  orange-
yellow,  hard,  compact,  and  having  a  waxy  fracture.  It  has  a  peculiar
odor  and  a  warm,  bitterish,  and  feebly  aromatic  taste ;  and  yields  its
properties  to  water  or  alcohol.  The  saliva  is  tinged  yellow  by  it,  when
the  root  is  chewed.  It  contains  lignin,  a  fourth  of  its  weight  of  yellow-
ish starch,  a  small  quantity  of  acrid,  volatile  oil,  gum,  a  brown  coloring
matter,  chloride  of  calcium,  and  an  uncrystallizable  yellow  coloring
matter  named  Cur  cumin.  This  may  be  obtained  by  digesting  the  alco-
holic extract  of  turmeric  in  ether,  and  evaporating  the  ethereal  tincture.
In  this  state  it  is  mixed  with  a  little  volatile  oil,  from  which  it  may  be
separated  and  obtained  pure,  by  oxide  of  lead.  It  is  brown  in  mass,
yellow  in  powder,  inodorous,  tasteless,  scarcely  soluble  in  water,  freely
soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  and  the  oils,  fusible  at  104°,  and  turned  to  a
reddish-brown  by  the  action  of  alkalies.

Properties  and  Uses.  — Stimulant  aromatic.  Seldom  used,  except  to
color  ointments  and  other  pharmaceutic  preparations.  Turmeric  Paper  is
used  as  a  test  of  acids  and  alkalies,  and  is  prepared  by  tinging  white
unsized  paper  with  a  tincture  or  decoction  of  Turmeric.  The  tincture
may  be  made  with  one  part  of  turmeric  to  six  of  proof  spirit ;  the  decoc-
tion, with  one  part  of  the  root  to  ten  or  twelve  parts  of  water.  Alkalies
change  turmeric  to  a  reddish-brown.  The  concentrated  mineral  acids,
boracic  acid,  and  numerous  salts,  are  said  also  to  turn  turmeric  paper  red,
or  reddish-brown — if  this  be  so,  its  indications  cannot  be  relied  on  with
certainty.


422  Materia Medic  a.

CYDONIA  VULGARIS.

Quince.

Nat.  Ord. — Pomaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Pentagynia.

•  THE SEEDS.

Description. — This  is  a  well-known  shrub  or  tree  from  eight  to  twenty
feet  high,  the  leaves  being  oblong-ovate,  obtuse  at  base,  acute  at  apex,
entire,  smooth  above,  tomentose  beneath.  The  fiowers  are  solitary,
white  with  a  purple  tinge,  large,  terminal.  The  pome  or  fruit  tomen-
tose, obovoid,  yellow  when  ripe,  of  an  agreeable  odor,  and  a  rough,
astringent,  acidulous  taste,  and  in  each  of  its  five  cells  contains  from
eight  to  fourteen  seeds.

History. — The  Quince  Tree  is  a  native  of  Candia,  but  is  cultivated
extensively  in  this  country  and  Europe,  and  its  fruit  is  much  employed
in  making  jellies,  preserves,  etc.  The  seeds  are  the  officinal  portion ;
they  are  ovate,  angled,  reddish-brown  externally,  white  within,  inodor-
ous, nearly  tasteless,  being  slightly  bitter  when  long  chewed.  The
external  covering  of  the  seeds  contains  an  abundance  of  mucilage,  which
may  be  extracted  by  boiling  water ;  two  drachms  of  the  seeds  will  render
a  pint  of  water  thick  and  ropy.  The  decoction,  evaporated  to  dryness
and  powdered,  will  form  a  proper  mucilage  with  water  in  the  proportions
of  three  grains  to  the  fluidounce.  One  part  of  it  gives  a  semi-syrupy
consistence  to  a  thousand  parts  of  water.  Pereira  proposes  to  call  this
mucilage  Cydonin ;  he  considers  it  a  peculiar  variety  of  gum,  which,
like  Arabin,  is  soluble  in  cold  or  boiling  water,  and  gelatinizes  with  ses-
quichloride  of  iron  ;  but,  unlike  that  principle,  it  is  not  affected  by  sili-
cate of  potassa.

Properties  and  Uses. — Decoction  of  Quince  Seeds  forms  a  demulcent
mucilage,  very  useful  in  gonorrhea,  dysentery,  aphthous  affections,  and
excoriations  of  the  mouth  and  fauces,  also  as  a  collyrium  in  conjunctival
ophthalmia.  A  syrup  prepared  from  the  fruit,  or  the  jelly,  forms  an
agreeable  article,  either  alone  or  added  to  drinks,  for  patients  laboring
under  febrile  diseases,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  nausea.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Cydonii.


CYNARA  SCOLYMUS.

Garden  Artichoke.
Nat.  Ord. — Asteracea?. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  subspinose,  pinnate  and
undivided  leaves  ;  heads  discoid,  homogamous ;  involucre  dilated,  imbrl-


Cynoglossum Officinale.  423

cate  ;  scales  ovate,  with  fleshy  bases,  emarginate,  pointed ; receptacle
setaceous ;  pappus  plumose,  sessile  ;  achenia  not  beaked.

History. — This  well-known  plant  is  indigenous  in  the  south  of  Europe,
and  is  cultivated  in  this  country  from  suckers,  as  a  culinary  vegetable,
they  being  placed  in  rows  about  three  feet  apart.  The  flowers  or  heads
as  they  are  commonly  called,  appear  in  August  and  September,  and  are
the  parts  used  ;  the  receptacle  and  the  lower  portion  of  the  fleshy  leaf-
lets of  the  calyx  are  eaten,  and  the  other  parts  rejected.  When  young,
the  heads  are  cut  up  raw  and  eaten  as  salad ;  when  older,  they  are
boiled,  and  dressed  variously.  The  flowers  are  said  to  curdle  milk,  and
the  plant  to  afford  a  good  yellow  dye.  The  leaves  and  their  expressed
juice  are  very  bitter.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic  and  alterative.  Reputed  very  benefi-
cial in  dropsies,  and  recommended,  in  the  form  of  tincture  or  extract,  in
rheumatic,  gouty  and  neuralgic  affections.  The  leaves  should  be  fresh,
and  the  preparations  made  from  them  quickly  used.  Dose,  of  the  tinc-
ture a  fluidrachm,  or  five  grains  of  the  extract,  three  times  a  day.

This  plant  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Helianthus  Tuberosus,  or
Jerusalem  Artichoke,  a  species  of  sunflower,  and  the  tuberous  roots  of
which  are  sometimes  used  as  a  substitute  for  potatoes.


CTNOGLOSSUM OFFICINALE.

Hound's  Tongue.
Nat. Ord. — Boraginaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia,

THE LEAVES AND ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  biennial  plant,  with  an  erect,  silky-pubescent
stem,  growing  from  one  to  two  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  hoary,  with
soft  down  on  both  sides,  lanceolate,  acute,  entire, — radical  ones  alternate
at  the  base,  petiolate, — cauline  ones  sessile,  clasping,  with  rounded  or
slightly  heart-shaped  bases.  The  flowers  are  in  terminal,  panicled
clusters,  recurved  at  the  end ;  calyx  downy,  five-parted  ;  corolla  reddish-
purple,  short,  funnel-form,  vaulted;  throat  or  orifice  closed  by  five  con-
verging, convex  scales.  Stamens  shorter  than  the  corolla.  Achenia
depressed,  fixed  laterally  to  the  style  ;  seeds  rough,  with  hooked  prickles.

History. — This  plant  is  common  both  in  Europe  and  this  country,
growing  in  waste  grounds  and  road-sides,  and  is  named  from  the  shape
of  its  leaves  ;  it  bears  purple  flowers  in  June  and  July.  The  leaves  and
root  have  been  employed,  but  the  latter  are  preferred.  It  has  a  disa-
greeable narcotic  odor,  resembling  that  of  mice,  which  is  dissipated  by
drying ;  and  a  nauseous,  bitterish,  and  mucilaginous  taste.  The  fresh
plant  is  much  more  active  than  the  dried.


424  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Anodyne,  demulcent  and  astringent,  and  has
been  used  in  coughs,  catarrh,  hemoptysis,  diarrhea  and  dysentery.
Externally,  in  the  form  of  a  poultice,  it  has  been  found  highly  beneficial
in  scrofulous  tumors,  burns,  goitre,  and  may  be  applied  to  recent  contu-
sions or  inflammations,  with  much  advantage,  also  to  remove  the  pain
and  soreness  attending  irritated,  bruised,  or  chafed  parts,  giving  com-
plete and  immediate  relief,  especially  in  excoriation  of  the  feet  from
much  traveling.  The  tincture  or  the  application  of  the  fresh  leaves,
bruised,  will  remove  the  swelling  and  ecchymosis  consequent  upon
severe  blows  or  bruises.  The  C.  Amplexicaule,  or  Wild  Comfrey,
affords  a  root  which  may  be  substituted  for  the  officinal  Comfrey.

Cynoglossum  Morrisoni,  variously  called  Virginian  Mouse-ear,  Beg-
gar's-lice,  and  Dysentery  Weed,  has  been  variously  classified  by  Botan-
ists, as  Rochelia  Virginiana,  Myosotis  Virginica,  and  Fchinospermum
Virginicum.  It  is  an  annual  plant,  with  an  erect,  hairy,  furrowed,  very
broadly  branched  and  leafy  stem,  from  two  to  four  feet  in  bight.  The
leaves  are  from  three  to  four  inches  long,  oblong-lanceolate,  acuminate,
entire,  remote,  tapering  at  the  base,  thin,  minutely  downy  underneath,
and  scabrous  above  ;  the  lower  ones  petioled.  The  branches  are  slender
and  remote,  each  terminating  in  a  centrifugal,  divaricate,  dichotomous,
hairy,  paniculate  raceme,  leafy-bracted  at  the  base.  The  Jlowers  are
very  small,  white  or  pale-blue,  the  pedicels  nodding  in  fruit.  Fruit  con-
vex, densely  covered  with  prickles  having  barbed  points.  This  plant  is
common  throughout  the  United  States,  growing  in  rocky  grounds  and
among  rubbish,  and  flowering  in  July.  The  whole  plant  has  an  unplea-
sant odor.  The  root  is  the  part  used,  and  imparts  its  virtues  to  water.
It  is  mucilaginous,  tonic,  and  astringent,  and  has  been  found  very  effica-
cious in  diarrhea  and  dysentery.  From  its  excellent  effects  in  these
diseases,  it  has  acquired  the  popular  name  of  Dysentery  Hoot.  The  root
may  be  chewed,  or  given  in  powder  or  infusion,  ad  libitum.  It  will,  pro-
bably, be  found  useful  in  other  diseases,  where  such  a  combination  of
properties  is  indicated.


CYPRIPEDIUM PUBESCENS.

Yellow  Ladies'  Slipper.

Nat.  Ord. — Orchidacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Gynandria  Diandria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Cypripedium  Pubescens  is  an  indigenous  plant,  known
by  various  names,  as  American  Valerian,  Umbel,  Nerve-Root,  Yellow-
Moccasin  Flower,  Noah's  Ark,  etc. ;  its  roots  are  perennial,  fibrous,
fleshy,  undulated  or  crooked,  long,  about  a  line  in  diameter,  and  from
which  arise  one  or  several  round,  leafy  stems,  growing  from  twelve  to


CrPRIPEDIUM PuBESCENS.  425

eighteen  inches  high.  The  leaves  are  from  three  to  six  inches  long  by
two  or  three  broad,  sheathing,  oblong-lanceolate,  entire,  veined,  cauline,
acuminate,  pubescent,  alternate,  generally  the  same  number  on  each
side.  Flowers  large,  very  showy,  terminal,  solitary.  Segments  four.
Lobe  of  the  style  triangular-oblong,  obtuse;  sepals  ovate,  oblong,  acumi-
nate; petals  long,  linear,  contorted;  lip  shorter  than  the  other  petals,
compressed  laterally,  very  convex  and  gibbous  above,  pale-yellow,  from
one  and  a  half  to  two  inches  long.

Cypripedium  Parviflorum,  has  been  considered  a  distinct  species  by
some  Botanists,  and  as  a  mere  variety  by  others.  It  differs  from  the
above,  in  having  the  lobe  of  the  style  acute,  the  leaves  are  broader,  the
flowers  somewhat  larger,  and  the  perianth  more  brownish-purple  in
color.

History. — This  plant  is  found  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  in
rich  woods  and  meadows,  flowering  in  May  and  June ;  its  flowers  are
scentless.  There  are  several  varieties  of  it,  all  of  which  possess  similar
virtues,  and  the  roots  of  which  are  undoubtedly  collected,  sold,  and
used,  with  the  officinal  article  indiscriminately. They  are  as  follows  :

1.  G.  Spectabile,  or  Showy  Ladies-slipper,  having  crowded,  ovate-
lanceolate  leaves,  embracing  each  other  ;  lobe  of  the  style  elliptic-cordate,
obtuse  ;  sepals  broad-ovate,  obtuse  ;  lip  longer  than  the  petals,  not  cleft
before,  white,  striped  with  purple,  two  inches  long,  one  and  a  half
broad  ;  flowers  very  large,  two  or  three  on  each  plant,  appearing  in  June
and  July. The  whole  plant  pubescent.

2.  C.  Acaule,  Low  or  Stemless  Ladies-slipper,  having  a  bulbous
root  with  numerous  fleshy  fibers  ;  scape  leafless,  one-flowered  ;  leaves
radical,  in  pairs,  oblong,  obtuse ;  lobe  of  the  style  round-rhomboid,  acu-
minate, deflexed  ;  lip  longer  than  the  lanceolate-petals,  cleft  before,
purple  or  white,  nearly  two  inches  long,  veiny  ;  flowers  solitary,  terminal,
with  a  single,  lanceolate  bract  at  the  base,  and  appearing  in  May  and
June.

3.  C.  Candidum,  Small  white,  or  White-flowered  Ladies-slipper,
having  a  leafy  stem,  oblong-lanceolate  leaves  ;  lobe  of  the  style  lanceo-
late, somewhat  obtuse  ;  lip  rather  shorter  than  the  lance-linear  petals,
white,  about  three-quarters  of  an  inch  long  ;  flowers  terminal,  solitary.
The  plant  is  slightly  pubescent,  seldom  growing  above  a  foot  in  Light ;
the  flowers  appear  in  May  and  June.

4.  C.  Arietinum,  or  Ram's  Head,  having  a  leafy  stem;  elliptical,  stri-
ate-veined,  sessile,  amplexicaul  leaves  ;  lobe  of  the  style  orbicular,  some-
what obtuse ;  Up  as  long  as  the  petals,  saccate,  obconic  before,  red,  and
white  veined,  hairy  at  the  orifice,  about  half  an  inch  long  ;  perianth
greenish-brown.  The  flowers  are  mostly  solitary  with  a  leafy  bract  at
base,  and  appear  in  May  and  June.


426  Materia  Medica.

The  C.  SpectabUe  and  C.  Acaule,  are  said  to  possess  more  narcotic
properties  than  the  others,  especially  when  inhabiting  dark  swamps.

The  fibrous  roots  of  these  plants  are  the  parts  used  in  medicine  ;  tbey
should  be  gathered  in  autumn,  cleansed  from  dirt,  and  carefully  dried
in  the  shade.  They  have  a  peculiar,  slightly  bitter,  and  rather  nau-
seous taste,  and  a  somewhat  unpleasant  odor.  As  met  with  in  the
shops,  they  are  composed  of  many  long,  fleshy,  cylindrical  fibers,  of  a
pale-yellow  color,  matted  together.  Alcohol,  or  boiling  water  takes  up
their  virtues,  which,  however,  are  impaired  by  boiling.  No  analysis  has
been  made  of  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  stimulant,  diaphoretic,  and  antispasmo-
dic. Useful  in  hysteria,  chorea,  nervous  headache,  and  all  cases  of
nervous  irritability  ;  and  combined  with  JEwpotorium  Aromatica  and
Scutellaria  Lateriflora,  it  has  proved  beneficial  in  neuralgia,  delirium,  and
hypochondria.  The  alcoholic  extract  is  the  best  form  of  administration.
Dose,  from  ten  to  twenty  grains  ;  tincture,  from  one  to  three  fluid-
drachms  ;  infusion,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces ;  of  the  powder,  one
drachm  in  warm  water,  repeated  as  often  as  required.  The  following
preparation  has  been  used  in  sick  or  nervous  headache,  not  dependent
on  acid  stomach,  in  several  hundred  cases,  by  various  practitioners :
Take  of  nepeta  cataria,  Scutellaria  lateriflora,  and  cypripedium  puhescens
in  powder,  of  each,  half  an  ounce — pour  on  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  and
infuse  for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  ;  dose,  one  fluidounce  of  the  warm
infusion  ;  after  which,  half  a  fluidounce,  every  half  hour,  for  three  or  four
hours,  or  until  the  headache  ceases.  Used  thus,  during  three  or  four
attacks  of  headache,  it  has,  as  far  as  I  am  informed,  invariably  effected
permanent  cures  of  this  distressing  complaint.  An  infusion  is  said  to  be
beneficial  in  the  pains  of  the  joints  following  scarlet  fever.  Although
considered  by  many  practitioners  superior  to  the  foreign  valerian,  yet  it
will  be  found  inefficient  in  many  instances  where  the  European  article
will  prove  beneficial.

Off.  Prep.  —  Extractum  Cypripedii  Hydro-alcoholicum  ;  Extractum
Cypripedii  Fluidum  ;  Infusum  Cypripedii ;  Tinctura  Serpentariae  Com-
posita.


CYTISUS  SCOPAKIUS.

Common  Broom.

Nat.  Orel — Fabacete. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Decandria.

THE  FRESH  TOPS  AND  SEEDS.

Description. — This  is  a  large  bushy  shrub,  growing  from  three  to
eight  feet  high,  with  numerous,  long,  strait,  pentangular,  bright-green,
smooth,  tough,  very  flexible  branches.  The  leaves  are  deciduous,  scat-
tered, stalked,  ternate  ;  the  upper  ones  generally  simple  ;  the  leajlets


Daphne  Mezereum.  427

are  uniform,  obovate,  obtuse,  entire,  silky  when  young.  The  flowers  are
numerous,  papilionaceous,  large,  showy,  of  a  golden-yellow  color,  and  are
supported  solitarily  upon  short,  axillary  peduncles.  Legume  brown,  flat,
above  an  inch  long,  nearly  smooth  at  the  sides,  but  fringed  with  hairs
at  each  margin,  and.  containing  about  fifteen  or  sixteen  seeds.  The
swelling  ovary  soon  splits  the  tube  of  the  filaments.

History. — This  is  a  common  European  shrub,  cultivated  in  our  gar-
dens ;  it  grows  on  dry  and  sandy  soils,  and  flowers  in  May  and  June.
The  tops  of  the  branches  and  the  seeds  are  the  officinal  parts  ;  the
latter  may  be  preserved  for  a  longer  time  than  the  former  ;  all  parts
of  the  plant  have  a  peculiar,  bitter,  nauseous  taste,  and  when  bruised,
emit  a  strong,  peculiar  odor.  They  contain  oils,  mucilage,  albumen,
etc.,  and  yield  their  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  The  flower-buds  are
sometimes  pickled  as  a  substitute  for  capers.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  emetic  and  cathartic  ;  in  small
ones,  diuretic.  Used  in  dropsy  ;  said  never  to  fail  in  increasing  the
flow  of  the  urine  ;  especially  beneficial  in  dropsy  of  the  thorax  combined
with  disease  of  the  lungs.  Dose,  of  a  strong  decoction,  four  fluidounces
every  hour  until  it  produces  some  effect;  of  the  pulverized  seed,  from
ten  to  fifteen  grains,  aided  by  the  free  use  of  diluents.  Seldom  used  in
this  country.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Scoparii.


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.

Mezereon.

Nat.  Ord. — Thymelacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Octandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — Mezereon,  or  Spurge  Olive,  is  a  very  hardy  shrub,  with
a  large  root,  and  bushy  stem  four  or  five  feet  high,  with  upright,  alter-
nate, smooth,  tough,  and  pliant  branches,  leafy  when  young,  and  a
smooth  dark-gray  bark,  which  is  easily  separable  from  the  wood.  The
leaves  spring  from  the  end  of  the  branches,  they  are  deciduous,  scattered,
sessile,  obovate-lanceolate,  entire,  smooth,  of  a  pale-green  color,  some-
what glaucous  beneath,  and  about  two  inches  long  ;  they  appear  after
the  flowers,  and  accompanied  with  the  flower-buds  of  the  next  season.
The  flowers  are  in  clusters,  each  consisting  of  two  or  three  flowers,  form-
ing a  kind  of  spike  at  the  upper  part  of  the  stem  and  branches,  ses-
sile on  the  naked  branches,  with  several  brown,  smooth,  ovate  bracts
underneath  ;  they  are  of  a  pale-rose  color,  very  fragrant,  and  consist  of
a  hypocrateriform  calyx,  crimson  all  over,  and  the  tube  externally  hairy.
Segments  of  the  calyx  four,  deep,  ovate,  spreading.  Stamens  eight,
alternately  longer,  inserted  into  the  tube,  and  having  roundish,  oblong


428  Materia  Medica.

anthers.  Ovary  ovate,  superior,  bearing  a  short  style  with  a  flattish,  entire
stigma.  The  fruit  is  a  pulpy,  scarlet,  oval,  shining  berry,  containing  a
single  seed.

Daphne  Gnidiwrn  is  a  small  bush,  with  the  leaves  linear-lanceolate,
clustered,  acuminate,  cuspidate,  quite  smooth.  The  flowers  are  numer-
ous, small,  white,  downy,  fragrant,  and  in  terminal  panicled  racemes.
The  fruit  is  globular,  dry,  at  first  green,  but  ultimately  black.

Daphne  Laureola  or  Spurge-laurel  is  a  smooth  plant,  with  a  stem  two
or  three  feet  high,  and  round,  pale,  brown,  upright,  tough  and  pliant
branches,  crowned  with  tufts  of  evergreen  leaves,  elegantly  drooping  in
all  directions,  and  about  two  or  three  inches  long,  lanceolate,  glabrous,
acute,  entire,  subsessile.  Flowers  deep-green,  with  orange  anthers,  four
of  which  are  just  visible  in  the  throat  of  the  calyx,  five  together  in
each  axillary  raceme.  An  oval,  concave  bract  accompanies  each  short
partial  stalk,  at  the  base. Berry  oval,  black.

History. — All  the  species  of  Daphne  possess  active  properties,  but  the
bark  met  with  in  commerce  is  usually  obtained  from  the  three  above
D.  Mezereum  is  a  native  of  the  northern  parts  of  Europe,  where  it  is
cultivated  both  as  a  medicine  and  an  ornament ;  it  flowers  very  early  in
the  spring,  often  before  the  snow  has  disappeared.  The  D.  Onidium
is  found  in  the  south  of  France  on  hills  and  barren  plains,  and  its
bark  is  employed  there  indiscriminately  with  that  of  the  other  species.

The  bark  of  the  root  is  the  officinal  part,  but  much  that  is  obtained  in
the  shops  is  derived  from  the  stem.  The  D.  Mezereum  is  the  most
active  plant  of  the  genus  ;  its  bark  is  generally  collected  in  the  spring.
It  is  met  with  in  flat  or  quilled  pieces,  from  two  to  four  feet  long,  and  an
inch  or  less  in  breadth,  always  folded  in  bundles,  or  in  the  shape
of  balls.  Externally,  it  is  covered  with  a  grayish,  or  reddish-brown
wrinkled  epidermis,  very  thin,  and  easily  removed  from  the  bark,  and
beneath  which  is  a  soft,  greenish  tissue.  The  inner  bark  is  tough,  pli-
able, fibrous,  striated,  of  a  yellowish-white  color  internally,  and  an
olive  or  brownish  hue  externally.  Its  smell  when  fresh  is  faint  and  dis-
agreeable, but  on  drying  it  becomes  inodorous  ;  its  taste  is  at  first
sweetish,  soon  followed  by  intense  and  durable  hot  acridity.  It  yields
its  virtues  to  water  by  decoction,  likewise  to  alcohol  ;  and  it  unites  with
oils  or  fats,  forming  an  excellent  ointment.  It  contains  an  acrid  resin,  a
yellow  coloring  matter,  a  reddish-brown  extractive  matter,  an  uncrystal-
lizable  and  fermentable  sugar,  a  gummy  matter  containing  azote,  ligne-
ous fiber,  malic  acid,  several  malates,  and  a  peculiar  principle  named
Daphnin.

Daphnin  may  be  obtained  by  treating  the  alcoholic  extract  of  the
bark  with  water,  decanting  the  solution,  precipitating  with  subacetate
of  lead,  filtering,  decomposing  the  excess  of  the  subacetate  by  sulphu-


Datura  Stramonium.  429

reted  hydrogen,  —  again  filtering,  evaporating  to  dryness,  submitting
the  residue  to  the  action  of  anhydrous  alcohol,  and  evaporating  the  alco-
holic solution  to  the  point  of  crystallization.  It  is  in  colorless,  transpa-
rent, brilliant,  prismatic  crystals,  slightly  soluble  in  cold  water,  very
soluble  in  boiling  water,  ether,  and  alcohol,  inodorous,  and  of  a  bitter,
somewhat  austere  taste.  It  is  not,  however,  the  principle  upon  which
the  virtues  of  the  bark  chiefly  depend ;  this  is  supposed  to  be  a  volatile
oil,  which  slowly  passes  to  the  state  of  an  acrid  resin.  It  may  be  ob-
tained by  boiling  mezereon  in  alcohol,  allowing  the  liquor  to  cool  in
order  that  it  may  deposit  some  wax  which  it  has  taken  up,  then  distil-
ling off  the  alcohol,  and  treating  the  residue  with  water,  which  leaves
the  resin ;  it  is  dark-green,  hard,  brittle,  and  of  an  exceedingly  acrid
and  persistent  taste.  When  boiled  with  water  some  of  the  acrid  princi-
ple of  mezereon  bark  passes  off,  which  is  not  the  case  when  boiled
with  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  mezereon  is  an  irritant  poison,
causing  redness  and  vesication  of  the  skin  when  left  in  contact  with  it,
and  causing,  when  swallowed,  dryness  and  burning  of  the  throat,  vomit-
ing, hypercatharsis,  and  frequently  renal  irritation.  The  berries  have
proved  fatal  to  children  who  have  eaten  them  ;  yet  in  some  countries
they  are  used  as  a  purgative,  in  doses  of  eight  to  twelve.  In  small
doses  it  acts  as  a  stimulant,  alterative,  diuretic,  diaphoretic  in  warm
decoction,  and  cathartic.  It  acts  favorably  in  syphilis,  mercurio-
syphilis,  scrofula,  chronic  rheumatism,  and  some  forms  of  obstinate  dis-
ease of  the  skin.  Dose  of  the  decoction,  from  one  to  three  fiuidounces ;
of  the  powder  ten  grains.

Externally,  it  is  seldom  used  by  Eclectics ;  sometimes  employed  by
other  practitioners  to  produce  rubefaction  and  vesication,  and  in  the
form  of  ointment  as  an  application  to  blistered  surfaces,  indolent  ulcers,
and  issues,  in  order  to  keep  up  a  discharge.  When  vesication  is  desired,
the  bark  is  moistened  with  vinegar,  after  having  been  cut  in  the  requi-
site form  and  size,  and  applied  to  the  skin  ;  it  is  renewed  twice  a  day,
until  a  blister  is  formed.  It  is  slow  in  its  operation,  frequently  requiring
forty-eight  hours  to  vesicate.

Of.  Prep. — Decoctum  Sarsaparillae  Compositum  ;  Unguentum  Me-
zerei.


DATURA  STRAMONIUM.

Stramonium.
Nat. Ord. — Solanacere. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND SEEDS.

Description.  —  This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Thorn  Apple,
Jamestown  weed,  Stinkweed,  Apple-pent,  etc., is a  bushy,  smooth,  fetid,


430  Materia  Medica.

annual  plant,  two  or  three  feet  in  hight,  and  in  rich  soil  even  more  ;  the
root  is  large,  whitish,  and  furnished  with  numerous  fibers.  The  stem.
is  erect,  round,  smooth,  somewhat  shining,  simple  below,  dichotomous
above,  with  numerous  spreading  branches,  of  a  yellowish-green  color,
cylindrical,  often  hollow.  The  leaves  stand  on  short,  round  petioles  in
the  forks  of  the  stem,  alternate,  five  or  six  inches  long,  ovate-triangu-
lar, or  oval-oblong,  irregularly  sinuated,  with  large  acute  teeth  and
round  sinuses,  end  acute,  unequal  at  the  base,  decurrent,  of  a  dark-
green  color  on  the  upper  surface,  and  paler  beneath.  The  flowers  are
large,  erect  or  nodding,  axillary,  solitary,  on  short  peduncles,'  white.
Calyx  monosepalous,  tubular,  pentangular,  five-toothed,  deciduous,  but
leaving  a  persistent  rim  at  the  base  which  becomes  reflexed.  Corolla,
funnel-shaped,  with  a  long  tube,  monopetalous  ;  its  limb  subangular,
waved  and  folded,  and  terminating  in  five  acuminate  teeth.  Stamens
five  ;  filaments  adhering  to  the  tube,  and  supporting  oblong,  erect  an-
thers. Ovary  free,  but  coherent  at  base  with  the  persistent  rim  of  the
calyx,  oval,  hairy ;  style  filiform,  as  long  as  the  stamina,  and  bearing  an
obtuse,  bi-lamellar  stigma.  Fruit,  a  large  fleshy,  roundish-ovate,  four-
valved,  four-celled  capsule,  thickly  covered  on  the  outside  with  sharp
spines  or  thorns,  opening  inside  at  the  top,  with  numerous,  reniform,
black  seeds  filling  the  cells,  and  attached  to  a  longitudinal  receptacle
occupying  the  center  of  each  cell.

Datura  Tatula,  or  Purple  Stramonium,  differs  from  the  above,  in
having  a  dark-reddish  stem,  minutely  dotted  with  green,  and  flowers  of
a  purplish  color,  with  deep  purple  stripes  on  the  inside.

History. — Stramonium  is  a  well-known,  poisonous  weed,  growing  in
all  parts  of  the  United  States,  along  road-sides,  waste  grounds,  etc.,  and
flowering  from  July  to  September.  Its  native  country  is  unknown.  It
is  found  growing  in  Asia,  Europe,  Canada,  Mexico,  and  Peru.  The
whole  plant  has  an  unpleasant,  fetid,  narcotic  odor,  which  diminishes  upon
drying.  Almost  every  part  of  the  plant  is  possessed  of  medicinal  pro-
perties, but  the  officinal  parts  are  the  leaves  and  seeds.  The  leaves
should  be  gathered  when  the  flowers  are  full  blown,  and  carefully  dried
in  the  shade.  They  have  a  rank  odor  when  fresh,  especially  if  bruised,
which  is  lost  on  drying,  and  a  mawkish,  bitter,  nauseous  taste.  They
impart  their  properties  to  water,  alcohol,  and  the  fixed  oils.  Water  dis-
tilled from  them  slightly  possesses  their  odor,  but  does  not  contain  their
active  properties.  They  consist  of  gum,  extractive,  green  starch,  albu-
men, resin,  saline  matters,  lignin,  and  water.  The  seeds  are  small,  kid-
ney-shaped, flat,  of  a  dark-brown,  almost  black  color  when  ripe,  pale
grayish-brown  when  unripe,  inodorous,  similar  in  taste  with  the  leaves,
with  some  acrimony  When  bruised  they  emit  the  peculiar  heavy  odor
of  the  herb.  They  should  be  gathered  when  ripe.  They  contain  a
glutinous  matter,  gum,  albumen,  a  butyraceous  substance,  green  wax,
resin  insoluble  in  ether,  fixed  oil,  bassorin,  sugar,  gummy  extractive,


Datura  Stramonium.  431

orange-colored  extractive,  various  saline  and  earthy  substances,  and  a
peculiar  alkaline  principle  called  Daturia.  Water,  spirit,  and  fixed  oils
take  up  their  active  properties.

Daturia  may  be  obtained  by  evaporating  the  alcoholic  tincture  of  the
seeds  with  a  very  gentle  heat,  decolorizing  by  repeated  additions  of  lime
and  sulphuric  acid  alternately,  with  filtration  after  each  addition,  and
then  still  further  concentrating  by  evaporation  ;  an  excess  of  powdered
carbonate  of  soda  is  now  to  be  added  to  decompose  the  product,  and  the
precipitate  which  follows  is  to  be  separated,  as  speedily  as  possible,  from
the  alkaline  liquor  by  expressing,  exhausting  the  residue  with  absolute
alcohol,  and  treating  the  alkaline  or  mother  waters,  with  sulphuric  ether.
The  alcoholic  and  ethereal  liquors  are  now  to  be  united,  and  treated
with  lime,  filtered,  and  then  decolorized  with  animal  charcoal.  Distil
off  the  etherized  alcohol,  add  a  little  water,  and  evaporate  by  a  very
gentle  heat.  If  the  daturia  now  deposited  should  still  be  colored,  it
must  be  combined  anew  with  an  acid,  and  the  whole  process  repeated
from  the  addition  of  carbonate  of  soda  onward,  in  order  to  obtain  it
quite  pure.  It  crystallizes  in  colorless,  inodorous,  shining  needles,  at
first  bitterish  when  applied  to  the  tongue,  but  ultimately  conveying  a  flavor
similar  to  that  of  tobacco.  It  dissolves  in  280  parts  of  cold,  and  72  of
boiling  water,  is  very  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  less  so  in  ether.  It  forms
salts  with  acids.  It  is  obtained  from  the  seeds  in  very  small  proportions,
yielding  under  the  most  favorable  circumstances  only  one-fiftieth  of  one
per  cent.  It  is  fusible,  volatile,  and  very  poisonous.  Dr.  Von  Planta
considers  daturia  identical  with  atropia,  the  formula  of  each  being
C38  H-23  NOg.  By  the  destructive  distillation  of  stramonium,  Morries
obtained  a  highly  poisonous  empyreumatized  oil.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  a  powerfully  narcotic  poison,
producing  dryness  of  the  throat,  excessive  thirst,  nausea,  vomiting,  a
sense  of  strangulation,  faintness,  anxiety,  cardialgia,  blindness,  dilatation
of  the  pupils,  vertigo,  delirium  either  of  a  furious  or  whimsical  charac-
ter, tremors  of  the  limbs,  palsy,  stupor,  convulsions,  and  often  death.
In  less  quantity  it  generally  causes  more  or  less  cerebral  disturbance  for
several  hours,  as  vertigo,  headache,  dimness  or  perversion  of  vision,
confusion  of  thought,  and  a  species  of  intoxication  or  slight  delirium.
In  medicinal  doses,  it  acts  as  an  anodyne-antispasmodic,  without  causing
constipation,  and  will  prove  serviceable  in  cases  where  opium  cannot  be
given.  It  has  proved  serviceable  in  mania,  epilepsy,  gastritis,  and
enteritis,  and  may  likewise  be  used  to  allay  rheumatic,  syphilitic,  and
neuralgic  pains.  In  combination  with  quinia,  it  forms  an  invaluable
preparation  which  has  been  found  exceedingly  beneficial  in  intermittent
fever,  all  periodic  pains,  headache,  dysmenorrhea,  delirium  tremens,  etc.
The  leaves,  dried  and  smoked,  are  said  to  be  useful  in  spasmodic  asthma,
but  we  do  not  recommend  them,  having  more  efficient  means  to  cure


432  Materia  Medica.

this  disease.  It  is  said  that  the  seeds  exert  an  influence,  to  prevent
abortion,  superior  to  anything  else  ;  seven  seeds  to  be  given  at  first,  after
which  one  every  hour,  as  may  be  required.

In  plethoric  habits,  and  in  patients  with  determination  to  the  head,
stramonium  must  be  administered  with  caution,  keeping  the  excretory
organs,  as  the  skin,  kidneys,  and  bowels  in  an  active  condition  during  its
employment.  Externally,  a  poultice  of  the  fresh  leaves,  bruised,  or  the
dried  leaves  in  hot  water,  will  be  found  an  excellent  application  over  the
bowels  in  severe  forms  of  gastritis,  enteritis,  peritonitis,  etc.  I  have  in
many  instances  applied  them  to  the  perineum,  in  cases  of  retention  of
urine  from  enlarged  prostate,  where  it  was  impossible  to  introduce  a
catheter,  and  after  having  allowed  them  to  remain  for  about  half  an  hour,
have  been  enabled  to  pass  the  catheter  with  ease  and  facility,  and  thus
afford  relief  to  the  patient.  I  have  met  with  similar  good  results  in
urethral  stricture.  It  will  also  be  found  beneficial  as  a  local  medication  to
all  species  of  painful  ulcers,  acute  ophthalmia,  swelled  breasts,  inflamma-
tory rheumatism,  and  hemorrhoidal  tumors.  An  ointment  of  it  is  very
valuable  in  many  of  the  above  diseases.  In  cases  where  the  leaves
cannot  be  obtained,  a  plaster  of  the  alcoholic  extract  or  inspissated  juice,
may  be  applied  over  the  affected  parts ;  or  the  extract  may  be  rendered
thin  by  heating  it  in  diluted  alcohol,  and  then  formed  into  a  poultice  with
meal,  or  moistened  bread,  and  applied.  In  the  absence  of  belladonna,
the  extract  of  stramonium  may  be  mixed  with  lard,  and  rubbed  over
the  eyelid,  or  a  solution  of  it  dropped  into  the  eye,  in  order  to  produce
dilatation  of  the  pupil,  previous  to  the  operation  for  cataract;  it  is  equal-
ly efficacious  with  this  agent.  Dose  of  the  powdered  leaves  or  seeds,
from  one  to  five  grains ;  of  the  extract,  which  is  the  best  form  of  admin-
istration, from  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  two  grains;  of  the  tincture,  for
which  the  seeds  bruised,  are  preferable,  from  five  to  thirty  drops.

Daturia  is  seldom  employed  in  medicine  ;  it  is  a  very  energetic  poison,
one- eighth  of  a  grain  having  killed  a  sparrow  in  three  hours,  and  nearly
proved  fatal  to  a  cat  when  applied  to  the  eye.  Very  minute  quantities
applied  to  the  eye,  occasion  protracted  and  excessive  dilatation  of  the
pupil.  In  cases  of  poisoning  by  stramonium,  the  best  mode  of  obtain-
ing relief,  is  to  evacuate  the  stomach  by  emetics  or  the  stomach-pump,
after  which  vinegar  and  water  maybe  used,  with  mucilaginous  drinks  at
a  later  period,  and  strong  coffee,  tea,  and  other  stimulating  drinks,  if
there  is  much  prostration. Magneto-electricity  may  also  be  useful.

Off.  Prep. —  Cataplasma  Stramonii  ;  Extractum  Stramonii  Alcoholi-
cum  ;  Tinctura  Stramonii ;  Tinctura  Viburnii  Composita  ;  Unguentum
Stramonii ;  Unguentum  Stramonii  Compositum.


Daucus  Carota.  433

DAUCUS  CAROTA.

Wild  Carrot.

Nat.  Ord. — Apiacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT AND SEEDS.

Description. — Wild  Carrot  has  a  biennial,  slender,  yellowish,  spindle-
shaped,  aromatic  and  sweetish  root,  and  an  annual,  round,  furrowed,
leafy,  hispid  stem,  two  or  three  feet  high,  which  divides  into  long,  erect,
flower-bearing  branches.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  on  broad,  concave,
ribbed  petioles,  and  pale-green  ;  the  lower  are  large  and  tripinnate  ;  the
upper,  smaller  and  less  compound  ;  in  both,  the  leaflets  are  linear,  acute.
The  flowers  are  small,  white  or  cream-color,  and  are  disposed  in  dense,
and  many-rayed  compound  umbels,  which  are  at  first  flat  on  the  top  and
spreading,  but  when  the  seeds  are  formed,  contract  so  as  to  present  a
concave  cup-like  surface ;  in  the  center  of  the  umbel  a  sterile  flower  of
a  deep-purple  color  is  often  observed.  The  general  involucre  is  composed
of  several  leaves,  divided  into  long  narrow  segments,  nearly  the  length
of  the  umbel ;  partial  involucre  undivided,  or  partly  three-cleft,  mem-
branous at  the  edges.  The  petals  are  five,  unequal,  and  cordate.  Fruit
small,  pale  dull  brown,  oval.  Mericarps  with  the  primary  ribs  filiform,
bristly,  three  near  the  middle  of  the  convex  back,  and  two  on  the  plane
of  the  commissure.  Secondary  ridges  deeper  and  irregularly  split  into
setaceous  lobes.  Vittce,  one  under  each  secondary  ridge,  and  two  on  the
plane  of  the  commissure.

History. — The  wild  carrot  is  a  native  of  many  parts  of  Europe,  and  is
extensively  naturalized  in  the  United  States,  growing  in  neglected  fields
and  by  road-sides,  and  flowering  from  June  to  September.  The  well
known  Garden  Carrot  is  the  same  plant,  somewhat  altered  by  cultivation.
The  root  of  the  wild  variety,  and  the  seeds  of  both  kinds  are  officinal.
The  seeds,  or  more  strictly  speaking,  the  fruit,  are  light,  of  a  dull-brown-
ish color,  an  oval  shape,  convex  and  bristly  on  one  side,  and  flat  on  the
other,  presenting  on  their  convex  face  four  longitudinal  ridges,  with
stiff  hairs  or  bristles  attached;  they  have  an  aromatic  odor,  and  a  warm,
pungent,  bitterish  taste.  Their  virtues  depend  upon  a  volatile  oil  of  a
pale-yellow  color,  and  which  may  be  obtained  by  distillation.  Boiling
water  extracts  their  active  properties,  which,  however,  is  lost  by  decoc-
tion.

The  root  is  fusiform,  slender,  whitish-yellow,  hard,  coriaceous,  branch-
ed, possessing  a  peculiar  aromatic  odor,  and  a  bitter,  acrid,  disagreeable
taste.  The  root  of  the  cultivated  variety  is  reddish,  succulent,  thick,
conical,  rarely  branched,  of  a  pleasant  somewhat  aromatic  odor,  and  a
sweet,  mucilaginous,  peculiar  taste.  The  root  contains  crystallizable  and
uncrystallizable  sugar,  starch,  extractive,  gluten,  albumen,  volatile  oil
28


434  Materia  Medica.

pectin,  malic  acid,  saline  matters,  lignin,  and  a  peculiar,  crystallizable,
ruby-red,  neuter  principle,  tasteless  and  inodorous,  called  Carotin.

Pectin  or  vegetable  jelly  exists  more  or  less  in  all  vegetables  ;  it  may
be  separated  from  the  juice  of  fruits  by  alcohol,  which  precipitates  it  in
the  form  of  jelly  ;  this  being  washed  with  weak  alcohol  and  dried,  yields
a  semi-transparent  substance  somewhat  resembling  isinglass.  When
placed  in  one  hundred  parts  of  cold  water,  it  swells,  and  forms  a  homo-
geneous jelly.  Cold  water  acts  upon  it  much  better  than  boiling.  A  fixed
alkali  or  an  alkaline  earthy  base  converts  it  into  pectic  acid,  which  unites
with  the  base,  forming  a  pectate.  Another  acid  being  added,  decompo-
sition ensues,  the  last  acid  unites  with  the  base,  separating  the  pectic
acid.  Pectic  acid  is  in  the  form  of  a  colorless  jelly,  gives  acid  reactions,
forms  salts  with  the  alkalies,  and  insoluble  salts  with  the  earths  and
metallic  oxides.

Properties  and  Uses. — Both  the  root  and  seeds  are  stimulant  and  diu-
retic. Used  in  infusion  with  much  success,  in  dropsy,  chronic  nephritic
affections,  and  gravel.  Also  as  a  carminative,  and  to  relieve  strangury
from  cantharides.  Externally,  scraped  or  grated,  it  forms  an  excellent
application  as  a  poultice  to  phagedenic,  cancerous,  malignant  and  indo-
lent ulcers — relieving  the  pain,  correcting  the  fetor,  lessening  the  dis-
charge, and  altering  the  morbid  condition  of  the  parts.  Dose  of  the
infusion,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  daily.

Off.  Prep. — Cataplasma  Dauci;  Infusum  Dauci.


DELPHINIUM CONSOLIDA.

Larkspur.

DELPHINIUM  STAPHISAGRIA.

Stavesacre.
Nat.  Ord. — Kanunculacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Polvandria  Trigynia.

THE ROOT AND SEEDS.

Description. — Delphinium  Consolida  is  an  annual  herbaceous  plant,
with  an  erect,  slightly  pubescent,  cylindrical,  divaricate  stem,  from  one
to  two  feet  high  ;  root  simple,  slender.  The  leaves  are  sessile,  and
divided  into  numerous  linear,  acute  segments,  usually  bifurcate  at  the
summit.  The  flowers  are  bright-blue  or  purple,  and  disposed  in  loose,
few-flowered,  terminal  racemes,  on  rigid  peduncles  which  are  furnished
with  two  small,  alternate  bracts.  The  nectary  is  one-leaved,  with  an
ascending  anterior  spur,  about  the  length  of  the  corolla.  Carpels  folli-
cular, solitary,  smooth,  containing  numerous  black,  or  blackish-brown,
angular,  hirsute  seeds.

Delphinium  Sta2)hisagria  is  a  handsome  annual  or  biennial  plant,  one
or  two  feet  high,  with a  simple, erect,  downy  stem. The  leaves  are


Delphinium  Consolida.  435

broad,  palmate,  five  or  seven-lobed,  on  hairy  petioles.  The  flowers  are
bluish-gray,  in  terminal  loose  racemes,  with  hairy  pedicels  twice  as  long
as  the  flower,  and  bracts  inserted  at  their  base.  The  nectary  is  four-
leaved,  and  shorter  than  the  petals,  which  are  five  in  number,  dirty-
white,  the  two  lower  spathulate,  the  uppermost  projected  backward  so  as
to  form  a  spur,  which  incloses  two  spurs  of  the  upper  leaflets  of  the  nec-
tary. Capsules  three,  large,  villous,  containing  many  globose,  three-
cornered,  thick,  black  seeds.

History. — The  Delphinium  Consolida  is  a  native  of  Europe,  which  has
become  naturalized  in  the  United  States,  growing  in  woods  and  fields,
and  flowering  in  June  and  July:  when  wild  the  flowers  are  blue,  but
when  cultivated,  are  of  various  colors,  as  red,  white,  blue,  etc.  The
finest  flowers  are  obtained  from  seed  sown  late  in  summer,  or  in  the
beginning  of  autumn.  All  parts  of  the  plant  are  endowed  with  a  bitter,
acrid  principle,  which  is  most  strongly  developed  in  the  seeds,  which
also  contain  much  oil.  The  flowers  furnish,  by  expression,  a  blue  pig-
ment, which  is  permanent  if  alum  be  used  as  a  mordant.  Diluted  alco-
hol is  its  best  solvent.

The  D.  Stap>hisagria  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe,  growing  in
waste  places  ;  the  seeds  are  the  officinal  part.  They  are  about  the  size
of  a  grain  of  wheat,  irregularly  triangular,  wrinkled,  externally  black  or
brown,  internally  whitish  and  oily,  with  a  slight,  unpleasant  odor,  and  a
very  acrid,  bitter,  hot,  nauseous  taste.  Their  virtues  are  extracted  by
water  or  alcohol.

The  seeds  of  the  D.  Consolida  contain  delphinia,  volatile  oil,  fixed  oil,
gum,  resin,  chlorophylle,  gallic  acid,  and  salts  of  potassa,  lime  and  iron.
Those  of  the  D.  Staphisagria  contain  a  brown  and  a  yellow  bitter  prin-
ciple, a  volatile  oil,  a  fixed  oil,  albumen,  an  azotized  substance,  a  muci-
laginous, saccharine  matter,  mineral  salts,  and  a  peculiar  alkaline  prin-
ciple combined  with  an  excess  of  malic  acid,  called  Delphinia.

Delphinia  may  be  obtained  by  boiling  a  decoction  of  the  seeds  with
magnesia,  collecting  the  precipitate,  and  treating  it  with  alcohol,  which
dissolves  the  delphinia,  and  yields  it  upon  evaporation.  It  is  white,
pulverulent,  inodorous,  of  a  bitter,  acrid  taste,  fusible  by  heat,  and
becoming  hard  and  brittle  upon  cooling,  slightly  soluble  in  cold  water,
very  soluble  in  alcohol  and  ether,  and  forms  salts  with  the  acids.  It
contains  three  distinct  principles, — one  of  a  resinous  nature  separated  from
its  solution  in  diluted  sulphuric  acid  by  the  addition  of  nitric  acid, —
another  insoluble  in  ether,  and  termed  Staphisain, — and  a  third  soluble
both  in  alcohol  and  ether,  and  considered  as  pure  Delphinia.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  D.  Staphisagria  possesses  the  same  proper-
ties as  the  D.  Consolida,  but  in  a  higher  degree.  In  large  doses  they
are  irritant  poisons  ;  in  medicinal  doses  the  former  is  emetic,  cathartic,
and narcotic,  but its action  is too violent  and uncertain for these


436  Materia  Medica.

indications.  An  infusion  of  the  seeds  of  Stavesacre,  may,  however,  be  ad-
vantageously used  both  by  the  mouth,  and  in  injection,  as  a  vermifuge.
Powdered  and  mixed  with  lard,  the  seeds  have  been  found  useful  in
some  forms  of  cutaneous  disease,  and  to  destroy  lice  in  the  hair;  a  tinc-
ture, or  infusion  of  the  bruised  seeds  in  vinegar  may  be  employed  for  the
same  purpose.  The  seeds  have  likewise  been  used  in  some  countries  to
intoxicate  fish.

The  flowers  of  the  D.  Consolida,  are  considered  diuretic,  emmena-
gogue,  and  vermifuge  ;  they  were  formerly  used  as  a  local  application
to  wounds,  and  the  decoction  was  recommended  as  efficacious  in  some
ophthalmic  affections.  The  seeds  possess  similar  properties  with  those  of
the  D.  Staphisagria,  but  less  energetic.  A  tincture  of  them  has  been
recommended  in  calculus,  as  a  vermifuge,  and  to  destroy  lice  in  the  hair;
it  has  also  been  found  useful  in  spasmodic  asthma  and  dropsy.  It  may
be  prepared  by  macerating  an  ounce  of  them  in  a  pint  of  diluted  alco-
hol ;  the  dose  is  ten  drops  gradually  increased  until  some  effects  upon
the  system  are  produced.  The  root  possesses  similar  virtues  but  is  sel-
dom employed.  A  drachm  of  two  of  the  flowers  of  D.  Consolida,
placed  in  a  pint  of  hot  water,  and  slowly  simmered  down  to  half  a  pint,
then  strained  and  sweetened,  is  said  to  be  an  excellent  remedy  for  chol-
era morbus  ;  to  be  administered  in  teacupful  doses,  at  short  intervals,
until  relief  is  obtained.  As  an  antiemetic  in  the  vomiting  of  autumnal
fevers  and  other  diseases,  this  plant  is  highly  extolled,  calming  the
stomach  speedily,  and  giving  a  delightful  relief;  it  is  used  in  infusion,
made  similar  to  the  above,  by  adding  half  an  ounce  of  the  leaves  and
flowers  to  half  a  pint  of  boiling  water.  The  dose  is  a  wineglassful,  to
be  repeated  every  half  hour  or  oftener,  if  .necessary.  This  plant
undoubtedly  deserves  further  investigation.

Delphinia  possesses  the  peculiar  properties  of  the  seed  in  an  eminent
degree.  It  is  very  poisonous  exerting  its  effects  chiefly  on  the  nervous
system  ;  six  grains  of  it  dissolved  in  vinegar  killed  a  dog  in  forty  min-
utes,—  the  symptoms  are  vomiting,  giddiness,  and  convulsions.  Dr.
Turnbull  states  that  pure  delphinia  may  be  given  in  doses  of  half  a
grain,  to  the  extent  of  three  or  four  grains  a  day,  without  any  unplea-
sant results  ;  it  sometimes  purges,  mostly  promotes  diuresis,  and  occa-
sions feelings  of  heat  and  tingling  in  various  parts  of  the  body.  If  used
at  all,  it  should  be  with  excessive  caution.  Externally,  it  has  been  suc-
cessfully used  in  neuralgia,  rheumatism,  and  paralysis  ;  it  is  applied  by
friction  over  the  part  in  the  form  of  ointment  or  alcoholic  solution,  in
proportions  varying  from  ten  to  thirty  grains  of  delphinia  to  one  ounce
of  the  vehicle  ;  and  the  friction  should  be  continued  till  some  redness
and  burning  are  produced.


Diervilla  Canadensis  —  Digitalis  Purpurea.  437

DIERVILLA CANADENSIS.

Bush  Honeysuckle.
Nat.  Ord.— Caprifoliace*. Sex.  Syst.— Pentandria  Monogynia.

ROOT, LEAVES AND TWIGS.

Description. — This  plant,  the  Diervilla  Trifida  of  Msenchausen,  and
sometimes  called  Gravelweed,  is  a  low  shrub,  with  a  branching,  pithy,
stem,  about  two  or  three  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  from  two  to  four
inches  long,  by  one  to  one  and  a  half  broad,  ovate,  acuminate,  finely  ser-
rate, opposite,  deciduous,  on  short  petioles.  The  peduncles  are  axillary
and  terminal,  dichotomous,  and  from  one  to  three-flowered;  flowers
greenish-yellow.  The  calyx  tube  oblong,  limb  five-cleft,  with  two  bracts;
corolla  twice  as  long  as  the  calyx,  greenish-yellow,  five-cleft,  funnel-
shaped  ;  border  five-cleft,  spreading.  Stamens  five,  which  with  the  style
are  much  exserted.  Stigma  capitate.  Capsule  oblong,  alternate  above,
two-celled,  naked,  with  many  seeds.

History. — This  is  a  woody  shrub,  growing  in  the  United  States  from
Canada  to  Carolina,  in  hedges  and  thickets,  and  by  the  sides  of  fences
and  rocks,  flowering  in  June.  The  leaves,  twigs,  and  roots  are  the  parts
us<;d,  and  yield  their  properties  to  alcohol,  and  boiling  water  in  infusion.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diuretic,  astringent,  and  alterative.  A  cold
infusion  of  the  bruised  leaves  and  twigs,  used  freely,  has  been  very
beneficial  in  inflammation  of  the  bladder  with  gravelly  deposit  in  the
urine,  in  nephritic  and  calculous  affections,  and  in  gonorrhea.  The  root
is  said  to  be  a  superior  article,  in  decoction  or  syrup,  for  the  cure  of
syphilis.  Externally,  applied  to  erysipelas,  or  erysipelatous  inflamma-
tions, and  over  the  inflamed  surface  occasioned  by  the  rhus,  ivy  or  poison
vine,  it  soon  relieves  the  itching,  burning,  inflammation  and  swelling.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Diervillse.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

Foxglove.
Nat. Ord. — Scrophulariacea). Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Angiospermia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Foxglove  is  an  elegant  plant  with  a  biennial,  whitish,
fibrous  root,  which  in  the  first  year  sends  up  large  tufted  leaves,  and  in
the  following  summer,  a  single,  erect,  wand-like,  roundish  with  several
slight  angles,  downy  and  leafy  stem,  rising  from  two  to  five  feet  in  hight,
and  terminating  in  a  spike  of  purple  flowers  ;  the  lower  leaves  are  ovate,
acuminate,  rugose,  crenate,  downy,  especially  on  their  under  surface,
veined,  of  a  dull -green  color  above  and  paler  beneath,  tapering  at  the


438  Materia  Medica.

base  into  short,  winged  petioles,  about  eight  inches  in  length  and  three
in  breadth,  and  spreading  on  the  ground ;  the  upper  or  cauline  ones  are
alternate,  elliptic-oblong,  somewhat  decurrent,  and  in  other  respects  like
the  former.  The  Jloivers  are  very  numerous,  large,  pendulous,  scentless,
on  short  peduncles,  and  are  arranged  in  a  long,  erect,  one-sided,  termi-
nal spike.  At  the  base  of  each  peduncle  is  a  sessile,  ovate,  and  acumi-
nate floral  leaf.  The  calyx  is  divided  into  five  segments,  rounded  or
acute,  much  shorter  than  the  corolla,  of  which  the  uppermost  is  the  nar-
rowest. The  corolla  is  monopetalous,  campanulate,  spotted  within  as
well  as  hairy,  inflated  on  the  lower  side,  and  narrowed  at  base,  the  upper
lip  somewhat  cleft,  emarginate,  and  smaller  than  the  lower.  The  sta-
mens are  didynamous,  subulate,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  corolla,
declined,  white,  supporting  large,  oval,  acute,  deeply-cleft,  naked
anthers.  The  ovary  is  pointed,  ovate,  having  a  simple  style,  with  a  bifid
stigma.  The  capsule  is  ovate,  acuminate,  two-celled,  two-valved,  with  a
septicidal  dehiscence,  and  containing  numerous  small,  oblong,  pale-
brown,  pitted  seeds.

History.  —  Foxglove  is  a  native  of  the  temperate  parts  of  Europe,
where  it  grows  wild,  and  is  cultivated  in  this  country ;  it  flowers  in  June
and  July.  The  leaves  and  the  seeds  are  active,  though  the  former  are
the  officinal  parts.  The  full  grown  and  perfectly  fresh  leaves  are
gathered  in  the  second  year  about  the  period  of  inflorescence,  the
petioles  and  midrib  being  rejected,  and  are  then  dried  by  exposure  to
a  current  of  dry  air,  by  being  placed  in  a  drying-stove,  or  by  being
inclosed  in  a  hot-air  press.  Much  care  is  necessary  in  preserving  them
for  medical  purposes,  or  else  they  will  prove  inefficient.  When  well
prepared,  the  powder  has  a  fine  green  color,  and  retains  the  intense  bit-
terness of  the  fresh  leaves.  The  dried  leaves  or  the  powder  should  con-
stantly be  kept  in  well-closed,  opake  vessels,  so  as  to  exclude  light  and
moisture.  Age  deteriorates  its  virtues,  consequently  the  drug  should  be
renewed  yearly.  The  compact  masses  of  digitalis  prepared  by  the
Shakers,  are  seldom  of  good  quality,  being  much  disposed  to  moldiness ;
but  when  free  from  this  they  may  be  used  with  advantage,  if  recently
prepared.  We  consider  this,  however,  a  very  objectionable  mode  of
preserving  this,  as  well  as  many  other,  agents.  In  the  fresh  state,  fox-
glove has  but  little  smell,  but  when  dried  emits  a  faint,  narcotic  odor ;
the  fresh  juice  has  a  faint,  mawkish  smell,  and  is  easily  evaporated  spon-
taneously without  undergoing  decomposition,  forming  a  firm,  elegant
extract.  The  taste  of  the  leaves  and  juice  is  intensely  bitter,  nauseous,
and  permanent.  The  dried  leaf  is  of  a  dull,  pale-green  color,  with  a
whitish  down  on  its  under  surface ;  the  powder  is  of  a  fine  deep  green.
Water,  alcohol,  ether,  or  diluted  acids  take  up  its  virtues.  A  solution
of  sesquichloride  of  iron  added  to  infusion  of  digitalis,  renders  it  dark-
greenish-black — tincture  of  galls  causes  a  gray  precipitate  ;  when  tritu-
rated with lime,  the  leaves  give  out  ammonia. Digitalis  contains  a


Digitalis Purpurea.  439

volatile  oil,  a  fatty  matter,  a  red  coloring  substance  similar  to  extractive,
chlorophylle,  albumen,  starcb,  sugar,  gum,  lignin,  salts  of  potassa,  and
lime,  digitalic  acid,  volatile  antirrhinic  acid,  and  a  neutral,  energetic
principle,  upon  which  its  properties  chiefly  depend,  called  digitalin.  Dr.
Morries  obtained  a  narcotic  empyreumatic  oil  by  the  destructive  distilla-
tion of  the  leaves.

Digitalin  may  be  prepared  as  follows : — First,  prepare  an  alcoholic
extract,  by  making  a  paste  of  the  coarsely  powdered  leaves  with  rectified
spirit,  expressing  the  solution,  and  distilling  off  the  spirit — this  extract
is  to  be  treated  with  distilled  water  acidulated  with  acetic  acid,  and
heated  to  about  110°  F.,  a  little  animal  charcoal  being  added.  To  the
liquor,  filtered,  and  partially  neutralized  by  ammonia,  a  fresh  concen-
trated infusion  of  galls  is  gradually  added,  so  long  as  a  precipitate  is
produced.  This  precipitate,  which  is  tannate  of  digitalin,  is  obtained
separate  by  decanting  the  liquid,  washing  it  with  pure  water  mixed  with
a  little  alcohol,  and  then  rubbing  it  in  a  mortar,  with  one-third  of  its
weight  of  very  finely-powdered  litharge.  The  mixture  is  gently  heated,
and  submitted  to  the  action  of  twice  its  volume  of  alcohol  at  about  90°.
The  alcoholic  solution  is  treated  with  a  little  animal  charcoal,  filtered,
and  evaporated  at  a  very  gentle  heat.  The  residue  is  acted  on  twice  or
three  times  with  cold  sulphuric  ether,  which  removes  impurities  and
leaves  the  digitalin.  This  may  be  powdered,  or  obtained  in  small
scales  by  dissolving  it  in  the  least  quantity  of  alcohol,  and  allowing  the
concentrated  solution  to  evaporate  in  a  stove  upon  plates  of  glass.  One
hundred  parts  of  the  leaves  yield  about  one  part  of  digitalin.  It  is
white,  inodorous,  crystallizing  with  difficulty,  intensely  bitter,  sternuta-
tory when  powdered,  slightly  decomposed  at  a  boiling  heat,  soluble  in
about  two  thousand  parts  of  cold  water,  more  soluble  in  boiling  water,
which  retains  one  part  in  one  thousand  when  it  cools,  very  soluble  in
alcohol,  slightly  soluble  in  ether,  incapable  of  precipitating  salts,  neutral,
and  devoid  of  nitrogen.  It  prevents  fermentation  in  an  aqueous  solution
of  sugar,  and  is  probably  a  poison  to  beer-yeast.  With  tannic  acid  it
forms  an  insoluble  compound  ;  to  concentrated  muriatic  acid  it  imparts
a  fine  emerald-green  color.  The  seeds  are  preferable  to  the  leaves,  as
they  contain  a  larger  amount  of  digitalin,  and  can  be  better  relied  upon
as  to  time  of  collection,  preserving,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  single  large  doses,  digitalis  is  an  irritant-
narcotic  poison,  producing,  nausea,  vomiting,  stupor  or  delirium,  purging,
cold  sweats,  extreme  prostration  of  strength,  a  slow,  feeble,  irregular
pulse,  hiccough,  suppression  of  urine,  coma,  convulsions,  and  death.  In
doses  sufficient  to  bring  the  system  under  its  immediate  influence,  it
causes  an  augmented  and  permanent  flow  of  urine,  reduces  the  pulse  to
forty  or  even  thirty  beats  in  a  minute,  with  languor,  nausea,  occasionally
anxiety  and  salivation,  a  sense  of  weight  or  constriction  and  dull  pain  in
the  head,  giddiness,  dimness  of  vision,  and  more  or  less  confusion  of  the


44:0  Materia Medica.

mental  faculties;  occasionally  it  gives  rise  to  irritation  of  the  pharynx,
larynx,  trachea  and  esophagus,  with  hoarseness.  And  if  the  use  of  the
remedy  be  persisted  in,  these  effects  will  continue  to  increase,  until  the
poisonous  symptoms,  first  referred  to,  become  developed.  In  medicinal
doses,  foxglove  is  sedative  and  diuretic,  and  may  be  employed  with
advantage  in  febrile  diseases,  acute  inflammations,  neuralgia  attended
with  irritative  fever,  hemoptysis,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  mania,  epi-
lepsy, pertussis,  and  spasmodic  asthma.  As  a  diuretic,  in  dropsy  con-
nected with  diseased  heart  or  kidneys.  It  should  always  be  used  with
care,  as  it  will  sometimes  act  suddenly  with  an  accumulated  influence,  and
endanger  the  life  of  the  patient.  When  its  effects  begin  to  appear,  its  use
should  be  suspended  for  a  time,  as  it  is  very  permanent  in  its  action,  and
if  its  sedative  effect  is  too  great,  it  is  best  counteracted  by  the  use  of
wine  and  opium  conjointly.  Dose  of  the  powder  from  one  to  three
grains ;  of  the  tincture  from  ten  to  twenty  minims,  either  being  repeated
two  or  three  times  daily,  and  gradually  increased  until  some  effect  is
produced  upon  the  head,  stomach,  pulse,  or  kidneys,  when  it  should  be
diminished,  or  entirely  omitted.

The  poisonous  effects  of  digitalis  are  best  counteracted  by  first  evacu-
ating the  stomach  by  the  free  use  of  warm  liquids,  if  any  of  it  is  sup-
posed to  remain  in  the  stomach,  and  then  administering  brandy,  wine,
ammonia,  or  other  stimulants,  with  sinapisms  to  the  wrists  and  ankles.

Dig'UaUn  produces  similar  effects  on  the  system  with  digitalis,  but  its
internal  employment  is  hazardous,  and  requires  great  caution.  If  given
at  all,  it  should  be  commenced  with  the  fiftieth  of  a  grain,  and  gradually
and  cautiously  increased  to  an  amount  not  to  exceed  the  twelfth  of  a
grain.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Digitalis.


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

Wild  Yam.

Nat.  Ord. — Dioscoreacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Dicecia  Hexandria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  called  Colic-root,  is  a  delicate,
twining  vine,  with  a  perennial  root,  from  which  proceeds  a  smooth,
woolly,  reddish-brown  stem,  one  or  two  lines  in  diameter,  and  from
five  to  fifteen  feet  long.  The  leaves  are  from  two  to  four  inches  long,
about  three-fourths  as  wide,  mostly  alternate,  occasionally  nearly  oppo-
site or  verticillate  in  fours,  broad-ovate,  distinctly  cordate  and  acuminate,
nine  to  eleven-veined,  margin  entire  or  wavy,  villose  with  short,  soft
hairs  on  the  lower  surface,  and  glabrous  on  the  upper.  The  petioles  are
elongated,  the  lowest  somewhat  verticillate  in  fours,  the  next  subopposite,
the  middle  and  upper  alternate,  and  from  two  to  four. The  flowers  are


DlOSCOREIN.  441

dioecious,  very  small,  of  a  pale-greenish  yellow  color,  and  in  axillary  pani-
cles or  racemes.  The  sterile  flowers  have  six  stamens  inserted  on  the  base
of  the  divisions  of  the  six-parted  perianth  ;  anthers  introrse,  with  the  spikes
paniculate  ;  the  fertile  flowers  have  the  ovary  adherent,  with  three  styles,
and  simple  spikes.  Peduncles  axillary.  Ovaries  at  first  elliptic,  but
finally  almost  as  broad  as  long,  about  three-fourths  of  an  inch  in  length,
three-celled,  loculicidally  three-valved  by  splitting  through  the  winged
ano-les.  Seeds  one  or  two  in  each  cell,  flat,  with  a  membranaceous
margin.

History. — This  is  a  slender  vine,  twining  over  bushes  and  fences,  in
thickets  and  hedges,  and  flowering  in  June  and  July.  It  is  a  native  of
the  United  States  and  Canada,  being,  however,  more  common  south-
ward, and  rare  in  the  New  England  States.  The  root  is  the  officinal
part ;  it  is  long,  woody,  contorted,  from  an  eighth  to  a  fourth  of  an  inch
in  diameter,  with  many  fine,  long,  scattering  fibers,  of  a  light,  brownish-
yellow  color  externally,  and  whitish  internally,  with  a  granular  fracture,
almost  smooth,  inodorous,  except  when  bruised,  then  it  emits  a  faint
peculiar  smell,  and  a  not  unpleasant,  slightly  bitter,  sweetish  and
pungent  taste.  Water  or  alcohol  are  its  solvents.  No  analysis  has
been  made  of  this  root,  further  than  to  extract  its  active  constituent,
dioscorein.

Properties  and  Uses. — Antispasmodic.  Successfully  used  by  Eclectics
in  bilious  colic  in  doses  of  half  a  pint  of  the  decoction,  repeated  every  half
hour  or  hour;  in  fact,  no  other  agent  seems  necessary  in  this  disease,  as
it  gives  prompt  and  permanent  relief  in  the  most  severe  cases.  It  will
likewise  allay  nausea,  also  spasms  of  the  bowels,  and,  combined  with
equal  parts  of  the  bark  of  Cornus  Sericea  in  decoction,  is  eminently
beneficial  in  the  nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnant  women.  In  ordinary
cases  the  decoction  of  the  .root  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  two  to
four  fluidounces,  and  repeated  every  half  hour  until  relief  is  obtained.
The  tincture  is  said  to  be  a  valuable  expectorant  and  diaphoretic,  and  in
large  doses  produces  emesis.  Dose  of  the  tincture  from  twenty  to  sixty
drops.

Off. Prep.  — Decoctum  Dioscorese  ;  Dioscorein.


DIOSCOREIN.

THE RESINOID PRINCIPLE OF THE ROOT OF DIOSCOREA VILLOSA.

Preparation. — Make  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  powdered  roots  of
Dioscorea  Villosa,  and  filter;  add  the  tincture  to  its  weight  of  water,
and  carefully  distil  off  the  alcohol;  the  dioscorein  will  be  left  behind  in
the  water;  collect,  dry,  and  pulverize  it.  It  is  prepared  similarly  to
Cimicifugin,  Leptandrin,  Podophyllin,  etc.

History. — The  profession  are  indebted  to  W.  S.  Merrell  for  the  prepa-
ration and  introduction  of  this  highly  valuable  agent;  it  having  been


442  Materia  Medica.

discovered  by  him  in  the  winter  of  1852-3.  It  forms  a  light  yellowish-
brown  powder  of  a  faint  smell,  and  a  slightly  sweetish,  resinous,  very
bitter,  disagreeable  taste,  with  a  persistent  acridity  which  is  very  sensibly
felt  in  the  throat  and  fauces.  When  exposed  to  the  atmosphere  it
absorbs  moisture,  becomes  darker  colored,  tenacious,  of  a  pilular  con-
sistence, and  leaves  a  light-yellowish  greasy  stain  on  white  paper  in
which  it  is  kept.  It  has  neither  acid  nor  alkaline  reactions.  When  first
prepared  it  is  wholty  soluble  in  alcohol,  but  on  keeping  for  a  time  is
only  partially  dissolved;  in  this  respect  it  resembles  podophyllin  and
several  other  resinoids,  which,  though  completely  taken  up  by  alcohol
at  first,  become  less  soluble  in  this  menstruum  by  age ;  probably  owing
to  an  oxidizing  of  the  resinoid  by  the  action  of  the  atmospheric  oxygen.
It  is  partly  soluble  in  water,  and  insoluble  in  oil  of  turpentine.  Ether
very  slightly  dissolves  it,  and  ammonia  added  to  the  ethereal  mixture
forms  a  dark-reddish  turbid  solution,  with  the  ether  floating  on  the  top
of  a  light  straw  color.  Chloroform  produces  with  it  a  dark,  muddy
solution,  which  becomes  light  brown  on  the  addition  of  ammonia,  and
if  permitted  to  stand  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  the  mixture  divides  into
four  separate  layers,  the  upper  one  being  clear  and  of  a  dark  wine  color,
the  next  turbid  and  light  brown,  the  third  saponaceous  and  whitish-
yellow,  and  the  lower  one  being  a  clear  yellowish-white  liquid.  By
rubbing  with  diluted  muriatic  acid  it  forms  a  liquid  which,  on  standing,
throws  down  a  yellowish-white  precipitate,  the  supernatant  liquor  being
clear  and  transparent;  the  same  result  ensues  when  rubbed  with  diluted
sulphuric  acid.  Ammonia  added  to  its  aqueous  solution  forms  a  light
straw-colored,  saponaceous  fluid,  with  a  very  small  precipitate  of  a  dark
color.  Rubbed  with  sulphuric  acid  it  becomes  of  a  dark  brownish-red
color,  and  partially  dissolves ;  with  nitric  acid,  it  becomes  light  yellow-
ish-red ;  with  muriatic  acid,  whitish-yellow ;  with  acetic  acid  a  light
straw  color,  and  partially  dissolves ;  ammonia  or  liquor  potassa  forms  an
amber  color  with  it.  Dioscorein  should  be  kept  in  bottles  well-stopped;
if  it  is  desired  to  form  pills  of  it,  exposure  to  the  atmosphere  will  pro-
duce the  proper  tenacity  for  this  purpose.

Properties  and  Uses. — Dioscorein  possesses  the  properties  of  the  crude
root  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  is  undoubtedly  as  much  a  specific  in
bilious  colic,  as  quinia  is  in  intermittent.  In  a  severe  case  of  bilious  colic
pronounced  past  hope  by  several  physicians,  four  grains  rubbed  up  with
a  tablespoonful  of  brandy  afforded  prompt  relief,  and  a  repetition  of  the
dose,  in  about  twenty  minutes  from  the  time  of  taking  the  first,  effected
a  cure.  In  ordinary  cases  one  or  two  grains  of  dioscorein  may  be
administered  every  five,  ten,  or  twenty  minutes,  according  to  the
urgency  of  the  case.  In  flatulence,  borborygmi,  etc.,  it  may  be  advan-
tageously combined  with  ginger,  aletrin,  or  asclepidin ;  in  many  forms
of  uterine  disease  its  union  with  cimicifugin,  senecin,  caulophyllin,  etc.,
will  prove  very  useful ;  and  it  may  be  combined  with  the  extract  of


DlOSPYROS VlRGINIANA.  443

cornus  sericea,  to  overcome  the  nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnant
females.  In  cramp  of  the  stomach,  or  painful  spasmodic  affections  of  the
bowels,  a  pill  or  powder  composed  of  equal  parts  of  dioscorein,  caulo-
phyllin,  and  viburine,  will  be  found  a  remedy  of  great  value,  as  well  as
in  after-pains ;  the  mixture  should  be  given  in  three  or  four-grain  doses,
and  repeated  every  half  hour  or  hour.  It  is  strictly  an  Eclectic  remedy
of  great  value,  and  not  known  or  employed  by  practitioners  of  other
schools.  Dose  of  dioscorein,  from  one  to  four  grains,  repeated  as  cir-
cumstances require.

DIOSPYROS  VlRGINIANA.

Persimmon.
Nat.  Ord. — Ebenacea). Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Octandria.

THE BARK AND UNRIPE FRUIT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  tree  from  twenty  to  sixty  feet  in
hight,  with  a  trunk  sometimes  twenty  inches  in  diameter,  more  especially
in  its  southern  locations,  covered  with  a  rugged  blackish  bark,  and
having  alternate,  spreading  branches.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  oval  or
oblong,  acuminate,  with  an  entire  margin,  smooth  and  shining  above,
paler  beneath  with  reticulated  veins,  on  short,  pubescent  petioles,  and
from  three  to  five  inches  long.  The  flowers  are  obscure,  pale-greenish
yellow,  lateral,  axillary,  mostly  solitary,  nearly  sessile,  the  male  and
female  flowers  being  on  different  trees,  though  sometimes  a  perfect
flower  occurs,  in  which  the  stamina  are  double  the  number  of  the  seg-
ments of  the  calyx,  and  the  stigmas  equal  to  these  segments.  The  fila-
ments are  short,  free,  or  inserted  on  the  calyx,  with  bilobate  anthers.
The  ovary  is  globular,  supporting  a  very  short  style,  with  obtuse,
spreading  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  a  round,  dark-yellow  or  orange  berry,
containing  a  fleshy,  edible  pulp,  and  from  six  to  eight  compressed,
hard  seeds.

History. — This  is  a  well  known  indigenous  tree,  common  to  the  Middle
and  Southern  States,  which  flowers  in  May  or  June,  but  does  not  ripen
its  fruit  till  the  middle  of  autumn.  It  is  seldom  found  above  the  forty-
second  degree  of  north  latitude.  The  unripe  fruit  is  very  astringent,
but  when  matured,  and  after  having  been  touched  by  the  frost,  it  is
sweet  and  palatable.  The  bark  is  also  astringent,  and  together  with
the  fruit,  form  the  officinal  portions  of  the  tree.  The  unripe  fruit  con-
tains tannic  acid,  sugar,  malic  acid,  coloring  matter,  and  lignin;  when
ripe  the  tannic  acid  almost  disappears,  while  the  sugar  and  malic  acid
increase  in  quantity.  The  bark,  probably  contains  tannic  and  gallic
acids.  Water,  spirit,  or  alcohol  extracts  the  virtues  of  the  bark  and
unripe  fruit.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic  and  astringent.  The  bark  has  been  used
in  intermittents,  and  both  it  and  the  unripe  fruit  have  been  beneficial  in


444:  Materia Medica.

various  forms  of  disease  of  the  bowels,  chronic  dysentery,  and  uterine
hemorrhage ;  used  in  infusion,  syrup,  or  vinous  tincture,  in  the  propor-
tion of  one  ounce  of  the  bruised  fruit  to  two  fiuidounces  of  the  vehicle,
and  half  a  fluidounce  or  more  given  to  adults,  and  a  fluidrachm  or  more
to  infants.  The  infusion  may  be  used  as  a  gargle  in  ulcerated  sore-
throat.  The  ripe  fruits  are  very  grateful  and  healthy,  and  as  they  ripen
at  a  time  when  most  other  autumnal  fruits  have  disappeared,  the  tree
should  be  cultivated ;  for  if  it  should  improve  in  the  same  ratio  as  the
peach,  plum,  etc.,  it  would  form  a  very  valuable  addition  to  our  fall
fruits.  A  pleasant  beer  is  made  with  the  ripe  fruit,  hops,  water,  and
yeast ;  and  a  species  of  brandy  is  obtained  by  distillation  of  the  fer-
mented infusion.


DIRCA  PALUSTRIS.
Leatherwood.

Nat.  Orel. — Thymelaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Octandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description.  —  This  is  an  indigenous  shrub,  known  by  the  various
names  of  Moosewood,  American  Mezereon,  and  Wicopy,  and  attains  the
hight  of  five  or  six  feet,  having  crooked,  jointed,  and  spreading  branches.
The  leaves  are  alternate  or  scattered,  nearly  sessile,  ovate,  entire,  rather
acute,  downy  when  young,  smooth  and  membranous  when  fully  grown,
pale  beneath,  and  not  appearing  till  long  after  the  flowers.  The  flowers
are  in  threes,  on  cohering  peduncles,  small,  axillary,  yellow,  and  funnel-
shaped  ;  when  young  they  are  inclosed  within  a  small,  dark,  hairy  bud,
occupying  a  sheath  or  cavity  in  the  end  of  each  flowering  branch.
Calyx  eight-toothed,  yellow,  funnel-shaped,  half  an  inch  long,  border
dilated,  drooping,  and  contracted  at  the  middle  and  base.  Corolla
wanting.  Stamens  eight,  much  longer  than  the  calyx,  and  alternately
a  long  and  a  short  one,  with  rounded  anthers.  Ovary  ovate,  placed
obliquely,  the  style  appearing  to  issue  from  one  side  ;  style  filiform,
curved,  longer  than  the  stamens,  and  terminated  by  an  acute  stigma.
Fruit,  a  small,  oval,  red  or  orange-colored  berry,  containing  a
single  seed.

History.  —  Found  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  but  is  more
abundant  in  the  Atlantic  than  in  the  Western  States  ;  it  grows  in  shady
swamps,  on  the  banks  of  streams,  and  in  low,  wet  places,  and  flowers
very  early  in  the  season,  April  and  May,  when  it  is  wholly  destitute  of
leaves.  The  bark,  which  is  the  officinal  part,  is  very  fibrous,  extremely
tough,  and  difficult  to  pulverize.  It  has  a  nauseous  odor,  an  unpleasant
acrid  taste,  followed  when  chewed,  by  a  flow  of  saliva,  and  imparts  its
properties  to  alcohol,  and  imperfectly  to  water,  even  by  decoction.  It
has  been  used  for  making  ropes,  thongs,  and  baskets,  and  might  be


DORSTENIA CoNTRAYERVA.  445

advantageously  employed  in  the  arts,  for  making  paper,  etc.  The  wood
is  white,  soft,  and  very  brittle.  No  complete  analysis  has  been  made  of
the  bark,  but  it  appears  to  contain  an  acrid  resin,  a  bitter  extractive,
mucilage,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  bark  is  acrid,  rubefacient  and  vesicant
when  fresh ;  in  the  dose  of  six  or  eight  grains  it  produces  a  sense  of
heat  in  the  stomach,  with  vomiting,  and  frequently  purging.  Applied
to  the  skin  it  slowly  excites  redness  and  ultimately  vesication,  and  the
sores  caused  by  it  are  difficult  to  heal,  frequently  degenerating  into
obstinate  and  indolent  ulcers.  When  chewed  it  causes  much  heat  and
pain  in  the  mouth,  followed  by  salivation,  and  has  been  found  useful  in
toothache,  neuralgia,  and  other  complaints  where  the  acrid  masticatories
are  found  to  be  beneficial.  A  decoction  of  the  bark  is  expectorant  and
sudorific,  and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  mezereon.  The  berries
are  said  to  be  emetic,  narcotic,  and  poisonous.  The  bark  or  berries  are
rarely  used  in  practice,  except  in  the  absence  of  better  known  and  more
efficient  articles.


DORSTENIA  CONTRAYERVA.

Con  tray  erva.
Nat.  Ord. — Urticaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  caulescent  plant,  with  a  perennial,  fusiform,
rough,  branching  root  or  rhizoma;  the  stem  is  covered  with  spreading,
green,  scaly  stipules.  The  leaves  are  about  four  inches  in  length,  palm-
ate, and  placed  upon  long  radical  petioles,  which  are  winged  toward  the
leaves  ;  the  lobes  are  lanceolate,  acuminate,  coarsely  serrate  and  gashed,
occasionally  almost  pinnatifid.  The  scapes  or  fower-stems  are  radical,
several  inches  long,  and  support  quadrangular,  and  waved  or  plaited
receptacles,  which  contain  male  and  female  flowers,  the  former  having
two  stamens,  the  latter  a  single  style.  The  capsule  when  matured,
throws  out  the  seeds  with  considerable  force.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  Mexico,  the  West  Indies,  and  Peru.
The  root  is  the  officinal  part  ;  as  found  in  the  shops,  it  is  oblong,  one  or
two  inches  in  length,  of  various  thicknesses,  very  hard,  rough,  and  solid,
of  a  reddish-brown  color  externally,  and  pale  within  ;  and  has  numer-
ous long,  slender,  yellowish  fibers  attached  to  its  inferior  part.  It  has
an  aromatic  odor,  and  a  warm,  slightly  bitter,  pungent  taste.  Alcohol
or  boiling  water,  extracts  its  sensible  qualities.  The  tincture  reddens
litmus  paper,  and  yields  a  precipitate  on  the  addition  of  water.  The  root
has  not  been  analyzed,  but  contains  starch,  volatile  oil,  resin,  and  bitter
extractive. The  root  of  the  shops  is  probably  derived  from  several


446  Materia  Medica.

other  species  than  the  officinal,  which  possess  similar  virtues,  as  D.
Brasiliensis,  D.  Houstoni,  D.  Drakena.  Some  writers  suppose  the  D.
Brasiliensis,  growing  in  Brazil,  to  furnish  the  true  root.  Contrayerva,
in  the  Spanish  American  language,  means  antidote,  having  the  power  to
counteract  the  effects  of  poisons.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  tonic,  and  diaphoretic.  Has  been
used  in  low  states  of  fever,  malignant  eruptive  diseases,  some  forms  of
dysentery  and  diarrhea,  and  other  diseases  requiring  gentle  stimulation.
Dose  of  the  powdered  root,  thirty  grains.  The  best  form  of  adminis-
tration is  the  infusion.  It  is  seldom  used  in  this  country,  having  been
superseded  by  the  Serpentaria.


DRYMIS  WINTER! (  Wintera  Aromatica.)

Winter's  Bark.

Nat.  Ord. — Magnoliaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Tetragynia.

THE  BARK.

Description. — This  is  a  very  large,  evergreen,  aromatic  tree,  varying
in  size  from  six  to  fifty  feet  high.  The  bark  of  the  trunk  is  gray  and
wrinkled,  and  that  of  the  branches  smooth  and  green.  The  branches
are  somewhat  erect,  and  scarred  by  the  traces  of  fallen  leaves.  The
leaves  are  alternate,  oblong,  obtuse,  entire,  quite  smooth,  shining,  some-
what coriaceous,  of  a  deep-green  color  above,  pale-bluish  beneath,
with  two  caducous  stipules  at  their  base,  and  standing  on  short  peti-
oles. The  flowers  are  small,  sometimes  solitary,  frequently  in  clusters
of  three  or  four,  and  on  short  peduncles,  which  are  either  simple  or
divided  a  little  above  the  base  into  long  pedicels.  The  sepals  are  two
or  three,  green,  thick,  coriaceous,  and  persistent.  The  corolla,  consists  of
seven  white,  obtuse,  concave,  erect,  very  caducous  petals.  The  fila-
ments are  numerous,  shorter  than  the  petals,  and  support  large,  oval
anthers,  longitudinally  divided  by  a  deep  fissure.  The  ovary  is  formed
of  from  four  to  eight  carpels,  and  is  surrounded  by  a  sessile  stigma.
The  fruit  is  a  thick,  fleshy,  ovate  berry,  containing  many  seeds.

History. — This  is  a  very  large,  evergreen  tree,  a  native  of  Terra  del
Fuego,  and  the  southern  parts  of  South  America,  and  takes  its  name
from  its  discoverer,  Captain  Winter.  The  bark  of  the  tree  is  the  part
employed.  It  is  in  quills  or  rolled  pieces  of  some  length,  of  different
widths  and  thicknesses  ;  of  a  pale-yellowish,  or  dull  reddish-gray,  with
darker  spots  externally,  and  of  a  dark-cinnamon  color  internally.  The
odor  is  aromatic,  and  the  taste  warm,  pungent,  and  spicy.  It  contains
tannic  acid  and  oxide  of  iron,  which  serve  to  distinguish  it  from  canella
alba,  with  which  it  is  often  confounded.

Properties  and  Uses.  — Stimulant,  aromatic,  and  tonic,  and  may  be
employed  in  all  cases  in  which  the  Canella  and  Cinnamon  are  indicated


Epigea  Repens.  447

It  was  highly  recommended  by  its  discoverer  as  an  antiscorbutic.  The
dose  of  the  powder  is  about  half  a  drachm.  It  is  seldom  used  in  this
country.  Another  species  growing  in  Chili,  Drymis  Chilensis,  yields  a
bark  possessing  analogous  virtues.


EPIGEA  REPENS.

Trailing  Arbutus.

Nat. Ord. — Ericaceae Sex.  Si/st. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. —  This  plant  has  several  names,  as  Winter -pink,  Gravel-
weed,  Mountain-pink,  Ground  Laurel,  May-flower,  etc.  It  is  a  small
trailing  plant,  indigenous,  with  woody  stems  from  six  to  twenty  inches
long,  and  is  covered  with  a  hairy  pubescence  in  all  its  parts.  The  leaves
are  evergreen,  alternate,  cordate-ovate,  entire,  two  or  two  and  a  half
inches  long,  by  one  and  a  half  wide,  roundish  at  the  end,  and  abruptly
tipped  with  a  very  short  point,  and  stand  on  slender  petioles.  The
flowers  are  very  fragrant,  white  or  tinged  with  various  shades  of  red,
and  are  disposed  in  small  axillary  clusters  on  short  stalks.  The  corolla
is  hypocrateriform,  tube  cylindrical,  longer  than  the  calyx,  hairy  within,
limb  five-parted,  spreading.  Calyx  green,  five-parted,  with  three  large
bracts  at  base  ;  stamens  ten  with  filiform  filaments  ;  anthers  oblong,
awnless,  dehiscent  by  two  longitudinal  openings.  Capsule  or  pod  de-
pressed globular,  five-lobed,  five-celled,  many-seeded.

History. — This  shrubby  little  plant  grows  in  sandy  woods,  sometimes
in  rocky  soil,  in  the  shade  of  pines,  and  is  found  from  Newfoundland  to
Pennsylvania  and  Kentucky;  it  generally  prefers  the  sides  of  hills  with
a  northern  exposure.  Its  flowers  exhale  a  rich,  spicy  fragrance,  and
appear  in  April  and  May.  The  plant  is  said  to  be  injurious  to  cattle
when  eaten  by  them.  The  leaves  are  the  officinal  parts,  and  yield
their  properties  to  water  or  spirits.  No  analysis  has  been  made  of  the
plant.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic  and  astringent.  This  is  a  very  valu-
able Eclectic  remedy,  and  is  highly  beneficial  in  gravel,  and  all  dis-
eases of  the  urinary  organs  ;  it  is  superior  to  the  uva  ursi,  or  foreign
buchu,  and  where  these  have  failed  in  producing  benefit,  this  has  suc-
ceeded. It  may  be  used  in  the  same  manner  and  doses  as  the  uva  ursi.
The  fluid  extract  is  an  elegant  preparation  for  all  urinary  difficulties.
It  enters  into  a  very  useful  preparation,  termed  Diuretic  compound,  which
see  under  the  head  of  Infusions.  It  has  been  occasionally  used  with
advantage  in  diarrhea,  and  bowel  complaints  of  children.  The  infusion
of  the  leaves  may  be  drank  freely.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Epigeae  Fluidum  ;  Infusum  Epigeae.


448  Materia Medica.

EPILOBIUM  ANGUSTIFOLIUM.

Willow  Herb.

Nat.  Ord. — Onagracere. Sex.  Syst. — Octandria  Monogynia,

THE LEAVES AND ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  known  as  Rose-bay,  is  the  Epilo-
bium  Spicatum  of  Lamark  ;  it  is  a  perennial,  indigenous  plant,  with  a
simple,  erect  stem  from  four  to  six  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  scat-
tered, lanceolate,  sessile,  smooth,  subentire,  with  a  marginal  pellucid
vein,  from  two  to  five  inches  in  length,  and  one-fourth  as  wide.  The
flowers  are  large,  numerous,  very  showy,  pink-purple,  and  in  a  long  ter-
minal spike  or  raceme.  The  corolla  has  four  deep  lilac-purple  petals,
clawed,  and  widely  spreading.  Calyx-tube  not  prolonged  beyond  the
ovary  ;  limb  four-cleft,  four-parted,  and  deciduous.  Stamens  eight,  and
as  well  as  the  style,  turned  to  one  side.  Stigma  with  four  linear,  long,
revolute  lobes.  Ovary  and  capsule  long,  linear,  four-cornered,  four-
celled,  four-valved ;  seeds  numerous,  with  a  tuft  of  long  hairs.

History. — Willow  Herb  is  found  growing  in  the  United  States  in  newly
cleared  lands,  and  low  waste  grounds,  in  the  northern  States,  flowering
in  July  and  August.  The  leaves  and  roots  are  the  parts  used,  and  yield
their  virtues  to  water  or  spirits.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  astringent,  demulcent,  and  emollient.
An  infusion  of  the  leaves  will  be  found  beneficial  in  chronic  diarrhea,
dysentery,  leucorrhea,  menorrhagia,  and  uterine  hemorrhage  ;  and  forms
an  excellent  local  application  for  ophthalmia,  ulcerations  of  the  mouth
and  throat,  and  leucorrhea.  The  leaves  in  poultice  are  a  valuable  rem-
edy for  foul  and  indolent  ulcers.  Dose  of  the  infusion  from  two  to  four
fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.


EQUISETUM HYEMALE.

Scouring  Rush.

Nat.  Ord. — Equisetacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Pilices.

THE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Horse  Tail,
Shave  Grass,  etc.,  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  simple,  stout,  erect,  jointed
and  hollow  stems,  fourteen  to  twenty-six  longitudinal  furrows,  the  ridges
rough  with  two  rows  of  minute  tubercles,  and  growing  from  two  to  three
feet  in  bight,  each  stem  bearing  a  terminal,  ovoid  spike ;  frequently  two
or  more  stems  are  united  at  the  base  from  the  same  root.  The  sheaths
are  from  two  to  three  lines  long,  and  from  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half
apart,  ashy-white,  black  at  the  base  and  summit,  short,  with  subulate,
black,  awned,  and  deciduous  teeth,  which  leave  a  bluntly  crenate  margin.


Ereciithites  Hieracifolius.  449

Fertile  plants  mostly  leafless.  Fruit  placed  under  peltate  polygons,
bein"-  pileus-like  bodies,  which  are  arranged  in  whorls,  forming  a  spike-
like  raceme  ;  from  four  to  seven  spiral  filaments  surround  the  spores,
which  resemble  green  globules,  and  which  roll  up  closely  around  them
when  moist,  and  uncoil,  when  dry.

History. — The  plant  is  common  to  the  northern  and  western  parts  of
the  United  States,  growing  in  wet  grounds,  on  river  banks,  and  borders
of  woods,  and  maturing  in  June  and  July.  They,  together  with  other
Cryptogamia  abound  in  the  fossil  remains  of  coal  measures,  indicating
that  they  were  once  of  gigantic  dimensions,  and  formed  a  large  part  of
the  original  flora  of  our  globe.  The  E.  Lccvigatum  and  E.  Bobustum,
of  the  southern  and  western  borders  of  our  country,  may  be  substituted
for  the  above.  Silex  enters  largely  into  the  composition  of  these  plants,
on  which  account  they  have  been  used  to  scour,  rough  polish,  etc.  The
whole  plant  is  medicinal,  and  imparts  its  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic  and  astringent.  An  infusion  drank
freely  has  been  found  beneficial  in  drops)^,  suppression  of  urine,  hema-
turia, gravel,  and  nephritic  affections ;  and  has  also  been  used  with
advantage  in  gonorrhea  and  gleet.  The  ashes  of  the  plant  are  ve^y
valuable  in  dyspepsia  connected  with  obstinate  acidity  of  stomach,  and
may  be  given  alone,  or  combined  with  powdered  resin,  or  hydrastin,  etc.
Dose  of  the  pulverized  ashes  from  three  to  ten  grains,  to  be  repeated
three  or  four  times  daily.

ERECHTHITES  HIERACIFOLIUS.
Fireweed.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceae. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE ROOT AND HERB.

Description. — This  plant  is  the  Senecio  Hieracifolius  of  Linnaeus  ;  it
has  an  annual,  herbaceous,  grooved,  thick,  fleshy,  branching,  virgate,
panicled,  and  roughish  stem,  from  one  to  five  or  even  eight  feet  high.
The  leaves  are  simple,  alternate,  large,  lanceolate  or  oblong,  acute,
unequally  and  deeply  toothed  with  acute  indentures,  sessile,  and  light-
green ;  the  upper  ones  often  with  an  auricled  clasping  base.  The/lowers
are  whitish,  terminal,  crowded,  and  destitute  of  rays.  Involucre  smooth,
large,  tumid  and  bristly  at  the  base. Achenia  oblong,  hairy.

History. — This  is  an  indigenous,  rank  weed,  growing  in  fields  through-
out the  United  States,  in  moist  woods,  and  in  recent  clearings,  especially
and  abundantly  in  such  as  have  been  burned  over.  It  flowers  from  July
to  October,  and  somewhat  resembles  in  appearance  the  Sowthistle,  Son-
chus  Oleraceus;  the  flowers  somewhat  resemble  those  of  Lettuce.  The
whole  plant  is  officinal,  and  yields  its  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  It  has
a  peculiar,  aromatic  and  somewhat  fetid  odor,  very  unpleasant  to  many


450  Materia Mkdica.

persons,  and  a  peculiar,  slightly  pungent,  bitterish,  rather  disagreeable
taste,  with  some  astringency.  These  properties  appear  to  depend  upon
a  volatile  oil,  which  may  be  obtained  from  the  plant  by  distillation  with
water,  and  which  possesses  in  an  eminent  degree  the  taste  and  odor  of
the  plant,  and  which  is  very  persistent;  it  is  of  a  light-yellowish  color.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fireweed  is  reputed  to  be  emetic,  cathartic,
tonic,  astringent  and  alterative,  of  which  the  most  valuable  are  the  latter
three.  Reputed  an  unrivaled  medicine  in  diseases  of  the  mucous  tissues
of  the  lungs,  stomach,  and  bowels.  A  spirituous  extract  of  the  plant  has
been  highly  recommended  by  Dr.  A.  R.  Wyeth,  of  Pennsylvania,  in  the
treatment  of  cholera  and  dysentery,  in  the  latter  disease  promptly
arresting  the  muco-sanguineous  discharges,  relieving  pain,  and  effecting
a  speedy  cure.  In  the  summer  complaint  of  children,  he  has  found  it
to  prove  almost  invariably  successful,  even  in  cases  where  other  means
had  failed.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Erechthites  ;  Oleum  Erechthites.


ERIGERON  CANADENSE.

Canada  Fleabane.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceas,  or  Composite  Asteroidea3.  (Be  Candolle.)  Sex.  Syst. —
Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE WHOLE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant  is  known  by  the  various  names  of  Colfs-tail,
Pride-weed,  Scabious,  Horse-weed ,  Butter-weed,  etc.  It  is  an  indigenous
annual  plant,  with  a  high,  branching,  furrowed,  and  bristly-hairy  stem,
from  six  inches  to  nine  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  linear-lanceolate,
ciliate  ;  lower  ones  subserrate.  The  /lowers  are  very  small,  numerous,
white,  irregularly  racemose  upon  the  branches,  and  consiiuiting  a  large,
terminal,  oblong  panicle.  Involucre  cylindric ;  rays  minute,  numerous,
crowded,  short ;  pappus  simple.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  the  northern  and  middle  poraons  of
the  United  States,  growing  in  fields  and  meadows,  by  road-sides,  and  in
waste  places,  and  flowering  in  July  and  August.  It  differs  from  the  other
species  of  Erigeron,  in  having  an  oblong  calyx,  very  minute  rays  and  more
numerous  than  the  disk-florets,  and  the  pappus  simple.  Hence,  Nuttall  has
placed  it  in  a  subgenus,  named  Ccenotus.  A  variety  of  the  E.  Canadense  is
the  E.  Pusilum,  growing  from  four  to  six  inches  high,  with  an  erect,
smooth  stem,  less  branched  than  the  above,  all  its  leaves  arc  entire,  and
scabrous  on  the  margin ;  the  panicle  is  simple,  and  the  peduncles  fili-
form, nearly  naked,  divaricate,  each  bearing  two  or  three  flowers.

The  whole  plant  is  officinal  and  should  be  collected  while  in  flower.
It  has  a  feeble  but  agreeable  odor,  and  a  bitterish,  acrid  and  astringent
taste,  and  yields  its  properties  to  water  or  alcohol. Boiling  diminishes


Eeigeron  Heterophyxlum.  451

its  acrimony,  in  consequence  of  the  escape  of  the  volatile  oil.  Analysis
has  found  in  it,  bitter  extractive,  tannin,  gallic  acid,  and  an  astringent
volatile  oil,  which  may  be  procured  by  distillation  with  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  astringent,  and  diuretic.  The  infusion
has  been  found  efficient  in  diarrhea,  gravel,  diabetes,  dropsical  affections,
dysury  of  children,  painful  micturition,  and  in  many  nephritic  affections.
It  may  be  given  in  the  form  of  powder  in  doses  of  half  a  drachm,  or  a
drachm;  or  the  infusion,  which  is  the  best  form  of  administration,  may
be  given  in  doses  of  from  two  to  four  iluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day ;
the  aqueous  extract  is  worthless,  but  the  fluid  extract  may  be  given  in
teaspoonful  doses.

The  volatile  oil  of  E.  Canadense  acts  as  an  astringent,  and  may  be
used  as  a  local  application  to  hemorrhoids,  bleedings  from  small  wounds,
etc.,  likewise  in  rheumatism,  boils,  tumors,  and  sore-throat,  in  which  it
should  be  combined  with  goose  oil  or  some  similar  substance,  being  too
acrid  to  use  alone.  Internally,  it  will  be  found  useful  in  diarrhea,  dysen-
tery, hemoptysis,  hematemesis,  and  hematuria ;  from  four  to  six  drops
of  it  on  sugar,  or  dissolved  in  alcohol,  and  given  in  a  little  water,  will
be  found  a  powerful  remedy  in  uterine  hemorrhage  and  menorrhagjp,
acting  promptly  and  efficaciously  ;  it  may  be  repeated  every  five  or  ten
minutes  if  required.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Erigeroni ;  Oleum  Erigeroni.


ERIGERON HETEROPHYLLUM.

Various-leaved  Fleabane.

ERIGERON PHILADELPHICTJM.

Philadelphia  Fleabane.

Nat.  Ord.  —  Asteraceae,  or  Compositae-Asteroidese.  (De  Candolle.)  Sex.
Syst.  —  Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE WHOLE PLANT.

Description. — The  Erigeron  Heterophyllum  is  the  E.  Annuum  of  Per-
soon,  and  many  other  celebrated  Botanists,  and  which  name  will  proba-
bly be  hereafter  generally  adopted.  It  is  a  biennial,  herbaceous  plant,
with  a  branching  root,  from  which  proceed  several  erect,  roundish,
thick,  striate  stems,  hispid  with  scattered  hairs,  branching,  and  growing
from  three  to  five  feet  in  bight.  The  lowest  or  radical  leaves  are  ovate,
acute,  deeply-toothed,  contracted  at  base,  and  on  long,  winged  petioles;
the  upper  or  stem  leaves  are  lanceolate,  acute,  deeply  serrate  in  the
middle,  and  sessile ;  the  floral  or  branch  leaves  are  lanceolate,  entire,
sessile;  all  are  ciliate  at  the  base,  except  those  from  the  root.  The
flowers  are  in  large  terminal,  rarely  lateral  corymbs,  numerous;  disk-
florets  yellow,  ray-florets  capillary,  white  or  pale-blue. Pappus  plainly


452  Materia  Medica.


double,  the  outer  a  crown  of  minute  chaffy-bristle-form  scales ;  the
inner  of  scanty  capillary  bristles  which  are  deciduous,  or  entirely  want-
ing in  the  ray.  This  plant  is  common  to  the  United  States  and  Europe,
being  a  very  common  weed  in  fields  and  waste  grounds  from  Canada  to
Pennsylvania  and  Kentucky,  and  flowering  from  June  to  August.

The  Erigeron  Philadelphicum  is  the  E.  Strigosum  of  Willdenow,  and
the  E.  Purpureum  of  Aiton.  It  is  a  perennial,  herbaceous  plant,  with
a  branching,  yellowish  root,  and  from  one  to  five  erect,  slender,  branched
stems,  which  rise  from  one  to  five  feet  in  hight.  The  loiver  leaves  are
ovate,  lanceolate,  nearly  obtuse,  ciliate  on  the  margin,  entire  or  marked
with  a  few  serratures,  and  on  long  petioles ;  the  upper  leaves  are  narrow,
oblong,  somewhat  wedge-shaped,  obtuse,  entire,  sessile,  and  slightly
embrace  the  stem ;  the  floral  leaves  are  small  and  lanceolate.  The
flowers  are  very  numerous,  radiate,  and  disposed  in  a  panicled  corymb,
with  long  peduncles  bearing  from  one  to  three  flowers.  The  rays  are
conspicuous,  very  narrow,  rose-purple  or  flesh-color,  twice  as  long  as
the  hemispherical  involucre.  Pappus  simple.  The  whole  herb  is
pubescent.  This  plant  is  found  growing  in  common  with  the  preceding
variety,  flowering  at  the  same  period.

History. — These  plants  are  identical  in  their  medical  properties,  and
are  employed  indiscriminately ;  they  differ  from  the  E.  Canadense  in
being  less  astringent  and  more  diuretic.  The  whole  herb  is  employed,
and  should  be  collected  while  in  flower.  They  have  a  peculiar,  aroma-
tic odor,  and  a  slightly  bitter  and  astringent  taste,  and  impart  their  pro-
perties to  boiling  water  in  infusion.  They  have  not  been  analyzed,  but
yield,  on  distillation,  a  pale-yellow,  acrid,  styptic  volatile  oil,  resembling
that  of  the  E.  Canadense.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic,  astringent,  and  tonic.  The  infusion
is  very  efficacious  in  affections  of  the  bladder  and  kidneys,  dysury,
especially  of  children,  painful  micturition,  various  forms  of  dropsy,
gravel,  and  in  hydrothorax  complicated  with  gout.  It  has  also  been
recommended  as  a  diaphoretic  in  rheumatism,  fevers,  colds,  etc.,  and  as
an  emmenagogue  in  suppressed  menstruation ;  and  has  been  used  with
advantage  in  gout,  some  forms  of  cutaneous  eruptions,  and  diabetes.
Dose  of  the  infusion,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times
a  day.

ERYNGIUM AQUATICUM.

Water  Eryngo.

Nat.  Ord. — Apiaceas,  or  Urnbelliferse. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  called  Button  Snakeroot,  Rattlesnake's
Master,  etc.,  is  an  indigenous  herbaceous  plant,  with  a  perennial  tuberous
root,  and  a  stem  nearly  simple,  growing  from  two  to  six  feet,  according


Erythronium  Americanum.  4:53

to  the  soil,  generally  branching  by  forks,  but  trichotomous  above.  The
leaves  are  from  one  to  two  feet  long,  and  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch
and  a  half  wide,  linear-lanceolate  on  the  upper  part  of  the  stem,  sword-
shaped  below,  parallel-veined,  ciliate  with  remote  soft  spines  upon  their
margins.  Brads  tipped  with  spines,  those  of  the  involucels  entire,
shorter  than  the  heads.  The  flowers  are  white  or  pale,  inconspicuous,
and  disposed  in  ovate-globose  heads,  which  are  pedunculate,  and  from
half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  diameter.  Calyx  five-parted,  permanent;
styles  slender ;  petals  connivent,  oblong,  emarginate,  with  a  long  infiexed
point. Fruit  scaly,  top-shaped,  bipartile.

History.  —  This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,  growing  in
swamps  and  low  wet  lands,  from  Virginia  to  Texas,  and  especially  on  the
prairie  lands.  It  flowers  in  August.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part.  It
has  a  dark-brown,  very  knotty  rhizoma,  wrinkled  horizontally,  with
many  fibers  of  the  same  color,  growing  downward,  furrowed  or  wrinkled
longitudinally,  and  from  a  line  to  a  line  and  a  half  in  thickness.  Inter-
nally, it  is  yellowish-white,  of  a  peculiar  smell,  somewhat  resembling
that  of  Iris  Versicolor,  and  a  faintly  sweetish,  mucilaginous,  aromatic  taste,
succeeded  by  bitterness,  some  degree  of  pungency  affecting  the  fauces,
and  a  very  slight  astringency.  It  is  easily  pulverizable.  Water  or  spirit
extracts  its  properties. It  has  not  been  analyzed  but  is  worthy  attention.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic,  stimulant,  diaphoretic,  expectorant,
and,  in  large  doses,  emetic.  Very  useful  in  dropsy,  nephritic  and  calcu-
lous affections,  also,  in  scrofula  and  syphilis ;  as  a  diaphoretic  and
expectorant  in  pulmonary  diseases.  Recommended  as  a  substitute  for
Senega.  The  pulverized  root  in  doses  of  two  or  three  grains  has  proved
very  effectual  in  hemorrhoids  and  prolapsus  ani.  Two  ounces  of  the
pulverized  root,  added  to  one  pint  of  good  Holland  gin,  has  effected
cures  in  obstinate  cases  of  gonorrhea  and  gleet ;  to  be  administered  in
doses  of  one  or  two  fluidrachms  three  or  four  times  a  day.  By  some
practitioners  this  root  is  employed  as  a  specific  in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  and
leucorrhea;  used  internally  in  syrup,  decoction,  or  tincture,  and  the
decoction  applied  locally  by  injection.  Used  externally  and  internally,
it  is  said  to  cure  the  bites  of  snakes  and  insects.  Dose  of  the  powder,
from  twenty  to  forty  grains ;  of  the  decoction,  which  is  principally  used,
from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  several  times  daily.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Eryngii.


ERYTHRONIUM  AMERICANUM.

Adder's  Tongue.

Nat. Ord. — Liliaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  name  of  Dog's  Tooth  Vio-
let,  Yellow  Snowdrop,  Rattlesnake Violet,  Yellow  Erythronium,  ete.,  is


454  Materia  Medica.

an  indigenous,  perennial,  bulbous  plant.  The  cormus  is  situated  deep
in  the  ground,  is  brown  externally,  white  and  solid  internally,  and  from
which  arises  a  single,  naked,  slender  scape,  from  three  to  four  inches  in
hight,  and  two  smooth,  lanceolate,  veiuless  leaves,  nearly  equal,  about
five  inches  long,  one  twice  as  wideas  the  other,  of  a  dark  brownish-
green  color,  clouded  with  irregular  brown  or  purplish  spots,  sheathing
the  scape  with  their  base,  and  involute  at  the  point,  terminating  in  an
obtuse,  callous  point.  The  Jlower  is  solitary,  drooping,  yellow,  expanded
and  revolute  in  the  sunshine,  but  nearly  closed  at  night  and  on  cloudy
days.  Sepals  and  petals  oblong-lanceolate,  obtuse  at  the  point;  sepals
partly  crimson  on  the  outside  ;  petals  with  an  obscure  tooth  on  each  side
near  the  base.  Stamens  six ;  filaments  flat ;  anthers  oblong-linear.  Ovary
obovate  ;  style  club-shaped,  longer  than  the  stamens,  three-lobed  at  top,
and  terminating  in  three,  undivided  stigmas.  Capsule  oblong-obovate,
stipitate,  three-valved  ;  seeds  rather  numerous,  ovoid,  with  a  loose  mem-
branaceous tip.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  most  parts  of  the  United  States,
growing  in  shaded  and  somewhat  moist  situations,  and  flowering  in  April
and  May.  The  bulb  and  leaves  are  the  parts  used,  and  impart  their  vir-
tues to  water. The  leaves  are  said  to  be  more  active  than  the  root.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Emetic,  emollient,  and  antiscrofulous  when
fresh  ;  nutritive  when  dried.  The  fresh  roots  and  leaves,  simmered  in
milk,  or  the  fresh  leaves,  bruised  and  applied  as  a  poultice  to  scrofulous
ulcers  or  tumors,  together  with  a  free  internal  use  of  an  infusion  of  them,
is  highly  recommended  as  a  remedy  for  scrofula.  The  expressed  juice
of  the  plant,  infused  in  cider,  is  reputed  useful  in  dropsy,  and  for  reliev-
ing hiccough,  vomiting  and  hematemesis.  Twenty-five  grains  of  the
fresh  root,  or  forty  of  the  recently-dried  root,  will  operate  as  an  emetic,
though  this  result  is  sometimes  uncertain.


EUONYMUS  ATROPURPUREUS.
Wahoo.'
Nat. Ord. — Celastracese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  small  shrub  or  bush  ;  known  by  several  other
names,  as  Indian  Arrow-wood,  Burning-bush,  Spindle  Tree,  etc.,  with
smooth  branches,  and  rising  from  five  to  ten  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves
are  from  two  to  five  inches  in  length,  and  about  half  as  wide,  opposite,
on  petioles  from  one-third  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  length,  elliptic-lance-
olate, mostly  acute  at  base,  finely  serrate,  pubescent  beneath ;  peduncles
opposite,  slender,  compressed,  from  an  inch  to  two  and  a  half  inches  in
length,  and  each  with  a  cyme  of  from  three  to  six  flowers.  Flowers
dark-purple,  usually  pentamerous.  Corolla  about  two  and  a  half  lines
in  diameter,  fiat,  and  inserted  on  the  outer  margin  of  a  glandular  disk ;


Eupatorium  Aromaticum.  455

calyx  flat,  of  four,  five,  or  six  united  sepals  ;  stamens  five,  with  short  fila-
ments. Capsule  or  pod  smooth,  crimson,  five-angled,  five-celled,  five-
valved ;  seeds  one  or  two  in  each  cell,  inclosed  in  a  red  aril.

Euonymus  Americanus,  is  of  smaller  size  than  the  preceding  variety,
with  smooth,  four- angled  branches  ;  the  leaves  are  oval  and  elliptic-lan-
ceolate, sessile,  subentire  at  the  margin,  acute  or  obtuse  at  apex,  smooth,
coriaceous,  from  one-third  of  an  inch  to  two  inches  in  length,  and  about
one-third  as  wide.  The  peduncles  are  round,  longer  than  the  leaves,  and
with  two,  three,  or  four  flowers.  Flowers  somewhat  larger  than  those
of  the  preceding  variety,  yellow  and  pink ;  capsule  dark-red,  rough-
warty,  depressed,  not  so  copious  as  in  the  former  plant.

History. — There  are  two  varieties  of  this  plant  used  in  medicine, — the
Spindle  Tree,  E.  Atropurpureus,  and  the  Burning  Bush,  or  E.  Ameri-
canus, to  both  of  which  the  term  Wahoo  is  indiscriminately  applied.
They  grow  in  many  sections  of  the  United  States,  in  woods  and  thickets,
and  in  river  bottoms,  and  flower  in  June.  The  bark  of  the  root  is  the
officinal  part.  It  has  a  bitter,  and  somewhat  unpleasant  taste.  Water
or  alcohol  extracts  its  virtues.  The  decoction,  concentrated  by  evapora-
tion, yields  acicular  crystals,  the  exact  nature  of  which  are  not  yet  ascer-
tained ;  probably  an  alkaloid.  They  are  soluble  in  boiling  water,  but  are
deposited  on  cooling ;  soluble  in  oils,  partly  soluble  in  nitric  acid,  but
insoluble  in  cold  water,  sulphuric  acid  and  alcohol.  If  these  should
prove  to  be  the  alkaloid  principle  of  the  plant,  they  will  be  termed
Euonymia.  The  Franklin  Pharmaceutical  Institute  of  N.  York  advertise
a  preparatiou  which  they  call  Euonymine,  and  state  to  be  the  active  prin-
ciple of  E.  Americanus.  It  is  held  to  be  an  alterative,  tonic,  laxative,
and  expectorant.  Unfortunately,  we  have  not  been  made  acquainted
with  the  article,  nor  its  method  of  preparation.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  plants  have  been  in  use  among  Eclectics
for  a  long  time.  The  bark  is  tonic,  laxative,  alterative,  diuretic,  and
expectorant ;  in  infusion,  syrup,  or  extract,  it  has  been  successfully  used
in  intermittents,  dyspepsia,  torpid  liver,  constipation,  dropsy,  and  pulmo-
nary affections.  Dose  of  the  saturated  tincture,  from  one  to  four
fluidrachms ;  of  the  syrup,  from  one  to  two  fluidounees  ;  of  the  hydro-
alcoholic  extract,  from  five  to  fifteen  grains  ;  of  the  powder,  from  twenty
to  thirty  grains. The  seeds  are  purgative  and  emetic.


EUPATORIUM  AROMATICUM.

White Snakeroot.
Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceae. Sex.  Syst.— Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE ROOT.

Description.-—  This  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  a  rough,  slightly  pubes-
cent stem,  about  two  feet  in  hight,  and  corymbose  at  the  summit. The


456  Materia  Medica.

leaves  are  from  two  to  four  inches  long,  and  about  one  half  as  wide,  on
petioles  not  quite  an  inch  long,  opposite,  subcordate,  lance-ovate,  acute,
three-veined,  obtusely  serrate,  smoothish,  or  very  slightly  pubescent.
Involucre  simple,  pubescent ;  scales  of  the  involucre  nearly  equal  and  in
one  row.  Flowers  white,  aromatic,  in  small  corymbs ;  heads  large,  ten
to  fifteen-flowered.

History.  — This  is  an  indigenous  plant,  growing  from  Massachusetts  to
Louisiana,  but  especially  throughout  the  middle  states,  and  flowering  in
August  and  September.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  and  should  be
collected  in  September  and  October.  It  has  a  pleasant,  aromaLic  odor,
and  a  bitterish  taste. Its  virtues  are  extracted  by  boiling  water.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diaphoretic,  antispasmodic,  expectorant  and
aromatic.  Used  in  the  form  of  infusion  or  decoction  in  fevers  of  a
typhoid  character,  connected  with  wakefulness ;  also,  in  pleurisy  and
peripneumony,  as  a  diaphoretic  and  expectorant.  In  hysteria,  hypochon-
dria, nervous  irritability  and  flatulence,  it  is  very  beneficial.  Dose  of
the  infusion  or  decoction  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  four  fluidounces.  It
is  sometimes  connected  with  sanguinaria  and  asclepias,  in  pulmonary
diseases. Said  to  be  valuable  in  gravel.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Eupatorise  Aromaticae.


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

Boneset.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  JEqualis.

THE TOPS AND LEAVES.

Description. — Boneset,  or  Thoroughwort,  as  it  is  also  called,  is  an  indi-
genous plant,  with  a  perennial,  horizontal  and  crooked  root,  sending  up
many  erect,  herbaceous  stems,  which  are  round,  hairy,  simple  below,
trichotomously  branched  above,  of  a  grayish-green  color,  and  from  two
to  five  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  connate  or  perfoliate,
resembling  a  single  leaf,  centrally  perforated  by  the  stem,  decussating  at
right  angles,  gradually  tapering  to  a  poiut,  serrated,  rough  above,  tomen-
tose  beneath,  of  the  same  color  as  the  stalks,  and  both  combined  are
from  eight  to  fourteen  inches  in  length  ;  the  upper  leaves,  and  those  of
the  branches  are  not  joined  at  the  base,  being  merely  sessile.  The
flowers  are  white,  numerous,  in  dense,  depressed,  terminal  corymbs,
formed  of  smaller,  fastigiate  ones.  The  peduncles  are  hairy.  Involucre
cylindrical,  imbricated,  twelve  to  fifteen-flowered  ;  the  bracts  lanceolate,
acute,  entire,  hairy.  Florets  tubular,  five-toothed,  with  a  rough,  down-
like pappus.  Anthers  five,  deep-blue  or  black,  united  into  a  tube.
Style  filiform,  divided  into  two  filiform,  acuminate  branches,  which  pro-
ject beyond  the  corolla.  Fruit  or  seeds  oblong,  black,  prismatic,  acute
at  base,  on  a  naked  receptacle.


EUPATORIUM PURPUREUM.  457

Hhtory. — This  is  a  well-known  plant,  growing  in  low  grounds,  and
on  the  margins  of  streams,  in  almost  every  part  of  the  United  States.
It  flowers  in  August  and  September.  The  tops  and  leaves  are  officinal.
It  has  a  faint  odor,  and  a  strongly  bitter,  somewhat  peculiar  taste.  Its
virtues  are  readily  taken  up  by  water  or  alcohol.  No  accurate  analysis
of  the  plant  has  been  made,  though  its  medical  virtues  probably  reside
in  a  bitter  extractive  matter,  which  is  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,  and
forms  copious  precipitates  with  the  metallic  salts.  According  to  Rafin-
esque  it  contains  a  brown,  bitter,  resinous  principle,  termed  by  him,
Euputorin.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  valuable  medicinal  agent.  The
cold  infusion,  or  extract,  is  tonic  and  aperient;  the  warm  infusion,
diaphoretic  and  emetic.  As  a  tonic,  it  is  useful  in  remittent,  intermit-
tent and  typhoid  fevers,  dyspepsia  and  general  debility  ;  and  combined
with  bitartrate  of  potassa  and  camphor,  the  powdered  leaves  have  been
serviceable  in  some  forms  of  cutaneous  disease.  In  intermittent  fever  a
strong  infusion,  as  hot  as  can  be  comfortably  swallowed,  is  administered,
for  the  purpose  of  vomiting  freely.  This  is  also  attended  with  profuse
diaphoresis,  and  sooner  or  later  by  an  evacuation  of  the  bowels.  During
the  intermission,  the  cold  infusion,  or  extract  is  given  every  hour  as  a
tonic  and  antiperiodic.  In  epidemic  influenza  the  warm  infusion  is  valu-
able as  an  emetic  and  diaphoretic,  likewise  in  febrile  diseases,  catarrh,
colds,  and  wherever  such  effects  are  indicated.  The  warm  infusion  is
also  administered  to  promote  the  operation  of  other  emetics.  Externally,
used  alone  or  in  combination  with  hops  or  tansy,  etc.,  a  fomentation  of  the
leaves  applied  to  the  bowels  have  been  useful  in  inflammation,  spasms,
and  painful  affections.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  ten  to  twenty  grains;
of  the  extract,  from  two  to  four  grains ;  of  the  infusion,  from  two  to  four
fluidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Eupatorii ;  Infusum  Eupatorii ;  Pilulae  Aloes
Composite.

EUPATORIUM PURPUREUM.

Queen  of  the  Meadow.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteracea?. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  likewise  known  by  the  names  of  Gravel  root,
Joe-pye,  Trumpet-weed,  is  herbaceous,  with  a  perennial,  horizontal,  woody
caudex,  with  many  long,  dark  brown  fibers,  which  send  up  one  or  more
solid,  glabrous,  green,  sometimes  purplish  stems,  five  or  six  feet  in  hight,
with  a  purple  band  at  the  joints,  about  an  inch  broad.  The  leaves  are
from  three  to  six  in  a  whorl  about  six  inches  apart,  oblong-ovate,  or
lanceolate,  pointed,  rugOsely  or  feather- veined,  coarsely  serrate,  slightly


458  Materia Medica.

scabrous,  with  a  soft  pubescence  beneath  along  the  midvein  and  veinlets,
thin,  soft,  on  petioles  an  inch  long,  and  from  eight  to  twelve  inches  long
by  three  or  four  inches  wide.  The  flowers  are  all  tubular,  purple,  vary-
ing to  whitish,  and  consist  of  numerous  florets  contained  in  an  eight-
leaved  calyx.  Heads  in  lax,  very  dense  and  compound  corymbs,
cylindrical,  and  from  five  to  ten-flowered.

History. — Queen  of  the  Meadow  grows  in  swamps  and  low  grounds
from  Canada  to  Virginia,  and  flowers  in  August  and  September.  The
root  is  the  officinal  part ;  as  found  in  the  shops  it  consists  of  a  blackish
woody  caudex,  from  which  proceed  numerous  long  fibers,  from  one  to
three  lines  in  diameter  ;  externally  they  are  covered  with  a  dark-brown,
longitudinally-furrowed  cortex,  beneath  which  the  internal  portion  is
white,  or  whitish-yellow,  according  to  its  age,  the  last  color  beino-  the
oldest.  It  has  a  smell  somewhat  resembling  old  hay,  and  a  slightly
bitter,  aromatic,  and  faintly  astringent,  but  not  unpleasant  taste,  and
yields  its  properties  to  water  by  decoction,  or  spirits.  It  has  not  been
analyzed;  a  principle  has  been  obtained  from  it,  by  Mr.  J.  B.  Robinson
of  Cincinnati,  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  Eupatorine.  It  is
obtained  by  making  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  root,  and  adding  to  it  an
equal  bulk  of  water  slightly  acidulated  with  muriatic  acid;  on  distilling
off  the  alcohol  the  resin  is  precipitated.  It  is  a  dark-brown  resin,
forming  a  yellowish-brown  powder,  with  a  peculiar,  slightly-aromatic,
not  unpleasant  odor,  and  a  peculiar,  slightly-bitterish  taste.  It  is  easily
pulverized,  but  in  a  short  time  the  powder  forms  a  solid  mass,  of  a  dark-
brown-color,  or  if  much  exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  black,  resembling
asphaltum.  Water  alone,  or  acidulated  with  muriatic  or  sulphuric  acids,
does  not  dissolve  it;  but  ammonia  or  liquor  potassa  added  to  water,
dissolves  it,  the  last  forming  a  solution  of  a  deep-red  color,  which  on
the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  muriatic  acid,  gives  a  clear,  transparent
liquor,  with  a  light-yellow  spongy  substance  floating  on  the  surface,  and
which  is,  probably,  the  resin  purified.  It  is  partly  soluble  in  alcohol,
but  becomes  completely  so  on  the  addition  of  muriatic  acid,  to  which,  if
water  be  added,  a  grayish  milky  opake  liquid  is  formed,  which  on
standing,  or  by  evaporation  of  the  alcohol,  gives  a  light-brown  precipi-
tate. Ether  dissolves  it,  and  if  ammonia  be  added,  a  separation  ensues,
the  ether  floating  above  with  a  yellow  tinge,  while  the  ammonia  sinks,
forming  a  clear  dark-red  solution  ;  if  liquor  potassa  be  added  to  the
ethereal  solution,  it  causes  a  light  yellowish-red  liquor  above,  and  a  dark
one  below.  Chloroform  partially  dissolves  it,  and  wholly  so  on  the
addition  of  ammonia,  which  separates  the  solution  into  a  yellow  fluid
below,  and  a  dark-brown  liquid  above.  It  is  insoluble  in  oil  of  turpen-
tine. The  therapeutical  properties  of  this  resin  are  not  yet  understood ;
it  remains  to  be  determined  whether  or  no  it  possesses  the  virtues  of
the  root.


Eupatorium  Teucrifolium.  459

Properties  and  Uses. — A  valuable  diuretic,  stimulant,  somewhat  astrin-
gent, and  tonic.  Used  with  excellent  effect  in  dropsical  affections,
strangury,  gravel,  and  all  chronic  urinary  disorders,  hematuria,  gout
and  rheumatism.  Dose  of  the  decoction  of  queen  of  meadow,  from  two
to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Since  writing  the  above,  Mr.  William  S.  Merrell  has  prepared  an  oleo-
resin  from  this  plant,  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  Eupurpurin;
it  may  be  obtained  by  adding  the  alcoholic  tincture  of  the  root,  to  twice
its  volume  of  water,  and  distilling  off  the  alcohol,  similar  to  the  process
for  obtaining  podophyllin,  iridin,  etc.  It  is  of  a  thick,  pilular  consis-
tence and  a  dark  greenish-brown  color,  having  a  faint  peculiar  smell,
and  a  slightly  nauseous  taste.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,  and  more
speedily  when  these  are  hot ;  slowly  soluble  in  oil  of  turpentine,  from
which  ether  precipitates  the  resin,  holding  the  oily  portion  in  solution,
and  on  the  addition  of  alcohol  the  resin  is  redissolved.  It  is  almost
completely  soluble  in  dilute  alkalis,  but  completely  so,  on  the  addition
of  a  small  quantity  of  ether.  Eupurpurin,  in  doses  of  three  grains,
repeated  every  three  or  four  hours,  is  a  most  powerful  diuretic,  occa-
sioning in  some  instances  a  most  enormous  flow  of  urine.  It  may  be
given  in  pill  form,  either  alone,  or  combined  with  an  equal  quantity  of
castile  soap.  An  excellent  pill  for  many  renal  affections  may  be  made,
composed  of  eupurpurin  three  grains,  geraniin  two  grains,  and  extract
of  nux  vomica  one-tenth  of  a  grain.  Divide  into  two  pills.  One  of
these  pills  may  be  given  every  four  hours  daily.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Eupatorii  Purpurei;  Infusum  Epigese  Compo-
situm.


EUPATORIUM  TEUCRIFOLIUM. (E. Verbence/olium.)

Wild  Horehound.

Nat. Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous,  perennial  plant,  with  a  herba-
ceous, paniculate,  pubescent  stem,  growing  from  two  to  three  feet  high,
with  fastigiate,  corymbose  branches  above.  The  leaves  are  opposite,
sessile,  distinct,  ovate-oblong,  and  ovate-lanceolate,  rough,  veiny,  the
lower  ones  coarsely  serrate  toward  the  base,  the  upper  ones  alternate,
subserrate,  and  often  entire.  Branches  of  the  corymb,  few,  unequal.
The  flowers  are  small,  white,  composed  of  five  florets  within  each  calyx;
scales  of  the  involucre  oblong-lanceolate,  rather  obtuse,  at  length  shorter
than  the  flowers.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  low  wet  places,  from  New  England  to
Georgia,  and  is  very  abundant  in  the  Southern  States,  flowering  from  Au-
gust to  November. The  whole  herb  is  employed ;  its  sensible  properties


460  Materia  Medica.

are  similar  to  boneset,  but  less  bitter  and  disagreeable.  Its  active
properties  are  taken  up  by  spirits,  or  water  by  infusion.  It  has  not  been
analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic,  diaphoretic,  diuretic,  and  laxative.
Recommended  by  Dr.  Jones,  of  Georgia,  in  intermittent  and  remittent
fevers.  Usually  administered  in  infusion ;  one  ounce  of  the  dried  leaves
infused  in  a  quart  of  water,  of  which,  half  a  teacupful  may  be  given
every  hour  or  two,  as  warm  as  can  be  comfortably  drank;  it  will  prove
diaphoretic,  or  diuretic,  according  to  the  temperature  in  which  the  patient
is  kept,  and  likewise  laxative. The  cold  infusion,  or  tincture,  is  tonic.

The  Ewpatorium  Hyssopi folium,  and  Eupatorium  Leucolepsis,  both
called  "Justice's  Weed,"  have  been  used  with  success  for  curing  the
bites  of  snakes  and  other  poisonous  animals;  they  were  employed  for
this  purpose  by  John  Justice,  of  South  Carolina,  in  1800,  who  received
a  premium  for  disclosing  his  remedy.


EUPHORBIA  COROLLATA.

Large  Flowering  Spurge.

Nat.  Ord. — Euphorbiacese.  Sex.  Syst. — Dodecandria  Trigynia,  Linnceus;
Monoecia  Monadelphia,  Michaux.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description.  —  This  plant  has  many  common  names,  as  Blooming
Spurge,  Milk-weed,  Bowman's  Moot,  etc.  It  is  a  tall,  erect  plant,  with  a
large,  perennial,  branching,  yellowish  root,  from  which  arise  several
stems  from  two  to  five  feet  in  bight,  round,  and  in  most  instances,  sim-
ple. The  leaves  are  scattered,  sessile,  oblong,  obovate,  or  linear,  entire,
flat  or  revolute  at  the  margin,  smooth  in  some  plants,  very  hairy  in
others,  verticillate  and  opposite  in  the  umbel,  and  from  one  to  two  inches
in  length.  The  flowers  are  white,  and  disposed  upon  a  large,  terminal
umbel,  with  a  five-leaved  involucrum,  and  five  trifid  or  dichotomous
rays,  each  fork  being  attended  by  two  bracts  and  a  flower.  Umbel  five
rayed,  with  as  many  bracteal  leaves.  Involucre  large,  rotate,  white,  with
five  obtuse  petal-like  segments  ;  at  the  base  of  these  divisions  are  five-
interior,  very  small,  obtuse  segments.  The  stamens  are  twelve,  evolving
gradually,  with  double  flowers;  many  flowers  have  only  stamens.  The
pistil,  when  present,  is  stipitate,  nodding,  rounded,  with  three  bifid
styles.  The  fruit  is  a  smooth,  three-celled,  and  three-seeded  capsule;
seeds  smooth.

History.— This  is  an  indigenous  plant,  found  growing  in  Canada  and
the  United  States,  in  dry,  sandy,  and  barren  soil,  and  flowering  in  July
and  August.  When  broken,  it  yields  a  milky  juice,  which  powerfully
irritates  the  skin  when  applied  to  it  for  a  few  minutes,  creating  a  pustu-
lar eruption ;  especially  the  juice  of  the  root,  or  the  recent  root,  bruised


Euphorbia  Hyperictfolia.  461

and  applied.  The  root  is  from  one-third  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  or  two
in  diameter,  and  one  or  two  feet  long,  and  should  be  gathered  in  the
fall;  it  is  inodorous  and  almost  tasteless,  causing  a  sense  of  heat  shortly-
after  havino-  been  chewed.  The  bark  of  the  root  is  the  officinal  part,
which  is  quite  thick,  constituting  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  whole  root ;
its  virtues  are  imparted  to  water  or  alcohol,  and  remain  in  the  extract
formed  by  the  evaporation  of  either  solvent.  It  forms  a  light  brownish-
yellow  powder,  speckled  throughout  with  innumerable  fine  dark  spots,
somewhat  resembling  a  mixture  of  fine  pepper  and  salt,  with  the  excep-
tion of  color.  Dr.  Zollickoffer  found  it  to  contain  resin,  mucilage,  and
caoutchouc.  Kino  and  Catechu  are  incompatible  with  this  plant;  Avhen
united  with  either,  the  medicinal  powers  of  the  euphorbia  are  destroyed,
while  the  astringency  of  the  Kino  or  Catechu  becomes  entirely  altered.
Probably  all  vegetable  astringents  are  incompatible  with  the  agent  under
consideration.  Opium  interferes  with  its  emetic  operation,  and  should
not,  therefore,  be  given  in  combination  with  it,  when  emesis  is  desired.
Acetic  acid  also  interrupts  its  emetic  influence,  causing  it  to  pass  off  by
the  bowels.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emetic,  diaphoretic,  expectorant,  and  epispastic.
Fifteen  or  twenty  grains  of  the  powdered  bark  of  the  root  will  excite
emesis,  rarely  occasioning  pain  or  spasms,  and  giving  rise  to  very  little
previous  nausea  or  giddiness ;  when  it  does  not  prove  emetic,  it  passes
off  by  the  bowels.  Four  grains  of  the  powdered  root-bark,  given  every
three  hours,  will  act  as  a  diaphoretic  ;  or  the  compound  powder  of
ipecacuanha  and  opium  may  be  employed  for  the  same  purpose,  substi-
tuting the  E.  corollata  for  the  ipecacuanha.  In  doses  of  three  grains,
exhibited  occasionally  in  a  little  honey,  syrup  or  molasses,  it  operates  as
a  useful  expectorant,  and  may  be  administered  in  all  cases  where  such
action  is  desired.  When  given  in  large  doses,  it  is  apt  to  induce  inflam-
mation of  the  mucous  coat  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  with  hypeica-
tharsis.  Occasionally,  when  given  as  an  emetic  or  cathartic,  it  causes
distressing  nausea,  with  considerable  prostration.  From  four  to  ten  or
twelve  grains  generally  act  as  a  cathartic.  In  dropsical  diseases,  espe-
cially hydrothorax  and  ascites,  it  will  evacuate  the  water  when  all  other
agents  prove  useless,  for  which  purpose  it  may  be  given  in  doses  of
fifteen  or  thirty  grains,  and  repeated  twice  or  three  times  weekly.


EUPHORBIA  HYPERICIFOLIA.

Large  Spotted  Spurge.

Nat.  Ord. — Euphorbiaceae. — Sex. Syst. — Dodecandria Trigynia, Linnaeus  •
Moncecia  Monadelphia,  Michaux.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Black-purse-
ly,  Milk-pursely,  Eye-bright,  etc.,  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  smooth,


462  Materia Medica.

somewhat  procumbent,  branching  stem,  from  one  to  two  feet  high  ;  the
branches  are  dichotomous,  and  divaricate-spreading.  The  leaves  are  from
half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  length,  and  about  one-fourth  as  wide,  opposite,
oblong,  somewhat  falciform,  serrated,  oblique  or  heart-shaped  at  base,
often  curved,  three  to  five-ribbed  underneath,  on  very  short  petioles,
and  often  marked  with  purple  oblong  dots  and  blotches.  The  flowers
are  small,  white,  numerous,  and  disposed  in  terminal  and  axillary
corymbs.  Fruit  mostly  rather  hairy ;  seeds  four  angled,  obscurely
wrinkled  transversely.

History. — E.  Hypericifolia  is  an  indigenous  plant,  growing  in  rich  soil
in  waste  and  cultivated  places,  and  flowering  from  July  to  September.
The  leaves  are  the  parts  used,  and  yield  their  properties  to  water  or
alcohol;  they  have  a  sweetish  taste,  succeeded  by  a  sensation  of  harsh-
ness and  roughness.  They  contain  caoutchouc,  resin,  tannin,  gallic
acid,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Astringent,  tonic,  and  slightly  narcotic.  As  an
astringent  it  has  been  found  efficacious  in  dysentery,  after  having  pre-
viously removed  the  inflammatory  symptoms,  often  curing  the  disease  in
forty-eight  hours ;  also  in  diarrhea,  after  the  exhibition  of  some  purga-
tive ;  in  menorrhagia  from  debility;  also  in  leucorrhea,  and  other  affec-
tions where  this  class  of  agents  is  indicated.  Half  an  ounce  of  the
dried  leaves  may  be  infused  in  a  pint  of  boiling  water  for  half  an  hour.
In  dysentery  and  diarrhea,  a  tablespoonful  may  be  given  every  hour
until  the  discharges  become  less  frequent,  and  other  morbid  symptoms
begin  to  yield ;  then  to  be  used  less  frequently.  In  the  other  diseases  a
wineglassful  may  be  given  three  times  a  day.

The  Euphorbia  Maculala,  or  Spotted  Spurge,  is  possessed  of  similar
properties,  and  has  been  used  with  advantage  in  the  same  forms  of  disease,
as  cholera-morbus,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  etc.  It  is  an  annual  plant,  gen-
erally found  growing  with  the  E.  Hypericifolia,  and  possesses  sensible
properties  analogous  to  those  of  this  variety.  It  has  a  procumbent  stem,
spreading  flat  on  the  ground,  much  branched  and  hairy ;  the  leaves  are
opposite,  oval  or  oblong,  minutely  serrulate  toward  the  end,  unequal  at
the  base,  slightly  three-ribbed,  smooth  above,  hairy  and  pale  beneath,
oblique  at  the  base,  on  short  petioles,  often  spotted  with  dark  purple,
from  three  to  six  lines  long,  and  one-half  as  wide.  The  flowers  are
white,  solitary,  axillary,  much  shorter  than  the  leaves,  appearing  from
July  to  October;  female  flowers  naked.  Filaments  articulated  ;  recep-
tacle squamose  ;  capsule  three-grained,  smooth,  pubescent,  or  warty  ;  seeds
four-angled,  obscurely  wrinkled  transversely,  and  about  one-third  smaller
than  the  E.  Hypericifolia.


Euphorbia  Ipecacuanha.  463

EUPHORBIA  IPECACUANHA.

American  Ipecacuanha.

Nat.  Ord. — Euphorbiaceaa.  Sec.  Syst. — Dodecandria  Trigynia,  Linnaeus ;
Moncecia  Monadelphia,  Michaux.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Wild  Ipecac,
Ipecac  Spurge,  Spurge,  has  a  perennial,  yellowish,  irregular,  succulent,
and  very  long  root,  sometimes  extending  to  a  depth  of  six  or  seven  feet,
its  thickest  part  being,  when  full-grown,  from  three-quarters  of  an  inch
to  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter.  The  stems  are  numerous,  herbaceous,
erect  or  procumbent,  rather  thick  and  succulent,  smooth,  dichotomous,
jointed  at  the  forks,  white  under  the  ground,  red,  pale-green,  or  yellow
above,  sometimes  almost  buried  in  the  sand,  forming  thick,  low  bunches
upon  its  surface.  The  leaves  are  from  an  inch  and  a  half  to  two  inches
long,  and  from  three  to  six  lines  wide,  inserted  at  the  joints,  opposite,
sessile,  entire,  smooth,  usually  oval,  but  occasionally  round,  obovate,
lanceolate,  or  linear,  and  varying  in  color  from  green  to  crimson;  they
also  vary  considerably  in  size.  Stipules  small,  cordate.  The  fiowers
are  small,  solitary,  on  long,  axillary  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  spreading,
with  five  exterior  obtuse  segments,  with  five  small,  gibbous,  inner  seg-
ments or  nectaries.  Stamens  numerous,  in  five  parcels,  appearing  at
different  times  two  or  three  together,  with  double  anthers.  The  fertile
flowers  have  a  large,  roundish,  drooping,  pedicelled  germ,  crowned
with  six  revolute  stigmas.  The  capsule  is  three-celled  and  contains
three  seeds.

History . — This  is  an  indigenous  plant,  found  growing  in  dry,  sandy
soil,  on  Long  Island,  in  New  Jersey,  and  the  Middle  and  Southern  States,
and  flowering  from  May  to  August.  As  with  the  E.  Corollata,  it  yields
a  milky  juice,  which  causes  a  pustular  eruption  when  applied  to  the
skin.  The  root  is  the  part  used  in  medicine;  in  the  dried  state  it  is
light  and  brittle,  of  a  grayish  color  externally,  white  within,  inodorous,
and  of  a  sweetish  not  unpleasant  taste.  The  powdered  root  is  of  a
light-brown,  or  light  snuff-color,  speckled  similar  to  the  E.  Corollata.
Water  or  alcohol  takes  up  its  active  properties.  It  has  not  been  accu-
rately analyzed,  but  is  supposed  to  contain  caoutchouc,  resin,  gum,  and
perhaps  starch.  Its  incompatibles  are  probably  the  same  as  those  of  the
E.  Corollata.

Properties  and  Uses. — It  very  much  resembles  the  E.  Corollata  in  its
actions  upon  the  system,  but  is  rather  milder.  It  is  emetic,  diaphoretic,
expectorant,  and  epispastic ;  and  may  be  used  in  the  "same  doses  and  for
the  same  purposes  as  the  Corollata;  in  dropsical  affections  it  is  preferred
by  some  practitioners.  When  given  in  cathartic  doses,  say  from  three
to  ten  grains,  it  is  said  to  promote  the  menstrual  discharge. As  an


461  Materia  Medica.

emetic  and  cathartic  it  has  been  found  valuable  in  bilious  colic,  but  is
superseded  in  this  disease  by  the  Dioseorea  Villosa,  which  ac;s  promptly
and  efficiently  without  any  unpleasant  symptoms.  In  dyspepsia  one  or
two  grains,  repeated  three  times  daily,  will  be  found  useful.  The  dose
of  the  powdered  root  is  from  ten  to  fifteen  grains  as  a  hydragogue ;  one
to  three  grains  as  an  expectorant  and  diaphoretic.  It  is  occasionally
used  in  jaundice  and  obstinate  torpidity  of  the  liver.  It  is  principally
used  by  Eclectics  as  a  hydragogue  in  dropsical  affections.


EUPHORBIUM.

Euphorbium.

Nat.  Orel.  —  Euphorbiacea?.  Sex.  Syst. — Dodecandria  Trigynia,  Linnceus ;
Monoecia  Monadelphia,  Michaux.

THE CONCRETE RESINOUS JUICE OF AN UNDETERMINED SPECIES OF

EUPHORBIA.

History. — The  precise  source  from  which  this  resin  is  obtained  is  un-
known. It  is  found  in  commerce  in  the  shape  of  tears,  or  in  oblong  or
roundish  masses,  about  the  size  of  a  pea  or  larger,  often  forked,  and
perforated  with  one  or  two  small  conical  holes,  produced  by  the  prickles
of  the  plant,  around  which  the  juice  has  concreted,  and  which  some-
times remains  in  the  holes.  The  masses  are  occasionally  large  and
mixed  with  impurities.  The  surface  is  dull  and  smooth,  bearing  some
resemblance  to  that  of  tragacanth ;  the  consistence  somewhat  friable;
the  color  light-yellowish  or  reddish  ;  the  odor  scarcely  perceptible,  a
slight  taste  at  first,  followed  by  excessive  acridity  and  burning.  The
powder  is  yellowish.  Alcohol  dissolves  the  resin  on  which  its  activity
depends.  Triturated  with  water  it  forms  a  milky  liquid,  and  is  partially
dissolved.  It  contains  a  large  proportion  of  resin,  excessively  acrid,
soluble  in  alcohol,  fusible,  and  burning  with  a  brilliant  flame,  ditfusing
an  agreeable  fragrance ;  also  wax,  malate  of  lime,  malate  of  potassa,
lignin,  bassorin,  volatile  oil,  water,  and  caoutchouc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emetic,  cathartic,  and  errhine.  Seldom,  how-
ever, used  for  these  properties,  on  account  of  its  severity  of  action.  Its
principal  use  is  externally  as  a  rubefacient  or  vesicant;  the  following
preparation  forms  an  excellent  counter-irritant :  Take  of  powdered
Euphorbium  half  a  drachm,  coarsely  powdered  Cantharides,  and  Meze-
reon  bark,  of  each  two  drachms,  rectified  spirits  of  wine  two  and  a  half
fiuidounces.  Mix  together,  digest  for  eight  days,  then  press  and  filter,
and  to  the  filtered  tincture  add,  white  colophony  one  ounce,  white  tur-
pentine six  drachms.  With  this  preparation,  paper  or  silk  may  be  coated
three  several  times,  by  means  of  a  soft  sponge,  and  which,  when  dry,
forms  an  excellent  irritating  plaster  in  rheumatic,  gouty  and  neuralgic
pains.


Euphrasia  Officinalis  —  Fel  Bovinum.  465

EUPHRASIA  OFFICINALIS.
Eyebright.

Nat.  Orel — Scrophulariaceai. Sex.  St/st. — Didynamia  Angiospermia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  an  elegant,  little,  annual  plant,  with  a  square,
downy,  leafy  stem,  simple  or  branched,  and  from  one  to  five  inches  in
hight.  The  leaves  are  almost  entirely  opposite,  ovate  or  cordate,  downy,
strongly  ribbed  and  furrowed,  the  lowest  crenate,  the  floral  with  sharp,
tooth-like  serratures.  The  flowers  are  axillary,  solitary,  very  abundant,
inodorous,  with  a  brilliant  variety  of  colors.  The  corolla  varies  much  in
size  as  well  as  in  color,  being  commonly  white,  with  deep  purple  streaks,
and  a  yellowish  palate.  Upper  lip  of  the  corolla  galeate,  emarginate,
two  broad  and  spreading  lobes  ;  lower  lip  larger,  spreading,  three-cleft,
the  lobes  obtuse  or  notched.  Calyx  campanulate,  four-cleft.  Stamens
four,  fertile,  under  the  upper  lip  ;  anthers  violet,  lower  cells  of  the  upper
ones  with  a  long  spur.  Pod  oblong,  flattened  ;  seeds  numerous,  oblong,
grooved  lengthwise.

History. — This  is  a  small  plant,  common  to  Europe  and  this  country,
bearing  white  or  red  flowers  in  July.  The  leaves  are  commonly  em-
ployed, they  are  inodorous,  but  of  a  bitter,  astringent  taste.  Water
extracts  their  virtues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Slightly  tonic  and  astringent.  Used  with  much
benefit  in  the  form  of  infusion  or  poultice,  in  catarrhal  ophthalmia;  also
of  service  in  all  mucous  diseases  attended  with  increased  discharges  ;  and
in  cough,  hoarseness,  earache,  and  headache,  which  have  supervened  in
catarrhal  affections.


FEL  BOVINUM.
ox,  or  beef's  gall.

Preparation. — As  prepared  for  medicinal  purposes,  it  is  dried  by  spon-
taneous evaporation,  or  aided  by  a  very  moderate  heat,  when  it  becomes  of
a  more  or  less  solid  and  hard  consistence,  brown  color,  and  possessing  its
natural  and  peculiar  odor.  The  method  recommended  for  its  preparation
is  to  pour  two  or  three  gallons  of  the  gall  into  a  deep  vessel,  and  let  it
stand  for  twenty-four  hours.  Then  pour  off  the  supernatant  fluid  into  a
shallow  earthen  dish.  Simmer  it  away  slowly,  stirring  it  all  the  time
until  it  is  dry.  Then  preserve  in  glass  bottles  well  stopped.  Thus  pre-
pared it  is  of  a  bright-green  color,  friable,  pulverulent,  and  slightly
aromatic.

A  refined  gall  is  obtained  by  boiling  one  pint  of it  and skimming ;
then  add alum  one  ounce,  and  keep it  on  the  fire  for  some  time ;  to
another  pint  of  gall  add  one  ounce  of  common  salt,  in  the  same  manner;.
30


466  Materia  Medica.

keep  them  bottled,  separately,  for  three  months,  then  decant  off  the
clear  liquid  ;  mix  them  in  equal  proportions  ;  a  thick,  yellow  coagulum
is  immediately  formed,  leaving  the  refined  gall,  clear  and  colorless.

History. — The  bile  of  the  ox  is  a  viscid  fluid,  of  a  green,  or  greenish-
yellow  color,  with  a  peculiar,  nauseous  odor,  and  a  bitter  taste  ;  its
exact  composition  is  not  yet  settled.  According  to  a  recent  analysis  by
A.  Strecker,  the  bile  of  the  ox  consists  of  a  mixture  of  a  nitrogenous
acid  free  from  sulphur,  which  he  calls  Cholic  acid,  and  a  sulphureted
acid  free  from  nitrogen  ;  both  of  these  acids  are  combined  with  soda.
The  sulphureted  constituent  undergoes  decomposition  with  great  facility,
yielding  a  resin,  taurin,  and  ammonia ;  so  that  it  is  obtained  separate
with  considerable  difficulty.  Probably,  the  picromel,  biliary  sugar,  and
bilin  of  other  chemists  may  be  referred  to  this  constituent.  In  addition
to  the  above,  bile  also  contains  a  coloring  matter,  called  GholejayrrMn,  a
peculiar  fatty  principle,  called  Cholesterin,  oleate,  margarate  and  stear-
ate  of  soda,  with  various  salts  of  soda,  and  phosphate  of  lime.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  and  laxative.  Used  in  intermittents,
dyspepsia,  torpor  of  the  liver,  colic,  constipation,  diarrhea,  dysentery,
etc.  Five  or  eight  grains  of  inspissated  gall  neutralize  the  constipating
and  narcotic  effects  of  one  grain  of  opium,  without  injuring  its  sedative
influence. Dose,  from  one  to  ten  grains.


FERRUM.

Iron.

History.  —  There  is  no  metal  of  more  utility  to  mankind,  whether
civilized  or  not,  or  more  abundantly  diffused  throughout  nature  than
iron  ;  independently  of  its  existence  in  the  form  of  ores,  it  is  found  to  a
greater  or  less  extent  as  a  constituent  of  earths,  minerals,  vegetables
and  animals.  It  is  found  in  meteoric  stones,  frequently  in  its  pure
state  ;  and  forms  an  essential  constituent  of  the  blood,  in  man,  and  many
animals  ;  and  is  one  of  those  metals  which,  under  certain  circumstances,
may  be  employed  medicinally,  with  safety  and  advantage  to  the  human
constitution.

Iron  occurs  in  its  native  state,  and  in  combination  witli  other  sub-
stances forming  what  are  called  iron-ores.  Its  most  common  ores  are
the  sulphuret  of  iron,  or  magnetic  and  cubic  iron  pyrites;  magnetic,  red,
brown,  specular,  and  argillaceous  oxides  of  iron  ;  and  the  carbonate,
sul]  hate,  phosphate,  and  arseniate  of  iron.  Magnetic,  and  specular  iron
ores  furnish  the  best  iron,  and  these  are  found  in  abundance  in  Sweden.
Spain,  France  and  Germany,  likewise  furnish  the  carbonate  or  sparry
iron,  red,  brown,  specular,  and  argillaceous  oxides.  In  the  United
States  iron  is  found  in  large  quantity,  but  is  principally  in  the  form  of
brown,  magnetic,  or  argillaceous  oxides  ;  and  some  of  the  ores,  espe-


Ferrum.  467

cially  those  of  New  York,  New  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania,  are  equal  if
not  superior  to  the  first  quality  of  Swedish  ore.

As  the  character  of  the  ores  differs,  the  method  of  extracting  the  iron
from  them  consequently  varies.  As  a  general  rule,  the  ore  is  broken
into  small  pieces  and  roasted  ;  it  is  then  exposed  to  the  influence  of  an
intense  heat,  in  contact  with  lime,  anthracite  coal,  charcoal,  or  coke,
and  in  connection  with  some  flux  capable  of  fusing  with  the  impurities
of  the  ore,  such  as  limestone  when  the  ore  is  argillaceous,  and  clay
when  it  is  calcareous.  The  flux  by  fusion  with  the  impurities  forms
what  is  called  the  slag,  while  the  carbonaceous  matter  reduces  the  oxide
of  iron  to  the  metallic  state.  The  slag  which  occupies  the  upper  strata
of  the  fused  mass,  is  allowed  to  escape  through  a  hole  in  the  side  of  the
furnace,  after  which  the  melted  metal  is  run  off,  through  an  opening  in
the  bottom  of  the  furnace,  into  long,  triangular  molds,  forming,  when
cold,  the  pig  or  cast  iron  of  commerce.  This,  however,  still  contains
many  impurities,  as  carbon,  phosphorus,  sulphur,  silicon,  and  occasion-
ally manganese.  To  remove  these  impurities,  the  iron  is  again  melted,
and  exposed,  while  stirring  it,  to  a  current  of  air  playing  on  its  surface,
by  which  means  the  carbon  is  nearly  burned  out,  and  the  other  impuri-
ties becoming  oxidized,  rise  to  the  surface  as  a  slag.  As  the  metal  puri-
fies, notwithstanding  the  same  degree  of  heat  is  maintained,  it  becomes
less  liquid  and  tough,  its  particles  adhering  to  each  other,  forming  half
fused  lumps,  which  are  removed  from  the  furnace,  and  by  means  of
ponderous  hammers,  moved  by  steam  or  water-power,  are  beaten  into
tenacious  masses,  which  are  finally  rolled  into  bars  of  pi'oper  size,  form-
ing the  soft  or  malleable  iron  of  commerce.

Iron  has  a  bluish-gray,  or  grayish-white  color,  a  granular  or  irregu-
larly foliaceous  fracture,  with  considerable  brilliancy,  which  is  rapidly
lost  under  exposure  to  both  moisture  and  air  combined.  It  has  a  pecu-
liar, slightly  styptic  taste,  and  a  peculiar  odor  rendered  more  sensible  by
friction.  It  varies  in  density  from  7.6  to  7.84,  and  is  fused  only  at  a
very  high  temperature.  It  is  hard,  very  ductile,  considerably  malleable,
and  the  most  tenacious  of  metals.  It  possesses  magnetic,  as  well  as
welding  properties.  In  oxygen  gas  it  burns  with  brilliant  scintillations,
and  when  heated  to  whiteness  it  likewise  burns  in  atmospheric  air,  on
being  struck  in  particles  from  the  mass.  Exposed  to  the  combined
action  of  air  and  moisture,  it  becomes  covered  with  a  reddish  hydrated
sesquioxide,  called  Rust.  It  unites  with  oxygen,  forming  three  oxides,
a  protoxide,  a  sesquioxide,  and  a  compound  of  these  forming  the  native
black  oxide,  and  a  teroxide,  having  acid  properties,  called  Ferric  acid.
It  unites  readily  with  sulphur,  with  iodine  if  moisture  be  present,  with
most  of  the  metals,  and  with  all  the  non-metallic  elements,  except
hydrogen  and  nitrogen.  It  forms  salts  with  the  acids,  which  are  gen-
erally soluble  and  crystallizable.


4:68  Materia  Medica.

The  protoxide  of  iron  is  of  a  dark-blue  color,  attracted  by  the  magnet,
and  spontaneously  combustible  in  the  air,  being  converted  into  the  ses«
quioxide.  It  is  the  base  of  sulphate  of  iron,  and  of  the  green  salts  of
iron,  generally.  From  its  tendency  to  absorb  oxygen,  its  salts  when  in
solution  become  changed  into  salts  of  the  sesquioxide.  It  consists  of
one  equivalent  of  iron  28,  and  one  of  oxygen  8=36.

The  sesquioxide  of  iron,  may  be  obtained  by  dissolving  iron  in  nitro-
muriatic  acid,  precipitating  by  ammonia,  and  igniting  the  precipitate.
It  is  of  a  reddish  color,  forming  salts  usually  of  a  similar  color,  and  is
not  attracted  by  the  magnet.  It  is  composed  of  two  equivalents  of  iron
56,  and  three  of  oxygen  24=80;  One  equivalent  of  the  sesquioxide  80,
with  one  of  the  protoxide,  36,  forms  the  native  black,  or  magnetic  oxide,
=  116.  The  teroxide  or  ferric  acid  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  iron
28,  and  three  of  oxygen  24=52.

Iron  may  be  detected  even  in  minute  quantities  by  bringing  it  to  the
state  of  sesquioxide  in  solution,  and  adding  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium
which  will  strike  a  deep  blue  with  it,  or  tincture  of  galls,  which  turns
the  solution  black.  It  may  be  converted  into  a  sesquioxide  by  boiling
the  solution  holding  it  with  a  little  nitric  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Iron  in  its  metallic  form  has  no  action  on  the
system  ;  when  swallowed  in  this  state  it  becomes  oxidated,  apparently
at  the  expense  of  the  water  in  the  stomach,  for  eructations  take  place,
having  a  disagreeable  chalybeate  taste,  and  an  odor  of  hydrogen.  It  is
usually  given  in  the  form  of  iron  filings,  in  doses  of  from  five  to  ten
grains.  The  proper  method  of  obtaining  iron  filings  for  medical  pur-
poses, is  to  file  a  piece  of  pure  iron  with  a  clean  file ;  those  obtained
from  the  blacksmith's  workshop,  whether  cleansed  by  the  magnet  or  not,
are  impure  and  not  fit  for  internal  administration.  Iron  wire  is  generally
sufficiently  pure  for  the  preparation  of  filings.

The  various  preparations  of  iron  are  powerfully  tonic,  and  when  taken
for  some  time  in  small  doses,  they  have  the  property  of  strengthening
and  sometimes  accelerating  the  pulse,  improving  digestion,  promoting
the  secretions,  and  increasing  the  coloring  matter  of  the  blood ;  when
administered  internally,  iron  probably  enters  the  blood,  as  it  has  been
detected  in  the  urine.  Whether  it  increases  the  iron  of  the  blood,  is
still  an  unsettled  question,  although  it  renders  that  fluid  more  florid.
The  preparations  of  iron  are  contra-indicated  in  all  inflammatory  dis-
eases, in  persons  subject  to  determinations  of  blood  to  the  head,  or
affected  with  habitual  constipation  ;  when  pushed  too  far,  or  when  inju-
giddiness,  heat,  thirst,  difficult  breathing,  distension  of  the  limbs,  and
other  symptoms  of  an  excited  circulation.  They  are  useful  in  diseases
characterized  by  debility  and  relaxation  of  fiber,  and  a  languid  circula-
tion, more  especially  when  the  consequence  of  inordinate  discharges.


Ficus  Carica.  469

The  diseases  in  which  they  are  most  usually  employed  are  chlorosis,
hysteria,  fluor-albus,  gleet,  scrofula,  rickets,  chorea,  and  all  passive
hemorrhages.  Chalybeates  are  also  proper  in  palsy  after  the  inflamma-
tory excitement  has  subsided,  in  dyspepsia  dependent  upon  deficient
energy  of  the  digestive  functions,  and  in  neuralgia,  when  owing  to  a
similar  cause.  They  have  also  been  found  advantageous  in  ague,
epilepsy,  enlargement  of  the  liver  and  spleen,  and  in  chronic  dysentery.
The  medical  effects  of  iron,  in  its  different  combinations  are  nearly  the
same,  but  where  it  becomes  modified  or  improved  by  combination,  it
will  be  noticed  under  the  head  of  each  preparation.  When  iron  is  in
the  form  of  protoxide  it  is  generally  more  active  than  where  it  is  present
as  a  sesquioxide.

Off.  Prep.  —  Ferri  Acetas ;  Ferri  Carbonas  Saccharatum  ;  Ferri
Citras ;  Ferri  et  Quiniae  Citras  ;  Ferri  et  Morphise  Tartras ;  Ferri  et
Quinise  Tartras ;  Ferri  et  Salicinise  Tartras ;  Ferri  Ferrocyanuretum  ;
Ferri  Iodidum ;  Ferri  Lactas ;  Ferri  Nitras ;  Ferri  Oxidum  Hydratum ;
Ferri  Oxidum  Rubrum ;  Ferri  Phosphas ;  Ferri  Pulvis ;  Ferri  Subcar-
bonas ;  Ferri  Sulphas ;  Ferri  Sulphas  Exsiccatum  ;  Ferri  Tannas  ;  Ferri
Valerianas.

FICUS  CARICA.

Fig.
Nat.  Ord. — Urticaceas ;  Moraceaj,  Lindhy. Sex.  Syst. — Polygamia  Dicecia.

THE DRIED FRUIT.

Description. — The  fig-tree  is  usually  about  ten  or  twelve  feet  in  hight,
but  in  warm  climates  rises  to  twenty-five  and  even  thirty  feet.  Its
trunk  seldom  exceeds  seven  inches  in  diameter,  and  is  divided  into
numerous  round  spreading  branches,  covered  with  a  coarse  short  down,
and  a  brown  or  ash-colored  bark.  The  leaves  are  large,  palmate,  three
to  five-lobed,  or  almost  entire,  lobes  obtuse,  coarsely  serrated,  deep
green,  shining,  and  rough  upon  their  upper  surface,  pale  green  and
coarsely  downy  beneath,  and  stand  alternately  on  strong  round  petioles.
The  flowers  are  green,  and  situated  within  a  turbinate,  fleshy,  closed
receptacle,  which  is  placed  solitarily  upon  a  short  peduncle  in  the  axils
of  the  upper  leaves.  Male  flowers,  calyx  three-parted ;  female  flowers,
calyx  five-parted.  Stamens  three;  pistil  one,  lateral.  The  receptacle
forms  what  is  called  the  fruit,  it  is  more  or  less  pearshaped,  or  almost
round,  succulent,  sweet  and  pleasant  to  the  taste.  The  numerous  seeds
which  are  attached  to  the  internal  surface  of  the  receptacle,  by  fleshy
pedicels,  constitute  more  properly,  the  fruit.

History. — The  fig-tree  is  supposed  to  have  come  originally  from  the
Levant,  but  is  now  cultivated  in  all  temperate  climates.  The  structure
of  its  fruit  is  peculiar ;  at  first  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  fleshy  recep-
tacle ;  but,  as  it  advances  to  maturity,  minute  flowers  form  in  a  cavity,


470  Materia Medica.

which  occupies  the  center  of  the  mass  and  communicates  outwardly  by
a  small  round  aperture  at  the  summit,  and  these  flowers  are  succeeded
by  many  small  roundish  seeds.  While  young,  the  fig  abounds,  like  the
trunk  and  branches,  with  a  milky,  aromatic,  acrid  juice,  destitute  of
sweetness ;  but  as  it  matures,  sugar  and  mucilage  are  formed,  and  the
acridity  disappears.  It  is  usually  top-shaped,  umbilicate  at  the  large
extremity,  about  the  size  of  a  small  pear,  of  a  whitish,  yellowish,  or
reddish  color,  and  when  ripe,  is  sweet,  high-flavored,  and  wholesome ;
but  if  eaten  to  excess,  occasions  flatulence,  pain  in  the  bowels  and
diarrhea.  When  perfectly  ripe,  it  is  dried  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  or  in
ovens.  Those  figs  which  are  brought  to  the  United  States,  come  chiefly
from  Smyrna,  packed  in  drums  or  boxes.  They  are  more  or  less  com-
pressed, and,  in  cold  weather,  are  usually  covered  with  a  whitish,  sac-
charine efflorescence,  which  melts  in  the  middle  of  summer,  and  renders
them  moist.  The  best  are  yellowish  or  brownish,  somewhat  translucent
when  held  to  the  light,  and  filled  with  a  sweet  viscid  pulp,  in  which  are
lodged  numerous  small  yellow  seeds.  Their  chief  constituents  are  sugar
and  mucilage.

Properties  and  Uses. — Nutritious,  laxative,  and  demulcent.  Used  in
some  cases  of  constipation,  as  a  laxative  article  of  diet.  Occasionally
they  enter  into  demulcent  decoctions ;  and  when  roasted  or  boiled  and
split  open,  may  be  applied  as  a  suppurative  cataplasm  to  boils,  buboes,
carbuncles,  and  to  parts  upon  which  an  ordinary  poultice  can  not  be
conveniently  retained.

FIRING.

Obtain  a  thick  iron-wire  shank,  about  two  inches  long,  and  inserted
into  a  small  wooden  handle ;  on  its  extremity,  which  must  be  slightly
curved,  have  a  disk  or  button  of  iron,  exactly  one-quarter  of  an  inch
thick,  and  half  an  inch  in  diameter.  The  whole  instrument  to  be  only
six  inches  in  length. The  face  of  the  disk  for  application  must  be  flat.

Mode  of  Application. — Light  a  small  spirit  lamp,  and  hold  the  button
over  the  flame,  keeping  the  fore-finger  of  the  hand  holding  the  instru-
ment, at  the  distance  of  about  half  an  inch  from  the  button.  As  soon  as
the  finger  feels  uncomfortably  hot,  the  instrument  is  ready  for  use,  and
the  time  required  for  heating  it  to  this  degree,  will  be  about  half  a
minute.  It  is  to  be  applied  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the  parts,  the  skin
being  tipped  successively,  at  intervals  of  half  an  inch,  over  the  affected
part,  as  lightly  and  as  rapidly  as  possible,  always  taking  care  to  bring
the  flat  surface  of  the  disk  fairly  in  contact  with  the  skin.  In  this  way
the  process  of  firing  a  whole  limb,  or  the  loins,  making  about  one  hun-
dred applications,  does  not  occupy  a  minute,  and  the  one  heating  by  the
lamp  suffices.  To  ascertain  whether  the  heat  be  sufficient,  look  sidewise
at  the  spots  as  you  touch  them,  and  each  spot  will  be  observed  to  become


FCENICULUM VuLGARE.  471

of  a  glistening  white,  much  whiter  than  the  surrounding  skin.  In  from
five  to  thirty  minutes  the  skin  becomes  bright  red,  and  a  glow  of  heat  is
felt  over  the  part.  The  iron  must  never  be  made  red-hot — it  is  very-
little  hotter  than  boiling  water — should  never  make  an  eschar,  and
rarely  raise  a  blister.  On  the  next  day  after  its  application,  a  number
of  circular  red  marks  will  be  seen  on  the  skin,  the  cuticle  not  even
being  raised,  and  the  surface  ready,  if  necessary,  for  a  fresh  application.
There  is  no  discharge  whatever,  and  in  most  cases  the  patient  is  uncon-
scious of  what  has  been  done.  It  is  vastly  superior  to  a  blister  in  many
cases  ;  even  the  most  delicate  female  will  not  object  to  its  frequent  repe-
tition when  required.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  A  powerful  counter-irritant.  Recommended
by  Dr.  Corrigan  in  paralysis,  local  muscular  rheumatism,  sciatica,  lum-
bago, neuralgic  pains,  etc.,  and  wherever  a  counter-irritant  is  required.
Also  applied  each  side  of  the  spinal  column,  in  intermittents,  epilepsy,
mania  and  other  diseases.


FCENICULUM  VULGARE.
Fennel.

Nat.  Ord. — Apiacese,  or  Umbelliferaj. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE SEED.

Description. — Fceniculum  Vulgare,  or  Common  Fennel,  has  a  biennial
or  perennial  tapering  root,  and  an  annual,  erect,  solid,  round,  striated,
smooth,  leafy,  copiously  branched  stem,  growing  from  three  to  five  feet
in  bight.  The  leaves  are  alternate  at  the  joints  of  the  stem,  upon  broad
membranous  striated  sheaths,  and  are  triply  pinnate  ;  the  leaflets  are
long,  linear,  acute,  smooth,  more  or  less  drooping,  deep  green.  The
flowers  are  in  large,  flat,  terminal  umbels,  with  from  thirteen  to  twenty
rays ;  the  partial  rays  more  slender,  short,  and  very  unequal.  Bracts
or  involucres  wanting.  The  corolla  consists  of  five  petals,  of  a  golden
yellow  color,  which  are  obovate,  with  a  broad,  obtuse,  indexed  point.
Calyx  none.  Styles  very  short,  with  a  large,  ovate,  pale-yellow  base.
Fruit  ovate,  not  quite  two  lines  long,  and  about  a  line  in  breadth,  pale
bright  brown,  smooth ;  ridyes  sharp,  with  but  little  space  between  each,
the  lateral  ones  rather  the  broadest;  terminated  by  a  permanent  conical
disk.  Fennel  is  a  native  of  Europe,  growing  wild  upon  sandy  and
chalky  ground,  and  flowering  in  July.

Fceniculum  Officinale,  or  Sweet  Fennel,  has  a  perennial,  fusiform
and  whitish  root,  with  a  solid,  jointed,  striated,  shining,  deep-glaucous-
green  stem.  The  leaves  are  shorter,  and  the  leaflets  less  elongated  than
in  the  preceding  species;  the  fruit  is  likewise  twice  as  long,  a  little
curved,  and  of  a  less  dark  color,  with  prominent  ridges,  and  a  persistent


472  Materia Medica.

peduncle. It  is  a  native  of  the  South  of  Europe,  but  is  naturalized  in
this  country,  and  is  sweeter  and  more  aromatic  than  F.  Vulgare.

Fceniculum  Dulce,  or  Sweet  Fennel,  and  sometimes  confounded
with  the  F.  Officinale,  very  much  resembles  the  F.  Vulgare,  but  differs
in  being  a  much  smaller  plant,  only  about  a  foot  high, — in  having  its
stem  somewhat  compressed  at  the  base — its  radical  leaves  somewhat  dis-
tichous, and  in  having  only  six  or  eight  rays,  instead  of  thirteen  or
twenty,  as  in  the  common  fennel.  The  fruit  likewise  varies  considerably,
being  narrow,  oblong,  three  lines  long,  pale-dull-brown,  smooth ;  ridges
sharpish,  with  a  space  between  each  for  a  convex  line  indicating  the
vittse,  the  lateral  ones  rather  the  broadest.  This  is  also  a  native  of
southern  Europe,  and  is  cultivated  largely  in  Italy  and  Sicily,  for  the
sake  of  the  shoots,  which  are  eaten  raw,  or  boiled  as  pot-herbs.

These  plants  were  formerly  included  in  the  genus  Anethura  of  Linnaeus,
but  weae  separated  from  it  by  Gaertner  and  De  Candolle,  on  account
of  the  difference  of  the  seed.  Authors  have  not  settled  the  question  as
to  the  officinal  species,  the  botanical  history  of  which  is  still  a  matter  of
confusion  and  indefiniteness.

History. — The  seeds  or  half  fruits  of  these  varieties,  do  not  differ
materially  in  aromatic  properties ;  they  have  a  fragrant  odor,  and  a
warm,  sweet,  aromatic  taste.  There  are  three  kinds  in  commerce;  1st,
ovoid,  glabrous,  of  a  dull  green,  marked  with  lines,  of  which  two  are
more  prominent  than  the  others — these  are  the  product  of  F .  Vulgare.
2d.  Long,  somewhat  curved,  of  a  brighter  green,  pedicel  often  adhering
to  them,  and  very  aromatic,  the  product  of  F.  Officinale.  3d.  Much
broader  and  ovoid,  ribs  strongly  marked,  from  the  F.  Dulce.  They
impart  their  virtues  to  hot  water,  but  more  abundantly  to  alcohol.  They
contain  volatile  oil,  which  may  be  obtained  by  distillation  with  water,
and  likewise  a  large  proportion  of  fixed  oil.

Properties  and  Uses. — Carminative  and  stimulant.  Used  in  flatulent
colic,  and  as  a  corrigent  of  other  less  pleasant  medicines.  Dose  of
powdered  seeds,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Fceniculi.


FRAGARIA  VESCA.
Strawberry.

Nat.  Ord. — Rosacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Polygynia.

THE FRUIT.

Description. — Strawberry  has  a  creeping,  knotty,  perennial  root,  with
short,  upright  and  reclined,  and  procumbent  and  stoloniferous  stems;
stolons  often  creeping  several  feet.  The  leaves  are  pubescent,  cauline
and  radical ;  the  latter  on  long  petioles,  trifoliate,  the  leaflets  sessile  or
nearly  so,  oboval,  oval,  or  nearly  round,  deeply  serrated ;  the  former


Frasera  Carolinensis.  473

nearly  similar,  but  smaller,  both  with  lanceolate,  oblong,  acute  stipules.
The  flowers  white,  one  or  many,  with  erect  or  drooping  pedicels.  Calyx
spreading  or  reflexed,  divided  into  ten  acute  segments,  the  alternate  one
being  somewhat  shorter.  The  petals  are  live,  white,  obovul  or  obcor-
date,  inserted  on  the  calyx.  Stamens  indefinite,  small,  and  also  inserted
on  the  calyx.  Ovaries  many,  with  a  small  stigma  each,  inserted  on  a
succulent  gynophore,  which  increases  in  size,  becomes  colored,  and  forms
the  fruit.  In  this  species  the  achenia  are  superficial  on  the  conical  or
hemispherical  fruiting  receptacle,  not  sunk  in  pits ;  in  the  F.  Virginiana
the  achenia  are  imbedded  in  the  deep  pits  of  the  receptacle.

History. — This  is  a  European  species,  presenting  innumerable  vari-
eties, which  are  cultivated  in  gardens,  flowering  from  April  to  May,  and
ripening  its  fruit  in  May  and  June.  The  F.  Virginiana,  or  wild  straw-
berry, F.  Canadensis,  or  mountain  strawberry,  F.  Orandiflora,  or  pine-
apple strawberry,  and  the  other  varieties  possess  similar  properties.  The
fruit  of  all  the  varieties,  is  highly  fragrant  and  delicious  when  ripened
in  the  sun ;  and  the  cultivated  varieties  frequently  become  very  large,
weighing  an  ounce  or  more.  Strawberry  consists  of  equal  parts  of  citric
and  malic  acids,  sugar,  mucilage,  pectin,  water,  peculiar  volatile  aroma,
woody  fiber,  and  pericarps.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  fruit  has  been  highly  spoken  of  in  calcu-
lous disorders,  used  very  freely,  likewise  in  gout,  and  the  juice  will  dis-
solve the  hard  concretions  called  "tartar,"  which  form  on  the  teeth,  and
without  injuring  them.  In  some  persons  strawberries  induce  an  erup-
tion resembling  nettle-rash,  with  a  derangement  of  the  digestive  organs.
The  grains  or  seed-like  pericarps  are  indigestible,  and  sometimes  cause
irritation  of  the  bowels.  Strawberry  juice,  or  the  syrup,  added  to  water,
forms  a  refreshing  and  useful  drink  for  febrile  patients  ;  care  being  taken
that  the  grains  are  removed  by  filtering  or  expressing  the  juice  or  syrup
through  a  piece  of  muslin.  Strawberries  eaten  with  cream  are  injurious
to  dyspeptics.  The  leaves  are  somewhat  astringent,  and  have  been
used  in  infusion,  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  intestinal  debility ;  the  roots
are  diuretic,  and  have  been  beneficially  used  in  infusion  in  dysuria,
gonorrhea,  etc.

FRASERA  CAROLINENSIS. (Frasera  Walteri.)

American  Col  umbo.

Nat.  Ord. — Gentianacea?. Sex. Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — American  Columbo  is  an  indigenous  plant,  with  a  trien-
nial, long,  spindle-shaped,  horizontal,  fleshy,  rugose,  and  yellow  root,
and  a  smooth,  erect,  solid,  cylindrical,  or  subquadrangular,  succulent
dark-purple  stem,  from  four  to  nine  feet  in  hight,  one  or  two  inches  in


471  Materia Medica.

diameter  at  base,  and  branched  above.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  sessile,
entire,  glabrous,  deep-green,  subcarnose,  from  three  to  twelve  inches
long,  by  one  to  three  inches  wide,  and  in  whorls  of  from  four  to  six.
The  whorls  commence  at  the  root,  and  ascend  to  the  top  with  succes-
sively diminishing  intervals  and  leaves.  The  lower  or  radical  leaves  are
from  five  to  twelve  in  number,  elliptical,  obtuse,  very  long,  and  rest
upon  the  ground  in  the  form  of  a  star.  The  cauline  leaves  become  suc-
cessively smaller  as  they  ascend,  the  lowest  oblong  lanceolate,  the  upper
lanceolate  and  pointed.  The  flowers  are  yellowish-white,  or  greenish-
yellow,  numerous,  forming  a  large  terminal,  compound,  pyramidal,  leafy,
verticillate  panicle,  from  one  to  five  feet  long,  the  branches  of  which  spring
from  the  axils  of  the  upper  leaves;  peduncles  one-flowered,  unequal,
leafy,  or  bracteate.  Calyx  deeply  four-cleft,  spreading;  segments  lanceo-
late, acute,  persistent,  and  nearly  as  long  as  the  corolla.  Corolla  with
four  elliptic  segments,  flat  and  spreading ;  margin  somewhat  inflexed,
an  oval  or  orbicular  fimbriated,  purple  pit  or  gland  in  the  center  of
each.  Stamens  four,  alternate  with  the  segments,  and  shorter  than  the
corolla.  Filaments  subulate,  short,  and  inserted  into  the  base  of  the
corolla  between  its  segments;  anthers  large,  oval,  oblong,  yellow,  and
notched  at  the  base.  Ovary  oblong-ovate,  compressed,  bearing  a  short
style  with  a  bifid  stigma.  Capsule  or  fruit  yellowish,  oval,  acuminate,
with  the  persistent  style,  compressed  ;  margin  thin,  two-valved,  one-
seeded. Seeds  eight  to  twelve,  flat,  elliptical,  imbricated,  winged.

History. — This  plant  grows  west  of  the  Alleghanies,  and  from  New
York  to  Alabama,  in  rich  woody  lands  and  meadows,  and  bearing  flowers
in  June  and  July.  The  stems  and  flowers  are  produced  in  the  third
year,  previous  to  which  the  radical  leaves  only  appear  above  ground.
The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  and  should  be  collected  in  the  autumn  of
the  second,  or  the  spring  of  the  third  year ;  they  are  large,  yellow,
rugose,  hard,  and  spindle-shaped  ;  but  as  found  in  the  shops,  they  are
in  dried,  transverse  slices,  having  a  light  reddish-brown  epidermis,  a
thick  yellow  bark,  and  a  yellowish  spongy  meditullium.  The  taste  is
bitter  and  slightly  sweetish  without  aroma.  Water  or  diluted  alcohol
extracts  its  virtues,  and  on  adding  water  to  the  tincture,  a  precipitate  is
thrown  down,  but  it  is  not  disturbed  by  the  tincture  of  galls.  It  contains
bitter  extractive,  gum,  tannin,  gallic  acid,  resin,  a  fatty  matter,  sugar,  etc.

It  may  be  distinguished  from  Colombo,  by  the  greater  uniformity  of
its  internal  structure,  the  absence  of  concentric  and  radiating  lines,  their
purer  yellow  color  without  a  greenish  tinge,  and  by  affording  a  dark-green
precipitate  with  the  salts  of  iron,  which  is  not  the  case  with  Colombo ;
and  this  last,  in  tincture,  gives  a  dirty-gray  precipitate  with  tincture  of
galls.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  fresh  root  is  emetic  and  cathartic  ;  the
dried,  a  simple  tonic,  which  may  be  used  wherever  mild  tonics  are  indi-


Fraxinus  Sambucifolia  —  Fraxinus  Acuminata.  475

cated. Dose  of  the  powder  from  twenty  to  sixty  grains,  of  the  infusion
from  one  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.
Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Fraseree.


FRAXINUS  SAMBUCIFOLIA.

Black  Ash.

FRAXINUS  ACUMINATA.

White  Ash.

Nat.  Orel. — Oleaceae. Sex.  Syst.—  Dicecia  Diandria.

THE BARK.

Description. — Fraxinus  Sambucifolia  is  a  tree  which  attains  the  hight
of  from  forty  to  seventy  feet ;  the  trunk  is  covered  with  a  bark  of  a  darker
hue  than  that  of  the  White  Ash,  and  less  deeply  furrowed,  and  is  from
one  to  two  feet  in  diameter.  The  wood  is  purplish,  very  tough  and
elastic,  but  less  durable  than  the  white  ash.  The  leaves  are  from  nine  to
sixteen  inches  in  length,  and  are  composed  of  about  seven  leaflets,  which
are  sessile,  ovate-lanceolate,  serrate,  rugose  and  shining,  round-oblique
at  the  base,  smooth  above,  and  red-downy  on  the  veins  beneath.  Calyx
and  corolla  both  wanting ;  buds  of  a  deep-blue  color.  Samara  ellipli-
cal-oblong,  very  obtuse  at  both  ends.  This  species  grows  in  swamps
and  moist  woods  in  the  northern  States  and  Canada,  blossoming  in  May.
The  young  saplings  are  much  employed  in  making  hoops,  and  the  ma-
ture trunks  for  baskets.  The  leaves  when  bruised  exhale  the  odor  of
Elder.

Fraxinus  Acuminata  of  Lamark,  or  the  Fraxinus  Americana  of  Lin-
naeus, is  a  large  forest  tree,  which  grows  from  fifty  to  eighty  feet  high ;
it  often  rises  more  than  forty  feet  without  a  branch,  and  then  expands
into  a  regular  summit  of  an  equal  additional  hight.  The  trunk  is  covered
with  a  gray,  furrowed  and  cracked  bark,  and  the  branchlets  are  a  smooth
greenish -gray.  The  leaves  are  a  foot  or  more  in  length,  opposite,  pin-
nate, consisting  of  about  seven  leaflets,  which  are  petiolate,  oblong,  shining,
acuminate,  entire  or  slightly  toothed,  glaucous  beneath.  Its  flowers  are
whitish-green,  and  are  disposed  in  loose  panicles,  the  fertile  ones  with  a
calyx,  and  the  barren  ones  without.  Corolla  wanting.  Calyx  small  and
four-cleft ;  buds  of  a  rust-color.  Samara  spatulate-linear,  obtuse,  with
a  long  narrowed  base.  The  white  ash  is  chiefly  confined  to  the  Northern
States  and  Canada,  growing  in  rich  woods,  and  blooming  in  April  and
May.  Its  wood  is  light,  firm,  elastic  and  durable,  furnishing  a  most
excellent  timber  for  carriage-frames,  bars,  handspikes,  agricultural
implements,  etc.

History. — There  are  several  species  of  this  tree,  all  of  which  possess
medicinal  virtues,  probably,  of  a  similar  character. The  bark  is  the


476  Materia Medica.

part  used,  the  properties  of  which  are  extracted  by  water. No  analysis
has  been  made  of  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic  and  astringent.  An  extract  of  the  black
ash  used  as  a  plaster  is  very  valuable  in  salt  rheum,  and  other  cutaneous
diseases.  The  infusion  may  be  used  internally  as  a  tonic,  and  for  all
purposes  where  a  combination  of  astringency  with  tonic  influence  is
indicated.

The  white  ash  is  also  cathartic,  and  has  been  found  beneficial  in  some
cases  of  constipation,  and  also  in  dropsical  affections.  It  may  be  used
in  the  form  of  infusion,  or  in  bitters.  The  bark  in  white  wine,  is  said  to
be  efficient  in  curing  ague-cake,  or  enlarged  spleen.  The  seeds  are  said
to  prevent  obesity.  ,  a

The  leaves  of  the  common  ash,  Fraxinus  Polyyamie,  have  been  high-
ly recommended  in  the  treatment  of  gout  and  rheumatism.  No  nausea,
sickness,  general  discomfort,  nor  depression  attends  their  employment,
and  generally,  after  having  used  them  for  four  or  five  days,  and  some-
times sooner,  the  pain,  redness,  and  swelling  sensibly  diminish  in  inten-
sity, or  entirely  disappear.  About  two  and  a  half  ounces  of  the
powdered  leaves  are  to  be  infused  for  three  hours  in  a  sufficient  quantity
of  boiling  water,  then  strained  through  a  linen  cloth  and  sweetened;
this  is  to  be  taken  during  the  day,  at  several  draughts,  and  is  to  be
repeated  daily  ;  it  should  be  continued  for  eight  days  after  the  symptoms
have  disappeared.  In  chronic  gout  it  may  be  repeated  for  eight  or  ten
days  every  month,  for  several  consecutive  months.  Probably  the  leaves
of  the  above  species,  or  of  the  Fraxinus  Quadrangulata,  or  Blue  Ash,
will  be  found  equally  efficacious.


FUCUS  HELMINTHOCORTON.

Corsican  Moss.

Nat.  Ord. — Algaceaj,  or  Ceramiace*,  (Lindley").  Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia
Alga?.

THE WHOLE PLANT.

Description. — This  is  the  Gigartina  Helminthocorton  of  Greville  ;  it  has
a  cartilaginous,  terete,  tufted,  entangled  frond,  with  setaceous  branches,
somewhat  dichotomous,  marked  indistinctly  with  transverse  streaks.
The  lower  part  dirty-yellow,  the  brandies  more  or  less  purple.

History. — This  is  a  marine  plant,  growing  on  the  Mediterranean  coast,
and  especially  on  the  Island  of  Corsica.  The  plant  is  of  a  cartilaginous
consistence,  of  a  dull  and  reddish-brown  color,  has  a  bitter,  salt  and
nauseous  taste,  and  its  odor  is  rather  pleasant.  It  is  found  in  the  form
of  thick  tufts,  composed  of  numerous  filaments,  united  at  the  base,  in
bundles  intermingled  together,  and  fastened  to  each  other  by  small
hooks,  with  which  the  stems  are  furnished.  It  is  seldom  employed  in
this  country. Water  dissolves  its  active  principles.


Fucus  Helminthocorton.  477

Properties  and  Uses. — Anthelmintic.  The  influence  exercised  by  this
substance  upon  the  economy,  is  hardly  appreciable;  perhaps,  occasion-
ally, a  slight  irritation  of  the  digestive  canal — but  it  acts  very  powerfully
on  the  intestinal  worms,  especially  the  Iumbricoid.  Dr.  Johnson  affirms
that  when  thrown  into  the  rectum,  "it  destroys  any  worms  domiciliating
there  as  effectually  as  choke-damps  would  destroy  the  life  of  a  miner."
The  dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  grains,  mixed  with  molasses,  jelly,  or
syrup,  or  in  infusion.

Fucus  Vesiculosis  is  a  perennial  seaweed.  The  root  is  a  hard  flattish
disk.  Frond  from  a  few  inches  to  four  feet  in  length,  and  from  two  lines
to  an  inch  in  width,  flat,  furnished  with  a  midrib  throughout  its  length,
occasionally  twisted  in  a  spiral  manner,  repeatedly  dichotomous,  the
angles  of  the  dichotomy  acute,  except  when  a  solitary  vesicle  happens  to
be  placed  there  ;  the  sterile  branches  obtuse  and  often  notched  at  the
extremity.  Air  vessels  from  the  size  of  a  pea  to  a  hazelnut,  in  pairs,
and  situated  at  irregular  intervals  in  different  parts  of  the  frond  ;  some-
times two  or  three  pairs  are  arranged  next  to  each  other  ;  they  are  rarely
altogether  wanting.  Receptacles  terminal,  compressed,  mostly  ovate  or
ellipitical,  about  half  an  inch  long,  but  varying  from  nearly  spherical  to
linear-lanceolate,  and  from  one-fourth  of  an  inch  to  nearly  two  inches
long  ;  they  are  mostly  in  pairs,  but  are  sometimes  solitary,  and  occasion-
ally forked.  They  are  rilled  with  a  clear,  tasteless  mucus.  The  whole
frond  is  proliferous  in  a  remarkable  degree  in  cases  of  injury,  throwing
out  numerous  new  shoots  from  the  injured  part.

The  Fucus  Vesiculosis,  Sea  Wrack,  or  Bladder  Wrack,  grows  upon
the  shores  of  Europe  and  of  this  continent,  attaching  itself  to  the  rocks
by  its  expanded  woody  root.  On  the  coast  of  Scotland  and  of  France,
it  is  much  used  in  the  preparation  of  kelp.  It  is  also  employed  as  a
manure,  and  is  mixed  with  the  fodder  of  cattle.

The  Fucus  Vesiculosis  has  a  peculiar  odor,  and  a  nauseous  saline
taste.  Several  chemists  have  undertaken  its  analysis,  but  the  results  are
by  no  means  satisfactory.  It  contains  a  large  quantity  of  soda  in  saline
combination,  and  iodine,  according  to  Gaultier  de  Claubry,  in  the  state
of  iodide  of  potassium.  These  ingredients  remain  in  its  ashes,  and  in
the  charcoal  resulting  from  its  exposure  to  heat  in  close  vessels.  The
charcoal  of  this  plant  has  long  had  the  reputation  of  a  deobstruent,  and
been  given  in  goitre  and  scrofulous  swellings.  Its  virtues  were  formerly
the  discovery  of  the  medical  properties  of  iodine,  this  has  been  considered
as  its  most  active  ingredient.  The  mucus  contained  in  the  vesicles  was
applied  externally,  with  advantage,  by  Dr.  Russel,  as  a  resolvent  in  scrof-
ulous tumors.

Other  species  of  Fucus  are  in  all  probability  possessed  of  similar  pro-
perties. Many  of  them  contain  a  gelatinous  matter,  and  a  saccharine


478  Materia  Medica.

principle  analogous  to  mannite;  and  some  are  used  as  aliment,  in  times
of  scarcity,  by  the  wretched  inhabitants  of  the  coasts  where  they  are
collected. —  U.  S.  Disp.


FULIGO  LIGNI. (Fulujo  Splendens.)

WOOD-SOOT.

Description. — The  best  soot  for  medicinal  purposes,  is  that  which  is
gathered  within  an  air-tight  wood  stove  and  its  pipe  ;  that  which  is  col-
lected from  a  clean  chimney  or  ordinary  stove-pipe,  where  hard  wood
alone  is  burned,  will  ordinarily  answer,  if  it  be  free  from  ashes  and  lime.
Soot  has  a  peculiar  smell,  resembling  that  of  creosote,  and  a  bitter,
empyreumatic,  disagreeable  taste.  Powdered  soot  steeped  in  boiling
water  makes  an  infusion  of  a  deep-yellow  or  brown  color,  imparting  to
it  its  characteristic  odor  and  taste.  The  part  which  is  soluble  consists
chiefly,  according  to  Berzelius,  of  a  pyrogenous  resin  united  with  acetic
acid,  saturated  with  potassa,  lime  and  magnesia.  It  also  contains  sul-
phate of  lime,  chloride  of  potassium,  acetate  of  ammonia,  and  traces  of
nitric  acid.  If  the  solution  be  evaporated  to  dryness,  it  furnishes  a  black
extract,  which  on  being  redissolved  in  water  forms  a  blackish-brown
solution,  which  lets  fall  acid  pyretin,  in  the  form  of  a  black  mass  resem-
bling pitch,  when  treated  with  any  free  acid  except  acetic ;  the  acid
employed  remains  in  solution  with  the  bases  previously  in  combination
with  the  pyretin.  That  portion  of  soot  which  is  insoluble  in  water,
amounts  to  about  forty-four  per  cent.  In  addition  to  the  above  ingre-
dients, soot  also  contains  empyreumatic  oil,  and  creosote,  to  which  it  is
supposed  to  owe  its  medical  virtues,  but  which  supposition  is  incorrect.

Properties  and  Uses. — Internally,  soot  will  be  found  valuable  in  all
forms  of  disease  attended  with  acidity  of  the  stomach.  A  powder  com-
posed of  one  part  each  of  powdered  rhubarb  and  soot,  and  half  a  part
of  bicarbonate  of  potassa,  will  be  found  invaluable  in  all  such  cases,
removing  acidity  and  a  tendency  to  constipation ;  it  may  be  given  in
doses  varying  from  three  to  twelve  grains,  three  limes  a  day,  or  in  suffi-
cient quantity  to  cause  one  or  two  evacuations  from  the  bowels  daily.
An  infusion  of  soot,  made  so  as  not  to  be  unpalatable,  is  very  beneficial
in  inflammation  of  mucous  membranes,  and  in  hysteria.  A  strong
decoction  of  soot  used  as  an  injection  into  the  rectum,  has  caused  the
expulsion  of  ascarides;  its  use  should  be  continued  for  several  days  in
succession ;  injected  into  the  bladder  it  has  been  of  service  in  chronic
inflammation  of  the  bladder;  it  should  be  injected  twice  a  day  for  some
days.  It  possesses  no  antispasmodic  virtues  further  than  the  neutraliz-
ing acidity  of  the  stomach,  to  which  the  spasmodic  action  is  owing.
Combined  with  geraniin,  in  the  proportion  of  two  parts  to  one  of  the
astringent,  it  will  prove  valuable  in  diarrhea  and  cholera-morbus  of
children; in  summer-complaint,  one  part  of  leptandrin,  and  a  fourth


Fumaria  Officinalis.  479

part  of  camphor  or  ginger  may  be  added  to  the  above.  The  infusion  or
decoction  may  be  made  by  adding  one  or  two  ounces  of  soot  to  a  pint
of  water,  macerate  or  boil  for  half  an  hour,  and  filter;  dose,  one  or  two
fluidounces,  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Externally,  I  have  used  the  Unguentum  Fuliginis,  in  cases  of  recent
and  extensive  burns,  with  almost  immediate  relief;  it  must  be  spread  on
raw-cotton  and  applied  over  the  part.  The  ointment  is  also  efficacious
in  various  cutaneous  disorders,  especially  those  of  an  erysipelatous  char-
acter, tiuea,  fistula,  cancerous  and  syphilitic  ulcers,  pruritus  of  the  vulva,
specks  on  the  cornea,  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  severe  burns  and  scalds,
etc.  In  some  of  these  diseases  the  decoction  will  answer.  In  many
ophthalmic  diseases,  a  strong  decoction  of  equal  parts  of  soot  and  golden-
seal, will  be  found  valuable ;  it  may  also  be  employed  internally  by
mouth,  or  injection  into  the  bladder  or  vagina,  for  chronic  mucous
inflammation.

A  preparation  called  Fuligokali,  has  been  recommended  in  scrofula,
chronic  rheumatism,  rheumatic  tumors,  and  certain  herpetic  affections.
It  is  made  by  boiling  for  an  hour,  one  hundred  parts  of  good,  shining
soot,  and  twenty  parts  of  caustic  potassa,  each  in  powder,  in  two  parts
or  a  sufficient  quantity  of  water.  When  cold  the  solution  is  diluted,
filtered,  and  evaporated  to  dryness.  Fuligokali  is  in  the  form  of  a  black
powder  or  scales,  very  soluble  in  water,  of  an  empyreumatic  odor,  and
mild  alkaline  taste.  The  dose  is  two  or  three  grains,  repeated  several
times  a  day.  Sixteen  or  thirty-two  grains  to  the  ounce  of  lard,  is  said
to  form  a  detersive,  resolvent,  and  gently  stimulant  ointment.

Off.  Prep. — Unguentum  Fuliginis.


FUMARIA  OFFICINALIS.

Fumitory.
Nat. Ord. — Fumariaceas. Sex. Syst. — Diadelphia  Hexagynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  an  annual  glaucous  plant,  with  a  suberect,  much-
branched,  spreading,  leafy,  and  angular  stem,  growing  from  ten  to  fifteen
inches  high.  The  leaves  are  mostly  alternate,  bipinnate  or  tripinnate ;
leaflets  wedge-shaped,  cut  into  flat,  lanceolate  segments.  The  flowers
are  small,  flesh-colored,  tipped  with  crimson,  nodding,  the  pedicels
becoming  erect  in  fruit.  Racemes  opposite  to  the  leaves,  stalked,  erect,
many-flowered,  rather  lax.  Bracts  lanceolate,  acute,  not  half  the  length
of  the  pedicels,  especially  when  in  fruit.  Petals  four,  unequal,  one  of
them  with  a  short,  rounded  spur  at  the  base.  Calyx  colored,  toothed,
deciduous.  Fruit  or  nut  ovoid  or  globose,  indehiscent,  emaro-inate,  one-
seeded,  and  valveless  ;  seeds  crestless.


4S0  Materia  Medica.

History. — This  is  a  small  European  plant,  naturalized  in  this  country,
growing  in  cultivated  grounds,  and  bearing  red  flowers  from  May  to
August.  The  leaves  are  the  officinal  part:  they  are  inodorous,  have  a
bitter,  saline  taste,  and  are  very  succulent,  yielding  by  expression  a  juice
which  has  the  sensible  and  medicinal  properties  of  the  plant.  The
whole  plant  abounds  in  saline  substances.  By  evaporating  the  expressed
juice,  or  a  decoction  of  the  leaves,  an  extract  is  obtained,  which  throws
out  upon  its  surface  a  copious  saline  efflorescence.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic,  laxative,  alterative,  and  diuretic.
Esteemed  as  a  valuable  remedy  in  visceral  obstructions,  in  scorbutic
affections,  in  leprosy,  and  many  forms  of  cutaneous  disease.  The
expressed  juice  may  be  used  in  the  dose  of  two  ounces  or  more  per
day ;  or  a  decoction  of  the  dried  or  fresh  leaves  and  tops  may  be  used
freely.  Two  ounces  of  the  flowers  and  tops  infused  in  three  pints  of
Madeira  wine,  and  taken  twice  a  day  in  doses  of  from  two  to  four
fiuidounces,  will  strengthen  the  stomach  and  improve  the  appetite.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Fumariae  Vinum.


GALBANUM.

Galbanum.

THE CONCRETE JUICE OF AN UNKNOWN PLANT.

History. — The  plant  from  which  the  gum-resin  Galbanum  is  obtained,
is  unknown  ;  various  plants  have  at  different  times  been  supposed  to
afford  it,  but  as  there  is  no  certainty  in  relation  to  the  subject,  it  is
scarcely  necessary  to  refer  to  them.  Galbanum  is  brought  from  the
Levant,  and  from  India.  It  is  generally  in  masses  of  whitish,  reddish,
or  yellowish  tears,  irregularly  agglutinated  by  a  darker  colored  yellow-
ish-brown, or  greenish  substance,  more  or  less  translucent,  of  a  peculiar,
disagreeable  odor,  and  a  bitterish,  warm,  and  acrid  taste.  Sometimes,
though  rarely,  it  has  been  obtained  in  the  state  of  distinct  roundish  tears,
about  the  size  of  a  pea,  of  a  yellowish-white  or  pale  brownish-yellow
color,  shining  externally,  and  translucent.  In  cool  weather,  galbanum
has  the  consistence  of  wax  ;  in  summer  it  softens,  and  is  rendered  duc-
tile and  adhesive  by  the  heat  of  the  hand.  As  it  is  generally  mixed
with  pieces  of  stalks,  seeds,  or  other  foreign  matters,  it  should  be  melted
and  strained  previous  to  using  it.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1.212.  It  is
soluble  in  diluted  alcohol  ;  when  triturated  with  water,  wine  or  vinegar,
it  forms  an  imperfect,  not  permanent,  milky  solution.  Alcohol  dissolves
all  except  the  gum.  Diluted  alcohol  is  its  proper  solvent.  Ether  dis-
solves the  resin  and  volatile  oil,  leaving  all  the  gum.  It  consists  of
resin,  soluble  gum,  bassorin,  volatile  oil,  traces  of  supermalate  of  lime,
and  some  impurities. The  volatile  oil  obtained  by  distillation  with  water,


Galipea  Officinalis.  481

is  colorless,  odoriferous,  and  becomes  yellowish  by  age;  it  is  lighter
than  water.

A  dark-brown  or  blackish  color,  permanent  softness,  the  absence  of
whitish  grains,  a  deficiency  in  odor  and  taste,  and  a  large  amount  of
impurities  in  connection  with  the  gum-resin,  are  signs  of  inferiority.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Stimulant,  expectorant,  and  antispasmodic.
Used  in  chronic  affections  of  the  bronchial  mucous  membrane,  amenor-
rhea, and  chronic  rheumatism.  Externally,  employed  in  the  form  of
plaster  to  indolent  tumors,  and  in  tincture  to  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  and
irritability  or  weakness  of  the  eyes.  Dose,  from  ten  to  twenty  grains,
in  pill,  or  triturated  with  water,  sugar,  and  gum  arabic.  It  is  less  ener-
getic than  assafcetida,  and  seems  to  hold  a  middle  place  between  this
and  ammoniac,  so  far  so  relates  to  activity.


GALIPEA  OFFICINALIS.

Angustura.

Nat.  Ord. — Eutaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  is  a  small  tree  not  more  than  twelve  to  twenty  feet
in  bight,  and  about  three  to  five  inches  in  diameter,  irregularly  branched,
and  covered  with  a  smooth,  gray  bark.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  petio-
late,  and  trifoliate ;  the  leaflets  are  oblong,  pointed  at  both  extremities,
supported  on  the  common  petiole  by  short  footstalks,  smooth,  glossy,
bricht-areen,  smelling  when  fresh  and  bruised  somewhat  like  tobacco:
they  are  from  six  to  ten  inches  long,  and  two  to  four  inches  wide,  and
some  of  them  are  marked  with  small,  whitish  round  spots  ;  petioles
about  the  length  of  the  leaflets,  slightly  channeled.  The  flowers  are
numerous,  white,  hairy,  and  arranged  in  terminal  and  axillary  racemes,
or  with  long  peduncles  ;  they  likewise  exhale  an  unpleasant  odor.  The
calyx  is  somewhat  campanulate,  five-cleft,  inferior,  hairy  ;  the  corolla  is
about  an  inch  long,  downy  on  both  sides,  and  somewhat  curved  before
expansion.  The  petals  are  five,  unequal,  oblong,  obtuse,  and  united  at
the  base  into  a  short  tube.  Fertile  stamens  two ;  sterile  ones  five,  subu-
late, tipped  with  a  pellucid  watery  gland.  The  style  is  erect  with  a
simple  stigma.  The  fruit  consists  of  five  bivalve  capsules,  of  Avhich
two  or  three  are  commonly  abortive  ;  the  seeds  are  two  in  each  capsule,
round,  black,  of  the  size  of  a  pea,  one  of  which  is  often  abortive.

History. — There  has  been  much  confusion  regarding  the  species  from
which  the  Angustura  Bark  is  obtained,  but  the  observations  of  Dr.
Hancock  have  conclusively  shown  that  the  bark  of  commerce  is  derived
from  a  tree  to  which  he  has  given  the  above  name.  The  tree  grows
abundantly  on  the  mountains  of  Carony  between  the  seventh  and  eighth
31


483  Materia Medica.

degrees  of  south  latitude,  and  is  well  known  in  the  district  of  country
bordering  on  the  Orinoco,  at  a  distance  of  two  hundred  miles  and
upward  from  the  ocean,  and  at  an  elevation  of  from  six  hundred  to  a
thousand  feet.  The  bark  is  generally  brought  from  the  West  India  ports,
in  casks.  It  is  in  flat  pieces  or  incomplete  quills,  from  two  to  eight
inches  long,  half  an  inch  to  one  and  a  half  inches  broad,  and  from  half
a  line  to  three  lines  in  thickness.  Externally  it  is  covered  with  a  dirty
grayish-yellow,  wrinkled  epidermis,  easily  removed  by  the  linger  nail,
and  internal^,  the  substance  of  the  bark  is  yellowish-brown.  It,  breaks
easily,  with  a  short,  resinous  fracture,  and  affords  a  powder  of  a  pale-
yellow  color,  somewhat  like  that  of  rhubarb.  When  macerated  in  water,
for  a  short  time,  it  becomes  soft  and  tenacious,  and  may  be  easily  cut
with  scissors.  It  has  a  peculiar,  disagreeable  odor,  becoming  fainter  by
age,  and  a  bitter,  aromatic,  hot,  but  not  unpleasant  taste.  Water,  alco-
hol, or  proof-spirits,  extract  its  virtues.  According  to  analysis  it  con-
tains bitter  extract,  bitter  resin,  gum,  volatile  oil,  a  soft  resin,  a  substance
resembling  caoutchouc,  lignin,  and  various  salts.  The  volatile  oil
may  be  obtained  by  distillation  with  water ;  it  is  acrid  to  the  taste,
odor  like  the  bark,  and  lighter  than  water.  It  also  contains  nearly
1.5  per  cent,  of  a  peculiar,  neutral,  crystalline  principle,  named  Cuqumn,
which  maybe  obtained  by  treating  an  infusion  of  the  bark  with  absolute
alcohol,  at  common  temperatures,  and  allow  it  to  evaporate  spontaneously;
the  crystals  thus  obtained  are  to  be  purified  by  repeated  crystalli-
zation from  alcohol,  and  agitation  with  ether  and  hydrated  oxide  of  lead.
It  forms  tetrahedral  crystals,  is  fusible  at  112°  F.,  and  loses  23.09  per
cent,  of  its  weight,  is  soluble  in  two  hundred  parts  of  cold,  and  one
hundred  parts  of  boiling  water,  freely  soluble  in  alcohol,  but  not  in
ether  or  volatile  oils,  readily  soluble  in  the  concentrated  acids,  and  more
sparingly  in  the  alkalies,  and  its  acid  solution  yields  a  whitish  precipitate
with  the  tincture  of  galls.  Some  years  since  a  poisonous  bark  was  intro-
duced as  the  true  bark,  and  the  administration  of  which  was  attended
with  fatal  results.  This  spurious  bark  was  at  first  supposed  to  be  the
product  of  the  Brucea  Ferruginea,  but  is  now  recognized  as  the  bark  of
Strychnos  Nux-vomica.  It  is  known  as  the  False  Angustura  Bark,  and
may  be  detected  by  its  greater  thickness,  hardness,  weight  and  compact-
ness, its  more  intense  bitterness  without  either  aroma  or  pungency  ;  by
the  appearance  of  its  epidermis,  which  is  sometimes  covered  with  a  fer-
ruginous efflorescence,  and  sometimes  is  yellowish-gray  and  marked  with
prominent  white  spots  ;  by  the  brownish-color  and  smoothness  of  its
internal  surface,  which  is  not  separable  into  laminse,  like  that  of  the  true
bark  ;  and  by  the  white,  slightly  yellow  powder  which  it  yields.  When
steeped  in  water  it  does  not  become  soft  like  the  genuine  drug-.  An
excellent  method  of  distinguishing  the  two  barks  is  by  the  action  of  nitric
acid,  a  drop  or  two  of  which,  applied  to  either  surface  of  the  true  bark,
produces  a  dull-red  color,  but  when  dropped  on  the  rusty  efflorescent


Galium  Aparine.  483

epidermis  of  the  spurious  article,  induces  an  emerald-green,  and  a  deep
blood-red  tint  on  its  internal  surface.  The  false  bark  is  seldom  seen
in  this  country.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  of  from  twenty  to  sixty  grains,
it  is  emetic  and  cathartic ;  in  doses  of  from  five  to  fifteen  grains,  tonic
and  febrifuge.  Recommended  in  bilious  diarrheas  and  dysenteries,
intermittents,  dropsies,  etc.  It  is  seldom  used,  on  account  of  its  liability
to  adulteration  with  the  poisonous  bark  of  the  Strychnos  Nux-vomica,
known  as  the  False  Angustura  Bark.


GALIUM APARINE.

Cleavers.

Nat.  Ord. — Eubiacese. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE HEKB.

Description. — This  plant  has  many  common  names,  as  Goose-grass,
Catch -weed,  Bed-straw,  etc. ;  it  is  an  annual,  succulent  plant,  with  a  weak,
procumbent,  quadrangular,  retrorsely-prickled  stem,  which  grows  from
two  to  six  feet  long,  and  is  hairy  at  the  joints.  The  leaves  are  one  or  two
inches  in  length,  and  two  or  three  lines  in  width,  verticillate  in  sixes,
sevens,  or  eights,  linear-oblanceolate,  nearly  sessile,  mucronate,  taper-
ing to  the  base,  rough  on  the  margins  and  midvein  ;  peduncles  axillary,
one  or  two-flowered.  Flowers  white,  small,  numerous,  scattered.  Calyx
four-toothed  ;  corolla  rotate,  four-parted ;  stamens  four,  short ;  styles
two. Fruit  large,  bristly  with  hooked  prickles.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  Europe  and  the  United  States,
growing  in  cultivated  grounds,  moist  thickets,  and  along  fences  and
hedges,  and  flowering  from  June  to  September.  Its  root  consists  of  a
few  hair-like  fibers,  of  a  reddish  color.  There  are  several  varieties  of
this  plant,  all  of  which  possess  similar  medicinal  virtues,  as  Galium
Asprellum,  or  Pointed  Cleavers,  which  differs  from  the  above  in  having
its  leaves  in  whorls  of  four  or  six,  and  smaller,  its  fruit  smooth,  its  stem
less  in  length,  and  is  perennial  ;  Galium  Verum,  or  Yellow  Bed-straw,
with  an  erect  stem,  leaves  in  whorls  of  eight,  root  long,  perennial,
fibrous,  flowers  densely  paniculate,  yellow,  and  terminal ;  Galium  Trifi-
dum  or  Small  Cleavers,  with  a  perennial  root,  decumbent  stem,  herb
smaller  than  the  others,  leaves  in  fours  or  fives,  and  white  flowers.

In  the  green  state  these  plants  have  an  unpleasant  odor,  but  are
inodorous  when  dried,  with  an  acidulous,  astringent,  and  bitter  taste.
Cold  or  warm  water  extracts  the  virtues  of  the  plants;  boiling  destroys
them.  They  have  not  been  analyzed.  The  roots  dye  a  permanent  red,
and  the  plant  when  eaten  by  animals,  colors  the  bones  similar  to  madder.
The  flowers  are  said  to  curdle  milk,  but  this  property  is  not  constant.


484  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  another  remedy  of  the  Eclectic  school
of  medicine,  the  virtues  of  which  are  unknown  to  allopaths.  It  is  a
most  valuable  refrigerant  and  diuretic,  and  will  be  found  very  beneficial
in  many  diseases  of  the  urinary  organs,  as  suppression  of  urine,  calcu-
lous affections,  inflammation  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder,  and  in  the
scalding  of  urine  in  gonorrhea.  It  is  contra-indicated  in  diseases  of  a
passive  character,  on  account  of  its  refrigerant  and  sedative  effects  on
the  system,  but  may  be  used  freely  in  fevers  and  all  acute  diseases.  It
has  been  recommended  in  scorbutic  and  nervous  affections,  but  cannot
be  depended  upon.  An  infusion  may  be  made  by  macerating  an  ounce
and  a  half  of  the  herb  in  a  pint  of  warm  water  for  two  hours,  of  which
from  two  to  four  fluidounces  may  be  given  three  or  four  times  a  day,
when  cold.  It  may  be  sweetened  with  sugar  or  honey.  Equal  parts  of
cleavers,  maidenhair,  and  elder-blows,  macerated  in  warm  water  for
two  or  three  hours,  and  drank  freely  when  cold,  form  an  excellent
drink  in  acute  erysipelas,  scarlatina,  and  other  exanthematous  diseases,
in  their  inflammatory  stages.

The  infusion  made  with  cold  water  is  also  considered  very  beneficial
in  removing  freckles  from  the  face,  likewise  lepra,  and  several  other
cutaneous  eruptions ;  the  diseased  parts  must  be  washed  with  it  several
times  a  day,  and  continued  for  two  or  three  months  in  cases  of  freckles.

Off.  Prep.  —  Infusum  Galii.


GAMBOGIA.

Gamboge.

THE CONCRETE JUICE OF AN UNCERTAIN TREE.

History.  —  In  relation  to  the  plant  from  which  this  gum-resin  is
derived  we  have  no  correct  information.  By  some,  it  is  laid  down  as
coming  from  the  Stalagmitis  Gambogioides,  upon  the  authority  of  Mur-
ray, but,  Dr.  Graham  has  satisfactorily  determined  that  there  is  no
such  plant  in  existence.  It  is  now  supposed  to  be  derived  from  trees  of
Ceylon,  which  produce  gum-resins  agreeing  closely  or  entirely  with  the
officinal  gamboge — these  are  the  Garcinia  Cambogia  and  the  Hebraden-
dron  Gambogioides,  which  last  is  supposed  to  be  the  tree  from  which  it
is  principally  had — though  on  merely  presumptive  evidence.  The  Heb.
Gambogioides  belongs  probably  to  the  class  and  order  of  the  sexual
system,  Monoecia  Monadelphia,  and  to  the  natural  order  Clusiacew  or
Gidtiferw.  It  is  a  moderate-sized  tree,  with  opposite,  petiolate,  obovate-
elliptical,  coriaceous,  smooth,  entire,  and  abruptly-acuminate,  shining
leaves,  dark-green  above,  and  paler  beneath.  The  flowers  are  unisexual,
sessile  and  axillary ;  the  calyx  membranous,  persistent,  and  consisting
of  four  sepals  ;  the  corolla  four-petalled  ;  the  fruit  is  a  pleasant,  saccha-
rine, quadrilocular  berry,  about  the  size  of  a  cherry,  crowned  with  a


Gambogia.  485

sessile  stigma,  and  containing  one  seed  in  each  division.  Incisions  are
made  into  the  tree,  or  a  large  slice  is  pared  from  the  bark,  from  which
the  juice  flows,  thick,  viscid,  and  bright-yellow,  which  is  scraped  off
and  dried  in  the  sun.  If  left  on  the  tree,  it  speedily  concretes  into  dry
tears  or  irregular  masses.  It  is  collected  in  Siam  and  Cochin- China,
and  sent  to  Canton  and  Calcutta,  from  which  places  it  is  imported  into
this  country.

The  best  kinds  are  the  Pipe  gamboge,  and  Ceylon  gamboge,  which  last
is  seldom  had  in  this  country.  The  pipe  gamboge  is  in  cylindrical  rolls,
from  one  to  two  inches  in  diameter,  sometimes  hollow  internally,  doubled,
or  agglutinated  into  irregular  cakes  weighing  some  pounds,  and  much
flattened.  Externally  they  are  striated,  of  a  dull  orange  color,  some-
times of  a  greenish  tinge,  derived  from  the  reeds  into  which  they  are
molded.  Pipe  gamboge  is  of  a  yellow-orange  color,  which  deepens  on
exposure  to  the  air,  brittle  with  a  conchoidal,  smooth,  and  glistening
fracture ;  it  possesses  but  little  smell,  and  a  taste  at  first  insipid,  but  suc-
ceeded by  an  acrid  sensation  in  the  fauces.  It  forms  a  yellow,  smooth,
rather  persistent  emulsion  with  water,  and  is  soluble  in  the  alkalies,  and
the  essential  oils  ;  alcohol  dissolves  all  the  resin,  leaving  the  gum ;
water  forms  only  an  emulsion  with  it.  Sulphuric  ether  dissolves  most
of  the  resin,  and  ammoniated  alcohol  forms  a  solution  with  it  which  is
not  disturbed  by  water.  The  resin  is  the  active  principle.  Its  specific
gravity  is  1.221.  The  strong  acids  dissolve  it,  and  deposit  a  yellow
precipitate  when  water  is  added  to  the  solution.  It  has  been  called
Gambogic  acid,  as  it  has  the  property  of  combining  with  salifiable  bases.
It  contains  nearly  four  parts  of  resin,  one  of  gum,  beside  water  and
impurities.  Its  color,  as  well  as  its  medical  properties,  resides  in  the
resin  ;  one  part  of  which  will  impart  a  yellowish  tinge  to  ten  thousand
parts  of  water  or  spirit.

A  variety  called  Cake  or  Lump  gamboge  is  sometimes  imported  ;  it  is  in
irregular  masses  of  two  or  three  pounds,  containing  many  sticks  or  other
impurities,  is  less  brittle  than  the  pipe,  vesicular,  splintery  in  fracture,
and  without  luster,  but  in  other  respects  resembling  the  finest  gamboge.
Other  varieties  are  occasionally  seen,  but  they  are  all  of  inferior  quality.
The  inferior  kinds  may  be  recognized  by  their  many  impurities,  their
greater  hardness  and  coarser  fracture,  by  the  brownish  or  grayish  color
of  their  broken  surface,  which  is  often  marked  with  black  spots,  and  by
the  green  color  imparted  to  their  decoction,  when  cooled,  on  the  addition
of  tincture  of  iodine.  The  pure  gum-resin  is  completely  dissolved  by  the
successive  action  of  ether  and  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  gamboge  is  a  powerful  irritant,
causing  gastro -enteritis,  and  death  ;  and  is  said  to  produce  diffuse  inflam-
mation of  the  cellular  tissue,  when  applied  beneath  the  skin.  On
account  of  its  severity  of  action,  and  its  liability  to  cause  serious  symp-


486  Materia Medica.

toms,  it  is  seldom  employed  singly,  as  a  purgative;  yet  when  combined
with  other  cathartics  it  forms  a  safe  and  excellent  physic.  It  may,  how-
ever, be  safely  administered  alone  in  moderate  doses,  by  reducing  it  to  a
state  of  fine  division  with  other  comparatively  inert  powders,  as  sulphate,
or  bitartrate  of  potassa.  It  thus  operates  effectually  as  a  hydragogue,
without  occasioning  much  tormina  or  constitutional  exhaustion.  In
medicinal  doses  it  is  a  drastic,  hydragogue  cathartic,  causing  nausea,
griping,  and  copious  watery  stools,  on  which  account  it  is  often  used  in
dropsy,  in  combination  with  squills,  cream  of  tartar,  etc.  It  has  also
been  used  for  the  expulsion  of  tapeworm,  in  torpor  of  the  bowels,  dys-
menorrhea, etc.  Two  grains  of  sulphate  of  quinia  combined  with  one
grain  and  one-fourth  of  gamboge,  and  administered  three  times  a  day,
have  been  highly  recommended  in  cases  of  long-continued  constitutional
debility,  with  constipation.  United  with  an  alkali,  it  acts  upon  the
kidneys,  and  proves  diuretic.

Its  use  is  contra-indicated  in  gastritis,  enteritis,  during  pregnancy,
menorrhagia,  hemorrhoids,  in  excited,  irritable,  or  diseased  uterus,  and
where  there  is  irritation  or  disease  of  the  urinary  organs.  When  taken
in  large  doses,  or  when  it  acts  with  severity,  the  best  remedy  to  coun-
teract its  dangerous  effects,  is  a  solution  of  some  alkali,  as  pearl-ash
water,  to  be  followed  by  general  treatment  if  inflammatory  symptoms  be
present.  Dose,  in  pill,  powder,  or  alkaline  solution,  from  one  to  fifteen
grains  ;  the  larger  doses  given  in  small  quantities,  and  repeated  at  short
intervals  until  it  operates.

Off.  Prep. — Pilulse  Aloes  Compositae ;  Pilulse  Gambogise  Compo-
sitae;  Pilulse  Podophyllini  Compositae.


GAULTHERIA  PROCUMBENS.
Wintergreen.

Nat. Ord. — Ericaceae Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant  is  known  in  various  sections  of  country  under
different  names,  as  Mountain  tea,  Deerberry,  Partridgeberry,  Checkerberry,
Teaberry,  Boxberry,  etc.  It  is  a  small,  indigenous,  shrubby,  evergreen
plant,  with  a  long,  slender,  horizontal,  creeping  root,  which  sends  up  at
intervals  one  or  two  erect,  slender,  round,  reddish  stems,  a  few  inches  in
bight,  naked  below,  and  leafy  at  the  top.  The  leaves  are  alternate,
ovate  or  obovate,  mucronate,  remotely  denticulate,  smooth,  coriaceous,
shining,  acute  at  each  end,  evergreen,  paler  beneath,  and  revolute  at  the
edges.  The  jlowers  are  few,  white,  or  flesh-colored,  three  to  five  on
each  stem,  on  terminal,  axillary,  downy-curved  and  drooping  peduncles.
The  calyx  is  five-cleft,  with  two  concave,  heart-shaped  bracts  at  base,
and  finally  changes  into  a  fleshy  covering  to  the  fruit. Corolla  ovate


Gaulthebu  Procumbens.  487

or  urceolate,  contracted  at  its  mouth,  five-angled,  white  or  flesh-colored,
and  divided  at  its  border  into  five  short,  acute,  reflexed  segments.  Sta-
mens ten,  rose-colored,  with  white,  curved,  plumose  filaments,  alternating
with  the  short  scales  of  the  receptacle.  Anthers  oblong,  orange-colored,
ending  in  two  double  horns,  opening  outwardly  for  their  whole  length
above  the  filaments;  pollen  white,  ovary  roundish,  depressed,  five-
angled,  and  resting  upon  a  reddish,  ten-toothed,  glandular  disk  ;  style
erect,  filiform ;  stigma  simple,  obtuse.  The  fruit  is  a  small,  five-celled,
five-valved,  many-seeded  capsule,  inclosed  in  the  fleshy  calyx,  which
becomes  of  a  bright  scarlet  color.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,  growing  from
Canada  to  Georgia,  and  westward  to  Pennsylvania  and  Kentucky,  in
mountainous  tracts,  dry  barrens,  and  sandy  plains,  beneath  the  shade
of  trees  and  shrubs,  and  flowering  from  June  to  September.  It  is  never
found  in  rich  alluvions  or  limestone  plains.  The  leaves  are  officinal,  yet
all  parts  of  the  plant  may  be  used  ;  they  have  a  peculiar  aromatic  taste
and  odor,  somewhat  resembling  that  of  the  Sweet  Birch  bark,  (Belula
Lenta,)  with  some  astringency,  and  in  the  berries  some  sweetness.  The
berries  are  eaten  by  many  persons,  and  form  an  article  of  food  with  par-
tridges, deer,  and  other  wild  animals.  The  astringency  of  the  lea,ves  is
owing  to  the  presence  of  tannic  acid;  the  aromatic  properties  depend
upon  a  volatile  oil,  which  is  separable  by  distillation.  It  is  the  heaviest
of  the  known  volatile  oils,  is  colorless  at  first,  but  subsequently  becomes
more  or  less  red,  has  a  specific  gravity  of  1.173,  a  burning  and  aromatic
taste,  possesses  acid  properties,  and  is  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether.  Water
by  infusion,  and  alcohol,  extract  the  virtues  of  the  plant.

Properties  and  Uses. — Wintergreen  possesses  stimulant,  aromatic,  and
astringent  properties.  It  is  used  in  infusion  in  chronic  diarrhea,  as  a
diuretic  in  dysury,  as  an  emmenagogue,  as  a  stimulant  in  cases  of  debi-
lity, and  is  said  to  increase  the  secretion  of  milk,  but  this  is  doubtful.
Its  chief  use  is  to  flavor  syrups,  mixtures,  etc.,  for  which  purpose  the
oil,  or  its  tincture  is  generally  employed.  The  oil  allays  the  pain  of
carious  teeth,  and  large  doses  of  it  administered  internally  have  caused
death  by  producing  gastric  inflammation  ;  the  essence  of  wintergreen  is
a  carminative,  and  is  sometimes  used  in  the  flatulent  colic  of  infants.
An  infusion  of  the  leaves  or  whole  plant,  may  be  drank  freely.

The  Gaultheria  Hispidula,  or  Cancer  wintergreen,  is  supposed  to  be
efficacious  in  removing  the  carcinomatous  taint  from  the  system ;  used
also  in  scrofula,  prolapsus  uteri.

Off.  Prep. — Oleum  Gaultherise.


488  Materia  Medica.

GELSEMINUM  SEMPERVIRENS.

Yellow  Jessamine.

Nat. Ord. — Apocynaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  likewise  known  by  the  names  of  Wild  Jes-
samine, and  Woodbine;  it  is  the  Bignonia  Sempervirens  of  Linnaeus,  and
the  Gelseminum  Nitidum  of  Michaux  and  Pursh.  It  has  a  twining,
smooth,  glabrous  stem,  with  opposite,  perennial,  lanceolate,  entire  leaves,
which  are  dark-green  above,  and  pale  beneath,  and  which  stand  on  short
petioles.  The  flowers  are  yellow,  having  an  agreeable,  but  rather  nar-
cotic odor,  and  stand  on  axillary  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  very  small,
with  five  sepals  ;  the  corolla  is  funnel-form,  with  a  spreading  border,  and
five  lobes  nearly  equal.  Stamens  five  ;  pistils  two.  Capsule  two-celled,
compressed,  flat,  two-partible.  Seeds  fiat,  and  attached  to  the  margins
of  the  valves.

History. — This  plant  was  brought  into  notice,  as  far  as  we  can  learn,
in  the  following  manner :  A  planter  of  Mississippi,  whose  name  we  have
forgotten,  while  laboring  under  a  severe  attack  of  bilious  fever,  which
resisted  all  the  usual  remedies,  sent  a  servant  into  his  garden  to  procure
a  certain  medicinal  root,  and  prepare  an  infusion  of  it  for  him  to  drink.
The  servant,  by  mistake,  collected  another  root,  and  gave  an  infusion  of
it  to  his  master,  who,  shortly  after  swallowing  some  of  it,  was  seized
with  a  complete  loss  of  muscular  power,  unable  to  move  a  limb,  or  even
raise  his  eyelids,  although  he  could  hear,  and  was  cognizant  of  circum-
stances transpiring  around  him.  His  friends  greatly  alarmed,  collected
around  him,  watching  the  result  with  much  anxiety,  and  expecting  every
minute  to  see  him  breathe  his  last.  After  some  hours,  he  gradually
recovered  himself,  and  was  astonished  to  find  that  his  fever  had  left  him.
Ascertaining  from  his  servant  what  plant  it  was  the  root  of  which  acted
in  this  manner,  he  collected  some  of  it,  and  employed  it  successfully  on
his  own  plantation,  as  well  as  among  his  neighbors.  The  success  of  this
article  finally  reached  the  ears  of  some  physician,  who  prepared  from  it
a  nostrum  called  the  "Electrical  Febrifuge,"  which  was  disguised  with
the  essence  of  wintergreen.  The  plant  was  the  Yellow  Jessamine,  and
a  knowledge  of  its  remarkable  effects  was  not  communicated  to  the  pro-
fession until  recently.

The  Yellow  Jessamine  abounds  throughout  the  Southern  States,  grow-
ing luxuriantly,  and  climbing  from  tree  to  tree,  forming  an  agreeable
shade.  On  account  of  its  fine  yellow  flowers,  and  the  rich  perfume
which  they  impart  to  the  surrounding  atmosphere,  as  well  as  the  shade
it  affords,  it  is  extensively  cultivated  in  the  gardens  of  the  South  as  an
ornamental  vine.  The  flowers  appear  from  March  to  May.  The  root  is
the  officinal  part,  and  yields  its  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol. It  is  several


Gelseminum  Sempervirens.  489

feet  in  length,  with  scattered  fibers,  and  is  from  two  or  three  lines  in
diameter  to  nearly  two  inches.  The  internal  part  of  the  root  is  woody,
and  of  a  light  yellowish  color ;  the  external  part,  or  bark,  in  which  the
medicinal  virtues  are  said  principally  to  reside,  is  of  a  light  snuff-color,
and  from  half  a  line  to  three  lines  in  thickness.  The  root  of  this  plant
has  been  said  to  contain  a  resin  which  is  poisonous  in  very  small  doses,
and  a  tincture,  made  by  digesting  it  in  undiluted  alcohol,  is  stated  to
have  proved  fatal.  This  statement  is  denied,  and  upon  good  grounds,  for
were  it  true,  death  would  necessarily  follow  the  use  of  the  tincture  made
with  undiluted  alcohol,  in  consequence  of  the  presence  of  this  resin  which
would  still  be  taken  up  by  the  alcohol  in  a  proportion  corresponding  to  the
alcoholic  strength  of  the  solvent.  Again,  it  has  been  asserted,  that  the
deaths  which  have  occurred  where  this  article  was  used,  were  owing,
not  to  the  Gelseminum,  but  to  the  presence  of  another  very  poisonous
root,  somewhat  resembling  it,  which  was  carelessly  or  ignorantly  collected
and  mixed  with  it.  Others  again,  state  that  they  have  given  large  doses
without  any  serious  consequences,  and  in  one  case,  six  fiuidrachms  of  the
tincture  were  swallowed  by  a  lad  twenty  years  of  age,  without  any  per-
manent injury.  Notwithstanding  these  statements,  death  has  followed
the  employment  of  what  was  supposed  to  be  the  tincture  of  gelseminum,
in  a  few  instances,  and  further  investigations  are  required  to  determine
its  probable  cause,  and  whether  this  agent  will  produce  any  fatal  results
in  large  medicinal  doses.  Yellow  Jessamine  may  be  administered  in
decoction,  infusion,  or  tincture.  It  is  reputed  incompatible  with  no  known
substance,  but  this  remains  to  be  satisfactorily  determined.

Dr.  Hiram  H.  Hill,  formerly  of  the  firm  of  F.  D.  Hill  &  Co.,  of  Cin-
cinnati, has  collected  many  hundreds  of  pounds  of  the  Gelseminum  root
in  the  South.  I  am  indebted  to  him  for  the  following  statement  of  it.
"The  length  of  the  Gelseminum  root,  in  clay  soil,  is  from  three  to  ten
feet,  and  on  the  Magnolia  ridges,  and  along  small  streams,  I  have  traced
some  roots  to  the  extent  of  thirty  feet,  although  the  average  length  is
about  fifteen.  Like  the  roots  of  many  other  vines,  it  is  branching,  with
scattered  fibers,  and  runs  horizontally  near  the  surface  of  the  ground,
sometimes  merely  under  the  leaves,  for  several  feet.  When  first  pulled
up  it  is  very  yellow,  and  has  a  peculiar  odor,  like  that  of  the  tincture,
with  a  bitter,  rather  pleasant  taste  to  most  persons,  at  least  people  were
constantly  tasting  or  chewing  it,  while  I  was  collecting  it.  The  vine  is
of  a  green  color,  and  always  runs  to  the  top  of  the  tree  or  bush  on  which
it  fastens,  then  branches  out,  covering  the  topmost  branches  with  its
thick  foliage.  I  have  seen  it  on  trees  that  were  fifty  feet  in  night,  and
the  size  of  the  vine  was  the  same  near  the  top  as  at  the  ground  ;  its  gen-
eral length  is  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet.  The  bark  of  the  vine  is  full
of  a  silk-like  fiber,  which  is  not  found  in  other  vines  that  I  have  seen.
On  old  vines,  the  leaves  are  about  one  and  a  half  inches  in  length,  of  a
dark-green  color,  lance-shaped,  and  on  short  footstalks ;  on  young  vines


490  Materia  Medica.

or  shoots  they  are  longer  and  are  four  or  five  inches  apart,  while  on  the
old  ones  they  are  very  close  and  always  opposite.  The  flowers  are  fun-
nel-shaped and  yellow.  The  vine,  the  root  of  which  is  sometimes
gathered  by  mistake  for  the  Gelseminum,  resembles  it  very  much  in
appearance,  though  it  is  of  a  lighter  color,  and  the  outer  bark  is  covered
with  white  specks  or  marks  somewhat  similar  to  those  on  young  cherry
or  peach  limbs,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  old  vines  become  rough  and
have  small  tendrils  that  fasten  upon  the  bark  of  trees,  and  which  are
never  seen  on  the  Gelseminum.  The  bark  of  the  vine  is  also  more
brittle,  and  the  leaves  are  always  on  long  footstalks  which  are  opposite,
at  the  end  of  which  are  two  opposite  leaves,  almost  exactly  resembling
the  leaf  of  the  Aristolochia  Serpentaria.  The  root  is  almost  white,  very
tough,  straight,  and  about  the  same  length  of  the  medicinal  root,  and  has  a
slightly  bitter,  disagreeable,  nauseating  taste.  I  never  saw  any  of  the
flowers,  though  they  are  said  to  resemble  the  others  in  shape,  but  are
snowy- white,  with  a  slight,  unpleasant  odor.  The  vine  is  called  While
Poison  Vine,  and  While  Jessamine."

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Gelseminum  is,  undoubtedly,  an  unrivaled
febrifuge,  and  which  appears  to  be  dependent  upon  its  relaxing  and
antispasmodic  properties.  Whether  it  is  a  narcotic,  is  not  yet  satis-
factorily established.  It  has  recently  been  employed  in  the  form  of
tincture  by  many  respectable  physicians,  who  speak  highly  of  it  in  all
fevers,  except  the  congestive  form,  in  which  its  use  is  considered  injuri-
ous. It  has  also  proved  efficacious  in  nervous  and  bilious  headache,
colds,  pneumonia,  hemorrhages,  leucorrhea,  chorea,  ague-cake,  and
several  other  diseases,  though  it  is  in  fevers  especially  in  which  its
efficacy  has  been  mostly  observed.  It  is  said  by  some  to  be  the  only
agent  ever  yet  discovered  capable  of  subduing,  in  from  two  to  twenty
hours,  and  without  the  least  possible  injury  to  the  patient,  the  most
formidable  and  most  complicated  as  well  as  the  most  simple  fevers  inci-
dent to  our  country  and  climate,  quieting  all  nervous  irritability  and
excitement,  equalizing  the  circulation,  promoting  perspiration,  and
rectifying  the  various  secretions,  without  causing  nausea,  vomiting  or
purging,  and  is  also  adapted  to  any  stage  of  the  disease.  It  may
follow  any  preceding  treatment  with  safety.  Its  effects  are  clouded
vision,  double  sightedness,  or  even  complete  prostration,  and  inability  to
open  the  eyes,  and  which  gradually  pass  off  in  a  few  hours,  leaving  the
patient  refreshed,  and  completely  restored  ;  and  as  soon  as  the  heavi-
ness or  partial  closing  of  the  eyes  is  induced,  no  more  of  the  remedy
is  necessary,  although  these  effects  should  even  follow  the  first  dose.
If  carried  to  such  an  extent  that  the  patient  cannot  open  his  eyes,  the
relaxation  may  be  too  great  for  the  system  to  recover  from,  hence  its
use  should  cease,  as  soon  as  the  symptoms  above-named  have  been
produced.


Gelseminum  Sempervirens.  491

The  tincture  is  the  form  in  which  it  is  employed ;  the  dose  is  from
ten  to  fifty  drops,  in  a  wineglass  half- full  of  water,  to  be  repeated  every
two  hours  ;  the  second  dose,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  usually  effecting
the  cure.  From  two  to  ten  grains  of  quinia,  according  to  the  severity
and  character  of  the  disease,  should  accompany  each  dose,  or  it  is  said
the  system  will  again  relapse  into  the  febrile  state,  in  a  few  hours,  for
want  of  tonicity  following  the  relaxation  produced  by  the  remedy.  The
original  discoverers  of  the  use  of  the  article  say,  however,  that  the
quinia  is  not  actually  necessary,  but  that  its  addition  renders  the  cure
more  prompt,  and,  by  its  combination,  its  usually  unpleasant  effects,  as
determination  to  the  head,  etc.,  are  completely  obviated.  When  the
fever  does  not  yield  in  six  hours,  a  mild  purgative  may  be  administered,
or  podophyllin  in  small  doses,  may  be  added  to  the  medicine  ;  if  diarrhea
be  present,  add  an  opiate  to  it.

In  the  treatment  of  typhus  and  typhoid  fevers,  it  should  be  given  in
smaller  doses,  say  from  three  to  eight  drops  of  the  tincture,  with  from
two  to  four  grains  of  sulphate  of  quinia,  and  repeated  every  two  or
three  hours  until  the  more  active  febrile  symptoms  subside  ;  then  give
one  or  two  grains  of  the  quinia,  every  two  hours,  and  eight  or  ten  drops
of  the  tincture  of  Gelseminum,  every  six  or  eight  hours.  A  writer
observes,  that  his  experience  in  the  treatment  of  fevers,  with  this  agent,
inclines  him  to  believe  that  when  given  in  doses  sufficiently  large  to
produce  its  full  and  complete  constitutional  effects,  it  impairs  the  tonicity
of  the  muscular  fibers  of  the  heart  (which  are  always  weakened  in
those  fevers),  and  thus  retards  or  prolongs  convalescence.

Gelseminum  possesses  a  most  perfect  control  over  the  nervous  system,
removing  nervous  irritability  more  completely  than  any  other  known
agent.  It  may  be  used  in  all  forms  of  neuralgia,  nervous  headache,
toothache,  and  lockjaw  or  tetanus.  It  is  recommended  in  this  last
difficulty,  as  an  agent  that  may  be  relied  upon  with  definite  certainty.
In  gout  and  rheumatism,  it  may  be  advantageously  added  to  the  tinc-
tures of  guaiacum,  or  of  colchicum.  Combined  with  mild  diuretic  and
secernent  agents,  nephritic  and  cystic  irritability,  and  leucorrhea,  have
readily  yielded.

Upon  the  uterus  it  appears  to  exert  an  opposite  influence,  for  while  it
produces  complete  and  powerful  relaxtion  of  every  other  tissue,  it  tends
to  promote  contraction  of  the  uterus;  causing  an  influence  intermediate
between  ergot  and  cimicifuga,  it  being  less  energetic  than  the  former,
and  more  so  than  the  latter.  This  property,  when  continued,  as  it  is,
with  its  relaxing  effects  upon  every  other  tissue,  promises  to  render  it  an
important  aid  in  parturition.

Externally,  the  tincture  will  be  found  of  service,  in  neuralgic  and
rheumatic  pains.  Its  internal  administration  is  contra-indicated  in  con-
gestive fever,  in  cases  where  there  is  great  muscular  or  nervous  prostra-
tion with  relaxation,  and  when  there  exists  a  determination  to  the  brain


492  Materia  Medica.

or  other  important  viscus.  Like  all  newly  discovered  agents  which
possess  active  and  efficacious  influences,  this  has  probably  been  too
highly  lauded,  yet  if  one-half  of  the  virtues  reported  to  exist  in  this
plant  are  true,  it  is  certainly  deserving  the  close  investigation  of  all
classes  of  physicians.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Gelsemini.


GENTIANA  LUTEA.

Gentian.

Nat. Ord. — Gentianaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  has  a  long,  thick,  cylindrical,  wrinkled,
ringed,  forked,  perennial  root,  brown  externally,  and  yellow  within.
The  stem  is  three  or  four  feet  high,  simple,  erect,  round,  hollow,  and
somewhat  annulated  at  base.  The  radical  leaves  are  narrowed  at  the
base  into  the  form  of  a  petiole,  ovate-oblong,  five-nerved,  plaited,  and
two  or  three  inches  broad ;  the  cauline  leaves  are  sessile,  ovate,  concave,
acute,  smooth,  pedunculate,  in  dense  whorls,  and  of  a  yellowish-green
color;  the  leaves  next  the  flowers  are  cordate,  amplexicaul,  concave;  all
a  pale,  bright  green.  The  flowers  are  large,  bright  yellow,  peduncled,
and  in  whorls  at  the  axils  of  the  upper  leaves.  The  calyx  is  monophyl-
lous,  membranous,  yellowish,  semi-transparent,  three  or  four  cleft,  with
short,  lanceolate,  unequal  segments.  The  corolla  is  rotate,  with  a  very
short  tube,  five  or  six  green  glands  at  the  base,  and  divided  into  five  or
six  long,  narrow,  veiny,  spreading  segments.  The  filaments  vary  from
five  to  eight,  are  shorter  than  the  corolla,  and  alternate  with  its  segments,
and  are  furnished  with  long,  erect,  subulate,  somewhat  united  anthers.
The  ovary  is  conical,  supporting  two  sessile,  reflected  stigmas.  The
capsule  is  conical,  two-valved,  one-celled,  containing  numerous,  small,
roundish,  compressed  seeds,  with  brownish  membranous  edges.

History. — This  plant  grows  among  the  Alps,  Appenines,  Pyrenees,
and  other  mountainous  regions  of  Europe.  The  root  is  the  only  part
used  in  medicine,  and  is  imported  from  Germany.  It  is  met  with  in
pieces  of  various  sizes,  seldom  above  an  inch  in  thickness,  split  length-
wise if  large,  marked  with  annular  wrinkles,  and  longitudinal  furrows;
sometimes  it  is  met  with  in  transversely  cut  pieces.  It  consists  of  an
external  reddish-yellow  layer,  separated  by  a  dark  reddish-brown  line,
and  a  grayish-yellow,  or  reddish  spongy  center.  It  has  a  feeble,  aro-
matic odor,  and  a  taste  at  first  faintly  sweetish,  and  then  purely  intensely
and  permanently  bitter.  It  imparts  its  virtues  readily  to  cold  or  hot
water,  alcohol,  wine,  spirit,  or  sulphuric  ether.  It  contains  according  to
Henry  and  Caventou,  gentianin,  a  volatile  odorous  principle,  a  substance


Gentiana  Lutea.  493

analogous  to  birdlime,  a  greenish  fixed  oil,  a  free  organic  acid,  uncrys-
tallizable  sugar,  gum,  yellow-coloring  matter,  pectic  acid,  and  lignin.
The  gentianin,  so  named  by  Henry  and  Caventou,  from  a  supposition
that  it  was  the  active  principle  of  the  root,  has  been  shown,  by  M.  Le-
conte,  to  be  impure  genistic  acid,  and  is,  when  quite  pure,  destitute  of
bitterness  and  medicinal  power.  It  may  be  obtained  in  pale-yellow,
needle-shaped  crystals,  insoluble  in  water,  and  soluble  in  alcohol,  by
treating  the  alcoholic  extract  of  gentian,  previously  exhausted  by  water,
with  sulphuric  ether,  filtering  the  ethereal  solution,  and  allowing  it  to
evaporate  spontaneously.  M.  Leconte  also  considers  the  birdlime  or
glue  to  be  a  combination  of  wax,  oil,  and  caoutchouc.  When  distilled
with  water,  gentian  yields  a  minute  quantity  of  concrete  oil,  having  the
odor  of  the  root.  When  the  root  is  macerated  in  cold  water,  on  the
addition  of  yeast  to  the  infusion  vinous  fermentation  ensues,  from  which
a  bitter  liquor  is  obtained  by  distillation,  much  prized  in  some  parts  of
Switzerland  as  a  stomachic.

The  bitter  principle  of  the  root  may  be  obtained  by  macerating  the
alcoholic  extract  in  water,  and  then  subjecting  the  solution  to  the  vinous
fermentation  in  order  to  separate  the  sugar.  It  is  then  to  be  treated
with  acetate  of  lead,  filtered,  and  treated  with  subacetate  of  lead  and  a
very  little  ammonia,  in  order  to  precipitate  the  combination  of  the  vege-
table principle  with  oxide  of  lead ;  if  too  much  ammonia  be  added,  in
consequence  of  its  stronger  basic  powers,  it  will  separate  the  vegetable
principle  from  the  oxide.  The  precipitate  obtained  is  to  be  washed  with
a  little  water,  then  mixed  with  a  large  proportion  of  the  same  fluid,  and
decomposed  by  hydrosulphuric  acid.  The  liquid  is  to  be  filtered,
evaporated  to  dryness  with  a  gentle  heat,  the  residue  treated  with  alco-
hol of  0.820,  and  the  alcoholic  solution  evaporated.  This  gives  a
brownish-yellow,  uncrystallizable  substance,  very  bitter,  almost  insoluble
in  absolute  alcohol,  soluble  in  ordinary  alcohol,  and  very  soluble  in
water.  It  possesses  acid  properties.  Gentianin  is  the  name  proposed
for  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  powerful  tonic,  excites  the  appetite,  invigor-
ates digestion,  and  moderately  increases  the  circulation  and  temperature
of  the  body.  Used  in  cases  of  debility  and  exhaustion,  and  in  all  cases
where  a  tonic  is  required,  as  dyspepsia,  gout,  amenorrhea,  hysteria,
scrofula,  intermittents,  diarrhea,  worms,  etc.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from
ten  to  thirty  grains;  of  the  extract,  from  one  to  ten  grains;  of  infusion,
one  or  two  fluidounces  ;  of  tincture,  one  or  two  fluidrachms.  When  taken
in  large  doses,  it  is  apt  to  oppress  the  stomach,  irritate  the  bowels,  and
even  produce  nausea  and  vomiting.  Its  administration  is  contra-indi-
cated where  gastric  irritability  is  present.

Dr.  Kuchenmeister  believes  that  impure  and  uncrystallized  gentianin
is  the  most  valuable  substitute  for  quinia,  acting  as  rapidly,  and  as  effica-
ciously on  the  spleen,  in  doses  of  from  fifteen  to  thirty  grains  twice  a  day.


494  Materia  Medica.

Gentiana  Catesbei,  Blue,  or  American  Gentian,  has  a  perennial,
branching,  somewhat  fleshy  root,  with  a  simple,  erect,  rough  stem,  eight
or  ten  inches  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  ovate  or  lanceolate,
slightly  three-veined,  acute,  rough  on  the  margin.  Flowers  large,  blue,
crowded,  subsessile,  axillary,  and  terminal.  Calyx  divided  into  four  or
five  linear-lanceolate  segments,  which  are  longer  than  the  tube.  Corolla
large,  blue,  ventricose,  plaited ;  its  border  divided  into  ten  segments,  of
which  the  outer  five  are  roundish  and  more  or  less  acute,  and  the  inner
five  bifid  and  imbricate.  Stamens  five,  with  dilated  filaments  and  sagit-
tate anthers.  Ovary  oblong-lanceolate,  compressed,  supported  by  a
sort  of  pedicel.  Style  none;  stigmas  two,  oblong,  reflexed.  Capsule
oblong,  acuminate,  one-celled  and  two-valved.  This  plant  grows  in  the
grassy  swamps  and  meadows  of  North  and  South  Carolina,  flowering
from  September  to  December.  The  root  is  little  inferior  to  the  foreign
gentian,  and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  it  in  all  cases,  in  the  same
doses  and  preparations.  Alcohol  and  boiling  water  extract  its  virtues.
Probably  the  Gentiana  Saponaria,  or  Soapwort  Gentian,  the  Gentiana
Pneumonanthe,  or  Marsh  Gentian,  and  the  Gentiana  Crinita,  or  Blue
Fringed  Gentian,  possess  analogous  medicinal  virtues.

Off.  Prep.  —  Extractum  Gentianae  ;  Extractum  Gentianae  Fluidum ;
Vinum  Symphyti  Compositum.

GENTIANA OCHROLEUCA.

Ochroleucous  Gentian.
Nat.  Ord. — Gentianaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT AND TOPS.

Description. — This  plant  is  likewise  known  by  the  names  of  Marsh
Gentian,  Yellowish-white  Gentian,  Straw-colored  Gentian,  Sampson  Snake-
root,  etc. ;  it  has  a  stout,  ascending  stem,  mostly  smooth,  and  from  one
to  two  inches  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  from  two  to  four  inches  long,  by
three-quarters  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  wide,  obovate-oblong,
sessile  or  ampltxicaul,  margins  slightly  scabrous,  and  narrowed  at  the
base ;  the  lowest  are  broadly  ovate  and  obtuse,  the  uppermost  some-
what lanceolate.  The  flowers  are  straw-colored,  two  inches  long  by
three-quarters  of  an  inch  thick,  and  disposed  in  a  dense  terminal  cyme,
and  often  also  in  axillary  cymes.  The  calyx  is  five-cleft,  the  lobes  un-
equal, linear,  longer  than  the  tube,  and  shorter  than  the  corolla.  The
corolla  is  clavate,  connivent  or  slightly  expanding  at  top,  ochroleucous
or  straw-color,  with  green  veins  and  lilac-purple  stripes  internally;  its
lobes  ovate,  obtuse  ;  the  folds  entire,  acute,  short.  Anthers  separate.
Capsule  or  pod  included  in  the  persistent  corolla.  Seeds  entirely
wingless.

History. — This  plant  is  found  growing  in  dry  grounds,  especially
through  the  middle  and  low  country  of  the  Southern  States,  flowering


Geraniin.  495

in  September  and  October.  Said  likewise  to  inhabit  Canada  and  the
Western  States,  but  this  must  be  rare.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,
and  the  tops  are  also  often  emplo)red.  They  are  bitter  to  the  taste,  and
probably  possess  the  medicinal  properties,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,
of  the  preceding  plants  of  the  same  family.  Alcohol  or  boiling  water
extracts  their  virtues.  None  of  the  American  gentians  have  been  satis-
factorily analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Bitter  tonic,  anthelmintic,  and  astringent.
Used  in  dyspepsia,  intermittents,  dysentery,  and  all  diseases  of  perio-
dicity. To  two  ounces  of  the  tops  and  roots,  pour  on  one  and  a  half  pints
of  boiling  water,  and  when  nearly  cold,  add  half  a  pint  of  brandy.  Dose,
from  half  a  fiuidounce  to  four  fluidounces,  every  half  hour,  gradually
increased  as  the  stomach  can  bear  it,  at  the  same  time  lengthening  the
intervals  between  the  doses.  Also  used  for  bites  of  snakes,  and  in
typhus  fevers,  pneumonia,  etc.


GERANIIN.
Geraniin.

THE CONCENTRATED EXTRACT OF GERANIUM MACULATUM.

Preparation. — Geraniin  is  obtained  by  making  a  saturated  tincture  of
the  root  of  Geranium  Maculatum,  filtering,  distilling  off  a  part  of  the
alcohol,  adding  water  to  the  rest,  and  evaporating  to  dryness.  The
operation  is  similar  to  that  for  preparing  podophyllin.

History. — Geraniin  is  especially  an  Eclectic  remedy,  and  is  but  little
known  among  the  other  schools  of  medicine.  It  was  first  prepared  by
Mr.  Wm.  S.  Merrell,  of  Cincinnati.  It  is  a  black  substance,  forming  a
dark-brown,  glistening  powder,  of  a  faint  odor,  somewhat  like  that  of
molasses,  and  an  astringent,  acidulous  taste,  leaving  a  flavor  in  the
mouth  somewhat  resembling  that  of  good  green  tea.  Cold  water  added
to  it  does  not  appear  to  dissolve  any,  but  when  filtered  gives  an  acid
reaction,  turning  blue  litmus  paper  red,  and  on  the  addition  of  sulphate
of  iron  becomes  a  deep-bluish  black,  forming  a  good  writing  ink.  Am-
monia added  to  water  in  which  geraniin  is  placed,  partially  dissolves  it;
liquor  potassa  added,  completely  dissolves  it  forming  a  black  solution  ;
muriatic  acid  added,  does  not  affect  its  solution  at  all.  It  is  very  little
soluble  in  alcohol,  imparting  to  it  a  light  reddish-yellow  tinge,  and  on
the  addition  of  ammonia,  more  of  the  geraniin  is  dissolved,  and  the  rest
is  held  in  a  state  of  suspension  in  the  liquid.  It  is  insoluble  in  ether,
chloroform,  and  oil  of  turpentine  ;  acetic  acid  added  to  ether  par-
tially dissolves  it,  causing  a  reddish  solution  ;  ammonia  added,  does  not
render  it  any  further  soluble,  and  the  clear  ether  floats  on  the  top.  Its
composition  is  not  yet  determined,  though  it  undoubtedly  contains  an
abundance  of  tannic  or  gallic  acids.


496  Materia  Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Geraniin  is  a  powerful  astringent,  and  unlike
tannic  acid  in  its  action,  does  not  cause  a  dryness  of  the  mucous  surfaces
with  which  it  comes  in  contact,  but  produces  its  therapeutical  influences
upon  them  with  the  continuance  of  their  natural  moisture.  On  this
account,  and  in  connection  with  its  not  unpleasant  taste,  it  will,  undoubt-
edly, in  a  short  time,  supersede  the  use  of  tannic  acid  in  most  of  the
diseases  in  which  this  acid  is  employed.  Geraniin  may  be  employed  in
all  instances  where  astringents  are  indicated.  It  has  been  found  a  supe-
rior article  both  in  the  first  and  second  stages  of  dysentery,  diarrhea,
and  cholera-morbus.  Equal  parts  of  geraniin,  dioscorein,  and  caulo-
phyllin,  will  be  found  a  valuable  mixture  in  diarrhea  and  cholera-mor-
bus, when  much  pain  and  flatulency  are  present;  the  mixture  may  be
given  in  six  grain  doses  to  an  adult,  every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  or  as
often  as  the  urgency  of  the  case  may  require.  Geraniin  will  be  found  effi-
cacious in  hemorrhages,  hematuria,  monorrhagia,  leucorrhea,  gleet,  dia-
betes, etc.  In  colliquative  diarrhea  it  answers  an  excellent  purpose  either
alone,  or  in  combination  with  quinia.  Externally,  it  may  be  applied  to
ulcers,  and  combined  with  alum  and  gum  arabic,  it  forms  an  excellent
application  to  bleeding  wounds  and  in  epistaxis*  All  practitioners  who
have  used  this  article  in  their  practice,  speak  in  the  highest  terms  of  its
efficacy  as  an  astringent.  Dose  of  Geraniin,  from  one  to  five  grains  or
more,  repeated  as  required ;  it  may  be  given  in  syrup,  molasses,  gruel,
water,  or  Port  wine.


GERANIUM  MACULATUM.
Geranium.

Nat.  Orel. — Geraniacese. Sex.  Syst. — Monadelphia  Decandria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Cranesbill,
Spotted-geranium,  Wild- Cranesbill,  Crowfoot,  Alum-root,  etc.  It  has  a
perennial,  horizontal,  thick,  rough,  knobby  and  fleshy  root,  with  short
fibers,  and  sends  up  annually  one  or  more  erect,  angular,  or  round,
retrorsely  pubescent,  herbaceous,  dichotomous  stems,  from  one  to  two
feet  high,  and  of  a  grayish  green  color.  The  leaves  are  spreading,
hairy,  palmate,  with  three,  five,  or  seven  deeply  cleft  lobes,  two  leaves
at  each  fork ;  the  lobes  are  cuneiform  and  entire  at  the  base,  incisely
serrate  above.  The  radical-leaves  are  on  long  petioles,  erect  and  terete ;
the  leaves  at  the  top  are  opposite  and  subsessile,  and  those  at  the  mid-
dle of  the  stem  are  opposite,  petiolate,  and  generally  reflexed.  The
stipules  are  linear  or  lanceolate.  The  flowers  are  large,  and  generally
purple,  mostly  in  pairs,  on  unequal  pedicels,  sometimes  umbelled  at  the
ends  of  the  peduncles.  Peduncles  long,  round,  hairy,  tumid  at  base,
and  arise  from the dichotomous divisions  of  the  stem. The  calyx


Geranium Maculatum.  497

consists  of  five  oval,  lanceolate,  ribbed,  cuspidate  sepals,  plumosely  ciliate
on  their  outer  margin,  and  membranaceous  on  the  other ;  sometimes
three  only  of  the  sepals  are  ciliate.  The  petals  are  five,  obovate,  entire,
light  purple,  marked  with  green  at  the  base.  The  stamens  are  ten,  erect
or  curving  outward,  alternately  longer,  furnished  at  the  base  with  glands,
and  terminated  by  oblong,  convex,  deciduous,  purple  anthers.  The
ovary  is  ovate,  bearing  five  styles,  at  first  about  the  length  of  the  sta-
mens, but  finally  longer, — they  cohere  to  a  permanent  central  axis  before
maturity,  but  separate  from  it  in  a  twisted  form  when  the  seed  is  ripe.
Stigmas  five,  at  first  erect,  afterward  recurved.  The  fruit  consists  of
five  aggregated,  one-seeded  capsules,  attached  by  a  beak  to  the  per-
sistent style,  and  curling  up  and  scattering  the  seeds  when  ripe.

History. — Geranium  is  an  indigenous  plant,  growing  in  all  parts  of  the
United  States  in  open  woods,  thickets  and  hedges,  flowering  from  April
to  June.  There  are  several  varieties  of  this  species  which  are  probably
equivalent  in  medicinal  virtues  to  the  G.  Maculatum.  The  root  is  the
officinal  part,  and  should  be  collected  late  in  the  autumn.  When  dried  it
is  in  pieces,  from  one  to  three  inches  in  length,  and  from  a  quarter  to  half
an  inch  in  diameter,  somewhat  flattened,  contorted,  wrinkled,  tubercu-
lated,  and  beset  with  slender  fibers.  It  is  of  an  umber-brown  color
externally,  reddish-gray  internally,  compact,  of  an  astringent  taste,
without  bitterness  or  other  unpleasant  flavor.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts
its  virtues.  It  contains  a  considerable  amount  of  tannin  and  gallic  acid,
some  mucilage,  amadin,  red  coloring  matter  from  the  cortex,  a  small
quantity  of  resin,  and  a  peculiar  crystallizable  principle.  A  concen-
trated article  is  prepared  from  it,  and  used  by  Eclectics  under  the  name
of  Gercmiin.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  powerful  astringent.  Used  in  the  second
stage  of  dysentery,  diarrhea,  and  cholera  infantum  in  infusion  with  milk.
Both  internally  and  externally  it  may  be  used  wherever  astringents  are
indicated,  in  hemorrhages,  indolent  ulcers,  aphthous  sore  mouth,  oph-
thalmia, leucorrhea,  gleet,  hematuria,  menorrhagia,  diabetes,  and  all
excessive  chronic  mucous  discharges ;  also,  to  cure  mercurial  salivation.
A  decoction  of  the  root  may  be  used  as  a  gargle  in  relaxation  of  the
uvula,  and  aphthous  ulcerations  of  the  throat.  As  it  is  void  of  unplea-
sant taste  or  other  offensive  qualities,  it  is  peculiarly  serviceable  in  the
cases  of  infants,  or  persons  with  very  delicate  stomachs.  In  cases  of
bleeding  piles,  a  strong  decoction  of  the  root  may  be  injected  into  the
rectum,  and  which  should  be  retained  as  long  as  possible.  Piles  are
said  to  be  cured  by  adding  of  the  root  in  fine  powder,  two  ounces,  to
tobacco  ointment  seven  ounces,  and  apply  to  the  parts,  three  or  four
times  a  day.  Troublesome  epistaxis,  bleeding  from  wounds  or  small
vessels  and  from  the  extraction  of  teeth,  may  be  checked  effectually  by
applying  the  powder  to  the  bleeding  orifice,  and  if  possible,  covering  with
a  compress  of  cotton.  With  Aletris  Farinosa  in  decoction,  and  taken
32


498  Materia  Medica.

internally  it  has  proved  of  superior  efficacy  in  diabetes  and  in  B  right's
disease  of  the  kidney.  A  decoction  of  two  parts  of  Geranium  and  one
of  Sanguinaria  forms  an  excellent  injection  for  gleet  and  lcucorrhea.
Dose  of  the  powder,  from  twenty  to  thirty  grains ;  of  the  decoction,
from  one  to  two  fiuidounces.  The  Geranium  Robertianum,  or  Herb
Robert,  grows  wild  both  in  Europe  and  the  United  States,  but  is  rare  in
this  country ;  and  Pursh  states  that  the  American  plant  is  destitute  of
the  heavy  smell  by  which  the  European  is  so  well  known,  though  the
two  agree  in  all  other  respects.  It  has  a  tapering  root,  with  several
round,  leafy,  branched,  reddish,  brittle,  succulent,  and  diffuse  stems,
hairy,  chiefly  on  one  side.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  shining,  petiolate,
more  or  less  hairy,  three  to  five  cleft  to  the  base,  the  segments  pinnatiiid,
and  the  pinnae  incisely-toothed.  The  flowers  are  small,  in  pairs,  pale-
purple,  occasionally  white,  and  situated  on  lateral  and  terminal  pedun-
cles. Calyx  brownish,  hairy,  with  ten  angles  when  closed.  Petals
obovate,  entire.  Sepals  mucronate-awned,  half  as  long  as  the  entire
petals.  Stamens  awl-shaped,  smooth.  Capsules  small,  obovate,  downy,
carinate,  curiously-marked  at  the  outer  edge  with  elevated  inter  branch-
ing wrinkles.  Seeds  smooth  and  even.  The  plant  is  in  flower  from
May  to  September,  and  has  a  strong  unpleasant  smell.  The  herb  has  a
disagreeable,  bitterish,  astringent  taste,  and  imparts  its  virtues  to  boiling-
water.  It  has  been  used  internally  in  intermittent  fever,  consumption,
hemorrhages,  nephritic  complaints,  jaundice,  etc. ;  and  has  been  em-
ployed as  a  gargle  in  affections  of  the  throat,  and  applied  externally  as
a  resolvent  to  swollen  breasts  and  other  tumors.


GERARDIA PEDICULARIA.
Bushy  Gerardia.

Nat Ord. — Scrophulariacca}. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Angiospermia.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  is  the  Dasystoma  Pedicularia  of  Bentham  ;  it  is  a
perennial  plant,  known  also  by  the  names  of  Feverweed,  Lousewort,
American  Foxglove,  etc.  Its  stem  is  tall  and  bushy,  with  a  scattered,
woolly  pubescence,  two  or  three  feet  in  hight,  and  brachiate-panicled.
The  leaves  are  numerous,  opposite,  ovatedanceolate  or  oblong,  pinnatifid,
the  segments  doubly  cut-dentate.  The  flowers  are  large,  yellow,  axil-
lary, trumpet-shaped,  opposite,  and  pedicelled ;  pedicels  longer  than  the
calyx.  The  calyx  is  five-cleft,  cut-dentate,  segments  as  long  as  the  hairy
tube.  The  corolla  is  yellow,  an  inch  or  more  in  length,  sub-campanu-
late,  unequally  five-lobed,  segments  mostly  rounded,  spreading,  leaf-like,
and  woolly  inside. Capsule  two-celled, dehiscent  at the top.

History. — This  is  a  most  elegant  plant  found  growing  in  dry  copses,
pine  ridges,  and  barren  woods  and  mountains  from  Canada  to  Georgia


Geum  Rivale  —  Geum  Virginianuh.  499

and  Kentucky,  and  flowering  in  August  and  September.  The  whole
plant  is  used.  Water  or  spirits  extracts  its  virtues.  It  has  not  been
analyzed.  There  are  several  varieties  of  the  species,  which  probably
possess  analogous  virtues.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diaphoretic,  antiseptic,  and  sedative.  Used
principally  in  febrile  and  inflammatory  diseases ;  a  warm  infusion  pro-
duces a  free  and  copious  perspiration  in  a  short  time.  Dose  of  the
infusion,  from  one  to  three  fluidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Gerardiee.


GEUM  RIVALE.

Water  Avens.

GEUM  VIRGINIANUM.

White  Avens.
Nat.  Ord. — Kosaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Polygynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Geum  Rivale,  likewise  known  as  Purple  Avens,  has  a
perennial,  horizontal,  somewhat  woody,  scaly,  jointed,  tapering  root,  of
a  reddish-brown  color  externally,  white  internally,  six  or  eight  inches  in
length,  and  furnished  with  numerous  descending  yellow  fibers.  The
stems  are  one  or  more  from  the  same  root,  erect,  nearly  simple,  pubes-
cent, of  a  purplish  color,  paniculate  at  top,  and  from  one  to  two  feet  in
hight.  The  radical  leaves  nearly  lyrate,  and  uninterruptedly  pinnate,
with  large  terminal  leaflets  on  long  hairy  petioles,  rounded,  lobed  and
crenate-dentate,  and  from  four  to  six  inches  long.  The  cauline  leaves
are  few,  subsessile,  from  one  to  three  inches  long,  and  divided  into  three
serrate,  pointed  segments ;  stipules  ovate,  acute,  cut,  purplish.  The
flowers  are  few,  subglobose,  nodding,  yellowish-purple,  and  stand  on
axillary  and  terminal  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  inferior,  erect,  purplish-
brown,  with  ten  lanceolate  pointed  segments,  with  five  alternately
smaller  than  the  others.  The  petals  are  five,  as  long  as  the  erect  calyx
segments,  broad- obcordate,  clawed,  purplish-yellow,  veined.  The  seeds
are  oval,  with  plumose  awns,  minutely  uncinate,  and  nearly  naked  at  the
summit.  This  species  is  common  to  Europe  and  the  United  States,  and
is  found  growing  in  woods,  wet  meadows,  and  along  streams,  especially
in  the  Northern  and  Middle  States,  and  flowering  in  June  and  July.
The  American  species  differs  from  the  European  in  having  smaller
flowers,  petals  more  rounded  on  the  top,  and  the  leaves  more  deeply
incised. The  fresh  root  is  aromatic.

Geum  Virginianum,  also  known  as  Throat-root,  Chocolate-root,  etc.,
has  a  perennial,  small,  brown,  contorted,  horizontal  root,  with  an  erect


500  Materia  Medica.

stem  about  two  feet  high,  simple  or  branched,  pubescent,  and  few
flowered.  The  radical  leaves  are  on  long  petioles,  without  stipules,
pinnate,  lyrate,  or  simple  and  rounded,  usually  three-foliate ;  ihe/olioles
oval  or  oval-lanceolate,  acute  at  the  base,  and  acuminate,  deeply  and
unequally  serrate.  The  cauline  leaves  are  on  shorter  petioles,  furnished
with  large  stipules,  three  to  five-lobed ;  the  upper  leaves  simple,  acute,
sessile ;  all  are  unequally  and  incisely  dentate,  nearly  smooth,  or  softly
pubescent.  The  Jlowers  are  quite  small,  white,  on  erect  peduncles.
The  calyx  subcampanulate,  deeply  five-cleft,  with  five  exterior  alternate
bracteoles.  The  petals  are  five,  yellowish-white,  not  exceeding  the
length  of  the  calyx,  and  inserted  into  it.  Stamens  numerous,  short,
unequal ;  filaments  filiform ;  anthers  roundish  and  yellow.  Styles  nume-
rous, long,  hairy,  geniculate  above  the  middle,  lower  portion  glabrous,
persistent,  uncinate  after  the  upper  portion  falls  off.  Fruit  a  cluster  of
dry  achenia,  which  are  oval,  brown,  smooth,  having  a  tail  or  awn  formed
of  the  persistent  styles,  twisted  and  uncinate  at  apex.  This  plant  is
found  in  hedges  and  thickets,  and  in  moist  places,  in  most  parts  of  the
United  States,  flowering  from  June  to  August.

History. — These  plants,  with  some  other  varieties,  have  long  been
used  in  domestic  practice.  The  whole  herb  contains  medicinal  proper-
ties, but  the  officinal  and  most  efficient  portion  is  the  root.  The  dried
root  of  the  G.  Rivale  is  scaly,  jointed,  tapering,  hard,  brittle,  easily  pul-
verized, of  a  reddish  or  purplish  color,  and  inodorous ;  that  of  the  G.
Virginianum  is  brown,  crooked,  tuberculated,  and  brittle  ;  both  are
white  internally,  and  of  a  bitterish,  astringent  taste.  Boiling  water  or
alcohol  extracts  their  virtues,  the  solution  becoming  reddish.  They  have
not  been  analyzed,  but  probably  contain  tannic  acid,  bitter-extractive,
gum,  resin,  etc.  A  weak  decoction  of  the  root  of  G.  Rivale  is  sometimes
used  by  invalids  as  a  substitute  for  tea  and  coffee.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic  and  astringent.  Used  in  numerous
diseases,  as  passive  and  chronic  hemorrhages,  chronic  diarrhea  and
dysentery,  leucorrhea,  dyspepsia,  phthisis,  congestions  of  the  abdominal
viscera,  intermittents,  aphthous  ulcerations,  etc.  Dose  of  the  powder,
from  twenty  to  thirty  grains;  of  the  decoction,  from  one  to  two  fluid-
ounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

The  Geum  Urbanum,  or  European  Avens,  possesses  similar  properties.


GILLENIA  TRIFOLIATA.

Indian  Physic.

Nat.  Ord. — Rosacea. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Pentagynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — Indian  Physic  is  an  indigenous,  herbaceous  plant,  with
a  perennial  root,  composed  of  a  great  number  of  long,  slender,  brown


GlLLENIA TRIFOLIATA.  501

fibers,  arising  in  a  radiated  manner,  from  a  brown,  irregular,  thick  tuber-
like head  or  caudex.  Some  of  these  fibers  are  knotted  or  annulated  for
some  distance  as  in  the  true  ipecacuanha.  The  stems  vary  in  number
from  one  to  several  from  the  same  root,  are  about  two  or  three  feet  in
hight,  erect,  slender,  flexuose,  smooth,  branched  above,  and  of  a  red-
dish or  brownish  color.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  trifoliate,  subsessile,
furnished  with  small  linear-lanceolate,  slightly-toothed  stipules  at  the
base;  the  leaflets  are  lanceolate,  acuminate,  sharply  and  unequally
toothed,  the  upper  ones  often  single,  the  lower  broader  at  the  end,  but
acuminately  terminated.  The  flowers  are  white,  with  a  reddish  tinge,
in  terminal,  loose  panicles,  few  in  number,  scattered,  on  long  peduncles,
and  occasionally  furnished  with  minute  lanceolate  bracts.  Calyx  sub-
campanulate  or  tubular,  terminating  in  five  sharp  reflexed  segments.
Petals  five,  the  two  upper  ones  separated  from  the  three  lower,  white
with  a  reddish  tinge  on  the  edge,  lanceolate,  unguiculate,  contracted  and
approximated  at  base,  and  three  times  as  long  as  the  calyx.  Stamens
are  about  twent}',  in  a  double  series  within  the  calyx,  with  short  fila-
ments, and  small  and  yellow  anthers.  The  styles  are  five,  with  obtuse
stigmas.  Capsules  five,  connate  at  base,  oblong,  acuminate,  diverging,
gibbous  without,  sharp  edged  within,  two-valved,  one-celled,  one  or  two-
seeded  ;  seeds  oblong,  brown,  bitter.

History. — This  plant  is  found  growing  from  Canada  to  Florida,  east
of  the  Alleghany  mountains,  in  hilly  woods,  in  light,  gravelly  soils,  and
in  moist  and  shady  situations.  It  flowers  in  June  and  July.  The  root
is  the  officinal  part,  and  should  be  collected  in  September ;  when  dried
it  is  about  the  thickness  of  a  quill,  wrinkled  longitudinally,  sometimes
irreo-ular  or  knotty,  of  a  light  brown  color  externally,  and  consists  of  a
thick,  somewhat  reddish,  brittle,  cortical  portion,  and  an  internal  whitish,
lioneous  cord.  The  cortical  part  is  readily  pulverizable.  It  has  a
feeble  odor,  and  a  nauseous,  bitter  taste.  Its  properties  are  extracted
by  alcohol  or  boiling  water.  It  affords  a  light  brownish  powder.  The
bark  is  the  active  portion,  the  internal  woody  substance  being  nearly
inert.  According  to  Mr.  Shreeve,  it  contains  starch,  gum,  resin,  wax,  a
fatty  matter,  a  red-coloring  substance,  a  volatile  coloring  matter,  and  a
peculiar  principle  soluble  in  alcohol  and  dilute  acids,  but  insoluble  in
water  or  ether.

The  Gillenia  Slipulacece,  or  Bowman's  root,  which  is  found  on  the
western  side  of  the  Alleghany  mountains,  growing  through  Ohio,  In-
diana, Illinois,  Missouri,  and  southward,  and  occupying  the  place  of  the
G.  Trifoliata,  possesses  similar  properties,  but  is  more  certain  in  its  effects
in  the  same  doses.  It  may  be  distinguished  by  being  larger  and  more
bushy  than  the  preceding  ;  the  stems  brownish  and  branched;  the  upper
leaves  trifoliate,  the  folioles  lanceolate,  incised,  and  serrate  ;  the  lower
leaves  more  deeply  incised,  becoming  pinnatifid  toward  the  root,  and


502  Materia  Medica.

of  a  reddish-brown  color  at  the  margin ;  the  stipules  are  ovate,  acumi-
nate, deeply  serrate,  foliate,  and  the  flowers  are  smaller,  and  placed  on
long  slender  peduncles  in  a  lax  corymb.  It  is  rare  in  calcareous  or
alluvial  regions,  but  is  common  in  hilly  and  sandstone  districts.  Its  root
resembles  the  eastern  species.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  root-bark  of  these  plants  is  emetic,  cathar-
tic, sudorific,  expectorant,  and  tonic.  In  their  action,  they  resemble
ipecacuanha.  They  have  been  recommended  in  amenorrhea,  rheuma-
tism, dropsy,  habitual  costiveness,  dyspepsia,  worms,  and  in  intermit-
tents.  As  an  emetic  and  cathartic,  from  twenty  to  thirty-five  grains  is
a  dose,  which  when  vomiting  is  required,  may  be  repeated  at  intervals
of  twenty  minutes.  It  may  be  used  in  all  diseases  where  emetics  are
indicated,  as  a  safe  and  efficacious  agent.  In  dyspepsia,  accompanied
with  a  torpid  condition  of  the  stomach,  from  two  to  four  grains  form  an
excellent  tonic.  As  a  sudorific,  six  grains  may  be  given  in  some  cold
water,  and  repeated  at  intervals  of  two  or  three  hours,  or  it  may  be
given  in  combination  with  a  small  portion  of  opium.  The  infusion,
repeated  as  often  and  as  largely  as  is  general  in  domestic  practice,  is
objectionable,  as  it  is  apt  to  produce  hyper-emesis  and  catharsis.


GLUE.
Glue.

AN  IMPURE  FORM  OF  GELATIN.

History. — Gelatin  is  found  in  abundance  in  various  animal  substances,
especially  in  the  skin,  cartilages,  tendons,  membranes,  and  bones ;  it
may  be  obtained  by  boiling  these  solid  animal  parts,  in  water,  straining
the  decoction,  and  evaporating  it,  until  it  assumes  the  consistence  of
jelly  on  cooling.  This  is  divided  into  thin  slices  of  various  sizes,  which
are  allowed  to  dry  in  the  open  air.  The  gelatinous  matter  of  the  cel-
lular tissue  and  membranes,  is  insoluble  in  cold  water  and  acids,  and
combines  with  corrosive  sublimate,  persulphate  of  iron,  alum,  and  other
salts,  forming  insoluble  compounds  which  do  not  putrefy ;  gelatine  itself
readily  putrefies.  The  gelatin  obtained  from  the  skin  when  moist,  com-
bines with  tannic  acid,  if  steeped  into  a  solution  of  the  acid,  and  is
converted  into  leather.  The  gelatin  of  the  cartilages  is  termed  Chon-
drin.  That  from  the  air-bladder  of  fishes  forms  isinglass,  which  is  the
purest  variety  of  gelatin.  (See  Isi?iglass.)  The  common  gelatin  of
commerce,  called  glue,  is  prepared  from  cuttings  of  parchments,  or  the
skins,  ears,  bones,  and  hoofs  of  animals.  When  pure  gelatin,  one  part,
is  dissolved  in  one-hundred  parts  of  hot  water,  a  jelly  is  formed  when
it  cools.

Glue  of  good  quality  is  hard  and  brittle,  not  easily  pulverized,  of  a
light  brown  color,  and  equally  translucent  throughout. On  the  addition


Glue.  503

of  water,  it  softens  and  swells,  but  does  not  dissolve  except  by  boiling  ;
hot  water  dissolves  it  slowly.  When  dissolved  in  hot  water,  it  is  much
in  use  for  cementing  pieces  of  wood,  and  various  other  substances  toge-
ther, but  is  too  impure  for  internal  use  or  for  a  chemical  test.  By  the
addition  of  nitric  acid  to  a  solution  of  glue,  a  cement  or  liquid  glue  is
obtained,  which  does  not  require  the  aid  of  heat  to  render  it  fit  for  use.
(See  Nitric  Acid.)

Properties  and  Uses. — Glue  has  been  introduced  here,  in  consequence
of  its  application  in  pharmacy  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  certain  use-
ful indications.  Several  remedial  agents  of  a  valuable  character,  are
unfortunately  so  offensive  to  the  taste,  as  to  produce  nausea  and  vomit-
ing whenever  swallowed,  and  as  in  many  instances  it  is  almost  impossi-
ble to  dispense  with  them,  an  important  object  is  to  prepare  them  so  as
to  prevent  their  coming  in  contact  with  the  tongue  and  palate.  This  has
been  accomplished,  as  far  as  liquid  medicines  are  concerned,  by  the
formation  of  capsules  of  gelatin,  invented  by  M.  Dublanc,  of  Paris.

The  purest  kind  of  glue  is  used  in  manufacturing  these  capsules,  and
which  is  accomplished  in  the  following  manner : — Very  smoothly  round
the  end  of  a  cylinder  of  iron  or  hard  wood  which  is  four  lines  in  diam-
eter, and  a  few  inches  in  length,  dip  half  an  inch  of  this  end  into  a  satu-
rated alcoholic  solution  of  soap  kept  warm,  then,  when  the  layer  of
soap  has  concreted,  dip  it  into  a  strong  hot  solution  of  sweetened  and
aromatized  gelatin,  and  which  may  be  repeated  two  or  three  times
according  to  the  thickness  desired ;  place  them  vertically  on  boards  to
cool,  and  before  complete  desiccation,  remove  the  capsule  by  a  screwing
motion,  place  it  with  others  on  sieves,  and  dry  by  a  stove  heat.  The  top
to  this  is  made  in  the  same  way,  but  shorter  and  a  trifle  wider  ;  and  when
the  body  is  filled  with  the  medicine,  the  top  is  placed  upon  it,  being  made
to  unite  by  rubbing  over  the  line  of  junction,  a  camel's  hair-brush  moist-
ened with  hot  water.

Or  they  may  be  prepared  in  another  manner,  as  follows: — "Small
pouches  made  of  fine  skin,  of  an  oval  form,  are  attached  by  a  waxed
thread  to  the  smaller  extremity  of  a  hollow  elongated  metallic  cone,
which  is  bent  toward  its  point,  and  has  its  base  closed  by  a  cover,  which
is  screwed  so  as  to  make  the  instrument  air-tight.  Into  this  conical  tube
sufficient  mercury  is  poured  to  fill  the  pouch,  which,  thus  distended,  is
dipped  into  a  concentrated  sweetened  solution  of  glue,  and  afterward
exposed  to  heat  in  a  vertical  position,  so  as  to  dry  the  layer  of  gelatin
which  it  has  received.  In  the  same  manner  a  second  coatino-  may  be
given,  and  the  process  again  repeated,  till  a  sufficient  thickness  has  been
obtained.  The  cone  being  then  reversed,  the  mercury  flows  out  of  the
pouch,  which  collapses  and  allows  the  capsule  of  gelatin  to  be  removed.
Into  this  the  medicine  may  now  be  introduced,  care  being  taken  to  avoid
any  contact  between  it  and  the  outer  surface  of  the  capsule.  The  open-
ing is  next  to  be  closed  by  means  of  a  thin  lamina  of  gelatin  previously


504  Materia  Medica.

softened  by  steam  ;  and  a  solution  of  the  same  substance  should  be
applied  to  the  edges  by  means  of  a  camel's  hair-pencil."  In  this  way
capsules  may  be  made  to  contain  from  ten  to  twenty  grains  of  liquid.
When  received  into  the  stomach,  the  gelatin  is  dissolved,  allowing  the
medicine  to  accomplish  its  therapeutical  influences.  For  another  method
see  Capsules,  in  Mohr  and  Redwood's  Pharmacy  by  Proctor.


GLYCERINA.

Glycerin.

THE SWEET PRINCIPLE OF OILS.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lead  Plaster,  recently  prepared  and  yet  fluid,
and  Boiling  Water,  of  each,  one  gallon.  Mix  them,  stir  briskly  for
fifteen  minutes,  then  allow  them  to  cool,  and  pour  off  the  supernatant
fluid.  Evaporate  this  until  it  has  the  specific  gravity  1.15,  and  pass  a
current  of  sulphohydric  acid  slowly  through  it  until  a  black  precipitate
is  no  longer  produced.  Filter,  and  boil  until  the  sulphohydric  acid  is
driven  off.  Lastly,  evaporate  the  liquid  until  it  ceases  to  lose  weight.
Or  it  may  be  prepared  by  digesting  equal  parts  of  ground  litharge,
(protoxide  of  lead),  and  olive  oil  with  a  little  boiling  water,  stirring  and
adding  water  as  it  evaporates.  When  it  is  of  the  consistence  of  soft
plaster,  it  is  to  be  well  washed  with  hot  water.  Decant  and  filter,  then
pass  sulphureted  hydrogen  through  the  mass,  in  order  to  throw  down
the  lead  ;  after  which,  filter,  and  evaporate  to  a  syrup  in  a  water  bath.
The  syrupy  product  is  glycerin,  and  looks  a  little  like  mucilage  of  gum
arabic.

The  following  mode  of  preparing  glycerin  is  by  Campbell  Morfit,  M.  D.,
who  says : — Glycerin  is  generally  made,  on  the  large  scale,  either  by
directly  saponifying  oil  with  oxide  of  lead,  or  from  "  the  waste,"  or
spent  leys  of  the  soap-makers.  The  first  mode  of  obtaining  it  is  com-
plex and  expensive,  while  in  the  latter  the  difficulty  of  wholly  separating
the  saline  matters  of  the  "  waste,"  renders  it  impossible  to  obtain  a  per-
fectly pure  product.  In  view  of  these  obstacles,  and  the  increasing
demand  for  the  article,  both  in  medicine  and  perfumery,  I  submit  a  new
process,  which  has  been  found,  by  actual  practice,  to  combine  the  great
and  desirable  advantages  of  economy  of  time,  labor,  and  money.

Take  one  hundred  pounds  of  oil,  tallow,  lard,  or  "stearin"  (pressed
lard),  place  it  in  a  clean  iron-bound  barrel,  and  melt  it  by  the  direct
application  of  a  current  of  steam.  While  still  fluid  and  hot,  add  fifteen
pounds  of  lime,  previously  slaked  and  made  into  a  milk  with  two  and  a
half  gallons  of  water,  then  cover  the  vessel,  and  continue  the  steaming
for  several  hours,  or  until  the  completion  of  the  saponification.  This  is
known  when  a  sample  of  the  resulting  and  cooled  soap  gives  a  smooth
and  lustrous  surface  on  being  scraped  with  the  finger-nail,  and  breaks-


Glycerina.  505

with  a  cracking  noise.  By  this  treatment,  the  fat  is  decomposed,  its
acids  unite  with  the  lime  to  form  insoluble  lime  soap,  while  the  elimin-
ated glycerin  remains  in  solution  in  the  water  along  with  the  excess  of
lime.  After  it  has  been  sufficiently  boiled,  it  is  allowed  to  cool  and
settle,  and  it  is  then  to  be  strained  through  a  crash  cloth.  The  soap  is
reserved  for  sale  to  stearic  candle-makers,  or  else  may  be  reconverted
into  a  saleable  fat  by  the  process  given  at  pp.  432,  445  Morfit's  "  Applied
Chemistry."

"  The  strained  liquid  contains  only  the  glycerin  and  excess  of  lime.  It
must  be  carefully  concentrated  by  steam  heat.  During  evaporation,  a
portion  of  the  lime  is  deposited  on  account  of  its  lesser  solubility  in  hot
than  cold  water.  The  remainder  is  removed  by  treating  the  evaporated
liquid  with  a  current  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  boiling  by  steam  heat,  to  con-
vert any  soluble  6i-carbonate  of  lime  that  may  have  been  formed,  into
insoluble  neutral  carbonate,  allowing  repose,  decanting  or  straining  off
the  clear  supernatant  liquid  from  the  precipitated  carbonate  of  lime,  and
further  evaporating,  as  before,  if  necessary,  to  drive  off  any  excess  of
water.  As  nothing  fixed  or  injurious  is  employed  in  the  process,  the
glycerin  thus  prepared  will  be  absolutely  pure." — Silliman's  Journal.

History. — Glycerin  was  discovered  by  Scheele,  who  called  it  the  sweet
principle  of  oils  and  fats.  When  perfectly  pure  and  anhydrous,  glycerin
is  colorless,  or  straw-colored,  having  a  sweet  taste  and  syrupy  consis-
tence, with  a  faint  but  not  disagreeable  odor.  It  combines  readily  with
water,  alcohol,  or  oils;  dissolves  many  gums  and  resinous  substances;
does  not  crystallize,  nor  ferment  like  sugar ;  will  not  evaporate  beyond
a  certain  point,  and  is  destroyed  by  boiling.  It  is  insoluble  in  fatty
matter,  and  can  only  be  incorporated  with  it  mechanically,  to  effect
which,  it  is  necessary  that  the  fat  should  have  a  soft  consistence,  which
may  be  imparted  to  it  by  combining  it  with  oil  of  sweet  almonds,  or
some  other  fixed  oil.  It  is  insoluble  in  ether,  does  not  evaporate  on
exposure  to  the  air,  and  becomes  decomposed  by  distillation.  It
burns  with  a  blue  flame  when  exposed  to  a  full  red  heat.  It  forms
sulphoglyceric  acid  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  in  union  with  sulphuric  and
nitric  acids  it  is  converted  into  a  liquid  called  Pyroglycerin,  which  is  explo-
sive and  very  poisonous.  Diluted  with  water,  the  absence  of  lead  may  be
determined  by  its  affording  no  precipitate  with  hydrosulphate  of  ammo-
nia; and  that  of  iron  by  not  precipitating  with  ferrocyanuret  of  potas-
sium. Its  formula  is  C;  H:,  05  -f-  HO.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  antiseptic,  and  demulcent.  Used  in
prurigo,  psoriasis,  impetigo,  lichen,  lepra,  ptyriasis,  herpes  exedens,  and
some  syphilitic  and  strumous  eruptions.  It  may  be  added  to  poultices
and  lotions  in  a  proportion  varying  from  one-fourth  to  one-sixteenth.  It
acts  as  an  emollient  and  soothing  application,  absorbing  moisture  from
the  air,  and  preventing  the  parts  to  which  it  is  applied  from  becoming
too  dry. One-sixteenth  of  a  grain,  added  to  a  few  grains  of  borax  and


506  Materia Medica.

rose-water,  furnishes  one  of  the  most  elegant  and  efficacious  washes  for
chapped  hands,  face,  lips,  or  nipples.  Pills  and  extracts,  incorporated
with  a  small  proportion  of  glycerin,  are  preserved  soft  and  free  from
moldiness.  It  has  been  highly  recommended  for  deafness,  in  which  there
is  a  partial  or  total  absence  of  ceruminous  secretion,  by  protecting  the
tympanum,  and  gradually  restoring  the  parts  to  their  natural  condition ;
it  is  likewise  said  to  cause  hearing  in  cases  where  the  tympanum  is
thickened  and  indurated,  or  where  it  is  in  a  sound  state  or  destroyed  by
ulceration,  but  in  this  last  case  it  is  not  permanent ;  and  when  there  is  a
hardness  of  the  cerumen,  and  induration  of  the  tympanum,  it  has  proved
very  successful,  in  several  cases  treated  by  Prof.  R.  S.  Newton,  and  other
practitioners.  The  plan  is  to  moisten  wool  with  the  glycerin,  pure  or
diluted  with  water,  and  pass  it  into  the  ear.  The  bland  and  unirritating
character  of  pure  glycerin,  its  permanence,  when  exposed  to  the  atmo-
sphere, and  the  completeness  with  which  it  shields  the  parts  covered  by  it,
render  it  susceptible  of  many  important  applications.  Mr.  J.  H.  Ecky
has  given  a  formula  for  the  preparation  of  a  glycerin  ointment,  especially
useful  for  chapped  hands,  lips,  excoriations  of  the  skin,  etc.  It  will  also
serve  as  a  medium  for  applying  powders,  etc.  to  ulcers,  cutaneous  affec-
tions, or  other  difficulties,  by  combining  them  with  it,  in  the  desired  pro-
portions. The  formula  is  as  follows  :  Melt  together  spermaceti  half  an
ounce,  and  white  wax  one  drachm,  with  oil  of  almonds  two  fluidounces,
at  a  moderate  heat ;  put  these  into  a  Wedgewood  mortar,  add  glycerin
one  fiuidounce,  and  rub  together  until  well  mixed  and  cold.

Dr.  Goddard  has  given  a  formula  for  a  very  adhesive  glycerin  paste,
suitable  for  fixing  paper  labels  to  glass  and  other  surfaces,  and  which
keeps  well ;  it  is  to  dissolve  an  ounce  of  gum  arabic  in  two  fluidounces
of  boiling  water,  add  two  fluidrachms  of  glycerin,  and  strain  if  necessary.
This  forms  a  valuable  paste  for  druggists,  chemists  and  others.


GLYCYRRHIZA  GLABRA.
Liquorice.
Nat.  Ord. — Fabacea?,  or  Leguminosa3. Sex.  Si/st. — Diadelphia  Decandria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — The  liquorice  plant  has  a  perennial,  cylindrical  root,  run-
ning to  a  considerable  length  and  depth,  grayish-brown  externally,  yel-
low internally,  succulent,  tough,  pliable,  rapid  in  its  growth,  and  furnished
with  scattered  fibers.  The  stems  are  erect,  herbaceous,  smooth,  striated,
with  few  branches,  of  a  dull,  glaucous-gray  color,  and  growing  two  or
three  feet  in  night.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  unequally  pinnate  ;  the
leaflets  are  generally  about  thirteen,  one  terminal,  ovate,  somewhat  retuse,
petiolate,  of  a  yellowish-green  color,  and  viscid  on  their  under  surface ;
stipules  inconspicuous. The  flowers  are  small,  bluish  or  purplish,  and


Gltcyrrhiza  Glabra.  507

are  arranged  in  axillary,  erect  spikes,  shorter  than  the  leaves,  and  sup-
ported on  long  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  persistent,  tubular,  bilabiate,
and  five-toothed.  The  corolla  consists  of  an  ovate,  lanceolate,  obtuse,
erect  vexillum,  two  oblong  alee,  and  a  two-parted,  straight  carina.  The
stamens  are  diadelphous  ;  the  anthers  simple  and  rounded.  The  ovary  is
short,  with  a  subulate  style  and  blunt  stigma.  The  legumes  are  oblong,
smooth,  compressed,  acute,  and  one-celled,  containing  two  or  three  small,
reniform  seeds.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe  and  Asia,  and
is  cultivated  in  England,  France,  and  Germany.  The  root  is  imported
chiefly  from  Messina  and  Palermo  in  Sicily,  and  some  considerable  from
Spain.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part;  when  dry  it  is  in  long  pieces,
varying  in  thickness  from  a  few  lines  to  more  than  an  inch,  wrinkled
longitudinally,  grayish-brown  on  the  surface,  so  dense  as  to  sink  in  water,
yellow,  fibrous,  and  tough  in  its  substance,  without  odor,  and  of  a  strong,
peculiar,  sweet,  mucilaginous  taste,  and  sometimes  with  a  slight  degree
of  acrimony.  Its  powder  is  brownish-yellow,  or  pale-yellow,  if  made
of  decorticated  root.  It  must  be  kept  in  a  dry  place,  or  it  will  spoil.
Its  active  part  is  soluble  both  in  water,  and  in  alcohol.  A  concentrated
watery  solution  is  acidulous.  The  best  pieces  are  those  not  decayed  or
worm-eaten,  with  an  internal  bright-yellow  color,  and  distinct  layers.
Analysis  has  found  in  it,  Glycyrrhizin  or  Glycion;  agedo'ite,  a  crystal-
lizable  principle  identical  with  asparagin ;  starch  ;  albumen ;  a  brown
acrid  resin  ;  a  brown  azotized  extractive  matter ;  lignin ;  salts  of  lime
and  magnesia,  with  phosphoric,  sulphuric  and  malic  acids.

Glycyrrhizin  may  be  obtained  by  subjecting  a  strong  cold  infusion  of
the  root  to  ebullition,  in  order  to  separate  the  albumen ;  then  filtering,
precipitating  with  acetic  acid,  and  washing  the  precipitate  with  cold  water
to  remove  any  adhering  acid.  By  solution  in  alcohol,  and  evaporation
by  a  very  gentle  heat,  it  may  be  still  further  purified.  It  is  a  peculiar,
transparent,  yellow  substance,  of  a  sweet  taste,  hardly  soluble  in  cold
water,  very  soluble  in  boiling  water,  but  forming  a  jelly  with  it  on  cool-
ing, precipitated  from  its  aqueous  solution  by  acids,  readily  soluble  in
cold  alcohol,  does  not  undergo  vinous  fermentation,  yields  no  oxalic  acid
by  the  action  of  the  nitric,  and  is,  therefore,  distinct  from  suoar.  In
combination  with  the  alkalies  it  retains  its  sweetness.  Carbon,  hydro-
gen, and  oxygen  are  its  elementary  constituents.

An  extract  of  sugar  of  liquorice,  (Extractum  Glycyrrhizae),  comes
from  Spain,  Italy,  and  Sicily,  in  the  form  of  hard,  black  cylinders,  which
is  prepared  by  inspissating  the  decoction  in  copper  kettles,  till  the  mass
is  thick  enough  to  become  firm  on  cooling.  The  finest  kind  comes  from
Italy,  and  is  stamped  with  the  maker's  name,  "Solazzi."  Water  slowly
dissolves  from  three-fifths  to  eleven-twelfths  of  it,  alcohol  only  about
one-eighth,  and  acquires  an  acrid  taste,  while  the  residuum  is  purely
sweet,  and  entirely  soluble  in  water.


508  Materia  Medica.

The  crude  extract  of  liquorice  is  in  cylindrical  rolls,  somewhat  flat-
tened, about  five  or  six  inches  in  length,  by  an  inch  in  diameter,  and
often  covered  with  bay  leaves.  The  best  kind  is  very  black,  dry,  brittle,
having  a  shining  fracture,  and  a  peculiar,  sweet  taste,  and  is  nearly
completely  soluble  in  water.  It  frequently  contains  impurities,  and
should  be  purified  previous  to  internal  administration.  A  good  extract,
but  less  hard  and  brittle  than  the  foreign,  and  more  soluble  in  water,  is
prepared  in  New  York.

To  purify  liquorice,  the  crude  extract  is  dissolved  in  water  without
boiling,  the  solution  strained,  and  evaporated  to  the  proper  consistence.
Sometimes  gum,  glue,  or  starch  is  added  during  the  process.  Before
the  extract  becomes  perfectly  dried  it  is  rolled  into  long  cylindrical
pieces  about  the  thickness  of  a  pipe-stem,  and  is  called  Refined  Liquorice.
If  the  water  be  boiled  during  the  purification,  much  of  the  impurity  may
be  taken  up,  as  well  as  the  acrid  oleo- resinous  substance  of  the  liquorice,
which  is  not  desirable.

The  Glycyrrhiza  Lepidota,  which  grows  in  Missouri,  possesses  the  taste
of  liquorice  to  a  considerable  degree.

Properties  and  Uses. — Liquorice  is  a  demulcent  and  expectorant,  and
is  very  useful  in  catarrhal  affections,  cough,  and  irritations  of  mucous
membranes,  allaying  irritation  of  the  urinary  organs,  and  the  pain  in
diarrhea.  The  decoction  is  the  best  form  of  administration,  which  may
be  given  alone,  or  in  combination  with  other  agents.  Before  being  used,
it  should  always  be  deprived  of  its  acrid  bark.  Long  boiling  extracts
the  acrid  resinous  principle  ;  hence,  in  making  a  decoction,  for  the  pur-
pose of  sweetening  diet-drinks,  or  covering  the  taste  of  nauseous  drugs,
it  should  be  boiled  for  only  a  few  minutes.  Probably,  upon  this  acrid
principle  depends  its  virtues  in  chronic  bronchial  affections.  The  pow-
dered root  is  also  employed  to  give  due  solidity  to  pills,  and  to  prevent
their  adhesion  to  each  other ;  the  extract,  for  imparting  the  proper  vis-
cidity to  them.  The  extract  held  in  the  mouth,  and  allowed  slowly  to
dissolve,  is  very  useful  in  allaying  cough.  An  excellent  troche  or
lozenge  very  useful  in  ordinary  cough,  may  be  made  by  combining
together,  six  parts  of  refined  liquorice,  two  parts  of  benzoic  acid,  four
parts  of  pulverized  alum,  and  half  a  part  of  pulverized  opium.  Dissolve
the  liquorice  in  water,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence,  then  add
the  powders  with  a  few  drops  of  oil  of  anise,  and  divide  into  three  or
six  grain  lozenges.

Of.  Pre]}.  —  Confectio  Sennas;  Decoctum  Glycyrrhizae  ;  Extractum
Glycyrrhizse ;  Tinctura  Aloes.


GNAPHALIUM POLYCEPHALUM GOODYERA PuBESCENS.  509

GNAPHALIUM  POLYCEPHALUM.

White  Balsam.
Nat.  Orel. — Asteraceae. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  various  names  of  Indian
Posy,  Sweet-scented  Life  Everlasting,  Old  Field  Balsam,  etc.,  is  indige-
nous, herbaceous,  and  annual,  with  an  erect,  whitish,  woolly,  and  much
branched  stem,  from  one  to  two  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  alternate,
sessile,  linear-lanceolate,  acute,  entire,  scabrous  above,  and  whitish
tomentose  beneath.  The  flowers  are  tubular  and  yellow  ;  in  heads  clus-
tered at  the  summit  of  the  panicled-corymbose  branches,  ovate-conical
before  expansion,  then  obovate.  Involucre  imbricate,  with  whitish,  ovate
and  oblong,  rather  obtuse  scales.  Florets  of  the  ray,  subulate, — of  the
disk,  entire. Receptacle  flat,  naked  ;  pappus  pilose,  scabrous,  capillary.

History.  —  White  Balsam  is  found  in  Canada,  and  various  parts  of  the
United  States,  growing  in  old  fields,  and  on  dry,  barren  lands,  and  bear-
ing whitish-yellow  flowers  in  July  and  August.  The  leaves  have  a
pleasant,  aromatic  smell,  and  an  aromatic,  slightly  bitter  and  astringent,
but  rather  agreeable  taste.  They  yield  their  properties  to  water.  No
analysis  has  been  made  of  them.  The  Antennaria  Margaritacea,  form-
erly Gnaphalium  Margaritacea,  or  Pearl-flowered  Life  Everlasting,  a
perennial  plant,  possesses  similar  properties  to  the  above.

Properties  and  Uses. — Astringent.  The  leaves  and  blossoms  chewed,
and  the  juice  swallowed,  has  proved  beneficial  in  ulcerations  of  the
mouth  and  throat.  A  warm  infusion  may  be  used  in  fevers  to  produce
diaphoresis,  and  is  of  service  in  quinsy,  pulmonary  complaints,  leucor-
rhea,  etc.;  it  may  be  used  internally  and  as  a  local  application.  Like-
wise used  in  infusion,  in  diseases  of  the  bowels,  and  hemorrhages,  and
applied  in  fomentation  to  bruises,  indolent  tumors,  and  other  local  com-
plaints. The  fresh  juice  is  reputed  anti-aphrodisiac.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Gnaphalii.


GOODYERA PUBESCENS.

Net-leaf Plantain.

Nat.  Ord. — Orchidaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Gynandria  Monandria.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  likewise  known  by  the  names  of  Scrofula-
weed,  Adder's  Violet,  Rattlesnake-leaf,  etc.,  has  a  perennial  root,  from
which  arises  an  erect,  sheathed  and  pubescent  scape,  from  eight  to  twelve
inches  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  radical,  ovate,  dark-green,  conspicu-
ously reticulated  and  blotched  above  with  white,  about  two  inches  in


510  Materia  Medica.

length,  and  contracted  at  base  into  winged  petioles  scarcely  half  as  long.
The  flowers  are  white,  numerous,  pubescent,  in  a  crowded,  terminal,
oblong,  cylindric  spike.  Lip  ovate,  acuminate,  saccate,  inflated.  Petals
ovate.  The  Goodyera  Repens  is  a  reduced  variety  of  the  above,  the
scape  being  from  six  to  eight  feet  in  bight,  the  leaves  less  conspicuously
reticulated,  and  the  flowers  being  on  a  somewhat  unilateral  spike,  more
or  less  spiral ;  in  other  respects  about  the  same  as  the  preceding.

History. — This  herb  grows  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  in  rich
woods,  and  under  evergreens,  and  is  common  southward,  while  the  G.
Repens  is  more  common  northward  and  on  mountains.  It  bears  white,
or  yellowish-white  flowers  in  July  and  August.  The  leaves  are  the  parts
employed,  and  yield  their  virtues  to  boiling  water.  No  analysis  has  been
made  of  them.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Net-leaf  Plantain  is  antiscrofulous,  and  is
reputed  to  have  cured  severe  cases  of  scrofula.  The  fresh  leaves  are
steeped  in  milk  and  applied  to  scrofulous  ulcers  as  a  poultice,  or  the
bruised  leaves  may  be  laid  on  them,  and  in  either  case,  they  must  be
renewed  every  three  hours  ;  at  the  same  time  a  warm  infusion  must  be
taken  as  freely  as  the  stomach  will  allow.  Used  as  an  injection  into  the
vagina,  and  at  the  same  time  exhibited  internally,  the  infusion  has  proved
beneficial  in  leucorrhea,  recent  prolapsus  uteri,  and  as  a  wash  in  scrofu-
lous ophthalmia.

Of.  Prep. — Infusum  Goodyerse.


GOSSYPIUM HERBACEUM.

Cotton.
Nat.  Ord. — Malvaceae Sex.  Syst. — Monadelphia  Polyandria.

THE FILAMENTOUS MATTER SURROUNDING THE SEEDS, AND INNER BARK

OF THE ROOT.

Description. — G.  Herbaceum  is  an  annual,  herbaceous  plant,  with  a
round,  upright,  pubescent  stem,  from  three  to  five  feet  high,  brown  at  the
lower  part,  with  straight  fissures,  spotted  with  black  at  the  top,  and  with
spreading  branches.  The  leaves  are  five-lobed,  palmate,  hoary,  with  a
single  gland  below,  on  the  midvein  at  the  back,  half  an  inch  from  the
base  ;  lobes  mucronate,  somewhat  lanceolate  and  acute.  The  flowers  are
pretty  and  yellow  ;  the  corolla  consists  of  five  spreading  petals,  united
below  into  a  tube,  of  a  pale-yellow  color,  with  a  red  or  purple  spot  on
each  at  the  base,  deciduous  ;  the  calyx  is  cup-shaped,  obtusely  five-
toothed,  and  surrounded  by  a  three-leaved  involucel,  the  leaflets  of
which  are  much  cut  and  dentate.  The  capsule  is  bluntly  three-cornered,
three-valved,  three-celled,  opening  when  ripe  and  displaying  a  loose
white  tuft  of  long  slender  filaments,  or  cotton. Seeds  three  in  each  cell,


Gossypium  Herbaceum.  oil

immersed  in  cotton,  clothed  with  a  dense,  close,  short  tomentum,  white,
cunvex  on  one  side,  and  somewhat  flattened  on  the  other.  Gossypium
Baiu3Adense  or  Sea  Island  Cotton  Plant,  is  a  larger  plant  than  the  pre-
ceding ;  the  leaves  are  five-lobed  with  three  glands  beneath,  upper  ones
three-lobed  ;  cotton  white,  and  seeds  black.  It  is  likewise  biennial  or
triennial.

History. — The  Cotton  Plant  is  a  native  of  Asia,  but  is  extensively  cul-
tivated in  the  warmer  climates  of  the  old  and  new  continents.  Cultiva-
tion has  much  changed  the  plant,  so  as  to  render  it  very  difficult  to
determine  which  are  distinct  species  and  which  the  varieties.  Authors
believe  to  be  mere  varieties  of  one  species  ;  while  Hamilton,  Wight  and
Arnott,  are  of  opinion  that  there  are  but  two  distinct  species,  the  G.
Album  with  white  seeds,  and  the  G.  Nigrum  with  black  seeds;  the
others  being  varieties  caused  by  cultivation.  There  is  considerable  dif-
ference in  the  various  cotton  plants,  as  regards  the  glands,  the  color  of
the  flowers,  the  shape  of  the  leaves,  the  hight  of  the  bush,  as  well  as
the  length  and  fineness  of  the  cotton.  The  plant  cannot  be  cultivated
for  practical  purposes  in  this  country,  north  of  Virginia.  The  leaves
contain  much  mucilage  and  have  been  used  as  a  demulcent,  and  the
seeds  yield  by  expression  a  drying  fixed  oil,  which  has  been  occasionally
employed.  But  the  officinal  part  is  the  inner  bark  of  the  root,  and  the
hairs  or  filamentous  substance  attached  to  the  seeds,  which  when  separ-
ated from  them  forms  cotton.  Under  the  microscope  these  filaments
appear  to  be  flattened  tubes,  with  occasional  joints,  indicated  by  trans-
verse lines.  Cotton  is  without  smell  or  taste,  insoluble  in  water,  alcohol,
ether,  oils,  vegetable  acids,  soluble  in  strong  alkaline  solutions,  and
decomposed  by  the  concentrated  mineral  acids.  Gun-cotton  is  made
from  it  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid,  from  which  collodion  is  prepared.
For  medical  use  it  should  be  carded  into  thin  sheets.  Cotton  has  not
been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  The  bark  of  the  root  of  the  cotton  plant  is
emmenagogue,  parturient  and  abortive.  It  is  said  to  promote  uterine
contraction  with  as  much  efficiency  and  more  safety  than  ergot ;  and  is
used  by  the  slaves  of  the  south  for  producing  abortion,  which  it  does
without  any  apparent  injury  to  the  general  health.  Four  ounces  of  the
inner  bark  of  the  root  is  boiled  in  a  quart  of  water  down  to  a  pint,  the  dose
of  which  is  one  or  two  fluidounces  every  twenty  or  thirty  minutes.  The
hydro-alcoholic  extract  forms  an  excellent  emmenagogue,  and  may  be
used  in  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  etc.

The  seeds  are  reputed  to  possess  superior  antiperiodic  properties.  A
pint  of  cotton  seed  placed  in  a  quart  of  water,  and  boiled  down  to  one
pint,  and  one  gill  of  the  warm  tea  given  an  hour  or  two  before  the
expected  chill,  is  said  to  cure  intermittent  fever  with  the  first  dose.  The
flowers  and  leaves  are  reputed  diuretic,  and  useful  in  urinary  affections ;


512  Materia Medica.

the  leaves  steeped  in  vinegar,  are  said  to  relieve  hemicrania  when  locally
applied,  and  a  decoction  is  considered  beneficial  in  the  bites  of  venomous
reptiles,  in  Brazil.  Externally,  cotton  is  employed  in  the  treatment  of
recent  burns  and  scalds,  in  erysipelas,  as  a  dressing  for  blisters,  wounds,
severe  bruises  or  contusions,  and  in  rheumatic  pains.  In  burns  and
blisters  care  must  be  taken  that  it  does  not  become  a  mechanical  irritant,
in  consequence  of  its  becoming  consolidated  over  the  surface  to  which  it
is  applied,  and  which  may  be  avoided  by  first  applying  some  simple
ointment  over  the  surface  which  is  to  come  in  contact  with  the  ulcer,  or
burn.  It  probably  produces  its  beneficial  results,  by  absorbing  the
fluids  effused,  and  protecting  the  parts  over  which  it  is  placed  from  the
action  of  the  air.

Off., Prep. — Decoctum  Gossypii  Radicis  ;  Decoctum  Gossypii  Seminis;
Extractum  Gossypii.


GUAIACUM OFFICINALE.

Guaiacum.

Nat.  Ord. — Zygophyllacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE  WOOD  AND RESIN.

Description. — This  is  a  tree  of  very  slow  growth,  attaining  the  night
of  from  fifty  to  sixty  feet,  with  a  trunk  from  three  to  six  feet  in  circum-
ference. The  stem  is  generally  crooked,  with  numerous,  divaricate,
knotty,  short-jointed,  fle'xuose  branches  ;  its  bark  is  smooth,  but  furrowed,
of  a  dark-gray  color,  variegated  with  greenish  or  purplish  spots ;  that
of  the  branches  is  ash-colored  and  striated.  The  wood  is  hard  and  pon-
derous, with  a  dark  olive-brown  center,  but  whitish  toward  the  bark,  and
has  a  peculiar  odor.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  abruptly-pinnate,  consist-
ing of  two,  three,  and  sometimes  four  pairs  of  elliptical,  entire,  veined,
smooth,  rigid,  shining,  dark-green,  and  sub-sessile  leaflets,  which  are
from  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  in  length  ;  the  common  petiole  is  terete,
and  channeled  above.  The  flowers  are  pale-blue,  on  long,  simple,  axil-
lary, filiform,  minutely  downy  peduncles,  about  an  inch  in  length.  The
calyx  consists  of  five  ovate,  obtuse,  concave,  hoar)',  deciduous  sepals,  the
two  outer  of  which  are  somewhat  broader  than  the  others.  The  petals
are  five,  light-blue,  roundish,  obovate,  thrice  the  length  of  the  sepals,
internally  downy,  with  short  linear  claws  inserted  into  the  receptacle.
The  stamens  are  ten,  awl-shaped,  erect,  shorter  than  the  petals,  grooved
on  the  back,  with  oblong,  curved  anthers,  bifid  at  the  base.  The  ovary
is  two-celled,  compressed,  with  numerous  suspended  ovules,  and  a  short
awl-shaped  style.  The  capsule  is  obovate,  succulent,  glabrous,  yellow,
with  from  two  to  five  rounded  angles,  and  as  many  cells  opening  at  these
angles  ;  two  or  three  of  these  cells  are  often  abortive.  The  seeds  are
solitary,  compressed,  convex  on  one  side,  angular  on  the  other,  pendu-
lous, with  a  cartilaginous  albumen,  and  a  straight,  green  embryo.


Guaiacum  Officinale.  513

History. — This  is  a  tree  growing  in  the  West  Indies,  particularly  in
Hayti  and  Jamaica.  All  parts  of  it  are  possessed  of  medicinal  proper-
ties, but  the  wood  and  the  concrete  juice  only  are  officinal.  The  bark  is
said  to  be  the  most  efficient  part  of  the  tree,  but  it  is  not  met  with  in
commerce.  The  wood  of  this  tree  had  been  used  as  a  medicine  by  the
natives  previous  to  the  discovery  of  the  country,  and  who  made  it  known
to  the  Europeans  ;  by  these  it  was  introduced  into  Europe  in  the  six-
teenth century,  and  employed  with  much  advantage  in  syphilitic  affec-
tions. Guaiacum  wood,  commonly  called  lignum  vitce,  from  a  supposition
that  it  possessed  superior  medicinal  virtues,  is  largely  imported  into  this
country  from  the  West  India  Islands,  for  the  purpose  of  making  block-
sheaves,  and  various  other  instruments,  for  which  its  density  and  ex-
treme hardness  render  it  especially  adapted.  It  comes  in  billets  about
a  foot  in  diameter,  covered  with  a  thick  gray  bark,  which  presents  on
its  inner  surface  as  well  as  on  its  fractured  edges,  numerous  shining,  crys-
talline points ;  more  generally,  however,  the  bark  is  absent.  The  wood,
as  used  in  medicine,  consists  of  turnings  from  the  workshop  of  the  turner,
and  is  a  uniform  mixture  of  the  alburnum  and  duramen.

The  alburnum  or  sap-wood  is  of  a  yellow  color,  that  of  the  duramen
or  heart-wood,  greenish-brown,  and  which  are  mixed  in  about  equal
proportion  in  the  shavings.  Guaiacum  wood  is  inodorous,  unless  rubbed
or  heated,  when  it  becomes  odorous;  giving  an  agreeable  scent  when
burned.  It  has  an  acrid,  bitterish,  and  aromatic  taste,  attended  with  a
singular  pricking  in  the  throat,  and  which  is  excited  most  strongly  by  the
alburnum.  It  is  very  dense,  hard  and  tough,  of  sp.  gr.  1333,  sinking  in
water.  When  rasped,  it  emits  a  peculiar  fragrance  and  excites  sneezing.
In  a  state  of  minute  division,  exposure  to  the  air  turns  it  green ;  nitric
acid  turns  it  bluish-green,  as  does  also  a  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate;
this  last  should  be  applied  to  the  shavings,  and  slightly  heated.  These
tests  may  be  employed  to  determine  the  genuineness  of  the  wood.
Boiling  water  and  alcohol  take  up  its  active  parts — the  alcohol  dissolving
21  per  cent.,  the  water  14.  It  has  not  been  satisfactorily  analyzed,  but
contains  a  bitter,  pungent  extractive,  resin,  and  benzoic  acid.  One
pound  of  the  wood  afforded  to  Geiger  two  ounces  of  extract.  This  ex-
tract treated  with  ether,  the  ethereal  tincture  evaporated  and  the  residue
carefully  sublimed,  affords  a  volatilizable  acid,  which  condenses  in  small,
brilliant  needles,  called  guaiacic  acid  ;  if  the  heat  be  pushed  too  far,  an
oil  is  produced  which  colors  the  crystals.  Jahn  considers  this  substance
to  be  benzoic  acid,  with  volatile  oil  and  resin.  It  is  stated  that  the
guaiacum  wood  is  also  obtained  from  other  species,  especially  the  G.
Sanctum,  and  67.  Arboreum.  The  former  is  semi-transparent,  paler-
yellow,  and  less  heavy  and  hard,  but  probably,  as  fit  for  medical  use  as
the  officinal  wood.

Properties  and  Uses. — Guaiacum  wood  is  stimulant,  diaphoretic,  altera-
tive, and  diuretic.  If  the  body  be  kept  warm  while  using  the  decoction,
33


514  Materia  Medica.

which  is  the  form  generally  preferred,  it  will  prove  diaphoretic;  if
cool,  diuretic.  As  a  diaphoretic  and  alterative,  it  has  been  administered
(but  usually  in  compound  decoction  or  syrup),  in  chronic  rheumatism,
chronic  cutaneous  diseases,  scrofula,  and  syphilitic  diseases.  As  water
cannot  take  up  much  of  the  active  principle  in  the  wood,  it  is  probable
that  its  reputed  efficacy  was  owing  principally  to  the  active  agents
associated  with  the  syrup  or  decoction.  The  resin  of  guaiaoum  is  the
active  principle,  which  see.  The  decoction  of  guaiacum  shavings  may
be  made  by  boiling  an  ounce  in  a  pint  and  a  half  of  water  down  to  a
pint,  the  dose  of  which  is  from  two  to  four  fluidounces  every  three  or
four  hours.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Guaiaci ;  Syrupus  Sarsaparillse  Compositus.


GUAIACI  RESINA.
Guaiac.

THE  CONCRETE  JUICE  OF  GUAIACUM  OFFICINALE.

History. — The  resin  of  Guaiacum,  or  gum  guaiacum  as  it  is  errone-
ously called  by  some,  is  obtained  from  the  wood  of  the  tree,  in  several
different  modes  ;  by  spontaneous  exudation,  by  incisions  made  into  the
tree,  or  by  boiling  the  chips  or  sawdust  from  the  wood  in  a  solution  of
common  salt,  and  skimming  off  the  substance  which  floats  to  the  surface.
This  last  is  the  method  most  commonly  pursued.  Guaiac  is  imported
from  the  West  Indies  in  irregular  lumps  of  various  sizes,  combined  with
more  or  less  impurities,  as  bark,  sand,  earthy  matters,  etc.  Its  surface
is  brownish-red,  or  brownish-yellow  when  recent,  but  becomes  greenish-
brown  under  exposure  to  the  air.  It  is  brittle,  presenting  a  splintery
vitreous  fracture  with  some  translucency.  Its  odor  is  feeble  but  frag-
rant, and  is  increased  by  heat.  Its  taste,  at  first  scarcely  perceptible,  is
faintly  bitter,  and  sweetish,  succeeded  by  a  permanent  sense  of  heat
and  pungency  in  the  mouth  and  fauces.  It  pulverizes  readily,  and  the
powder,  at  first  of  a  light-gray  color,  becomes  greenish  on  exposure  to
the  light,  and  in  the  air  it  becomes  somewhat  tenacious,  quickly  aggre-
gating. A  very  moderate  heat  melts  it.  Alcohol  dissolves  it  readily,
forming  a  dark  reddish-brown  fluid,  from  which  the  guaiac  is  precipitated
by  water,  by  sulphuric  or  muriatic  acid.  Ammoniated  alcohol,  or  solu-
tions of  the  fixed  alkalis  dissolve  it.  Ether  does  not  readily  dissolve  it;
fixed  and  volatile  oils  scarcely  at  all.  Water  dissolves  about  nine  parts
in  one  hundred  of  the  resin,  becoming  colored  greenish-brown  and  having
a  sweet  taste;  and  upon  evaporating  the  water  from  the  infusion  a  brown
substance  is  obtained  which  is  soluble  in  hot  water  or  alcohol,  but  hardly
at  all  in  ether.  Sulphuric  acid  forms  with  guaiac  a  deep-red  solution  ;
nitric  acid  converts  it  into  oxalic  acid  and  an  extractive  matter,  without
producing  any  artificial  tannin.  Its  specific  gravity  varies  from  1.2  to
1.23. Analysis  has  found  in  it  resin  and  a  trace  of  benzoic  acid.


Guaiaci  Resina.  515

Guaiac  is  subject  to  adulteration  with  pine  resin,  and  other  substances;
this  may  be  detected  by  observing,  that  the  genuine  article  when  freshly
fractured  is  green,  not  red  ;  that  the  tincture  of  the  spurious  article  will
not  render  the  recently-cut  surface  of  a  potato,  carrot,  or  other  plants
containing  gluten  or  milk,  mucilage  of  gum  Arabic,  etc.,  blue — which
change  will  be  effected  by  the  tincture  of  the  genuine  guaiac  ;  that  when
heated, guaiac  does  not  exhale  a  turpentine  odor;  that  oil  of  turpentine
dissolves  resin,  but  not  guaiac  ;  and  that  paper  which  has  been  moist-
ened by  the  tincture  of  guaiac,  speedily  becomes  blue  on  exposure  to
the  vapors  of  nitric  acid.  The  mineral  acids  are  incompatible  with  the
solutions  of  guaiac.

The  pure  resinoid  principle  of  guaiac,  obtained  by  ether  from  the
resin,  by  a  process  similar  to  that  named  in  the  preceding  article  for
procuring  it  from  the  wood,  is  named  Gvaiacin.  It  is  readily  soluble  in
alcohol,  less  so  in  ether,  and  insoluble  in  water.  It  forms  soluble  com-
pounds with  the  alkalis,  which  are  decomposed  by  mineral  acids,  and
several  salts,  on  which  account  it  has  been  termed  Guaiacic  acid.  The
resin  of  guaiac,  according  to  Jahn,  consists  of  three  distinct  resins,  one
soft,  and  soluble  in  ether  or  ammonia,  and  forming  18.7  per  cent,  of  the
crude  drug ;  another,  likewise  soft,  soluble  in  ether,  but  scarcely  in
ammonia,  constituting  58.3  per  cent.;  and  the  third,  hard,  soluble  in
ammonia  but  not  in  ether,  amounting  to  11.3  per  cent.

Properties  and  Uses. — Guaiac  is  stimulant  and  alterative.  Soon  after
being  swallowed  it  produces  a  sense  of  warmth  in  the  stomach,  which
is  followed  by  slight  increase  of  the  pulse  and  temperature,  dryness  of
the  mouth,  thirst,  and  diaphoresis  or  diuresis,  depending  upon  the
temperature  at  which  the  body  is  kept  during  its  exhibition.  Large
doses  act  as  a  cathartic.  It  is  used  in  the  same  affections  as  the  Guaiaci
Lignum,  or  guaiacum  wood.  Several  practitioners  have  found  it  benefi-
cial in  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  and  other  uterine  diseases  ;  likewise
in  acute  dysentery,  in  which  its  employment  is  said  to  be  followed  by
speedy  beneficial  results.  It  is  much  used  in  chronic  rheumatism,  and
in  the  declining  stages  of  the  acute  form,  and  has  proved  a  most  valu-
able agent  in  these  diseases.  It  is  said  to  be  an  antidote  to  the  effects
of  the  tincture  of  Rhus  Toxicodendron.  If  the  preparations  of  guaiacum
produce  sickness,  defective  appetite,  and  irregularity  of  the  bowels,  their
use  must  be  discontinued.  Dose  of  the  powdered  resin,  from  five  to
twenty  grains ;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  four  fiuidrachms,  either  of
which  may  be  repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day.  A  mixture  of  ten
grains  each  of  guaiac  and  compound  powder  of  ipecacuanha  and  opium,
has  been  found  of  advantage  in  rheumatism  and  dysentery.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Guaiaci;  Tinctura  Guaiaci  Aromatica ;  Tinctura
Guaiaci  Ammoniata.


516  Materia  Medica.

GUNPOWDER.
(Pulvis  Pyrius. Pulvis  Nitratus.)

History. — Gunpowder  is  prepared  by  combining  together,  five  or  six
parts  of  nitre,  with  one  part  each,  of  charcoal  and  sulphur ;  however,
these  proportions  vary  with  the  different  manufacturers  of  the  article,  so
that  there  is  no  regular  or  officinal  method  for  its  preparation.  The
uses  of  gunpowder,  aside  from  medicine,  are  too  well  known  to  require
any  description.

Properties  and  Uses. — Recommended  as  a  detergent  and  alterative  in
chlorosis,  and  dyspepsia,  also  as  a  corrective  of  morbid  secretions  of  the
gastro-mucous  membrane,  dependent  on,  or  accompanied  with  subacute
inflammation.  Dose,  ten  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  gradually
increased,  occasionally  using  a  mild  laxative.  Externally,  applied  in
powder  or  ointment  to  indolent  ulcers,  and  several  forms  of  cutaneous
diseases.  Gunpowder  dissolved  in  water,  and  the  solution  taken  in  tea-
spoonful  doses  three  or  four  times  in  twenty-four  hours,  and  continued
daily,  has  cured  gonorrhea.  Dr.  Bone  and  Dr.  Henry,  two  celebrated
botanic  practitioners  of  some  thirty  or  forty  years  since,  made  consider-
able use  of  this  article  in  the  treatment  of  some  forms  of  cutaneous
disease,  indolent  ulcers,  and  even  cancers ;  the  following  is  the  formula
they  employed ;  simmer  one  pound  of  the  inspissated  juice  of  poke  for
a  short  time,  on  hot  ashes,  until  the  aqueous  portion  has  evaporated ;
then  place  it  in  an  iron  dish,  add  to  it  a  pound  of  fresh  butter,  and  half
a  pint  of  finely  pulverized  gunpowder,  and  place  it  over  a  fire,  where  it
must  be  kept  until  it  is  so  far  dried  that  the  mixture  will  flash  once  or
twice ;  or  if  it  should  take  fire  instead,  it  must  be  immediately  smoth-
ered. Remove  it  into  a  glazed  pipkin,  and  let  it  remain  on  hot  ashes
until  it  is  well  incorporated,  when  it  may  be  transferred  into  pots,  and
covered  with  alcohol  to  prevent  it  from  molding.  This  ointment  applied
twice  a  day,  is  reputed  to  destroy  cancer  to  its  extreme  fibers  or  roots.

Off.  Prep. — Lotio  Hydrastii  Composita.


GUTTA  PERCHA.
Gutta  Percha.

Nat. Orel. — Sapotaceee Sex.  Stjst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

CONCRETE JUICE OF ISONANDRA GUTTA.

Description. — This  is  the  product  or  milky  juice  of  a  large  tree  grow-
ing in  Singapore  and  its  vicinity,  the  Isonandra  Gutta.  The  tree  is  very
large,  having  a  trunk  from  three  to  six  feet  in  diameter,  with  numerous
ascending  branches,  the  extremities  of  which  are  crowded  with  petiolate,
oblong  leaves,  green  above,  brownish  beneath,  and  four  or  five  inches
long  by  two  in  width. The  flowers  are  small  and  white.


Gutta  Percha.  517

History. This  substance  was  introduced  in  1 842,  to  the  profession,  by

Dr.  William  Montgomerie,  a  surgeon  in  the  British  army  in  the  Indies.
The  mode  pursued  by  the  natives  in  collecting  it,  is  to  cut  down  the
tree,  strip  off  the  bark,  and  then  collect  the  milky  juice  in  suitable  ves-
sels, which  coagulates  on  exposure  to  the  air.  This  he  considers  a
wasteful  course,  as  each  tree  yields  only  twenty  or  thirty  pounds  of  the
concrete  juice,  and  probably  a  larger  yield  might  be  had  by  tapping  the
trees,  and  thus  preserving  them  for  future  use.  As  received  in  this
country  it  is  rendered  impure  by  the  admixture  of  various  foreign
matters,  from  which  it  may  be  freed  by  kneading  in  hot  water,  or  by
melting  it  with  oil  of  turpentine,  straining,  and  evaporating  the  oil.
Gutta  percha  is  of  a  dull  white,  or  whitish  color,  of  a  feeble  odor,  taste-
less, at  ordinary  temperatures  hard,  almost  horny,  somewhat  flexible  in
thin  pieces,  having  an  unctuous  feel  under  the  fingers,  and  very  tena-
cious. It  is  softened  by  hot  water  or  dry  heat,  and  on  cooling  resumes
its  former  state,  and  retains  any  form  which  may  have  been  given  to  it.
At  150°  or  160°,  it  is  soft,  very  plastic,  and  capable  of  being  welded
and  molded  into  any  form.  When  soft,  it  may  be  cut  with  a  knife.  Its
specific  gravity  is  0.9791.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  alcohol,  alkaline
solutions,  and  the  weak  acids.  Ether  and  the  volatile  oils  soften  it  in
the  cold,  and  imperfectly  dissolve  it  with  the  aid  of  heat.  Oil  of  turpen-
tine dissolves  it  perfectly,  forming  a  clear,  colorless  solution,  which
yields  it  unchanged  by  evaporation.  Bisulphuret  of  carbon  also  dis-
solves it  without  change.  It  resembles  caoutchouc  and  is  a  non-con-
ductor of  electricity.  It  is  used  for  a  number  of  useful  and  ornamental
purposes.  In  the  dissolved  state  it  is  used  as  a  varnish  impervious  to
moisture.  Chloroform  and  benzole  dissolve  it.  Pure  gutta  percha  is
analogous,  in  its  ultimate  composition,  with  caoutchouc ;  the  ordinary
article  of  commerce  contains  pure  gutta  percha,  a  small  quantity  of  a
vegetable  acid,  casein,  a  resin  soluble  in  ether  or  oil  of  turpentine,  and
a  resin  soluble  in  alcohol.  It  may  be  vulcanized  in  the  same  manner  as
caoutchouc,  and  undergoes  a  similar  change  of  properties.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Used  in  surgery,  as  bands  and  splints,  to
preserve  limbs  and  joints  in  fixed  positions,  also  for  the  formation  of
bougies,  injection  pipes,  catheters,  pessaries,  artificial  teats,  forceps-
handles,  etc.  The  solution  in  bisulphuret  of  carbon  is  recommended  as
an  application  to  the  skin  in  incised  wounds — the  liquid  speedily  evapo-
rates, while  the  gutta  hardens,  and  holds  the  edges  of  the  wound  firmly
together.  The  following  compound  is  recommended  for  the  hemorrhage
supervening  the  extraction  of  teeth.  Take  of  gutta  percha  an  ounce ;
best  tar  an  ounce  and  a  half;  creosote  a  drachm  ;  shell  lac  an  ounce.
Boil  these  in  a  crucible,  stirring  or  beating  them  well,  until  they  are
blended  into  a  stiff,  homogeneous  mass.  The  compound  is  readily  soft-
ened between  the  fingers,  and  is  easily  introduced  into  the  bleeding
socket. It  must  be  pressed  in,  and  the  hemorrhage  will  be  speedily


518  Materia Medica.

checked.  Mr.  Acton  states  that  the  following  preparation  is  useful  for
protecting  exposed  surfaces  from  contagions,  poisonous  contact,  etc.;
dissolve  with  a  gentle  heat  one  drachm  of  gutta  percha  in  an  ounce  of
henzole  ;  also  half  a  scruple  of  caoutchouc  in  an  ounce  of  benzole,  and
mix  the  two  solutions.  Apply  it  with  a  brush,  the  liquid  evaporates
leaving  a  delicate  covering  behind.  An  improved  cement  for  uniting
the  parts  of  boots  and  shoes,  and  in  the  manufacture  of  articles  of  dress
in  which  cement  is  required,  is  made  of  64  parts  by  weight  of  gutta
percha,  16  parts  of  caoutchouc,  8  parts  of  pitch,  4  parts  of  shell-lac,
and  8  parts  of  oil ;  the  ingredients  are  melted  together,  the  caoutchouc
having  been  previously  dissolved.  A  cement  for  uniting  sheet  gutta
percha  to  silk  or  other  fabrics,  is  composed  of  gutta  percha  40  lbs.,
caoutchouc  3  lbs.,  shell-lac  3lbs.,  Canada  Balsam  14  lbs.,  Liquid  styrax
35  lbs.,  gum  mastic  4  lbs.,  and  oxide  of  lead  1  lb.  Another  for  uniting
it  to  leather,  as  soles  of  shoes,  etc.,  consists  of: — Gutta  percha  50  lbs.,
Venice  turpentine  40  lbs.,  shell-lac  4  lbs.,  caoutchouc  1  lb.,  and  liquid
styrax  5  lbs.

H^EMATOXYLON CAMPECHIANTJM.
Logwood.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabacese. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE WOOD.

Description. — This  is  a  tree  of  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  feet  in
hight,  and  occasionally  reaching  forty  or  fifty  feet. The  trunk  or  stem
is  generally  crooked  and  deformed,  seldom  exceeding  a  foot  and  a  half
in  diameter  and  covered  with  a  rough,  ash-colored  bark. The  brunches
are  somewhat  flexuose,  terete,  covered  with  whitish  spots ;  in  mountains
and  moist  situations  they  are  unarmed,  but  in  localities  where  the  tree  is
stunted in  growth,  they  are  furnished with  sharp  spines  below  the
leaves. The  leaves  are  alternate,  abruptly  pinnate,  and  are  composed
of  three  or  four  pairs  of  subsessile,  obovate  or  obcordate,  obliquely-
nerved  leaflets. The  flowers  are  yellow,  slightly  fragrant,  on  pedicels
half  an  inch  in  length,  and  collected  in  axillary  and  subterminal  racemes.
The  calyx  is  deeply  five-parted,  brownish-purple,  with  thin,  membra-
nous, deciduous,  unequal  lobes,  and  a  short,  green,  campanulate  tube.
The  petals  are  nearly  equal,  obovate,  wedge-shaped  at  base,  scarcely
longer  than  the  sepals,  and  of  a  lemon-yellowish  color. The  stamens
are  ten,  alternately  short,  inserted  on  the  inside  of  the  margin  of  the
persistent  tube  of  the  calyx ;  filaments  hairy  at  base ;  anthers  ovate,  and
without glands. The  ovary  is  lanceolate, compressed, three-seeded,
bearing  a  capillary  style  which  projects  beyond  the  stamens  and  petals ;
stigma  capitate,  expanded. The  pod  or  legume  is  flat,  compressed,  lance-
olate, acuminate  at  both  ends,  one-celled,  two-seeded,  not  opening  at


HiEMATOXYLON CAMPECHIANUM.  519

the  sutures,  but  bursting  in  the  middle  longitudinally. The  seeds  are
transversely  oblong.

History. — This  tree  is  a  native  of  Campeachy  and  other  parts  of  tropi-
cal America,  and  has  become  naturalized  in  many  of  the  West  India
islands.  The  wood  consists  of  a  yellowish  alburnum,  and  a  dingy
cherry-red  inner  wood,  which  last  is  the  part  used  in  medicine  and  the
arts  ;  it  forms  a  valuable  article  of  commerce,  and  is  extensively  used
in  dyeing.  It  is  imported  in  heavy,  hard,  close-grained  billets,  which
are  cut  into  chips,  or  rasped  into  a  coarse  powder  for  general  use.  It
becomes  darker-colored  by  exposure,  has  a  sweetish,  somewhat  astrin-
gent, and  peculiar  taste,  and  a  slight,  rather  pleasant  odor.  Water  or
alcohol  extracts  its  coloring  matter,  forming  deep-purple  solutions.  Its
aqueous  solution  yields  a  fine  blue  precipitate  with  lime-water,  alum,
acetate  of  lead,  a  deep  violet  blue  with  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron,
and  curdy  flakes  with  solution  of  gelatin;  sulphuric,  nitric,  muriatic  and
acetic  acids,  and  sulphate  of  copper  also  produce  precipitates.  Water
is  the  menstruum  usually  employed  to  extract  its  virtues.  A  pound  of
the  wood  yields  about  two  ounces  of  extract.  It  has  been  analyzed
several  times,  and  is  found  to  contain  volatile  oil,  an  oleaginous  or  resin-
ous matter,  a  brown  substance  the  solution  of  which  is  precipitated  by
gelatin,  another  brown  substance  soluble  in  alcohol,  but  not  in  ether  or
water,  an  azotized  substance  resembling  gluten,  free  acetic  acid,  various
salts,  and  a  peculiar  principle  called  Hematin  or  Hematoxylin,  which  is
sometimes  found  crystallized  in  the  crevices  of  the  wood.  It  may  be
obtained  by  digesting  the  dry  commercial  watery  extract  with  alcohol,
evaporating  the  tincture  till  a  thick,  syrupy  fluid  is  obtained,  then
adding  a  little  water,  and  submitting  the  liquid  again  to  a  gentle  evapor-
ation. Crystals  form  in  a  few  days  upon  standing,  and  more  are
deposited  as  the  fluid  evaporates  spontaneously.  These  may  be  purified
by  washing  with  alcohol  and  drying.  When  first  obtained  they  are  of
a  yellow-rose  color,  shining,  bitterish,  acrid,  and  slightly  astringent,
readily  soluble  in  boiling  water,  forming  an  orange-red  solution  which
becomes  yellow  on  cooling,  and  soluble  also  in  alcohol  or  ether.  If
ether  be  used  in  the  process  instead  of  alcohol,  and  the  purifying  be
accomplished  by  washing  the  crystals  with  water,  they  are  obtained  of  a
pale-straw  color,  becoming  reddish-yellow  by  exposure  to  air  containing
the  least  trace  of  ammonia,  or  even  in  close  vessels,  to  bright  sunlight.
They  are  sweet  like  liquorice,  without  either  bitterness  or  astringency ;
and  though  not  a  coloring  substance  of  themselves,  yet  they  afford  beau-
tiful red,  blue,  and  purple  colors  when  acted  upon  by  an  alkaline  base
and  the  oxygen  of  the  air. Their  constitution  is  C20  Hi?  Oij.

Properties  and  Uses. — Logwood  is  tonic  and  astringent,  without  any
irritating  properties.  It  may  be  used  with  much  advantage  in  diarrhea,
dysentery,  and  the  relaxed  condition  of  the  bowels  succeeding  cholera-


520  Materia Medica.

infantum.  A  favorite  preparation  with  many  practitioners  in  cholera-
infantum,  after  a  proper  employment  of  the  Syrup  of  Rhubarb  and
Potassa,  is  the  following:  Dissolve  two  drachms  of  extract  of  logwood
in  four  fluidounces  of  boiling  water,  to  this  solution  add  two  fiuidrachms
of  ammoniated  tincture  of  opium,  three  fiuidrachms  of  tincture  of  cate-
chu, one  fluidrachm  of  compound  spirits  of  lavender,  and  four  fluid-
ounces  of  simple  syrup,  or  syrup  of  ginger.  The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful
every  three  or  four  hours.  In  constitutions  broken  down  by  disease,
dissipation,  or  the  excessive  use  of  mercury,  the  decoction  of  logwood,
used  freely  in  connection  with  the  other  treatment,  will  be  found  highly
beneficial.  Dose  of  the  decoction  from  two  to  four  fluidounces ;  of  the
extract,  five  to  thirty  grains.  The  use  of  logwood  imparts  a  blood-red
color  to  the  stools  and  the  urine.  It  should  never  be  combined  with  chalk
or  lime-water,  as  they  are  incompalibles.

A  good  red  ink  may  be  made  as  follows  :  Take  of  Pernambuco  wood,
a  Brazilian  wood  said  to  be  derived  from  Ccesalpina  Bchinata,  four
ounces,  dilute  acetic  acid,  distilled  water,  of  each  sixteen  ounces;  boil
together,  until  twenty-four  ounces  remain.  Then  add  an  ounce  of  alum,
evaporate  the  liquid  to  sixteen  ounces,  dissolve  an  ounce  of  gum  arabic
in  it,  strain,  and  to  the  cold  liquid  add  a  drachm  of  protochloride  of  tin.
This  ink  is  preferable  to  the  cochineal  ink,  being  free  from  its  bluish
tint,  and  more  permanent.

Of.  Pre]). — Decoctum  Haematoxyli ;  Extractum  Heematoxyli;  Vinum
Hsematoxyli  Compositum.


ELEMOSPASIS.

Heemospastic  Medication. Dry  Cupping.

This  is  a  powerful  revulsive  treatment.  Anything  which  draws  the
blood  to  a  part  may  be  said  to  act  haemospastically.  Dry  cupping  does
so ;  it  not  only  draws  the  blood  from  internal  parts  to  the  surface,  but
likewise  attracts  morbid  action,  and  thus  affords  relief.  Common  half-
pint  tumblers  will  answer  for  adults  very  well,  in  place  of  ordinary
cupping-glasses.  A  piece  of  paper  or  cotton,  rolled  up  and  fired,  and
dropped  into  the  tumbler,  and  allowed  to  burn  a  minute  or  two,  fits  the
tumbler  for  application  to  the  spot.  One,  two,  or  more  may  be  applied,
and  repeated  as  often  as  may  be  desirable ;  they  should  remain  until
ready  to  fall  off.  Intermittent  fever  has  been  invariably  cured  by  M.
Condret,  by  applying  eight  or  ten  middle-sized  cupping-glasses,  on  each
side  of  the  spinal  column,  from  the  neck  downward,  and  allowing  them
to  remain  for  about  thirty  or  forty  minutes.  To  be  applied  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  cold  stage.  One  to  four  applications  effects  the  cure.
Also  useful  in  cases  of  difficult  respiration  from  congestion  of  the  lungs
or  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchii,  etc.


Hamamelis  Virginica.  521

H^emastasis  is  a  term  applied  to  the  retention  of  venous  blood  in  the
extremities  by  ligature.  Tie  a  handkerchief,  or  any  suitable  cord  around
the  upper  part  of  the  arms,  and  the  thighs,  and  then,  by  means  of  a
piece  of  wood,  twist  or  turn  the  cord  sufficiently  tight  to  check  the  cir-
culation of  the  venous  blood,  but  not  the  arterial,  which  may  be  known
by  the  action  of  the  pulse.  In  a  short  time  the  arms  and  legs  will  be
much  distended,  and  an  amount  of  blood  removed  from  the  trunk  and
retained  in  the  limbs,  which  the  most  heroic  practitioner  dare  not  remove
by  the  lancet.  If  the  subject  faint,  promptly  loosen  or  remove  the  liga-
tures ;  if  he  be  plethoric  and  of  firm,  vigorous  constitution,  he  must  be
reduced  by  cathartics,  diuretics,  sudorifics,  and  be  under  the  influence
of  gentle  nauseants,  at  the  time  of  the  operation.  This  is  found  very
useful  in  uterine  hemorrhage,  hemoptysis,  and  other  hemorrhages,
inflammations  of  the  brain,  lungs,  bowels,  etc.,  congestions,  puerperal
convulsions,  and  wherever  it  is  deemed  advisable  to  lessen  the  amount
of  blood  in  the  head  and  trunk,  without  injuring  the  system.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

Witch  Hazel.

Nat.  Ord. — Hamamelaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Virginica.

THE BARK AND LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  shrub,  sometimes  called  Winter-
bloom,  Snapping -hazlenut,  Spotted  Alder,  etc. ;  it  consists  of  several
crooked,  branching  trunks  from  the  same  root,  from  four  to  six  inches
in  diameter,  ten  or  twelve  feet  in  hight,  and  covered  with  a  smooth  gray
bark.  The  leaves  are  on  short  petioles,  alternate,  oval  or  obovate,  acu-
minate, obliquely  subcordate  at  base,  margin  crenate-dentate,  scabrous
with  minute  elevated  spots  beneath,  from  three  to  five  inches  long,  and
two-thirds  as  wide.  The  flowers  are  yellow,  on  short  pedicels,  three  or
four  together  in  an  involucrate,  axillary,  subsessile  glomerule.  The
calyx  is  small,  and  divided  into  four,  thick,  oval,  pubescent  segments,
with  an  involucel  of  two  or  three  bracts  at  base.  Petals  four,  yellow,
three-quarters  of  an  inch  long,  linear,  curled  or  twisted.  Stamens  four,
fertile,  alternate  with  the  petals,  and  four,  sterile  at  their  base.  Ovary
ovate,  with  two  short  styles,  crowned  by  obtuse  stigmas.  Fruit  a  nut-
like capsule,  bilobate  and  split  above,  yellowish,  pubescent,  with  two
cells,  each  containing  an  oblong,  shining  black  seed,  which  seeds  are
dispersed  by  the  elastic  valves  of  the  capsule  opening  rapidly.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  almost  all  sections  of  the  United  States,
especially  in  damp  woods,  flowering  from  September  to  November,  when
the  leaves  are  falling,  and  maturing  its  seeds  the  next  summer.  The
bark  and  leaves  are  the  parts  used  in  medicine;  they  have  a  pleasant,
aromatic  odor,  and  a  bitter,  astringent  taste,  leaving  a  sense  of  pungency


522  Materia Medica.

and  sweetishness  in  the  mouth.  Water  extracts  their  virtues.  No
analysis  has  been  made  of  them.  The  shoots  are  used  as  divining-rods
to  discover  water  and  metals  under  ground,  by  certain  adepts  in  the
occult  arts.

Properties  and  Uses. — Witch  Hazel  is  tonic,  astringent,  and  sedative.
The  decoction  of  the  bark  is  very  useful  in  hemoptysis,  hematemesis,
and  other  hemorrhages,  as  well  as  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  exces-
sive mucous  discharges.  It  has  been  employed  with  advantage  in  inci-
pient phthisis,  in  which  it  is  supposed  to  unite  anodyne  influences  with
its  others.  Reputed  to  have  been  used  by  the  Indians  as  a  sedative  and
discutient  in  painful  tumors,  and  external  inflammations.  The  decoction
may  be  advantageously  used  as  a  wash  or  injection  for  sore-mouth,  pain-
ful tumors,  external  inflammations,  bowel  complaints,  prolapsus  ani  and
uteri,  leucorrhea,  gleet,  and  ophthalmia.  An  ointment  made  with  lard
and  a  decoction  of  white  oak  bark,  apple-tree  bark,  and  witch  hazel,  has
been  found  a  valuable  application  to  piles.  The  following  forms  a  use-
ful preparation: — Take  equal  parts  of  witch  hazel  bark,  golden  seal,  and
lobelia  leaves,  the  first  two  made  into  a  strong  decoction,  after  which
add  the  lobelia  to  the  hot  liquid,  and  cover;  when  cold,  strain.  With
this  decoction  as  a  collyrium,  I  have  succeeded  in  curing  the  most  obsti-
nate and  long  standing  cases  of  ophthalmia,  as  have  many  other  prac-
titioners to  whom  I  have  named  it.  Dose  of  decoction,  from  two  to
four  fiuidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.
Off.  Prep. — Decoctum Hamamelis.


HEDEOMA PULEGIOIDES.

Pennyroyal.
Nat. Ord. — Lamiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  annual  plant,  sometimes  called
Tick-weed,  Squaw-mint,  etc.  The  root  is  small,  fibrous,  branching,  yel-
low, from  which  arises  a  pubescent  stem  from  six  to  fifteen  inches  in
hight,  upright,  somewhat  angular,  with  numerous,  erect,  slender  branches.
The  leaves  are  opposite,  small,  lanceolate-oblong  or  ovate,  narrowed  at
the  base,  margin  remotely  serrate,  rough,  pubescent  and  prominently
veined  on  the  under  surface,  smooth  above,  and  on  short  petioles.  The
flowers  are  very  small,  of  a  pale-blue  color,  on  short  pedicels,  and
arranged  in  axillary  whorls,  along  the  whole  length  of  the  branches.
The  calyx  is  striated  and  pubescent,  bilabiate,  the  upper  lip  divided  into
two  ciliated  segments,  the  lower  into  three  rounded  lobes.  The  sta-
mens and  style  are  filiform.  The  seeds  are  four,  oblong,  contained
in  the  persistent  calyx,  the  mouth  of  which  is  closed  by  bristles  of  the
lower  lip.


Hedera Helix.  523

History. This  herb  was  placed  by  Linnaeus  in  the  genus  Melissa,  and

afterward  Cunila,  from  which  it  was  separated  by  Persoon,  and  placed
in  the  genus  Hedeoma.  It  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Mentha
Pulegium,  or  European  Pennyroyal.  It  is  a  well  known  plant,  growing
in  dry,  sterile  situations,  especially  in  calcareous  soils,  and  blossoms  from
June  to  September  and  October,  rendering  the  air  fragrant  for  some  dis-
tance around  it.  It  is  common  to  nearly  all  parts  of  the  United  States.
It  has  a  pleasant,  aromatic  smell,  which,  however,  is  very  offensive  to
some  persons,  and  a  warm,  pungent,  mint-like  taste.  It  imparts  its
virtues  to  boiling  water  by  infusion;  boiling  destroys  its  activity  by
evaporating  the  volatile  oil,  on  which  its  properties  depend.  The  oil
may  be  obtained  by  distillation  with  water,  and  is  often  employed,  or  its
tincture,  instead  of  the  herb  itself;  it  is  of  a  light-yellow  color,  and
specific  gravity  0.948.

Properties  and  Uses. — Pennyroyal  is  a  stimulant,  diaphoretic,  emmen-
agogue,  and  carminative.  The  warm  infusion,  used  freely,  will  promote
perspiration,  restore  suppressed  lochia,  and  excite  the  menstrual  dis-
charge when  recently  checked  ;  it  is  often  used  by  females  for  this  last
purpose, — a  large  draught  being  taken  at  bed-time,  the  feet  having  been
previously  bathed  in  warm  water.  A  gill  of  brewer's  yeast  added  to  the
draught  is  reputed  a  safe  and  certain  abortive.  The  warm  infusion  may
likewise  be  employed  with  advantage  in  the  flatulent  colic  of  children.
The  oil,  or  its  tincture,  is  also  administered  as  a  carminative,  and  anti-
emetic, and  has  been  of  benefit  in  hysteria,  hooping-cough,  spasms,  etc.
It  is  likewise  used  as  a  rubefacient  in  rheumatism,  and  united  with  lin-
seed oil,  as  an  application  to  burns.  Dose  of  the  oil,  from  two  to  ten
drops.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Hedeomse ;  Oleum  Hedeomse.


HEDERA  HELIX.

Ivy.

Nat.  Ord.— Araliaceaj. Sex.  Syst.— Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND BERRIES.

Description. — This  is  an  evergreen  creeper,  with  long  and  flexible
stems  and  branches,  which  attach  themselves  to  the  earth,  or  trees,  or
walls,  by  numerous  root-like  fibers.  The  leaves  are  coriaceous,  smooth,
shining,  dark-green,  with  white  veins,  petiolate,  the  lower  ones  five-
ana-led  or  five-lobed,  the  upper  or  old  ones  ovate  and  acute.  The  flowers
are  greenish-white,  and  are  disposed  in  numerous,  simple  and  downy
umbels,  forming  a  corymb. The  berries  black,  with  a  mealy  pulp.

History. — This  well  known  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  culti-
vated in  many  parts  of  the  United  States ;  it  flowers  in  September. The


524  Materia  Medica.

leaves  and  berries  are  the  parts  used.  The  leaves  have  a  balsamic  odor,
especially  when  rubbed,  and  a  bitter,  astringent,  and  nauseous  taste.
The  berries  have  an  acidulous,  resinous,  somewhat  pungent  taste.  A
peculiar,  very  bitter,  alkaline  principle,  named  Hederin  or  Hederia,  has
been  discovered  in  the  ivy  seeds  by  Vandamme  and  Chevallier,  and
which  appears  to  be  closely  allied  to  quinia  in  febrifuge  properties.  It
is  obtained  by  treating  the  seeds  with  hydrate  of  lime,  dissolving  the
precipitated  alkali  in  boiling  alcohol,  and  evaporating  the  alcoholic
solution.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  leaves  have  been  employed  for  dressing
issues,  and,  in  the  form  of  decoction,  have  been  recommended  as  a
wash  in  sanious  ulcers,  itch,  tetter,  and  other  cutaneous  eruptions;  like-
wise to  destroy  vermin  in  the  hair,  which  latter,  it  is  stated,  is  stained
black  by  this  application ;  reputed  beneficial  as  a  cataplasm,  in  chronic
glandular  enlargements.  Dried  and  powdered,  they  have  been  employed
in  the  atrophy  of  children,  rachitis,  and  pulmonary  complaints,  in  the
dose  of  a  scruple  or  more.  The  berries  are  purgative  and  emetic,  and
were  at  one  time  much  esteemed  in  febrile  affections.  Boyle  considered
them  to  be  sudorific,  and  in  the  great  plague  in  London,  they  were
administered  in  combination  with  vinegar.


HELENIUM  AUTUMNALE.
Sneezewort.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  plant,  likewise  called  Sioamp,  or  False  Sunflower,
has  a  perennial  fibrous  root,  with  several  angular  branching,  minutely
pubescent  stems,  two  or  three  feet  high,  and  strongly  winged  by  the
decurrent  leaves.  The  leaves  are  smooth  or  slightly  pubescent,  alter-
nate, sessile,  decurrent,  lanceolate,  acuminate,  unequally  serrate,  punc-
tate. The  flowers  are  large,  numerous,  of  a  bright-yellow  color,  loosely
corymbose.  Peduncles  axillary,  one-flowered,  thicker  above.  Involucre
with  linear-acute  scales.  Disk  semi-globose.  Pays  flat,  cuneate,  three
to  five-lobed.  Pappus  of  five  membranous,  subulate,  and  awned
scales.

History. — Sneezewort  grows  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  flourish-
ing best  in  meadows,  moist  fields,  and  other  low  damp  grounds,  and
flowering  from  August  to  October.  It  has  scarcely  any  smell,  but  a
bitter,  somewhat  pungent  or  acrid  taste. It  has  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  diaphoretic,  and  errhine.  Useful  in
intermittent  and  other  febrile  diseases.  The  whole  plant  possesses
errhine  properties  ; but  the  flowers,  and  especially  the  central  florets,


Helianthemum  Canadense.  525

are  the  most  active,  and  may  be  used  in  powder,  as  a  snuff  in  headache,
catarrh,  deafness,  and  other  affections  where  errhines  are  desired.


HELIANTHEMUM  CANADENSE. (Cistus  Canadensis.)

Frostweed.

Nat. Ord.— Cistacese. Sex.  Syst.— Polyandria  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Rock-rose,
Frost-plant,  etc.  It  is  herbaceous,  and  perennial,  with  a  slender,  rigid,
pubescent,  ascending  stem,  from  six  to  eighteen  inches  high,  and  having
erect,  pubescent  branches.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  from  eight  to  twelve
lines  long,  and  about  one-fourth  as  wide,  oblong,  somewhat  lanceolate,
erect,  entire,  subsessile,  tomentose  beneath,  and  without  stipules.  The
flowers  are  large  and  bright  yellow;  those  which  first  appear  are  terminal,
few  or  solitary,  on  short  peduncles,  with  erosely-emarginate  petals,  about
twice  as  long  as  the  calyx  ;  at  a  later  period  the  flowers  are  very  small,
axillary,  solitary  or  somewhat  clustered,  nearly  sessile,  sometimes  destitute
of  petals,  and  usually  wanting  the  two  outer  sepals  of  the  calyx.  Stamens
declinate.  The  fruit  is  a  smooth,  shining  capsule,  with  brown,  scabrous,
punctate  seeds  ;  the  capsules  of  the  apetalous  or  later  flowers,  not
larger  than  a  pin's  head.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  in  dry,
sandy  soils,  and  flowering  from  May  to  July.  The  whole  plant  is  offici-
nal. The  leaves  and  stems  of  the  plant  are  covered  with  a  white  down,
and  Eaton  states  that,  in  the  months  of  November  and  December,  he
has  seen  these  plants  sending  out,  near  the  root,  broad,  thin,  curved  ice
crystals,  about  an  inch  in  breadth,  which  melted  in  the  day,  and  were
renewed  in  the  morning.  The  plant  has  a  bitterish,  astringent,  slightly
aromatic  taste,  and  yields  its  properties  to  hot  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plant  has  long  been  used  by  Eclectics  as  a
valuable  remedy  for  scrofula,  in  which  disease  it  has  effected  some
astonishing  cures.  It  is  used  in  the  form  of  decoction,  syrup,  or  fluid
extract ;  if  taken  in  too  large  doses  it  will  sometimes  vomit.  It  is
tonic  and  astringent,  as  well  as  antiscrofulous.  In  secondary  syphilis,  either
alone,  or  in  combination  with  Corydallis  Formosa,  and  Stillingia,  it  forms
a  most  valuable  remedy.  The  decoction  may  be  employed  with  advan-
tage in  diarrhea,  as  a  gargle  in  scarlatina  and  aphthous  ulcerations,  as  a
wash  in  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  prurigo  and  other  cutaneous  diseases.
Externally,  a  poultice  of  the  leaves  is  applied  to  scrofulous  tumors  and
ulcers.  The  fluid  extract  is  the  best  form  for  internal  use  ;  dose,  one  or
two  fiuidrachms,  three  or  four  times  a  day.  A  physician  in  the  west,
writes  to  me,  that  he  procures  an oil  from  this  plant,  which  he  finds


526  Materia  Medica.

valuable  in  cancerous  affections  ;  how  he  prepares  it  is  not  stated.  The  U.
Corymbosum  or  Frost-weed,  with  an  erect,  branching,  canescent  stem;
lance-oblong,  alternate  leaves,  canescently  tomentose  beneath  ;  the  /lowers
in  crowded,  fastigiate  cymes ;  the  primary  ones  on  elongated,  filiform
pedicels,  and  with  petals  twice  longer  than  the  calyx  ;  sepals  villous-
canescent,  outer  ones  linear,  obtuse;  inner  ones  ovate,  acute;  is  found
growing  in  pine-barrens  and  sterile  sands,  in  the  Southern  and  Middle
States.  It  possesses  properties  analogous  to  the  preceding,  and  may  be
indiscriminately  employed  with  it.
Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Helianthemi.


HELIANTHUS  ANNUUS.
Sunflower.
Nat.  Ord- — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Frustranea.

THE SEEDS.

Description. — This  is  an  annual  plant,  with  an  erect,  rough  stem,  usu-
ally about  seven  feet  high,  but  which  under  favorable  circumstances,
attains  the  hight  of  fifteen  and  even  twenty  feet.  The  leaves  are  large,
cordate,  three-nerved,  the  upper  alternate,  the  lower  opposite.  Pedun-
cles thickening  upward.  Flowers  large,  nodding  ;  rays  yellow  ;  disk
dark-purple.  Seeds  numerous,  dark-purple  when  ripe.  A  splendid
variety  occurs  with  the  flowers  all  radiate.

History. — This  well  known  plant  is  a  native  of  South  America,  and  is
extensively  cultivated  in  the  gardens  of  this  country,  on  account  of  its
beautiful,  brilliant,  yellow  flowers,  which  appear  in  July  and  August.
The  ripe  seeds  are  the  parts  used,  they  are  of  a  purplish  color,  exter-
nally, about  four  or  five  lines  long,  between  two  and  three  wide,  two-
angled,  margins  parallel,  apex  somewhat  pointed,  the  base  truncate,
compressed,  with  longitudinal  convex  surfaces,  so  as  nearly  to  present
four  angles ;  internally  the  testa  is  whitish,  and  the  kernel  is  whitish,
oily,  rather  sweetish,  and  edible.  They  contain  a  fixed  oil  which  may
be  obtained  by  expression.  The  leaves  are  large,  and  when  carefully
dried,  may  be  made  into  segars,  very  much  resembling  in  flavor  that  of
mild  Spanish  ones.  The  virtue  of  the  seeds  chiefly  depends  upon  the
fixed  oil  they  contain.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sunflower  seeds  and  leaves,  are  diuretic  and
expectorant,  and  have  been  used  in  pulmonary  affections  with  consider-
able benefit.  The  following  preparation  has  been  of  much  efficacy  in
bronchial  and  laryngeal  affections,  and  even  in  the  cough  of  phthisis ;  it
acts  as  a  mild  expectorant  and  diuretic  :  Take  of  sunflower  seeds,  bruised,
two  pounds,  water  five  gallons  ;  boil  the  two  together  until  but  three
gallons  of  liquid  remain,  then  strain,  add  twelve  pounds  of  sugar,  and


Helleborus  Niger.  527

one  and  a  half  o-allons  of  good  Holland  gin.  The  dose  of  this  is  from
two  fiuidrachms  to  two  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  or  when-
ever tickling  or  irritation  of  the  throat,  or  cough  is  excessive,  or  when
expectoration  is  difficult.  Various  agents  may  be  added  to  this  prepara-
tion, according  to  indications,  as  tincture  of  stillingia,  tincture  of  balsam
of  Tolu,  tincture  of  iodine,  etc.  An  infusion  of  the  pith  of  sunflower
stem  is  diuretic,  and  may  be  used  where  this  class  of  agents  is  indicated,
also  in  many  febrile  and  inflammatory  forms  of  disease ;  it  likewise
makes  a  <>-ood  local  application  in  some  forms  of  acute  ophthalmia.  The
pith  contains  nitre,  and  has  been  proposed  for  the  preparation  of  moxa  ;
the  quantity  of  nitre,  however,  varies,  depending  entirely  upon  the  local-
ity and  character  of  soil  in  which  the  plant  grows.  The  oil  obtained
from  the  seeds  by  expression,  has  been  employed  with  benefit  in  cough,
in  dysentery,  in  inflammation  of  the  mucous  coat  of  the  bladder,  and  in
disease  of  the  kidneys.  To  be  given  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  fifteen  drops,
two  or  three  times  a  day.  A  teaspoonful  of  the  oil  taken  at  one  dose,
has  produced  active  diuresis  for  four  consecutive  days,  accompanied
toward  the  termination  with  pain  and  debility  in  the  lumbar  region.
The  leaves  are  astringent.

HELLEBORUS  NIGER.

Black  Hellebore.

Nat.  Ord. — Ranunculaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

the root.

Description. — Black  hellebore  has  a  black,  perennial,  tuberculated,
horizontal,  scaly  root  or  rhizoma,  whitish  internally,  and  sending  off
numerous,  long,  fleshy,  brownish-yellow  fibers,  which  become  dark-
brown  upon  drying.  The  leaves  are  large,  radical,  on  cylindrical  pe-
duncles from  four  to  eight  inches  long,  pedate,  of  a  deep  green  color
above,  paler  and  strongly  reticulated  beneath  ;  the  leaflets  are  five  or
more,  one  terminal,  two  to  four  on  each  side  supported  on  a  single  par-
tial petiole,  ovate-lanceolate,  smooth,  shining,  coriaceous,  and  serrated
near  the  top.  The  scape  is  shorter  than  the  petiole,  one  or  two-flowered,
with  ovate  lacerated  bracts  immediately  beneath  the  calyx,  six  or  eight
inches  high,  round,  tapering,  and  reddish  toward  the  base.  The  flowers
are  large,  rose-like  ;  the  petaloid  calyx  consists  of  five  large,  ovate  or
roundish,  concave,  spreading  sepals,  at  first  white,  then  rose-red,  and
eventually  becoming  green.  The  petals  are  tubercular  and  two-lipped,
of  a  greenish-yellow  color,  and  shorter  than  the  stamens.  The  stamens
are  very  numerous  and  support  yellow  anthers.  The  ovaries  are  from
six  to  eight  in  number,  surmounted  by  a  somewhat  curved  pistil.  The
capsules  contain  many  black,  shining  seeds.

History. — Black  Hellebore  is  a  native  of  the  mountainous  regions  of
southern and temperate Europe,  and  is found  in Greece, Austria,


528  Materia Medica.

Switzerland,  France,  Italy,  and  Spain.  It  is  cultivated  in  many  places,
on  account  of  its  flowers  appearing  in  winter,  between  December  and
February,  on  which  account  it  is  called  the  Christmas  Rose.  It  is  not
the  Melampodium  of  the  ancients,  so  celebrated  in  mental  diseases,
which  is  now  shown  to  be  a  distinct  species,  the  Helleborus  Orientalis,
and  which  probably  possesses  similar  medicinal  virtues,  as  well  as  the
roots  of  some  other  species  of  the  same  genus.

The  whole  root  is  generally  kept  in  the  shops,  though  the  fibers  are
the  only  parts  employed.  It  is  a  many-headed  root,  with  a  caudex  or
body  seldom  over  half  an  inch  in  thickness,  and  several  inches  long,
horizontal,  sometimes  contorted,  uneven,  knotty,  with  transverse  ridges,
slightly  striated  longitudinally,  its  upper  surface  having  the  remains  of
the  leaf  and  flower-stalks,  and  thickly  beset  upon  the  sides  and  under-
surface  with  fibers  about  as  thick  as  a  straw,  and  which  when  not  broken,
are  from  four  to  twelve  inches  long,  smooth,  brittle,  externally  black  or
deep-brown,  internally  white  or  yellowish-white,  spongy,  with  a  feeble
odor,  and  a  taste  at  first  sweetish,  then  nauseously  acrid  and  biting,  but
not  very  durable,  and  bitterish.  At  from  two  to  six  inches  from  their
origin,  they  are  furnished  with  small,  slender  branches.  When  fresh
they  are  extremely  powerful,  producing  when  chewed  and  retained  for
a  time  upon  the  tongue,  a  burning  and  benumbing  impression,  like  that
caused  by  taking  hot  liquids  into  the  mouth.  Drying  diminishes  this
acrimony,  which  becomes  gradually  weakened  by  age.  Water  or
alcohol  extracts  its  virtues,  which  are  impaired  by  long  boiling.  Analy-
sis has  found  in  these  fibers,  a  volatile  oil,  an  acrid  fixed  oil,  a  resinous
substance,  wax,  a  volatile  acid,  bitter  extractive,  gum,  albumen,  gallate
of  potassa,  supergallate  of  lime,  a  salt  of  ammonia,  and  woody  fiber.
Its  acridity  is  supposed  to  depend  on  the  volatile  acid,  while  its  purga-
tive qualities  are  attributed  to  the  resinous  substance,  from  the  fact  that
alcohol  extracts  the  medicinal  virtues  of  the  fibers  most  effectually.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses  a  powerful  poison,  causing  gastro-
intestinal inflammation,  vomiting,  purging,  vertigo,  cramp,  convulsions
and  even  death.  Applied  to  the  skin,  the  fresh  root  inflames  and  even
vesicates.  In  medicinal  doses,  a  drastic  cathartic,  diuretic,  anthelmintic
and  emmenagogue.  Formerly  used  in  palsy,  insanity,  apoplexy,  dropsy,
epilepsy,  etc.,  but  seldom  used  at  present;  occasionally  it  is  found  useful
in  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  etc.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  five  to  ten
grains;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  two  fluidrachms ;  of  the  extract,  from
two  to  five  grains.

The  Helleborus  Foetidus  or  Bear's  foot,  possesses  similar  properties,  but
is  scarcely  known  in  this  country.  It  has  been  used  in  asthma,  hysteria,
and  for  the  removal  of  tapeworm,  in  powder  or  decoction.

Off.  Prep. — Vinum  Hsematoxyli  Compositum.


Helonias  Dioica.  529

HELONIAS  DIOICA.

Helonias.

Nat.  Ord. — Melanthaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Trigynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  False  Unicorn-
root,  Drooping  Starwort,  Devil's  Bit,  etc.,  is  the  Veratrum  Luteum  of
Linnaeus,  and  the  Melanihium  Dioicum  of  Walter.  It  is  a  herbaceous
perennial,  with  a  large,  somewhat  bulbous,  premorse  root,  from  which
arises  a  simple,  very  smooth,  somewhat  angular  stem  or  scape,  one  or
two  feet  in  hight.  The  cauline  leaves  are  lanceolate,  acute,  small,  and
at  some  distance  from  each  other,  without  petioles ;  the  radical  leaves  are
broader,  being  from  four  to  eight  inches  in  length,  by  half  an  inch  to  an
inch  in  width,  narrow  at  base,  and  formed  into  a  sort  of  whorl  at  the
base  of  the  scape.  The  Jlowers  are  small,  very  numerous,  greenish-
white,  and  are  disposed  in  long,  terminal,  spicate,  nodding,  dioecious
racemes,  resembling  a  plume,  and  which  are  more  slender  and  weak  on
the  barren  plants.  Male  jlowers  with  white,  linear-spathulate,  obtuse,
one-nerved  petals;  stamens  rather  longer  than  the  petals;  filaments  subu-
late ;  anthers  terminal,  two-lobed  ;  ovaries  wanting.  Female  Jlowers,  the
raceme  is  generally  few  flowered,  becoming  erect ;  petals  linear ;  stamens
very  short,  abortive ;  ovary  ovate,  subtriangular,  with  the  sides  deeply
furrowed ;  stigmas  three,  spreading  or  reflexed.  Capsvle  ovate-oblong,
tapering  to  the  base,  three-furrowed,  opening  at  the  summit.  Seeds
many  in  each  cell,  acute,  compressed.

History.  — This  plant  is  indigenous  to  the  United  States,  and  is
abundant  in  some  of  the  Western  States,  growing  in  woodlands,  mea-
dows and  moist  situations,  and  flowering  in  June  and  July.  It  is  also
found  in  low  grounds  from  Canada  to  Georgia  and  Louisiana.  The
plant  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  the  Aletris  Farinosa,  but  may  be  identi-
fied by  the  leaves  of  the  aletris  being  sharply  pointed,  with  a  straight
slender  spike  of  scattered  flowers,  while  the  helonias  is  not  so  sharply
lance-shaped  in  its  leaves,  and  has  a  thick  plumose  dioica]  spike.

The  root  is  the  officinal  part ;  it  is  tapering,  fibrous,  about  an  inch  and
a  quarter  in  length,  and  from  two  to  six-eighths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,
very  hard,  transversely  wrinkled,  and  abrupt  or  premorse  at  the  end,
appearing  as  though  it  had  been  cut  or  bitten  off.  There  has  been,  and
still  exists  much  difficulty  among  druggists  and  herb-gatherers  in  de-
termining the  difference  between  the  roots  of  Aletris  Farinosa  and
Helonias  Dioica;  it  has  often  been  the  case  that  these  roots  have  been  in-
discriminately bought  and  sold.  The  specimens  of  Helonias  which  I  have
before  me  are  from  half  an  inch  to  two  inches  in  length,  and  from  four
to  six  or  eight  lines  in  diameter,  mostly  premorse,  but  occasionally  some-
what pointed,  with  many  small,  yellowish-white,  thread-like  fibers,  from
half  an  inch  to  two  or  three  inches  in  length ;  externally,  they  are  dark-
34


530  Materia  Medica.

brown,  transversely  wrinkled,  rough  and  uneven,  with  annular  promi-
nences which  often  have  the  appearance  as  if  a  small  root  had  been
driven  into  the  end  of  a  larger  one  and  grew  there ;  there  are  also
many  small  openings,  cups,  pores,  or  raised  cells,  through  which
passed  the  fibers,  and  which  will  always  be  seen  at  the  base  of
each  fiber  upon  carefully  removing  it  from  the  root;  attached  to  the
upper  part  of  the  root,  will  frequently  be  seen  the  remains  of  the
scape  and  radical  leaves.  Internally,  on  cutting  them  transversely,  a
whitish,  rough,  circular  center  is  presented,  which  is  surrounded  with  a
smooth  substance  of  a  similar  or  darker  color,  and  near  the  margin  of
which  may  be  observed  at  short  distances  from  each  other,  dark  spots
or  openings,  which  appear  to  be  continuations  of  the  fibers,  or  of  the
canals  through  which  they  pass;  a  longitudinal  section  exhibits  a  rough,
whitish  center  one  or  two  lines  in  diameter  passing  through  the  root,  on
each  side  of  which  is  the  smooth  substance  above  referred  to,  with  few
or  none  of  the  dark  spots.  The  roots  have  a  faint,  peculiar,  unpleasant
odor  when  bruised,  and  a  peculiar  bitter,  somewhat  aloetic  taste,  not  so
powerful  in  the  dried  ones  as  in  the  fresh.  As  far  as  I  can  recollect,  the
root  of  the  aletris  seldom  exceeds  an  inch  in  length,  is  not  premorse,
has  a  brittle,  scaly  appearance,  is  blackish  outside,  brownish  inside,  and
although  having  many  fibers,  the  most  of  them  pass  from  the  upper  and
lateral  portions  of  the  root.

Properties  and  Uses. — Helonias  is  tonic,  diuretic,  and  vermifuge ;  in
large  doses,  emetic,  and  when  fresh,  sialagogue.  In  doses  of  ten  or
fifteen  grains  of  the  powdered  root,  repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day,
it  has  been  found  very  beneficial  in  dyspepsia,  loss  of  appetite,  and  for
the  removal  of  worms.  It  is  reputed  beneficial  in  colic,  and  in  atony  of
the  generative  organs.  In  uterine  diseases  it  is  held  to  be  invaluable,
acting  as  a  uterine  tonic,  and  gradually  removing  abnormal  conditions,
while  at  the  same  time  it  imparts  tone  and  vigor  to  the  reproductive
organs.  Hence,  it  is  much  used  in  leucorrhea,  amenorrhea,  dysmenor-
rhea, and  to  remove  the  tendency  to  repeated  and  successive  miscar-
riages. The  plant  is  said  to  kill  cattle  feeding  on  it ;  and  the  decoction
to  kill  insects,  bugs,  and  lice.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  twenty  to  forty
grains  ;  of  the  decoction,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces  ;  of  the  hydro-
alcoholic  extract  from  two  to  four  or  five  grains.  The  Helonias  Bullala,
with  purple  flowers,  and  probably  some  other  species,  possesses  similar
medicinal  virtues.


HEMIDESMUS  INDICUS.

Indian  Sarsaparilla.

Nat.  Ord. — Asclepidacerc. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  climbing  plant  with  a  long  and  slender  root,
with  few  ramifications,  covered  with  rust-colored  bark,  and  with  twining,


Hemidebmus  Indicus.  531

diffuse  or  climbing,  woody,  slender  stems,  from  the  thickness  of  a  crow's
quill  to  that  of  a  goose's,  and  nearly  smooth.  The  leaves  are  opposite,
on  short  petioles,  entire,  smooth,  shining,  and  of  firm  texture  ;  they  vary
much  in  shape  and  size,  those  on  the  young  shoots  that  issue  from  old
roots,  being  linear,  acute,  and  striated  down  the  middle  with  white  ;
while  the  others  are  generally  broad-lanceolate,  and  sometimes  ovate  or
oval.  The  stipules  are  four-fold,  small,  on  each  side  of  each  petiole,
caducous.  The  flowers  are  small,  externally  green,  internally  a  deep-
purple,  and  are  disposed  in  axillary,  sessile  racemes,  which  are  imbri-
cated with  flowers,  and  then  with  scales  like  bracts.  The  calyx  is  five-
parted,  with  acute  divisions  :  the  corolla  is  flat,  rotate,  with  oblong,
pointed  divisions,  rugose  inside.  The  follicles  are  long,  slender,  and
spreading.

History. — This  plant  is  the  Periploca  Indica  of  Willdenow,  and  the
Asclepias  Pseudosarsa  of  Roxburgh  ;  it  is  a  native  of  Lower  India  and
Ceylon,  and  other  parts  of  the  East  Indies.  It  has  been  used  as  a  med-
ical agent  in  India  for  a  long  time,  and  was  unknown  to  the  profession
until  its  introduction  in  1819  by  Dr.  Ashburner.  The  root  is  the  part
used ;  this  is  long,  tortuous,  round,  rugose,  with  a  brownish  cork-like
bark,  which  is  marked  by  longitudinal  furrows  and  transverse  fissures,
with  an  internal,  yellowish,  ligneous  center.  The  odor  is  peculiar  and
somewhat  aromatic,  somewhat  resembling  that  of  Orris  Root,  and  the
taste  bitterish.  Mr.  Garden  found  it  to  contain  a  peculiar  volatile,  crys-
tallizable,  acid  principle,  on  which  the  properties  of  the  root  depend.
He  called  it  Smilasperic  Acid,  from  a  belief  that  the  root  was  derived
from  Smilax  Aspera.  The  name  suggested  by  Pereira  is  the  most  cor-
rect, viz  : Hemidesmic  Acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Indian  Sarsaparilla  is  said  to  be  tonic,  diuretic,
and  alterative.  It  has  been  employed  as  a  substitute  for  sarsaparilla,
and  has  proved  successful  in  syphilitic  affections  when  that  medicine  has
failed.  It  increases  the  appetite,  acts  as  a  diuretic,  and  improves  the
general  health.  Likewise  said  to  be  useful  in  nephritic  complaints,
scrofula,  cutaneous  diseases,  and  in  the  sore-mouth  of  children.  Not-
withstanding these  statements  it  is  by  no  means  so  efficacious  and  cer-
tain as  many  of  our  indigenous  remedies.  It  is  used  in  the  form  of  infu-
sion, as  boiling  dissipates  its  volatile  active  principle  ;  two  ounces  of  the
root  may  be  infused  in  a  pint  of  boiling  water  for  an  hour  ;  the  whole  of
which  may  be  taken  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours.


532  Materia Medica.

HEPATICA  AMERICANA.

Kidney  Liverleaf.

HEPATICA  ACUTILOBA.

Heart  Liverleaf.

Nat.  Ord.— Banunculaceas. Sex.  Syst.— Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE PLANT.

Description.  —  Hepatica  Americana  of  De  Candolle,  is  the  Hepatica
Triloba  of  Willdenow.  It  has  a  perennial  fibrous  root,  with  leaves  which
are  cordate  at  base,  three-lobed  ;  lobes  unequal,  rounded,  obtuse,  or
acute,  coriaceous,  nearly  smooth,  purplish  beneath,  green-mottled  with
purple  above,  and  supported  on  hairy  footstalks  from  four  to  eight  inches
long,  which  spring  directly  from  the  root.  The  scapes  or  fiower-stems
are  several  in  number,  as  long  as  the  petioles,  round,  hairy,  terminating
in  a  single  white,  bluish,  or  purplish  flower,  and  invested  at  base  with
membranous  sheaths.  Flowers  at  first  drooping,  afterward  erect.  Invo-
lucre resembling  a  calyx,  very  hirsute,  with  deep,  ovate,  entire  segments.
Sepals  in  two  or  three  series,  purplish  or  white,  equal,  ovate,  obtuse.
Stamens  subulate  ;  anthers  elliptic.  Seeds  ovate,  acute,  awnless.  Hepa-
tica Acutiloba  differs  in  having  cordate  leaves,  with  from  three  to  five
entire,  acute  lobes,  and  the  involucral  leaves  are  acute.

History. — But  one  species  of  Hepatica  is  generally  admitted  by  Bota-
nists, the  differences  in  form,  color,  etc.,  being  considered  as  accidental ;
and  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  pharmacopceists  of  this  country.
These  plants  are  common  to  the  United  States,  growing  in  woods,  and
upon  the  sides  of  hills  and  mountains  ;  the  H.  Americana,  which  is  the
most  common,  preferring  the  south  side,  and  the  other  the  north.  They
both  bear  white,  blue,  or  purplish  flowers  which  appear  late  in  March
or  early  in  April.  The  whole  plant  is  used  ;  it  is  inodorous,  with  a  mu-
cilaginous, somewhat  astringent,  slightly  bitterish  taste,  and  yields  its
active  properties  to  water.  The  term  Liverwort,  sometimes  erroneously
applied  to  it,  belongs  to  the  cryptogamous  genus,  Marckantia  Polymorpha.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  mild,  demulcent  tonic  and  astringent.  It
has  been  used  in  infusion,  in  fevers,  hepatic  complaints,  hemoptysis,
coua-hs,  etc.,  but  in  severe  cases  it  is  unavailable.  The  infusion  may  be
taken  ad  libitum.


HERACLEUM LANATUM.

Masterwort.

Nat. Ord.—Aphcese. Sex.  Syst.— Pentandria  Digynia.

THE KOOT.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  called  Cow-parsnep,  has  a  large,
spindle-shaped,  perennial  root,  with  a  strong,  unpleasant  smell,  which


Heuchera  Americana.  533

sends  up  annually  a  hollow,  thick,  furrowed,  branching  and  pubescent
stem,  from  three  to  five  feet  high,  and  often  an  inch  or  more  in  diameter
at  the  base.  The  leaves  are  very  large,  on  downy,  channeled  petioles,
and  ternately  divided  ;  the  segments  roundish-cordate,  unequally  lobed ;
the  lobes  acuminate,  almost  glabrous  above,  and  woolly  underneath.
The  flowers  are  white,  and  are  disposed  in  large,  spreading  umbels,
having  an  involucre  of  from  six  to  ten  oblong-lanceolate,  deciduous  leaf-
lets. Involucel  composed  of  lanceolate-leaflets  which  are  narrowed  to  a
long  point.  Petals  of  the  exterior  flowers  unequal,  as  if  unequally  two-
cleft,  owing  to  the  enlargement  of  the  lobes  on  each  side  of  the  inflexed
apex.  Fruit  nearly  half  an  inch  long,  often  emarginate.  Vittce  of  the
channels  clavate. Commissure  usually  with  two  vittae.

History. — Found  growing  in  meadows  and  along  fences  and  hedges
from  Canada  to  Pennsylvania,  and  flowers  in  June.  The  root  is  officinal,
resembles  common  parsley,  has  a  strong,  disagreeable  odor,  and  an  acrid
taste.  When  applied  to  the  skin,  both  the  root  and  leaves  excite  redness
and  inflammation.  When  gathered  from  a  damp  situation,  supposed  to
be  poisonous.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Stimulant,  antispasmodic  and  carminative.
Used  in  flatulency  and  dyspepsia,  in  decoction ;  and  two  or  three
drachms  of  the  powdered  root,  taken  daily  in  epilepsy,  and  continued
for  some  time,  with  a  strong  infusion  of  the  leaves  and  tops  at  night,  has
been  found  successful.  Recommended,  also,  in  asthma,  colic,  amenor-
rhea, dysmenorrhea,  palsy,  apoplexy,  intermittents,  etc.,  in  doses  of  one
drachm.


HEUCHERA  AMERICANA.

Alum  Root.

Nat.  Ord. — Saxifragacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

the  root.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  called  American  Sanicle,  is  her-
baceous and  indigenous,  with  a  perennial,  knotty,  yellowish  root.  The
leaves  are  all  radical,  on  very  long  downy  petioles  from  two  to  eight
inches  in  length,  roundish-cordate,  hispidly  pilose,  about  seven-lobed ;
and  from  two  to  three  and  a  half  inches  in  diameter  ;  the  lobes  are  short
and  roundish,  crenate-dentate,  with  dilated  mucronate  teeth.  Numerous
scapes  or  flower-stems  are  sent  up  by  the  same  root,  from  two  to  four  feet
high,  erect,  naked,  viscid-pubescent  in  their  upper  part,  and  terminating
in  loose,  pyramidal,  dichotomous  panicles,  which  are  nearly  one-third
the  length  of  the  scape.  The  calyx  is  permanent,  five-cleft,  campanu-
late,  small,  obovate,  striated,  with  very  obtuse  segments,  and  more  con-
spicuous than  the  petals. The  petals  are  purplish-white,  or  rose-colored,


534  Materia  Medica.

minute,  spathulate,  and  inserted  into  the  margin  of  the  calyx,  between
its  segments.  The  filaments  are  twice  as  long  as  the  petals,  yellowish,
inserted  opposite  the  segments  of  the  calyx,  persistent,  and  surmounted
by  small,  red,  globose  anthers.  Capsule  ovate.  Seeds  minute,  oblong,
black,  very  hispid.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  North  America,  and  is  found  in
shady,  rocky  situations,  from  New  England  to  Carolina,  and  westward  ;
it  flowers  in  June  and  July.  The  root  is  the  officinal  portion  ;  it  is  hori-
zontal, somewhat  compressed,  knotty,  irregular,  yellowish,  inodorous,
and  of  a  powerfully  styptic  taste.  It  yields  its  medicinal  virtues  to
water.  No  analysis  has  been  made  of  this  plant.  There  are  several
species  of  this  plant,  the  Heuchera  Caulescens,  H.  Pubescens,  and  others
which  possess  similar  properties,  and  are  often  collected  and  sold  with
the  roots  of  H.  Americana.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Alum  root,  as  its  name  would  indicate,  is  a
powerful  astringent,  so  intensely  so,  as  seldom  to  be  administered  inter-
nally ;  yet  it  would  undoubtedly  prove  useful  in  small  doses,  in  all  cases
where  astringents  are  indicated.  An  aqueous  extract  will  be  found  very
beneficial  in  diarrhea  and  dysentery  in  the  second  stages,  in  hemor-
rhages, and  other  similar  diseases.  Externally,  the  powdered  root  may
be  applied  to  hemorrhages,  epistaxis,  wounds,  foul  and  indolent  ulcers,
etc.  The  decoction  is  useful  in  aphthous  sore-mouth,  and  soreness  of
the  throat  and  fauces ;  it  may  be  used  as  a  wash  or  gargle.  Taken
internally,  in  doses  of  a  wineglass  half-full  three  or  four  times  a  day,  it
has  been  efficacious  in  diabetes,  and  in  bleeding  piles,  employing  it,  in
this  last  complaint,  by  injection  also.  Equal  parts  of  alum  root  and
black-cohosh  root  in  decoction,  form  an  excellent  local  application  in
leucorrhea  and  excoriation  of  the  cervix  uteri.  Some  practitioners
employ  this  root  indiscriminately  with  that  of  the  Geranium  Maculatum;
it  is,  however,  more  powerfully  astringent,  and  probably  a  preparation,
equal  at  least  to  g  era-nun  in  medical  virtue  might  be  obtained  from  it.


HIERACIUM  VENOSUM.

Hawkweed.
Nat.  Ord. — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE  ROOT  AND  LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  as  Veinyleaved  Hawkweed,  Rat-
tlesnakeweed,  Striped  Bloodwort,  etc.,  has  a  perennial  root,  with  a  stem
or  scape  from  one  to  two  feet  in  hight,  dark-brown,  slender,  some-
times naked,  sometimes  with  one  or  more  glabrous  cauline  leaves,
several  times  dichotomous,  so  as  to  form  a  compound  diffuse  corymb,
with  a  subulate  bract  at  each  division.  The  radical  leaves  are  obovate,
or  oblong-spathulate,  entire  or  slightly  toothed,  subsessile,  thin,  a  little


Hirudo  Medicinaus.  535

hairy  above,  nearly  glaucous,  and  purplish  beneath,  ciliate  on  the  mar-
gins and  midrib,  marked  with  purple  veins,  and  the  first  that  unfold  are
appressed  to  the  ground.  Heads  small,  and  about  twenty-flowered ;  base
of  involucre  somewhat  hispid  with  short  hairs ;  inner  scales  of  involucre
glabrous  or  nearly  so.  Florets  bright-yellow.  Achenia  linear,  not
tapering  above.

History. — Hawkweed  grows  in  many  parts  of  the  United  States,  but
is  more  common  to  the  northward  and  eastward,  growing  upon  dry  hills,
and  in  pine  woods.  It  bears  yellow  flowers  from  May  to  July.  The
leaves  and  roots  are  the  parts  that  have  been  used ;  they  have  no  odor,
but  a  bitterish  and  somewhat  mucilaginous  taste.  Water  extracts  their
virtues. They  have  not  been  chemically  examined.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plant  is  tonic,  astringent,  and  expectorant ;
it  has  been  used  in  scrofula,  menorrhagia,  hemoptysis,  and  other  hemor-
rhages, in  decoction.  The  powdered  leaves  and  root  have  been  used  as
a  snuff  in  polypus  of  the  nose,  combined  with  bloodroot.  Said  to  be
efficient  against  the  bites  of  venomous  snakes.  The  juice  of  the  fresh
leaves  are  recommended  as  a  cure  for  warts.  Dose  of  the  infusion  or
syrup,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.


HIRUDO MEDICINALIS.

The  Leech.

Description. — The  leech  belongs  to  Class  1  of  invertebrated  articu-
lated animals,  called  Annelides,  composed  of  worms  with  red  blood,
having  soft  retractile  bodies  composed  of  numerous  segments  or  rings,
usually  breathing  by  means  of  branchiae,  with  a  nervous  system  consist-
ing in  a  double-knotted  cord,  the  contractile  power  of  their  segments
supplying  the  place  of  feet;  to  Order  3  of  this  class,  called  Abranchiate,
comprising  worms  with  no  apparent  external  organ  of  respiration ;  and
to  Family  2,  called  Asetigervs,  without  setae  to  enable  them  to  crawl.
The  leech  is  an  aquatic  worm,  with  a  flattened  body,  tapering  toward
each  end,  and  terminating  in  circular  flattened  disks,  the  hinder  one
being  the  larger  of  the  two.  It  swims  with  a  vertical  undulating  motion,
and  moves  when  out  of  the  water  >by  means  of  these  disks  or  suckers,
fastening  itself  first  by  one  and  then  by  the  other,  and  alternately
stretching  out  and  contracting  its  body-  The  mouth  is  placed  in  the
center  of  the  anterior  disk,  and  is  furnished  with  three  cartilaginous
lens-shaped  jaws  at  the  entrance  of  the  alimentary  canal.  These  jaws
are  lined  at  their  edges  with  fine  sharp  teeth,  and  meet  so  as  to  make  a
triangular  ineision  in  the  flesh.  The  head  is  furnished  with  small  raised
points,  supposed  by  some  to  be  eyes.  Respiration  is  carried  on  through
small  apertures  ranged  along  the  inferior  surface.  The  nervous  system
consists  of  a  cord  extending  the  whole  length,  furnished  with  numerous


536  Materia Medica.

ganglions.  The  intestinal  canal  is  straight  and  terminates  in  the  anus,
near  the  posterior  disk.  Leeches  are  hermaphrodite,  but  impregnate
each  other  mutually;  they  are  oviparous  having  from  six  to  fifteen  eggs
contained  in  a  spongy,  slimy  cocoon,  which  are  deposited  near  the
water's  edge,  arid  hatched  by  the  heat  of  the  sun.  They  do  not  gene-
rate until  they  are  six  or  seven  years  old,  and  the  young  leeches  leave
the  eggs  in  about  twenty-five  days.

History. — There  are  several  species  of  the  leech  employed  in  medi-
cine, the  most  common  of  which  are  the  gray  and  green  leech  of  Europe,
and  the  American  leech.  The  European  varieties  are  both  marked  with
six  longitudinal  dorsal  ferruginous  stripes,  the  four  lateral  ones  being
tesselated  with  black  spots.  The  color  of  the  black  varies  from  a  black-
ish to  a  grayish-green.  The  belly  of  the  H.  Medicinalis,  or  gray  leech,
is  grayish  or  yellowish,  more  or  less  speckled  with  black  spots;  that  of
the  H.  Officinalis  or  green  leech,  is  paler,  more  yellowish  or  greenish,
and  unspotted.  They  are  from  two  to  four  inches  in  length,  and  inhabit
marshes  and  running  streams,  in  various  parts  of  Europe.  The  H.
Decora,  or  American  leech  has  its  back  of  a  deep  pistachio-green  color,
with  three  longitudinal  rows  of  somewhat  quadrate  spots,  the  central
beino-  of  a  bright  brownish-orange  color,  and  the  two  lateral  of  a  black.
The  belly  is  of  the  same  color,  with  scattered  black  dots.  It  is  from
two  to  three  inches  in  length,  and  sometimes  larger.

Leeches  are  very  troublesome  to  preserve,  often  dying  suddenly  and
in  numbers,  and  various  means  have  been  adopted  to  keep  them  healthy.
The  most  common  cause  of  their  sickness  and  death  is  the  formation  of
a  slimy  matter  on  their  skin,  and  which  they  are  in  the  habit  of  remov-
ing by  drawing  themselves  through  moss.  Large  quantities,  when
kept  together,  are  more  liable  to  disease  and  mortality,  than  when  kept
together  in  small  numbers.  They  should  be  kept  in  jars,  in  clear,  soft
water,  which  should  be  changed  twice  a  week  in  winter,  and  every  other
day  in  summer.  The  jar  must  be  covered  with  a  linen  cloth,  and  placed
in  a  situation  not  liable  to  sudden  changes  of  temperature,  nor  to  strong
odors.  They  will  live  a  long  time,  and  continue  active  and  healthy
without  any  other  attention  than  that  of  frequently  changing  the  water
in  which  they  are  kept.  As  soon  as  a  leech  is  known  to  be  dead,  it
should  be  instantly  removed,  and  fresh  water  applied.  In  country
places,  leeches  may  be  preserved  in  a  jar,  with  small  holes  to  admit  the
water,  in  the  bottom  of  which  are  placed  moss  and  pebbles,  and  placed
in  a  spring  or  running  stream  of  soft  water.  A  very  good  method  is  to
keep  them  in  loose  turf  or  moss,  kept  constantly  moist  with  rain-water,
and  packed  in  vessels  which  admit  of  a  free  renewal  of  air  all  the  while.

Properties  and  Uses.— Leeches  are  occasionally  used  as  affording  the
least  painful,  and  in  many  instances  the  most  effectual  means,  for  the
local  abstraction  of  blood,  and  may  be  applied  to  parts  which,  either
from  their  situation  or  great  tenderness,  will  not  admit  of  the  use  of


HORDEUM DlSTICHON.  537

cups.  They  are  used  generally  in  local  inflammations,  bruises,  etc.  In
applying  them,  the  hair  should  be  shaved  off,  if  there  be  any,  and  the
part  well  cleansed  with  soap  and  water,  and  afterward  with  pure  water.
If  the  leech  does  not  readily  bite,  the  skin  should  be  moistened  with  a
little  blood  or  sweet  milk.  When  it  is  required  that  it  should  bite  in
one  particular  spot,  it  may  be  placed  in  a  quill  or  tube,  and  held  over
the  spot  until  it  does  take  hold,  when  the  quill  may  be  withdrawn.
When  a  leech  is  gorged,  it  drops  off.  One  European  leech  will  draw
from  half  an  ounce  to  an  ounce  of  blood.  Six  American  are  applied
for  every  fluidounce.  They  may  be  separated  from  the  skin  at  any
time,  by  sprinkling  a  little  salt  upon  them,  which  will  also  make  them
disgorge  after  they  have  dropped  off.  But  the  usual  method  is  to  draw
the  leech  through  the  fingers,  from  the  tail  to  the  head,  with  gentle
pressure,  and  thus  squeeze  out  the  blood.  After  emptying  them,  they
should  be  placed  in  clean  water,  which  must  be  frequently  changed,  and
they  should  also  be  kept  by  themselves  for  several  days,  or  until  they
have  recovered  their  activity.  When  the  hemorrhage  from  leech-bites
is  troublesome,  it  may  be  stopped  by  tannin  or  other  astringents,  collo-
dion, or  even  a  single  stitch  of  the  needle,  which  need  not  penetrate
deeper  than  the  cutis.  Should  a  leech  get  into  the  stomach,  a  solution
of  salt  may  be  drank,  which  is  poison  to  it,  and  will  kill  it.


HORDEUM  DlSTICHON.

Barley.

Nat.  Ord. — Graminaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Digynia.

THE DECORTICATED SEEDS.

Description. — Various  species  of  barley  are  cultivated  in  different
parts  of  the  world ;  the  most  common,  and  which  have  been  introduced
into  this  country,  are  the  following: — Hordeum  Vulgare,  has  an  erect,
smooth,  fistular  culm  or  stem,  from  two  to  four  feet  in  hight,  with  alter-
nate, sheathing,  lanceolate,  roughish,  and  pointed  leaves;  the  sheaths
auriculate  at  the  throat.  The  flowers  are  all  perfect,  and  disposed  in  a
thick,  terminal  spike,  about  three  inches  long,  the  axis  of  which  is
dentate,  and  on  each  tooth  supports  three  sessile  flowers.  The  calyx  or
outer  chaff  has  two  valves ;  the  corolla  or  inner  chaff  is  also  composed  of
two  valves,  of  which  the  exterior  is  larger  than  the  other,  and  termin-
ates in  a  long,  rough,  serrated  awn  or  beard.  The  fruit  or  seeds  are
arranged  in  four  rows.

Hordeum  Distichon  is  distinguished  by  its  flat  spike  or  ear,  havinn-  on
each  flat  side  a  double  row  of  imperfect  or  male  florets  without  beards,
and  on  each  edge,  a  single  row  of  perfect  or  hermaphrodite  florets ;  the
fruit  or  seeds,  are,  therefore,  in  two  rows.


538-  Materia  Medica.

History. — Barley  is  thought  to  be  a  native  of  Central  Asia,  but  the
subject  is  involved  in  much  uncertainty.  The  seeds  are  officinal ;  they
are  oval,  oblong,  pointed  at  one  end,  obtuse  at  the  other,  marked  with  a
longitudinal  furrow  on  one  side,  externally  yellow,  internally  white,  of
a  faint  odor  when  in  mass,  and  having  a  mild,  sweetish  taste.  When
deprived  of  the  husks,  and  rounded  and  polished  by  a  peculiar  process,
it  is  called  Pearl  barley — hordeum  perlatum  ;  this  is  the  proper  officinal
form  of  barley,  Which  is  kept  in  the  shops,  and  when  ground  into  a
coarse  flour,  it  forms  barley  meal.  It  abounds  in  starch,  with  some
gluten,  sugar  and  gum,  and  is  destitute  of  hordein.

When  the  entire  grain  is  moistened,  and  exposed  in  mass  to  a  sum-
mer temperature  until  it  begins  to  germinate,  and  is  then  deprived  of
vitality  by  a  stronger  heat,  it  is  called  malt,  and  in  this  form  barley  is
largely  consumed  in  the  manufacture  of  malt  liquors.  The  process  of
making  malt  increases  the  quantity  of  sugar,  starch,  and  gum,  while
that  of  the  hordein  becomes  lessened — thus,  100  parts  of  malt  contain
56  of  starch,  1  of  gluten,  15  of  sugar,  15  of  gum,  1  of  yellow  resin,  and
only  12  of  hordein.  While  barley  in  its  natural  state  consists  in  100
parts  of  32  of  starch,  3  of  gluten,  5  of  sugar,  4  of  gum,  1  of  yellow
resin,  and  55  of  hordein.  Hordein  is  a  principle  very  closely  resem-
bling lignin,  and  which,  it  has  been  suggested  by  Berzelius,  may  be  an
intimate  mixture  of  vegetable  fiber  with  gluten  and  starch.  It  may  be
obtained  by  boiling  the  starchy  matter  which  is  obtained  by  kneading
barley-meal  in  a  cloth  with  water;  the  undissolved  residuum,  when
well  washed  with  boiling  water,  is  hordein.  It  is  a  yellowish,  granular
powder,  like  sawdust,  yielding  oxalic  acid  when  treated  with  nitric  acid,
and  consisting  according  to  Marcet  of  12  equivalents  of  carbon,  11  of
hydrogen,  and  10  of  oxygen.  M.  Guibort  and  Dr.  Thomson  consider
it  to  be  the  amylin  or  tegumentary  membrane  of  the  starch  globules,
which  are  stronger  and  more  solid  in  barley  starch  than  in  other  kinds.
Barley  is  insoluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  or  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils ;  but
alcohol  or  ether  removes  from  it  a  little  resin.  Boiling  water  dissolves  a
large  proportion  of  it.  A  peculiar  substance  has  been  found  in  barley-
seeds  after  having  undergone  germination,  by  MM.  Pay  en  and  Persoz,
which  they  have  named  Diastase,  on  account  of  its  effect  in  detaching
the  principles  of  the  starch-globules  from  one  another.  During  the  pro-
cess of  germination,  the  rupture  of  the  starch  globules,  and  the  separa-
tion of  their  tegumentary  amylin  from  the  contained  amidin,  is  the  first
change  effected,  and  which  is  succeeded  by  conversion  of  the  amidin  into
sugar  and  dextrine,  which  changes  are  owing  to  this  principle,  which  is
developed  at  the  time  in  the  seed.  The  same  substance  has  likewise
been  found  in  the  seeds  of  oats  and  wheat,  and  in  the  potato,  but  only
after  these  have  undergone  germination.

Diastase  may  be  applied  to  various  useful  economical  purposes;  it  is
obtained  by  moistening  ground  malt  with  half  its  weight  of  cold  water,


HORDEUM DlSTIGHON.  539

expressing  strongly,  and  adding  to  the  viscid  liquid  obtained  by  expres-
sion just  enough  of  alcohol  to  destroy  its  viscidity,  then  filtering  to
separate  the  coagulable  albumen,  and  finally  adding  fresh  alcohol  to  the
liquid,  which  precipitates  the  diastase  in  an  impure  state.  It  may  be
purified  by  three  successive  solutions  in  water  and  precipitations  by  alco-
hol ;  after  which  it  is  best  obtained  in  the  dry  state  by  exposing  it  in
thin  layers  to  a  current  of  air  about  the  temperature  of  110°.  When
pure,  diastase  is  solid,  white  and  amorphous,  tasteless,  neutral,  soluble
in  water  and  weak  alcohol  but  insoluble  in  undiluted  alcohol.  Its  aque-
ous solution  is  not  precipitated,  like  that  of  starch,  by  lime,  baryta,  or
diacetate  of  lead ;  on  keeping  it  becomes  acid.  Its  most  remarkable
property  is  that  of  converting  starch  and  water,  at  a  temperature  of  about
160°,  into  sugar  and  dextrine.  It  has  no  action  upon  either  gum  or
sugar,  and  yet  one  part  of  it  added  to  two  thousand  parts  of  starch
suspended  in  water,  causes  the  starch -globules  speedily  to  burst,  the
teguments  separating  from  the  contained  amidin,  which  by  the  prolonged
action  of  the  above  heat,  effects  this  extraordinary  conversion  without
any  perceptible  difference  in  the  weight  of  the  substances  employed.

The  different  kinds  of  beer,  ale,  and  porter,  are  made  from  malt,  with
the  addition  of  hops  and  other  articles.  Malt  has  a  sweetish,  mucilagi-
nous, rather  agreeable  taste;  an  infusion  of  it  at  160°  completes  the
conversion  of  the  starch  into  sugar  and  gum  ;  yeast  being  then  added  at
a  temperature  between  60°  and  80°,  vinous  fermentation  takes  place,
carbonic  acid  is  disengaged  and  alcohol  formed.  The  sugar  is  the
source  of  the  alcohol  existing  in  malt  liquors,  while  the  gum  or  dextrine
is  the  cause  of  their  viscidity,  and  the  permanence  of  their  effervescence
and  frothy  top.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Pearl  barley  in  decoction  is  a  nutritive  and
demulcent,  and  on  account  of  its  mild  and  unirritating  qualities  is  much
used  as  an  article  of  diet  for  the  sick  and  convalescent,  acting  at  the
same  time,  if  the  barley  itself  be  swallowed,  as  a  gentle  aperient.  The
decoction  is  employed  for  suspending  powdered  drugs  insoluble  in  water,
and  also  as  a  drink  in  febrile  diseases,  catarrh,  dysentery,  inflammation
of  the  bladder,  gonorrhea,  and  chronic  mucous  inflammations.  Com-
bined with  hops,  or  in  the  form  of  beer,  ale,  or  porter,  it  forms  a  valu-
able tonic  in  many  chronic  exhausting  diseases,  and  in  convalescence.
From  two  to  four  ounces  of  malt  boiled  in  a  quart  of  water,  afford  a
more  demulcent  and  nutritious  liquor  than  barley,  and  is  consequently
better  adapted  to  cases  requiring  a  sustaining  course  of  treatment.  In
making  the  decoction  of  barley,  two  ounces  must  first  be  washed  with
cold  water,  and  all  extraneous  matters  removed ;  then  place  the  barley
in  half  a  pint  of  water,  boil  for  a  short  time,  strain  off  the  water,  and
throw  it  away,  as  this  is  only  employed  to  remove  mustiness,  or  any
disagreeable  flavor  which  the  barley  may  have  acquired.  To  the  barley
thus  prepared,  add  four  pints  of  boiling  water,  boil  down  to  two  pints


540  Materia  Medica.

and  strain. The  decoction  may  have  other  articles  added  in  the  course
of  its  preparation,  varied  to  suit  the  taste  of  the  patient,  as  sugar,  sliced
figs,  raisins,  liquorice  root,  etc. It  may  be  drank  freely.
Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Hordei.


HUMULUS  LUPUS.
Hops.

Nat. Ord. — Urticaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Dicecia  Pentandria.

THE STROBILES OR CONES.

Description. — This  plant  has  a  perennial  root,  which  sends  up  annual,
angular  stems,  rough  backward,  with  minute  refiexed  hairs,  and  twining
around  neighboring  objects  in  a  spiral  direction  with  the  sun,  and
climbing  to  a  great  bight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  on  long  winding
rouo-h  petioles  ;  the  smaller  ones  cordate,  the  larger  from  three  to  five-
lobed  ;  all  are  deep  green,  serrated,  veiny,  and  extremely  rough.  The
flowering  branches  are  axillary,  angular  and  rough.  The  stipules  are
two  or  four,  between  the  petioles,  smooth,  ovate,  refiexed.  The  flowers
are  numerous,  axillary,  and  of  a  greenish  color.  The  male  flowers  are
very  numerous,  panicled  and  yellowish-white;  sepals  five,  oblong,  obtuse,
spreading,  concave  ;  stamens  short ;  anthers  oblong,  opening  by  two
terminal  pores.  The  female  flowers  are  pale-green,  and  grow  on  a
separate  plant  in  the  form  of  an  ament,  having  each  a  pair  of  flowers
supported  by  a  bract,  which  is  ovate,  acute,  and  tubular  at  the  base ;
sepals  solitary,  obtuse,  smaller  than  the  bracts,  and  enveloping  the
ovary  ;  ovary  roundish,  compressed  ;  stigmas  two,  long,  subulate,  downy.
The  bracts  enlarge  into  a  persistent  catkin  or  strobile,  each  bract  in-
closing a  nut  enveloped  in  its  permanent  bractlet,  and  some  grains  of  a
yellow  resinous  secretion.

History. — The  Hop  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  also  of  North
America.  It  is  sometimes  found  growing  wild  in  the  Eastern  States,
and  was  found  in  abundance  by  Nuttall  on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi
and  Missouri.  It  is  also  indigenous  in  the  Canary  Islands,  and  is  said
to  occur  in  China.  It  is  extensively  cultivated  for  its  cones  or  strobiles
which  are  employed  in  medicine  and  the  manufacture  of  malt  liquors.
A  few  layers  of  the  barren  vines  planted  among  the  fertile  ones,  is  said
to  be  profitable  by  increasing  the  weight  of  the  produce.  The  part  of
the  plant  used  in  medicine  is  the  strobiles,  which  are  collected  when
fully  ripe,  dried  by  artificial  heat,  and  packed  in  bales.  The  strobiles,
known  in  commerce  by  the  name  of  Hops,  consist  of  numerous,  thin,
somewhat  translucent,  veined,  leaf-like  scales,  of  a  pale  greenish-yellow
color,  having  near  their  base  two  small,  round,  black  seeds.  They  have
a  strong,  peculiar,  somewhat  narcotic  and  fragrant  odor,  which  is  lost
by  age,  and  a  bitter,  aromatic,  and  slightly -astringent  taste. Though


Humulus  Lupus.  541

brittle  when  dried,  yet  they  are  not  readily  pulverized.  Water  takes  up
their  properties  by  decoction,  but  long  boiling  dissipates  them.  The
decoction  turns  litmus  paper  red,  becomes  deep-green  with  the  salts  of
iron,  and  turbid  with  the  solution  of  isinglass ;  a  better  solvent  than  water
is  proof-spirit.

The  active  properties  of  hops  depend  upon  a  yellow,  granular  powder
secreted  by  the  scales,  and  which  is  found  in  abundance  in  the  dried
fruit ;  the  scales,  however,  contain  similar  virtues  though  in  an  inferior
degree.  This  yellow  powder  is  called  Lupulin  (Lvpulina),  and  may
be  obtained  by  threshing  or  rubbing,  and  sifting  the  strobiles,  of  which
it  constitutes  from  one-tenth  to  one-sixth  by  weight.  It  is  in  rounded
or  reniform  grains,  of  a  cellular  texture,  golden-yellow  color,  and  some-
what transparent  ;  the  axis  around  which  the  cells  are  arranged  is
called  the  hilum.  Lupulin  has  the  peculiar  flavor  of  hops  ;  it  is  inflam-
mable, and  becomes  adhesive  by  moderate  heat.  Unless  carefully  dried
it  soon  loses  its  taste  and  odor,  which,  under  all  circumstances,  are
impaired  by  keeping.  It  is  always  preferable  to  the  hop  for  officinal
purposes.  Lupulin  has  been  found  to  consist  of  resin,  volatile  oil,  bitter
principle,  lignin,  and  traces  of  tannin,  gum,  stearin,  and  various  salts.
It  is  probably  to  the  oil  and  bitter  extract,  that  its  virtues  depend,  and
which  are  taken  up  by  alcohol.  The  volatile  oil  is  yellowish,  of  an  acrid
taste,  having  the  odor  of  hops,  and  lighter  than  water  ;  it  may  be  ob-
tained by  distillation  with  water.

The  bitter  principle,  called  Litpulile  by  the  French  chemists,  may  be
procured  by  treating  the  aqueous  extract  of  lupulin  mixed  with  a  little
lime,  with  alcohol,  evaporating  the  tincture  and  forming  an  alcoholic
extract,  dissolving  this  extract  in  water,  and  again  evaporating  to  form
a  second  aqueous  extract,  which  is  to  be  washed  with  ether.  When
pure,  lupulite  is  yellowish,  inodorous,  but  when  heated  giving  off  the
peculiar  smell  of  hops,  of  a  bitter,  hop  taste,  slightly  soluble  in  water,
which  takes  up  five  per  cent,  of  its  weight,  readily  soluble  in  alcohol,
almost  insoluble  in  ether,  neutral,  free  from  nitrogen,  and  an  excellent
tonic.  The  weak  acids  or  alkaline  solutions,  and  metallic  salts,  scarcely
affect  it.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Hops  are  tonic,  hypnotic,  febrifuge,  antili-
thic,  and  anthelmintic.  Their  tonic  and  anthelminthic  properties  are
small,  and  probably  depend  upon  their  bitterness  ;  they  possess  no  anti-
periodic  virtues.  Sometimes  they  cause  diuresis,  and  are  said  to  correct
lithic  acid  deposits.  They  are  principally  used  for  their  sedative  or
hypnotic  action — inducing  sleep,  relieving  restlessness,  and  alleviating
pain,  but  which  they  often  fail  to  accomplish.  A  pillow  stuffed  with
hops  has  long  been  a  popular  remedy  for  procuring  sleep.  The  lupulin
or  its  tincture  is  used  in  delirium  tremens,  and  watchfulness  in  connection
with  nervous  irritation,  anxiety  or  exhaustion ;  it  does  not  disorder  the
stomach  nor  cause  constipation,  as  with  opium. Also  useful  in  after-


542  Materia  Medica.

pains,  to  prevent  chordee,  suppress  venereal  desires,  and  allay  the  pain
attendant  on  gonorrheal  disease.  Externally,  in  the  form  of  a  fomen-
tation alone,  or  combined  with  boneset,  or  other  bitter  herbs,  hops  have
proved  beneficial  in  pneumonia,  pleurisy,  gastritis,  enteritis,  also  as  an
application  to  painful  swellings  or  tumors.  An  ointment  made  by  boil-
ing two  parts  of  stramonium  leaves  and  one  of  hops,  in  lard,  has  proved
an  effectual  application  in  salt-rheum,  ulcers,  and  painful  tumors.  The
dose  of  lupulin  is  from  six  to  ten  grains,  and  which  may  be  given  in
powder,  or  in  pill  made  by  merely  rubbing  it  in  a  warm  mortar  till  it
acquires  a  pilular  consistence.  The  tincture  of  lupulin  may  be  given  in
doses  of  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms.  The  decoction  of  hops  is  sel-
dom employed.  Ale,  porter,  and  beer  are  frequently  administered  in
cases  of  debility  in  the  absence  of  inflammatory  symptoms,  as  tonic,
stimulant,  and  nutritive  agents.  The  ethereal  tincture  of  lupulin  forms
what  is  termed  the  ethereal  oil  of  lupulin,  by  allowing  the  ether  to
spontaneously  evaporate.  It  produces  at  first  a  stimulant  influence,
succeeded  by  a  very  agreeable,  calming  sensation,  and  has  been  used
with  advantage  in  some  cases  of  nervous  irritability  where  opium  and
other  narcotics  failed.  It  does  not,  however,  appear  to  possess  any  nar-
cotic properties.  A  mixture  of  oil  of  chamomile  one  fluidrachm,  and
ethereal  oil  of  lupulin  one  fluidrachm  and  a  half,  dissolved  in  sulphuric
ether  half  a  fluidounce,  has  been  found  beneficial  in  dysmenorrhea,  and
other  painful  uterine  diseases,  in  doses  of  from  thirty  to  sixty  drops,
every  three  or  four  hours.

Off.  Prep.— Extractum  Lupulinae  ; Infusum  Humuli ;  Tinctura  Lupu-
linae ;  Untjuentum  Humuli.


HYDRANGEA  ARBORESCENS.
Hydrangea.

Nat. Ord. — Saxifragacese. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  called  Seven-barks,  Wild  Hydran-
gea, etc.,  is  the  Hydrangea  Vulgaris  of  Michaux  and  Pursh.  It  is  an
indigenous  shrub,  smooth  or  nearly  so,  attaining  the  bight  of  five  or
six  feet,  with  opposite,  petiolate  leaves,  which  are  ovate,  obtuse  at  base,
rarely  cordate,  acuminate,  serrate-dentate,  nearly  smooth,  and  green  on
both  sides.  The  flowers  are  often  all  fertile,  numerous,  small,  white,
becoming  roseate,  and  disposed  in  fastigiate  cymes.  Calyx-tube  hemi-
spherical, eight  or  ten  ribbed,  coherent  with  the  ovary;  the  limb  four  or
five-toothed,  persistent ;  petals  ovate,  sessile ;  stamens  eight  or  ten,  slen-
der ;  capsule  crowned  with  the  two  divergent  styles,  two-celled  below,
opening  by  a  foramen  between  the  styles ;  seeds  numerous.

History. — This  elegant  shrub  grows  abundantly  in  the  Southern,  Mid-
dle, and  Western  States,  in  mountains  and  hills,  and  on  rocks  and  near


Hydrangea  Arborescens.  543

streams.  The  bark  is  rough,  peeling  off — each  Layer  being  of  a  different
color,  and  which  has  probably  given  origin  to  the  name  "  Seven-barks."
It  is  quite  common  in  the  Susquehanna  and  Schuylkill  valleys,  and  its
flowers  are  often  met  with  in  bouquets  in  the  markets  of  Philadelphia.
The  root  is  the  part  that  has  been  employed  ;  it  is  formed  of  numerous
radicles,  sometimes  not  larger  than  a  goosequill,  and  again  half  an  inch
or  more  in  diameter,  and  of  considerable  length.  These  proceed  from
a  caudex  which  sends  upward  numerous  divergent  branches.  When
fresh,  the  root  and  stalks  are  very  succulent,  containing  much  water,
and  can  easily  be  cut ;  and  the  root  likewise  contains  a  great  deal  of
mucilage,  with  albumen  and  starch.  When  dry  they  are  very  tough  and
resistent,  and  exceedingly  difficult  to  bruise  or  cut,  hence  they  should  be
bruised  while  fresh,  or  which  is  better,  cut  into  short  transverse  sections,
which  facilitates  the  drying.  The  bark  of  the  dried  root  has  a  rather
pungent,  aromatic,  not  disagreeable  taste,  somewhat  similar  to  that  of
cascarilla  bark.  The  stalks  contain  a  pith  which  is  easily  removed,  and
they  are  used  in  some  parts  of  the  country  for  pipe-stems.  Mr.  Joseph
Laidley,  of  Richmond,  Va.,  found  it  to  contain  gum,  albumen,  starch,
resin,  soda,  lime,  potassa,  magnesia,  sulphuric  and  phosphoric  acids,  and
a  protosalt  of  iron.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plant  was  introduced  to  the  profession  by
Dr.  S.  W.  Butler,  of  Burlington,  N.  J.,  as  a  remedy  for  the  removal  of
calculus  or  gravelly  deposits  in  the  bladder,  and  for  relieving  the  excru-
ciating pain  attendant  on  the  passage  of  a  calculus  through  the  ureter ;
and  from  the  reports  made,  it  certainly  deserves  a  full  and  thorough
investigation.  The  power  of  curing  stone  in  the  bladder  is  not  claimed
for  it;  it  is  only  while  the  deposits  are  small,  when  in  that  form  of  the
disease  known  as  gravel,  that  it  is  an  efficient  remedy  ;  then  by  removing
the  nucleus,  which,  if  allowed  to  remain  in  the  organ,  would  increase  in
size  and  form  stone,  the  disease  is  averted,  and  when  employed  at  this
stage,  it  is  said  to  have  proved  beneficial  in  every  instance,  and  as  many
as  120  calculi  have  been  known  to  come  from  one  person  under  the  use
of  this  remedy.  The  effect  of  the  plant,  Dr.  Butler  states,  is  to  remove
by  its  own  specific  action  on  the  bladder,  such  deposits  as  may  be  con-
tained in  that  viscus,  provided  they  are  small  enough  to  pass  through
the  urethra.  The  mode  of  using  it,  is  to  prepare  a  concentrated  syrup
of  it  with  sugar  or  honey,  and  give  a  teaspoonful  three  times  a  day ;  or
a  simple  decoction  of  the  root  may  be  taken  freely.  If  taken  in  over-
doses it  will  produce  some  unpleasant  symptoms,  as  dizziness  of  the
head,  oppression  of  the  chest,  etc.  The  leaves  of  Hydrangea,  are  said
by  Dr.  Eoff  to  be  tonic,  sialagogue,  cathartic,  and  diuretic.


5"  Materia Medica.

HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

Golden  Seal.
Nat.  Ord. — Kanunculaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  plant,  which  is  also  known  by  the
various  names  of  Yellow  Puccoon,  Ground  Raspberry,  Turmeric  Root
etc.;  it  has  a  perennial  root  or  rhizoma,  which  is  tortuous,  knotty,  creep-
ing, internally  of  a  bright-yellow  color,  with  numerous  long  fibers.  The
stem  is  erect,  simple,  herbaceous,  rounded,  pubescent  upward,  from  six
to  twelve  inches  in  night,  becoming  purplish,  and  bearing  two  unequal
terminal  leaves.  The  leaves  are  two  only,  alternate,  palmate,  with  from
three  to  five  lobes,  hairy,  dark-green,  cordate  at  base,  veiny,  the  lower
leaf  petiolate,  the  other  sessile,  from  four  to  nine  inches  wide  when  full
grown,  and  the  segments  serrated.  The  fiower  is  solitary,  terminal,  small,
white  or  rose-colored  and  on  a  peduncle  about  two  inches  in  length.  The
calyx  consists  of  three  petaloid,  deciduous,  broadly -ovate,  pale  greenish-
white,  concave,  slightly  downy  sepals,  which  fall  away  when  the  flower
opens.  Stamens  many,  longer  than  the  pistils.  Filaments  flat  linear-
lanceolate,  having  the  cells  of  the  anther  on  their  edge  at  the  apex.
Pistils  several ;  ovary  oval,  glabrous,  attenuated  upward  into  a  short
style.  Stigma  obtuse,  scarcely  lobed.  The  fruit  resembles  a  raspberry,
is  red,  and  consists  of  many  little  two-seeded  drupes  collected  into  a
globose  head,  and  each  crowned  with  the  persistent  style ;  seeds  nearly
black,  obovate,  polished,  having  a  minute  embryo  at  the  base  of  a  fleshy
and  oily  albumen.

History. — This  plant  is  found  growing  in  shady  woods,  in  rich  soil
and  damp  meadows,  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States  and  Canada,
but  is  more  abundant  west  of  the  Alleghanies.  It  flowers  in  May  and
June.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part ;  it  consists  of  a  tortuous,  knotty
caudex,  with  numerous  long  fibers,  and  is  of  a  bright-yellow  color.  In
the  fresh  state  it  is  juicy,  and  when  dried  loses  much  of  its  weight.  Its
odor  is  strong  and  somewhat  narcotic,  with  a  very  bitter  taste.  Its  vir-
tues are  imparted  to  water  or  alcohol.  Analysis  has  found  it  to  contain
resin,  fatty  matter,  albumen,  starch,  yellow-coloring  matter,  sugar,  lig-
nin,  various  salts,  and  a  peculiar,  nitrogenous,  crystallizable  substance,
called  Hydrastin.  The  root  of  Hydrastis  yields  a  brilliant  yellow  color,
which  appears  to  be  permanent,  and  which  might  be  employed  to  dye
silk,  wool,  linen,  etc.  ;  by  the  addition  of  indigo  it  affords  a  beautiful
green.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  remedy  is  peculiar  to  Eclectics,  and  ranks
among  their  most  valuable  agents.  It  is  a  powerful  tonic,  at  the  same
time  exerting  an  especial  influence  upon  mucous  surfaces  and  tissues
with  which  it  comes  in  contact. Internally,  it  is  successfully  adminis-


Hydrastis  Canadensis.  545

tered  in  dyspepsia,  chronic  affections  of  the  mucous  coats  of  the  stomach,
erysipelas,  remittent,  intermittent,  and  typhoid  fevers,  torpor  of  the
liver,  and  wherever  tonics  are  required.  In  conjunction  with  Geraniin
it  forms  a  very  efficient  remedy  in  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery.  In
some  instances  it  proves  laxative,  but  without  any  astringency  ;  and
seems  to  rank  in  therapeutical  action  between  rhubarb  and  bloodroot.
Externally,  and  as  a  topical  application,  the  decoction  or  tincture  proves
a  superior  remedy  in  all  chronic  mucous  inflammations.  In  some  cases
of  opacity  of  the  cornea,  as  well  as  in  other  forms  of  ophthalmic  dis-
ease, I  have  found  the  following  preparation  more  efficacious  than  the
usual  caustic  solutions  :  Mix  together  two  parts  of  decoction  of  Hydras-
tis, and  one  of  the  saturated  tincture  of  Aralia  Spinosa,  and  apply  to  the
eye  with  a  camel's  hair  pencil,  two  or  three  times  a  day.  The  decoction
of  hydrastis  to  be  made  by  evaporating  a  strong  decoction  of  the  root  to
the  consistence  of  mucilage  or  syrup.  It  has  been  used  in  ophthalmic
diseases,  with  much  success  in  the  following  form  :  Tincture  Capsicum
two  fluidrachms,  tincture  Hydrastis  three  fluidrachms,  Olive  Oil  two  •
fluidounces  ;  shake  well  together  each  time  before  using,  and  apply  with
camel's  hair  pencil.  A  strong  decoction  of  two  parts  of  hydrastis,
and  one  of  geranium  maculatum,  is  very  valuable  in  gleet,  chronic  gon-
orrhea, and  leucorrhea,  used  in  injection  ;  it  is  likewise  of  much  benefit
in  incipient  stricture,  spermatorrhea,  and  inflammation  and  ulceration  of
the  internal  coat  of  the  bladder.  Ulceration  of  the  internal  coat  of  the
bladder  has  been  cured  by  the  decoction  of  Hydrastis  alone.  It  must
be  injected  into  the  bladder,  and  held  there  as  long  as  the  patient  can
conveniently  retain  it — to  be  repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day,  imme-
diately after  emptying  the  bladder.  Combined  with  Caulophyllum,  in
strong  decoction,  and  sweetened  with  honey,  it  is  a  superior  remedy  in
all  ulcerations  of  the  mouth  and  fauces,  both  as  a  gargle  or  wash,  and
taken  internally.  The  peculiar  action  of  this  agent  on  mucous  tissues,  I
noticed  some  sixteen  years  ago,  since  which  I  have  successfully  contin-
ued its  use  in  inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  bladder,  diseases  of  the
eye,  dyspepsia,  etc.  Prof.  R.  S.  Newton,  to  whom  I  made  known  its
value  in  these  diseases,  has  also  used  it  with  a  success  similar  to  my
own.  When  taken  in  very  large  doses,  I  have  known  the  decoction  of
Golden  Seal  to  produce  excessive  secretion  from  the  mucous  surfaces  of
the  mouth  and  nose,  so  much  so,  that  the  secretions  were  removed  by
the  patients  in  long,  tenacious  shreds  or  pieces.  Dose  of  the  powder,
from  ten  to  thirty  grains ;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  two  fluidrachms  ;
of  the  hydro-alcoholic  extract,  from  two  to  five  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum Hydrastis  ;  Extractum  Hydrastis  Hydro-alco-
holicum  ; Lotio Hydrastis  Composita; Tinctura  Hydrastis; Tinctura
Hydrastis  Composita  ;  Vinum  Hydrastis  Compositum.
35


546  Materia Medica.

HYDRASTIN.

Hydrastin.

THE ACTIVE PRINCIPLE OF HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  root  of  Hydrastis  Canadensis,  in  coarse
powder,  one  hundred  pounds,  and  add  of  alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity  to
form  a  tincture  by  percolation  ;  and  distil  off  the  alcohol  ;  the  residuum,
which  is  of  a  thick,  syrupy  consistence,  must  be  warmed,  and  poured
into  eight  gallons  of  hot  water,  which  will  take  up  the  hydrastin,  with  a
portion  of  gum,  extractive,  and  some  coloring  matter.  Let  it  stand  for
two  or  three  days,  and  then  decant  into  a  precipitating  tub,  and  add  of
muriatic  acid  five  pounds.  This  causes  a  precipitate,  which,  when  per-
fected, must  be  collected  on  a  linen  or  cotton  cloth  placed  over  a  tub  for
the  purpose,  and  washed  well  by  pouring  clean  water  upon  it.  When  it
has  thoroughly  drained,  place  it  into  a  tin  boiler,  and  add  of  animal
charcoal  three  pounds,  and  alcohol,  six  or  eight  gallons  ;  place  this  over
a  strong  heat,  and  stir  constantly  till  it  is  all  dissolved,  bringing  the  liquid
to  the  boiling  point  ;  then  set  it  aside,  and  as  it  cools  the  crystals  will
form  on  the  sides  of  the  boiler  and  through  the  alcohol,  and  will  con-
tinue to  form  for  two  or  three  days.  The  liquid  and  crystals  must  then
be  placed  on  a  cloth,  as  before,  being  careful  not  to  dip  up  the  charcoal
which  is  in  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  wash  the  crystals  with  cold
alcohol,  after  which  spread  them  on  a  cloth  or  paper  and  dry  in  the  open
air,  or  by  moderate  heat,  if  necessary.  If  they  are  not  of  the  proper
color,  redissolve  them  in  alcohol  with  animal  charcoal,  and  proceed  as  at
first.  For  the  purpose  of  obtaining  any  remaining  hydrastin,  the  alco-
hol in  which  it  crystallizes  may  be  distilled  and  carried  through  the
same  process  as  at  first ;  and  the  mother  water  may  be  treated  with
ammonia,  and  the  precipitate  purified  in  the  same  manner  as  at  first.

The  following  is  Dr.  A.  R.  Brown's  process  for  obtaining  hydrastin :
"  Macerate  thirty  pounds  of  the  roots  of  Golden  Seal  in  eight  gallons  of
Alcohol  76  per  cent.,  for  forty-eight  hours  ;  then,  through  a  small  open-
ing made  in  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  containing  the  above,  allow  the
tincture  to  run  off  into  a  separate  vessel ;  add  of  a  new  supply  of  alco-
hol four  gallons,  and  after  macerating  for  twenty-four  hours,  draw  off
as  before.  Now,  pour  upon  the  roots,  six  gallons  of  cold  water,  and  in
twenty-four  hours  draAV  off  the  remaining  alcohol,  the  water  having
been  absorbed  by  the  roots.  Place  these  several  tinctures  together  into
a  displacement  apparatus  sufficiently  large  for  the  purpose,  (I  prefer
Smith's)  and  distil  off  the  alcohol.  Remove  the  residue,  and  let  it  stand
an  hour  or  two  ;  and  then  pour  off  the  supernatant  liquid  very  carefully,
so  as  to  leave  behind  a  black  oleo-resinous  substance,  which  if  not
removed  will  injure  the  beautiful  yellow  color  of  the  hydrastin,  and  pre-
vent it  from  being  pulverizable. Now  treat  the  liquid  which  has  been


Htdrastin.  547

poured  off,  with  six  or  eight  gallons  of  water,  and  while  stirring  the
whole,  gradually  add  of  pure  muriatic  acid,  sixteen  ounces  ;  let  it  stand
ten  or  twelve  hours,  and  filter  through  very  fine  muslin.  Remove  the
hydrastin  and  place  it  on  unglazed  dishes  to  facilitate  its  drying.  As
prepared  by  this  process,  one  pound  of  the  roots  yields  half  an  ounce  of
the  so-called  hydrastin."

History. — This  elegant  and  highly  valuable  article  was  introduced  to
the  profession  by  Dr.  H.  H.  Hill  of  the  firm  of  F.  D.  Hill  &  Co.,  whole-
sale druggists  in  Cincinnati.  I  feel  highly  indebted  to  these  gentlemen
for  the  above  description  of  the  process  employed  by  them  for  its  man-
ufacture, and  would  take  this  occasion  to  remark,  that  I  regret  the  spirit
of  selfishness  which  prompts  some  manufacturers  to  withhold  a  knowl-
edge of  their  mode  of  preparing  concentrated  articles ;  it  is  a  species  of
empiricism  which  should  never  be  countenanced  by  any  physician.  I
never  employ  an  article  of  any  kind,  unless  its  mode  of  preparation  is
known  to  the  profession,  and  this  course  should  be  adopted  by  every
practitioner,  as  one  among  the  many  other  means  of  elevating  the  pro-
fession, and  securing  the  confidence  of  others,  as  well  as  of  ourselves.
It  is  but  a  short  time,  since  I  was  presented  with  a  concentrated  agent
obtained  by  precipitation  with  acetate  of  lead,  and  on  an  investigation  I
found  some  lead  mixed  with  it,  and  which,  had  I  administered  without  a
knowledge  of  the  process  employed  for  obtaining  it,  and  my  consequent
examination,  might  have  caused  serious  results.  In  this  instance  the
proper  course  had  not  been  taken  to  free  the  article  from  the  lead.  The
profession,  therefore,  cannot  be  too  uncompromising  in  refusing  to  admi-
nister agents,  however  valuable  they  may  be,  which  are  manufactured
by  secret  processes.

Hydrastin  prepared  by  the  above  process,  forms  in  delicate,  acicular
crystals,  of  a  yellow  color  and  translucent.  It  exhibits  neither  acid  nor
alkaline  reactions,  and  forms  when  pulverized  a  beautiful  yellow  powder.
It  is  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol,  but  is  deposited  as  it  cools  in  crystals.  It
is  insoluble  in  cold  alcohol,  ether,  chloroform,  spirits  of  turpentine,  and
water,  though  each  liquid  becomes  tinged  more  or  less  of  a  yellow  color.
It  is  rendered  more  soluble  in  alcohol,  but  not  completely  so,  by  ammo-
nia, liquor  potassa,  or  acetic  acid,  the  last  article  making  the  solution  of
a  lighter  color.  It  dissolves  to  a  greater  extent  in  water  by  the  addition
of  acetic  acid,  which  changes  the  solution  to  a  light-yellow  color ;
ammonia  or  liquor  potassa  does  not  make  it  more  soluble  in  water,  and
nitric  acid  changes  the  hydrastin  to  a  beautiful  bright-yellow  color,  with-
out solution — sulphuric  acid  to  a  chrome-yellow.  Concentrated  nitric  acid
turns  hydrastin  red,  and  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  swells  or  effervesces
and  changes  it  to  a  chrome-yellow  color.  Heat  gradually  changes  the  color
to  a  brownish-red,  and  then  black  with  effervescence.  At  its  point  of
effervescence  by  the  application  of  heat,  it  is  inflammable  if  brought


5-iS  Materia  Medica.

into  contact  with  flame,  burns  quickly,  and  leaves  a  black,  porous,
shining  substance  behind.

The  hydrastin  prepared  by  the  Franklin  Pharmaceutical  Institute  of
the  city  of  New  York,  is  said  to  be  soluble  in  water;  as  I  have  not
4  seen  the  article,  nor  been  able  to  obtain  an  account  of  its  mode  of  pre-
paration, I  can  merely  refer  to. the  fact  that  such  an  article  is  advertised.
Soluble  preparations  of  the  concentrated  principles  of  many  of  our
agents  are  certainly  very  desirable,  on  account  of  the  difference  of
therapeutic  action  existing  between  them  and  a  decoction,  infusion,  or
tincture  of  the  crude  articles  ;  thus,  a  decoction  of  golden  seal  exerts  an
influence  in  sore  mouth,  and  several  other  affections,  not  to  be  obtained
from  the  insoluble  hydrastin.  These  facts  should  be  especially  observed.
Properties  and  Uses. — Hydrastin  is  a  tonic,  with  an  especial  action
on  diseased  mucous  tissues;  it  possesses,  in  an  eminent  degree,  the  tonic
virtues  of  the  root,  and  is  much  used  as  a  substitute  for  it.  It  is  more
beneficial  as  a  tonic  during  convalescence  from  exhausting  diseases,  such
as,  bilious  and  typhoid  fever,  acute  hepatitis,  gastritis,  enteritis,  diarrhea,
dysentery,  etc.  In  dyspepsia,  and  chronic  inflammation  of  the  stomach
it  is  very  valuable,  and  will  be  found  of  especial  advantage  in  the  treat-
ment of  persons  who  are  intemperate,  gradually  removing  the  abnormal
condition  of  the  stomach,  and  in  many  instances  destroying  the  appetite
for  liquor — it  may  be  combined  in  these  cases  with  sulphate  of  quinia,
extract  of  quassia,  or  other  bitter  tonic.  In  jaundice  a  combination  of
equal  parts  of  hydrastin,  myricin,  and  xanthoxylin,  will  often  prove
efficacious.  Combined  with  Quinia  and  Leptandrin,  it  will  be  found
useful  in  infantile  remittent  fever.  One  part  of  Hydrastin,  and  two  of
fine  salt,  well  triturated  together,  form  an  excellent  powder  for  many
ophthalmic  diseases,  to  be  blown  into  the  eyes  through  a  quill  or  small
tube.  Equal  parts  of  hydrastin,  caulophyllin,  and  leptandrin,  form  an
excellent  medicine  for  aphthse,  and  other  ulcerations  of  the  mouth  and
throat,  in  infants  as  well  as  adults,  it  should  be  administered  internally.
A  pill  composed  of  one  grain  of  hydrastin,  one-twentieth  of  a  grain  of
alcoholic  extract  of  Nux-vomica,  and  sufficient  ptelein  to  form  a  pill
mass,  is  found  an  efficacious  remedy  for  some  forms  of  dyspepsia,  and
loss  of  appetite;  one  pill  to  be  given  for  a  dose,  and  repeated  three
times  a  day.  Dose  of  hydrastin,  for  an  adult,  from  three  to  five  grains;
for  children  from  half  a  grain  to  three  grains,  and  which  may  be  re-
peated from  three  to  six  times  a  day,  if  required.


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.
Henbane.

Nat.  Orel. — Solanaceas. — Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND SEEDS.

Description. — Henbane  is  a  biennial  plant,  with  a  fusiform,  long,  thick,
wrinkled,  fleshy  and  somewhat  branching  root,  brown  externally,  and


Hyoscyamus Niger.  549

whitish  within.  The  stem,  which  rises  in  the  second  year,  is  erect,
branched,  woody,  cylindrical,  closely  covered  with  long  weak  hairs
tipped  with  a  minute  black  gland,  thickly  furnished  with  leaves,  and
growing  from  one  to  four  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  large,  oblong,
acute,  alternate,  coarsely  and  unequally  sinuated,  sessile,  occasionally
somewhat  decurrent,  stem-clasping  at  the  base,  pale  dull-green,  slightly
pubescent,  with  long  glandular  hairs  upon  the  midrib.  The  flowers  are
numerous,  nearly  sessile,  of  a  straw-yellow  color,  marked  with  purple
veins,  and  arise  singly  either  from  the  axilla  of  the  leaves,  or  from  long,
nodding,  secund  spikes,  at  the  end  of  the  branches  and  stem.  The
corolla  is  monopctalous,  funnel-shaped,  with  a  somewhat  erect  limb,
which  is  divided  above  into  five  rounded  lobes,  the  two  anterior  of
which  are  a  little  smaller  than  the  others,  and  separated  at  base  by  a
deep  slit  in  the  tube.  The  calyx  is  villous,  funnel-shaped,  five-lobed,
regular,  wider  than  the  corolla,  to  whose  tube  it  is  equal  in  length  and
persistent;  each  lobe  ovate,  acute,  with  an  open  aestivation.  Stamens
five,  declinate,  straight,  shorter  than  the  corolla,  the  three  lower  longer
than  the  others ;  filaments  pubescent,  inserted  about  the  middle  of  the
tube  of  the  corolla,  inclined,  and  bearing  cordate,  purple  anthers.  The
ovary  is  nearly  round,  shining,  pale-green,  two-celled,  with  numerous
ovules  adhering  to  the  dissepiment ;  style  filiform,  declinate,  having  a
blunt,  round  stigma.  The  fruit  or  capsule  is  ovate,  bilocular,  and  open-
ing by  a  convex  lid;  it  contains  numerous  small,  obovate,  unequal,  brown
seeds.  The  whole  plant  has  a  rank,  offensive  smell,  and  a  forbidding
appearance.

History. — Henbane  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  naturalized  in  the
northern  parts  of  the  United  States,  flowering  in  July  and  August.
Botanists  are  divided  as  to  whether  it  is  an  annual  or  biennial  plant,  as
it  is  sometimes  found  to  be  the  former.  The  biennial  is  the  officinal
plant,  though  we  are  not  aware  of  any  difference  between  the  two  as
regards  medical  properties.  All  parts  of  the  plant  are  medicinal,  but
the  leaves  and  seeds  are  the  parts  usually  employed ;  the  former  should
be  gathered  at  the  time  of  its  full  inflorescence,  and  the  latter  when
perfectly  matured.  The  leaves  of  the  second  year's  growth  of  the
officinal  plant  are  more  active  than  those  of  the  first  year ;  when  fresh
they  abound  in  a  viscid  juice,  and  when  bruised  have  a  strong,  fetid,
narcotic  odor,  with  a  mucilaginous,  unpleasant,  and  somewhat  acrid  taste.

Upon  drying  most  of  these  qualities  are  lost.  The  leaves  impart
their  properties  completely  to  diluted  alcohol;  water,  alcohol,  ether,
fixed  or  volatile  oils,  also  take  up  a  portion  of  their  virtues.  The
aqueous  infusion  is  pale-yellow,  insipid,  with  a  narcotic  odor.  By  de-
structive distillation,  the  leaves  yield  a  very  poisonous  empyreumatic  oil.
The  seeds  are  of  a  yellowish-gray  or  brown  color,  with  the  odor  of  the
plant,  and  an  oleaginous,  bitter  taste;  they  are  very  small,  roundish,


550  Materia  Medica.

compressed,  somewhat  reniform,  and  a  little  wrinkled.  They  contain
fixed  oil,  fatty  matter,  gum,  bassorin,  starch,  albumen,  vegetable  fiber,
saline  matters,  with  hyoscyamia,  etc.

Hyoscyamia  is  the  active  principle  of  henbane  ;  it  may  be  obtained  by
exhausting  the  seeds  first  with  alcohol,  and  then  with  hot  water — con-
centrating the  united  liquids  by  a  very  gentle  heat,  and  decolorizing
them  by  the  alternate  use  of  lime  and  sulphuric  acid,  with  filtration
after  each  addition,  and  then  still  further  concentrating  by  evaporation
with  gentle  heat ;  the  product  is  now  to  be  decomposed  by  adding  an
excess  of  powdered  carbonate  of  soda,  and  the  precipitate  produced  is
separated  as  speedily  as  possible,  from  the  alkaline  carbonate  by  express-
ing, and  treated  with  absolute  alcohol ;  while  the  mother  waters  are
treated  at  the  same  time  with  sulphuric  ether.  The  alcoholic  and  ethe-
real liquors  are  united,  and  again  treated  with  lime,  filtered,  decolorized
with  animal  charcoal,  and  evaporated  by  a  very  gentle  heat.  If  the
hyoscyamia  deposited  should  be  colored,  it  must  be  combined  with  an
acid,  and  the  whole  process  repeated  from  the  addition  of  carbonate  of
soda  onward.  The  quantity  obtained  is  small.  Hyoscyamia  crystallizes
in  tufts  of  colorless,  transparent,  silky  needles,  which  are  inodorous,  of
an  acrid,  disagreeable  taste,  slightly  soluble  in  water,  very  soluble  in
alcohol  and  ether,  and  volatilizable  with  little  change  if  carefully  dis-
tilled. If  boiled  in  contact  with  water  and  an  alkali,  it  is  quickly
decomposed,  with  evolution  of  ammonia.  It  neutralizes  acids,  forming
with  them  crystallizable  salts.  The  tincture  or  infusion  of  galls  precipi-
tates it  from  its  solutions.  Hyoscyamia  is  an  active  poison,  as  are  its
salts  ;  a  minute  quantity  of  it  placed  within  the  eye,  produces  a  persis-
tent dilatation  of  the  pupil.  In  its  natural  state  of  combination,  this
principle  is  very  prone  to  decomposition  under  the  influence  of  heat,  and
its  destruction  is  always  indicated  by  the  escape  of  ammonia.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  henbane  is  a  powerful  narcotic,
and  dangerously  poisonous ;  it  powerfully  affects  the  brain,  as  well  as  the
alimentary  canal,  occasioning  dilatation  of  the  pupils,  disordered  vision,
loss  of  speech,  stupor  or  delirium,  convulsions,  paralysis,  pain  in  the
bowels,  diarrhea,  great  arterial  prostration,  petechia?,  and  other  alarming
symptoms,  which  sometimes  end  in  death.  Inflammation  of  the  stomach
and  bowels  are  found  on  dissection.  Emetics  and  the  stomach  pump,
stimulants,  galvanism  and  acids  are  the  chief  remedies  in  such  cases.  In
medicinal  doses,  it  is  anodyne  hypnotic,  calmative,  and  antispasmodic  ;
allaying  pain,  soothing  excitability,  inducing  sleep,  and  arresting  spasm.
It  does  not  produce  constipation  like  opium,  but  has  a  tendency  to  act
as  a  laxative.  Usually  given  in  cases  where  opium  disagrees,  or  where
constipation  must  be  avoided  ;  in  neuralgic  and  all  spasmodic  affections,
asthma,  gout,  rheumatism,  chronic  cough,  irritations  of  the  urinary
organs,  and  inflammatory  cases  attended  with  nervous  excitability  and


Hypericum  Perforatum.  551

not  with  high  fever.  It  may  be  combined  with  active  cathartics,  as
scammony,  colocynth,  aloes,  podophyllin,  etc.,  for  preventing  tormina
without  impairing  their  energy.  Its  principal  employment  is  to  cause
sleep,  or  remove  irregular  nervous  action.  Where  the  fresh  leaves  can
be  obtained,  they  are  employed  in  fomentation,  or  bruised  as  an  external
application  to  allay  pain  and  irritation  of  tumors,  ulcers,  nervous  head-
ache, gouty,  rheumatic,  and  neuralgic  pains,  and  similar  affections.  An
infusion  of  the  leaves,  or  a  solution  of  the  extract  is  dropped  into  the
eye  by  oculists,  previous  to  the  operation  for  cataract,  in  order  to
dilate  the  pupil,  which  it  usually  effects  in  three  or  four  hours,  without
any  subsequent  injury  to  the  eye.  One  part  of  hyoscyamia  to  twenty-
four  of  water,  forms  a  solution  for  a  similar  purpose,  and  of  which  one
drop  is  to  be  placed  on  the  eye.  Dose  of  the  powdered  leaves  from  five
to  ten  grains  ;  of  the  tincture  from  thirty  drops  to  two  fiuidrachms ;  and
of  the  alcoholic  extract,  which  is  the  only  extract  that  should  be  usedy
from  one-half  of  a  grain  to  two  grains,  which  may  be  increased  gradu-
ally to  twenty.

Off.  Prep.  —  Extractum  Hyoscyami  Alcoholicum  ;  Extractum  Hyo-
scyami  Fluidum  ;  Tinctura  Hyoscyami.


HYPERICUM PERFORATUM.

St.  John's  Wort.
Nat. Ord. — Hypericaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Pentagynia.

THE TOPS AND FLOWERS.

Description.  —  This  plant  has  a  perennial,  woody,  tufted,  fusiform,
tortuous,  somewhat  creeping  root.  The  stem  is  ancipital,  branchiate,
erect  above,  curved  below,  much  branched,  and  from  one  to  two  feet
high.  The  leaves  are  very  numerous,  elliptical  or  ovate,  obtuse,  conspi-
cuously marked  with  numerous  pellucid  dots,  of  a  light  green  color,  from
six  to  ten  lines  long,  and  one  third  as  wide,  the  ramial  leaves  being  much
smaller.  The  Jlowers  are  numerous,  of  a  bright  yellow  color,  and  ar-
ranged in  dense,  finked,  terminal  panicles.  The  calyx  is  persistent,  and
is  composed  of  five  acute-lanceolate  sepals,  united  at  base,  and  bordered
with  fine  dark-colored  glands.  The  corolla  consists  of  five  ovate,  obtuse,
sessile  petals,  much  longer  than  the  sepals,  of  a  yellow  color,  with  nu-
merous dark  glandular  spots  at  the  edges.  The  stamens  are  numerous,
united  at  base,  and  divided  into  three  sets,  with  small  anthers.  The
styles  are  three,  short,  erect,  with  very  small  stigmas.  The  fruit  or
capsule  is  somewhat  globose,  with  three  cells,  and  opening  naturally  by
three  valves  ;  seeds  numerous,  small,  roundish.  The  whole  herb  is
dark-green,  with  a  powerful  scent  when  rubbed,  staining  the  fingers
with  dark  purple,  from  the  great  abundance  of  colored  essential  oil.


552  Materia  Medica.

History.  —  St.  John's  Wort  is  an  herb  abundantly  growing  in  this
country  and  Europe,  and  proving  exceedingly  troublesome  to  farmers.
The  flowers  appear  from  June  to  August.  It  has  a  peculiar  balsamic
odor,  and  a  bitter,  resinous,  somewhat  astringent  taste.  It  contains  a
volatile  oil,  a  resinous  substance,  tannin  and  coloring  matter.  It  imparts
its  properties  to  water,  alcohol,  ether,  oils,  or  alkaline  solutions.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Astringent,  sedative,  and  diuretic.  Used  in
suppression  of  the  urine,  chronic  urinary  affections,  in  diarrhea,  dysen-
tery, worms,  jaundice,  menorrhagia,  hysteria,  nervous  affections  with
depression,  hemoptysis,  and  other  hemorrhages.  Externally,  in  fomen-
tation, or  used  as  an  ointment  for  dispelling  hard  tumors,  caked  breasts,
bruises,  ecchymosis,  swellings,  ulcers,  etc.  The  blossoms  infused  in
sweet  oil  or  bear's  oil,  by  means  of  exposure  to  the  sun,  make  a  fine
red  balsamic  ointment  for  wounds,  ulcers,  swellings,  tumors,  etc.  Dose
of  the  powder,  from  half  a  drachm  to  two  drachms  ;  of  the  infusion,
from  one  to  two  fluidounces.
Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Hyperici.


HYSSOPUS  OFFICINALIS.

Hyssop.

Nat. Ord. — Labiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE TOPS AND LEAVES.

Description. — Hyssop  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  numerous,  erect,  qua-
drangular, spreading,  and  much  branched  stems,  which  are  woody  at
their  base,  and  about  two  feet  high  ;  the  branches  are  rod-like,  and  one
or  two  feet  long.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  sessile,  usually  oblong-linear,
or  lanceolate,  sometimes  elliptical,  sometimes  narrower,  acute,  entire,
punctate,  green  on  each  side,  rather  thick,  one-ribbed  underneath.  The
flowers  are  violet-colored  or  blue,  sometimes  white,  chiefly  one-sided,
and  arranged  in  half  verticillated,  terminal,  leafy  spikes.  Floral  leaves
like  those  of  the  stem  but  smaller.  Outer  bracts  lanceolate-linear,  acute,
scarcely  shorter  than  the  calyx.  The  upper  Up  of  the^orolla  is  roundish,
and  emarginate,  the  lower  is  divided  into  three  segments,  of  which  the
undermost  is  obovate. Stamens  four. Calyx  teeth  erect.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  cultivated  in  the
gardens  of  that  country  as  well  as  in  those  of  the  United  States  ;  it
flowers  in  July.  The  tops  and  leaves  are  the  parts  used ;  they  have  an
agreeable  odor,  and  a  warm,  pungent,  bitterish  taste,  and  owe  their
properties  to  a  volatile  oil,  which  may  be  obtained  separate  by  distil-
lation with  water.  Water  by  infusion  or  alcohol  extracts  its  active
virtues.  Said  to  contain  beside  its  yellow  oil,  some  bitter  principles,
and  sulphur.


IBERIS AmAKA — IctlTHYOCOLLA.  553

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Stimulant,  aromatic,  carminative  and  tonic.
Principally  used  in  quinsy  and  other  sore-throats,  as  a  gargle,  combined
with  sage  and  alum,  in  infusion  sweetened  with  honey.  Also  recom-
mended in  asthma,  coughs,  and  other  affections  of  the  chest,  as  an  ex-
pectorant. The  leaves  applied  to  bruises,  speedily  relieve  the  pain,  and
disperse  every  spot  or  mark  from  the  part  affected.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Hyssopi.


IBERIS  AMARA.

Bitter  Candytuft.
Nat. Ord. — Brassicaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Tetradynamia  Siliculosa.

THE SEEDS.

Description.  —  This  plant  has  a  herbaceous  stem,  about  a  foot  in
hight,  with  lanceolate,  acute,  somewhat  toothed  leaves,  and  white
flowers,  corymbed,  but  becoming  racemed.  Silicles  obcordate,  narrowly
emarginate.

History. — This  is  a  small  annual  plant,  indigenous  in  Europe,  Avhere
it  is  cultivated  in  gardens,  on  account  of  its  bright  milk-white  flowers,
which  appear  in  June  and  July.  The  leaves,  stem,  and  root,  are  said
to  possess  medicinal  properties  ;  but  the  seeds  are  the  most  efficacious.
The  ancients  employed  it  in  rheumatism,  gout  and  other  diseases.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses  it  produces  giddiness,  nausea,
and  diarrhea ;  but  its  virtues  do  not  seem  to  be  associated  with  any  per-
ceptible physiological  effect.  It  is  thought  to  exercise  a  happy  influence
over  the  excited  actions  of  the  heart,  and  is  especially  useful  in  hyper-
trophy. Much  advantage  is  also  said  to  have  accrued  from  it  in  asthma,
bronchitis  and  dropsy.  The  dose  of  the  seeds  is  from  one  to  three
grains.

ICHTHYOCOLLA.

Isinglass.

THE SWIMMING BLADDER OF ACIPENSER HUSO, AND OTHER SPECIES OF

ACIPENSER.

History. — In  the  greater  part  of  fishes,  there  is  a  membranous  bag
placed  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  abdomen,  frequently  communicating
by  means  of  a  duct,  with  the  esophagus  or  stomach,  and  which  is
termed  "  sound,"  or  "  swimming  bladder,"  from  the  idea  that  its  contrac-
tion or  expansion  enables  the  fish  to  sink  or  rise  in  the  water.  Its  shape
varies  among  fishes,  and  it  is  composed  of  two  inner,  thin  and  delicate
coats,  and  one  external,  tough  and  silvery  white.  These  are  removed
from  the  fish  while  fresh  and  sweet,  split  open,  cleansed  from  any
impurities  by  careful  washing,  divested  of  their  mucous  coat,  and  spread


554  Materia  Medica.

out  to  dry  or  stiffen  in  the  air.  They  are  then  formed  into  cylindrical
rolls  about  as  thick  as  the  finger,  and  bent  into  the  shape  of  horse-shoes,
by  bringing  the  ends  together,  which  are  secured  by  pegs.  The  lono-er
rolls  are  called  Long-staple,  and  the  shorter,  Short-staple.  These  rolls
are  known  in  commerce  as  Staple  Isinglass.  Sometimes  the  sounds  are
dried  in  a  flat  state,  or  simply  folded,  and  then  receive  the  name  of
Leaf  or  Book  Isinglass.  These  are  the  best  kinds,  but  the  finest  book
isinglass  is  superior  to  any ;  one  hundred  grains  of  it  dissolve  in  ten
ounces  of  water,  forming  a  tremulous  jelly  when  cold,  and  yield  but  two
grains  of  membranous  insoluble  residuum.

There  are  other  kinds  of  an  inferior  character,  as  the  Cake  Isinglass,
which  is  in  cakes  or  globular  masses,  brownish,  of  an  unpleasant  odor,
and  used  only  in  the  arts.  A  Russian  product  of  an  inferior  character,
which  comes  in  the  form  of  Leaf,  Book,  and  Short-staple,  and  termed
Samovey  Isinglass,  is  said  to  be  prepared  from  the  Silurus  Glanis.
Isinglass  is  also  made  in  New  England  from  the  intestines  of  the  codfish
(Morrhua  Americana),  and  some  of  its  allied  fishes;  this  sort  is  in  rib-
bons, several  feet  in  length,  and  from  one  to  two  inches  in  width ;
although  pure,  yet  its  fishy  taste  and  odor  render  it  unfit  for  culinary
and  medicinal  purposes.  Fifty  grains  of  this  dissolve  in  four  ounces  of
water,  and  form  a  tremulous  jelly  on  cooling,  leaving  but  one  grain  of
insoluble  membrane.  Isinglass  is  also  prepared  in  Brazil  and  the  East
Indies,  but  is  inferior  in  quality.

Refined  or  transparent  isinglass  is  made  by  dissolving  the  New  Eng-
land isinglass  in  hot  water,  and  spreading  the  solution  to  dry  on  oiled
muslin.  It  is  in  very  thin  plates,  and  is  an  excellent  glue,  but  retains  a
fishy  odor.  Cooper's  Gelatin  appears  to  be  the  dried  froth  of  a  solution
of  pure  bone-glue.

Isinglass  is  the  purest  form  of  gelatin  with  which  we  are  acquainted;
it  is  whitish,  semi-transparent,  of  a  shining,  pearly  appearance,  inodor-
ous, and  tasteless  when  pure.  It  is  insoluble  in  alcohol,  but  is  readily
dissolved  by  most  dilute  acids  and  alkaline  solutions.  It  swells  up  and
softens  in  cold  water,  but  does  not  dissolve  ;  boiling  water  wholly  dissolves
it,  with  the  exception  of  any  impurities,  forming  on  cooling  a  jelly  of
pure  gelatin  and  water.  Its  aqueous  solution  speedily  putrefies.  With
tannin  it  forms  an  insoluble  compound,  somewhat  like  leather.  Boiled
with  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  it  is  converted  into  a  kind  of  sugar,
termed  Olycocoll,  or  Sugar  of  Gelatin.  The  inferior  kinds  of  isinglass
are  yellowish  and  more  opake  than  the  better  kinds.  Analysis  has  found
in  isinglass  a  large  quantity  of  gelatin,  some  albumen,  osmazome,  inso-
luble membrane  in  boiling  water,  free  acid,  various  salts  and  water.

An  excellent  cement,  called  Armenian  or  Diamond  Cement  is  made
with  isinglass,  which  is  valuble  to  the  chemist  and  pharmaceutist  for
mending  glass,  china  and  porcelain  vessels,  which  are  not  exposed  to
heat  and  moisture. It  is  made  by  sprinkling  water  upon  two  drachms


Ilex  Opaca.  555

of  isinglass,  allowing  it  to  stand  until  softened,  then  adding  as  much
proof  spirit  as  will  rather  more  than  cover  it,  and  dissolving  it  with  a
moderate  heat.  Have  previously  prepared,  a  solution  made  by  dissolv-
ing one  drachm  of  gum  mastic,  in  two  or  three  fluidrachms  of  alcohol.
Mix  the  two  solutions,  and  stir  in  one  drachm  of  gum  ammoniacum,
previously  reduced  to  a  fine  powder,  and  rubbed  down  with  a  little
water.  Evaporate,  if  necessary,  in  a  water-bath  to  a  proper  consistence.
Keep  the  cement  thus  prepared  in  a  vial.  When  required  for  use  plunge
the  bottle  in  warm  water,  and  keep  it  there  until  the  cement  becomes
fluid;  then  apply  it  with  a  stick  or  small  hard  brush  to  the  edges  of  the
broken  vessel,  previously  warmed.  Compress  the  pieces  firmly  together
until  cold,  taking  care  to  make  the  contact  perfect,  and  using  a  very  thin
layer  of  cement ;  when  properly  applied,  the  cement  is  almost,  if  not
quite,  as  strong  as  the  glass  or  china  itself.

A  cement  for  stoneware  may  be  made  by  allowing  gelatin  to  swell  in
cold  water,  the  jelly  warmed,  and  so  much  recently  slaked  lime  added
as  is  requisite  to  render  the  mass  sufficiently  thick  for  the  purpose.  A
thin  coating  of  this  cement  is  spread  while  warm  over  the  gently  heated
surfaces  of  fracture  of  the  articles,  and  let  dry  under  a  strong  pressure.
What  oozes  out  is  removed  directly  with  a  moist  rag.

Isinglass  is  sometimes  kept  cut  up  in  fine  shreds,  in  which  form  it  is
more  readily  acted  on  by  boiling  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Isinglass  is  seldom  used  in  medicine  except  as
a  nutritive.  It  is  used  as  a  diet,  in  the  form  of  jelly,  or  added  to  other
jellies,  to  give  them  a  tremulous  appearance.  I  have  used  the  following
preparation  in  incontinence  of  urine,  both  in  children  and  adults,  in
many  instances,  and  have  found  it  a  useful  as  well  as  agreeable
remedy,  proving  serviceable  when  other  means  had  failed:  Take  of
isinglass  {long  staple)  one  roll;  boil  it  in  one  pint  of  water  till  it  is  dis-
solved, then  strain,  add  one  pint  of  sweet  milk,  put  it  again  over  the
fire,  and  remove  it  just  as  ebullition  commences;  then  sweeten  with  loaf
sugar,  and  grate  nutmeg  upon  it.  When  made,  it  very  much  resembles
custard.  Of  this,  a  tumblerful  may  be  taken  three  or  four  times  a  day
by  an  adult.

Isinglass  is  employed  in  the  arts  for  various  purposes,  and  is  often
added  to  vegetable  jellies  for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  a  tremulous
appearance. Three  drachms  form  a  proper  jelly  with  a  pint  of  water.


ILEX  OPACA.

American  Holly.

Nat. Ord. — Aquifoliacea?. Sex.  Sust. — Tetrandria Tetragynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  tree  rises  from  twenty  to  forty  feet  in  hight,  having
leaves  which  are  alternate,  coriaceous,  evergreen,  smooth  and  shining,


556  Materia Medica.

flat,  oval,  acute  at  the  end,  and  the  wavy  margins  armed  with  strong
scattered  spiny  teeth.  The  flowers  are  small,  greenish-white,  and  are
arranged  in  scattered  clusters  along  the  base  of  the  young  branches,
and  from  the  axils  of  the  leaves.  The  calyx  is  persistent ;  calyx-teeth
acute.  The  corolla  is  rotate,  monopetalous,  four-cleft;  stamens  erect,  and
alternate  with  the  divisions.  The  ovary  is  globular,  four-celled,  with
four  sessile  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  globular,  umbilicated  at  top,  fleshy,
scarlet,  and  contains  four  bony  nucules.

History. — The  Holly  is  found  growing  throughout  the  United  States
from  Maine  to  Louisiana,  in  moist  woodlands,  and  flowering  in  June.  It
is  quite  common  to  the  Atlantic  States,  especially  New  Jersey.  The
leaves  are  the  medicinal  parts ;  they  have  a  bitter,  somewhat  austere
taste,  but  no  odor,  and  yield  their  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  They
are  said  to  contain  ilicin,  wax,  gum,  several  salts,  etc.  llitin  is  the  bitter
principle  upon  which  the  febrifuge  virtues  of  the  leaves  depend ;  it  may
be  obtained  by  diluting  a  strong  alcoholic  extract  of  the  holly  leaves
with  water,  to  which  add  sugar  of  lead,  then  sulphuric  acid,  and  finally
carbonate  of  lime.  The  ilicin  being  thus  separated,  dissolve  it  in  alco-
hol ;  then  evaporate  to  a  syrupy  consistence.  Or,  a  filtered  decoction
of  the  leaves  may  be  boiled  with  animal  charcoal,  then  allow  the  char-
coal to  subside,  wash  it,  treat  it  with  alcohol,  filter  off  the  alcoholic
solution,  and  evaporate  to  a  syrupy  consistence.  The  liquid  thus
obtained  is  very  bitter,  and  when  allowed  to  evaporate  spontaneously,
yields  an  amorphous  substance,  resembling  gelatin,  which  is  ilicin.  It
is  not  soluble  in  ether,  partially  dissolves  in  warm  water,  soluble  in  alco-
hol, and  is  not  decomposed  by  acids  or  alkalies.  Two  pounds  of  the
dried  leaves  yield  more  than  two  ounces  of  this  principle.  The  inner
bark  of  the  holly  is  glutinous,  and  the  viscous  substance  called  birdlime
is  prepared  from  it,  by  burying  it  in  the  earth  for  some  days,  in  order  to
soften  it,  it  is  then  beaten  in  a  mortar,  and  well  washed  in  water  to  sepa-
rate the  impurities.  The  berries  are  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  red,  with
a  bitter,  acrid  taste.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Holly  leaves  are  tonic  and  febrifuge ;  said  to
be  very  efficacious  in  the  treatment  of  intermittent  fever,  used  in  doses
of  a  drachm  of  the  powder  two  hours  before  the  paroxysm.  The  infu-
sion has  likewise  proved  beneficial  in  catarrh,  jaundice,  pleurisy,  small-
pox, gout,  etc.  Ten  or  twelve  of  the  berries,  are  said  to  be  emeto-
cathartic,  producing  copious  watery  evacuations.

Ilicin,  as  well  as  the  holly  leaves,  exerts  a  sedative  influence  on  the
spleen,  liver,  and  pancreas,  and  is  a  cheap  substitute  for  quinia.  The
dose  of  ilicin  for  an  adult,  as  a  febrifuge  or  antiperiodic,  is  twelve  grains
gradually  increased  to  twenty-four,  and  given  in  the  form  of  pill.

The  European  Holly,  Hex  Aquifolium,  together  with  several  other
species  in  this  country,  possesses  similar  properties. The  Hex  Vomiloria


Impatiens  Pallida.  557

or  South  Sea  tea,  an  evergreen  shrub  growing  in  our  Southern  States,  is
the  Cassina  of  the  Indians.  They  toast  its  leaves  and  make  a  decoc-
tion, called  Black  drink,  which  is  used  in  their  religious  ceremonies  and
great  councils,  by  tbe  men  only,  to  purge  their  bodies  from  impurities.
The  leaves  are  inodorous,  with  an  aromatic,  acrid  taste.  A  decoction  of
them  in  small  doses,  acts  as  a  powerful  diuretic ;  in  large  doses  it  pro-
duces copious  evacuations  from  the  stomach,  bowels,  and  bladder.  The
inhabitants  of  North  Carolina,  on  the  sea  coast,  modify  the  deleterious
action  of  their  brackish  water,  by  boiling  a  few  leaves  of  Cassina  with  it.
These  plants  are  deserving  a  careful  investigation.


IMPATIENS  PALLIDA.

Jewelweed.

Nat.  Ord. — Balsaminaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Impatiens  Pallida,  likewise  known  by  the  names  of  Pale
Touch-me-not,  Balsam-weed,  etc.,  is  an  indigenous  annual  plant,  having  a
smooth,  succulent,  tender,  subpellucid,  branching  stem,  with  tumid
joints,  and  growing  from  two  to  four  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are
oblong-ovate,  coarsely  and  obtusely  serrate,  teeth  mucronate,  from  two
to  five  inches  long,  petiolate,  and  about  two-thirds  as  wide.  The  flowers
are  large,  pale-yellow,  sparingly  maculate,  mostly  in  pairs  ;  peduncles
two  to  four-flowered,  elongated.  Sepals  apparently  but  four,  the  two
upper  united,  the  lowest  gibbous,  dilated-conical,  broader  than  long,
with  a  very  short,  recurved  spur.  Petals  apparently  two,  unequal-sided
and  two-lobed,  each  consisting  of  a  pair  united.  Stamens  five,  short ;
anthers  opening  on  the  inner  face,  connivent  over  the  stigma.  Ovary
five-celled;  stigma  sessile.  Capsules  oblong- cylindric,  an  inch  long,
fire-valved,  bursting  at  the  slightest  touch  when  ripe  and  scattering  the
anatropous  seeds.

Impatiens  Fulva,  or  Speckled  Jewels  is  the  most  common  variety ;  its
leaves  are  rhombic-ovate,  obtusish,  coarsely  and  obtusely  serrate,  teeth
mucronate.  The  flowers  are  smaller  than  in  the  previous  one,  deep
orange,  and  maculate  with  many  brown  spots;  lower  gibbous  sepals
acutely  conical,  longer  than  broad,  with  an  elongated,  recurved  spur.

Impatiens  Balsamina,  the  Garden  Balsam  or  Ladies'  Slippers,  is  spon-
taneous about  gardens  ;  its  leaves  are  lanceolate,  serrate,  upper  ones
alternate  ;  peduncles  clustered,  one  flowered  ;  spur  shorter  than  the
flowers.  The  flowers  are  red,  white,  purple,  pink,  flesh-color,  and  scar-
let; sometimes  they  are  double.  This  is  an  exotic  plant,  a  native  of  the
East  Indies,  and  cultivated  as  a  beautiful  garden  annual.  Its  hight  is
from  one  to  five  feet.


558  Materia  Medica.

History. — These  plants  grow  throughout  the  United  States,  in  moist
shady  places,  and  along  rills,  in  rich  soil,  flowering  from  July  to  Sep-
tember. The  I.  Pallida  is  most  common  northward  and  westward  and
the  I.  Fulva,  southward.  They  all  possess  similar  properties.  The
whole  plants  are  used,  and  impart  their  virtues  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — They  are  aperient  and  diuretic  ;  a  decoction  is
recommended  in  jaundice,  hepatitis  and  dropsy.  The  juice  is  said  to
remove  warts,  cure  ringworms,  salt-rheum,  etc.,  and  to  cleanse  foul
ulcers  ;  or  it  may  be  applied  for  these  purposes  in  the  form  of  a  poultice
boiled  in  milk.  The  recent  plant  boiled  in  lard,  forms  an  excellent  oint-
ment for  piles.


INULA  HELENIUM.
Elecampane.
Nat.  Orel. — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Elecampane  has  a  thick,  fusiform,  branching,  aromatic,
and  perennial  root,  with  a  thick,  leafy,  round,  furrowed,  solid  stem,  from
four  to  six  feet  high,  and  branched  and  downy  above.  The  leaves  are
large,  ovate,  serrated,  veiny,  smooth  and  of  a  dark-green  color  above,
downy  and  hoary  beneath  with  a  fleshy  midrib  ;  the  radical  ones  are
petiolated,  from  one  to  three  feet  in  length,  by  six  or  twelve  inches
wide  ;  the  cauline  ones  sessile,  amplexicaul.  The  flower- heads  are  large,
radiated,  solitary  at  the  downy  summits  of  the  branches,  two  inches
broad,  and  of  a  bright-yellow  color.  The  involucre  is  hemispherical ;
the  oiiter  scales  are  broad,  recurved,  leafy,  finely  downy  on  both  sides;
the  inner  scales  are  narrow,  linear,  and  chaffy.  The  florets  of  the  ray
are  numerous,  spreading,  linear,  ligulate,  pistillate,  and  terminate  in
three  unequal  teeth  ;  the  disk-florets  are  numerous,  perfect,  tubular,
five-cleft.  The  anthers  are  furnished  with  bristles  at  their  base ;  the
ovary  is  oblong  with  a  filiform  cloven  style,  and  spreading,  obtuse  stig-
mas. The  seeds  are  quadrangular,  smooth,  striated,  and  furnished  with
a  simple,  roughish  pappus.

History. — Elecampane  is  a  native  of  Europe  and  Japan,  and  is  natu-
ralized in  some  parts  of  the  United  States,  growing  in  moist  places,  and
.  about  houses,  flowering  in  July  and  August.  The  root  is  the  officinal
part,  and  should  be  gathered  in  autumn,  and  in  the  second  year  of  its
growth.  When  fresh  it  is  very  thick,  spindle-shaped,  much  branched,
with  whitish  cylindrical  ramifications  furnished  with  thread-like  fibers ;
brown  externally,  and  whitish  and  fleshy  internally.  As  found  in  the
shops  in  the  dried  state,  it  is  usually  in  longitudinal  or  transverse  slices,
and  of  a  grayish  color  internally.  It  has  an  agreeably  aromatic,  some-
what camphorous  smell,  and  a  warm,  aromatic,  bitter  taste. It  yields


Iodinum.  559

its  properties  to  alcohol  or  water,  but  more  especially  to  the  former.
Analysis  has  found  in  it,  a  volatile  oil,  a  peculiar  camphor,  wax,  acrid
resin,  gum,  bitter  extractive,  inulin,  etc.  Inulin  is  an  amylaceous  sub-
stance, differing  from  starch  in  being  deposited  unchanged  from  its
solution  in  boiling  water,  as  the  liquid  cools,  and  in  giving  a  yellowish
instead  of  a  blue  color  with  iodine.  Its  constitution  is  identical  with
that  of  starch,  and  it  has  been  found  in  the  roots  of  many  other  plants.
Beside  this  principle,  elecampane  contains  another,  called  Helenin,  which
is  intermediate  in  its  properties  between  the  essential  oils  and  camphor,
and  is  separable  by  distillation  with  water.  Helenin  may  be  obtained
by  cutting  the  fresh  root  of  elecampane  in  slices,  and  exhausting  with
boiling  alcohol  of  sp.  gr.  0.833;  the  hot  solution  is  to  be  filtered,  and
mixed  with  three  or  four  times  its  bulk  of  cold  water,  when  a  slight
turbidness  results,  and  after  standing  twenty-four  hours,  long,  dazzling
white  needles  of  pure  helenin  will  be  found  in  the  lkjuid,  leaving  very
little  in  solution.  The  dried  root  gives  a  smaller  quantity  of  this  prin-
ciple than  the  fresh.

Inulin  may  be  had  by  boiling  the  roots  in  water,  and  concentrating  the
decoction  by  evaporation  ;  it  is  deposited  as  a  brittle  white  mass,  formed
of  crystalline  grains,  or  as  a  fine,  tasteless  powder.

Properties  and  Uses. — Elecampane  is  an  aromatic  stimulant  and  tonic,
and  is  said  to  possess  diaphoretic,  diuretic,  expectorant,  and  emmena-
gogue  properties.  It  is  much  used  in  chronic  pulmonary  affections,
weakness  of  the  digestive  organs,  hepatic  torpor,  dyspepsia,  and  inter-
nally and  externally  in  tetter,  itch,  and  other  cutaneous  diseases.  When
added  to  the  Compound  Syrup  of  Spikenard,  it  should  be  exhausted  by
boiling  alcohol,  and  the  tincture  added  to  the  syrup,  instead  of  boiling-
it  with  the  other  articles,  as  is  usually  done.  The  alcoholic  extract,  com-
bined with  powdered  extract  of  liquorice,  benzoic  acid,  sanguinarina,
and  morphia,  forms  a  lozenge  or  pill  very  valuable  in  chronic  catarrhal,
bronchial,  and  all  pulmonary  irritations  ;  one  drop  of  the  Oil  of  Stillin-
gia  may  be  added  to  each  lozenge,  for  bronchial  and  laryngeal  affec-
tions. Dose  of  the  powder,  from  one  scruple  to  one  drachm  ;  of  the
infusion,  from  one  to  two  fiuidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Helenii ;  Extractum  Helenii  Hydro- alcoholi-
cum  ;  Syrupus  Araliae  Compositus.


IODINUM.

Iodine.

Preparation. — Kelp,  which  contains  about  a. 224th  part  of  Iodine,  is
lixiviated  in  water,  in  which  about  one-half  dissolves.  The  solution  is
concentrated  to  a  pellicle,  and  allowed  to  cool,  whereby  all  the  salts,
except  the  Iodide of  Sodium,  are  almost  completely  separated,  they


560  Materia Medica.

being  less  soluble  than  the  iodide.  The  remaining  liquor,  which  is  dense
and  dark-colored,  is  rendered  sour  by  sulphuric  acid,  whereby  carbonic
acid,  sulphureted  hydrogen,  and  sulphurous  acid  are  evolved,  and  sul-
phur is  deposited.  The  liquor  is  now  introduced  into  a  leaden  still,  and
distilled  with  a  portion  of  deutoxide  of  manganese  into  a  series  of  glass
receivers,  inserted  into  one  another,  in  which  the  iodine  is  condensed.
In  this  process  the  iodide  of  sodium  is  decomposed,  and  the  iodine
evolved  ;  and  the  sulphuric  acid,  deutoxide  of  manganese,  and  sodium
unite,  so  as  to  form  the  sulphate  of  protoxide  of  manganese  and  sulphate
of  soda.

Souberain  states  that  a  much  larger  quantity  of  iodine  may  be
obtained  by  the  following  process  :  Add  sulphate  of  copper  to  the  mother
water  so  long  as  a  white  precipitate  of  iodide  of  copper  is  thrown  down.
Then  treat  the  supernatant  liquid  with  more  of  the  sulphate,  together
with  iron-filings.  The  iron,  taking  the  place  of  the  copper  in  the  solu-
tion, sets  that  metal  free  ;  and  the  metal,  in  the  act  of  evolution,  unites
with  what  remains  of  the  iodine  in  the  fluid,  so  that  more  iodide  of
copper  is  formed.  When  this  iodide  is  mingled  with  oxide  of  manga-
nese and  sulphuric  acid,  a  moderate  heat  decomposes  it,  and  iodine  is
sublimed.

History. — Iodine  is  an  elementary  non-metallic  body,  discovered  in
1812  by  Courtois,  a  French  soda  manufacturer  ;  and  in  1820,  its  medi-
cinal virtues  were  first  made  known  by  Dr.  Coindet,  sen.,  of  Geneva,
It  exists  in  many  marine  vegetables,  particularly  the  fuci  or  common  sea-
weeds, and  is  also  found  in  nitre,  sponge,  sea-water,  oyster,  cod-liver
oil,  water-cress,  brook-lime,  fine-leaved  water  hemlock,  coal-gas,  many
ores,  salt-springs,  spring-waters,  etc.  Sea-weeds,  however,  contain  it  in
the  greatest  proportion  ;  they  are  burned  for  the  sake  of  their  ashes,  the
product  being  a  dark-colored  fused  mass  called  Kelp.

Iodine  is  a  soft,  friable,  opake  substance,  in  the  form  of  crystalline
scales,  or  in  solid  masses,  of  a  shining  appearance,  and  bluish-black
color.  It  emits  a  peculiar,  powerful  odor,  which  strongly  irritates  the
nostrils,  and  excites  cough,  has  a  hot,  acrid  taste,  and  is  brittle  and  pul-
verizable.  It  stains  the  skin  brownish-yellow,  and  if  the  contact  be  pro-
longed, will  destroy  the  soft  textures  of  the  body.  It  is  volatile,  and
slowly  evaporates  at  common  temperatures  ;  when  heated  it  evaporates
more  rapidly,  fuses  at  245°,  and  boils  at  347°,  distilling  over  in  the  form
of  a  rich  purple  vapor,  which  condenses"  into  scales.  Water  dissolves
only  a  7,000th  of  its  own  weight  of  iodine,  and  acquires  a  brownish-
yellow  color ;  in  saline  solutions  it  is  much  more  soluble,  and  freely  so
in  solutions  of  chloride  of  sodium,  nitrate  of  ammonia,  or  iodide  of
potassium.  It  dissolves  in  twelve  parts  of  rectified  spirit  at  60°,  is  very
soluble  in  ether,  or  the  volatile  oils,  but  with  some  of  them,  especially
those  from  coniferous  vegetables,  considerable  heat  is  evolved,  brisk


IODINUM.  561

effervescence  ensues,  and  much  of  the  iodine  is  discharged  in  vapor.  It
unites  with  oxygen  or  hydrogen  to  form  acids ;  also  with  sulphur,  phos-
phorus, carbon,  chlorine,  etc.  ;  starch  globules,  if  converted  by  boiling
with  water  into  soluble  starch  or  amidin,  form  a  blue  precipitate  with  it,
of  such  intensity  that  iodine  may  be  detected  in  450,000  parts  of  water.
To  effect  this  the  iodine  must  be  free,  which  may  be  obtained  by  adding
a  little  nitric  acid  to  the  suspected  solutions,  and  the  solutions  must  be
cold.  Iodine  is  easily  mixed  with  fatty  substances  ;  it  is  apt  to  escape
from  the  surface  of  ointments,  unless  united  with  iodide  of  potassium,
which  much  impedes  this  result.  The  combination  of  iodine  with  hydro-
gen forms  a  gaseous  acid,  called  Hydriodic  Acid  :  and  that  with  oxygen
forms  three  acids,  the  Iodous,  Iodic,  and  Hyperiodic  Acids.  Starch  is  a
delicate  test  to  determine  the  presence  of  iodine  in  urine,  solutions,  etc.
Chloroform  has  been  recently  proposed  as  a  test ;  thus,  if  150  grains  of
a  solution  containing  one  part  of  iodide  of  potassium  in  one  hundred
thousand  of  its  weight,  be  treated  with  two  drops  of  nitric  and  fifteen  or
twenty  drops  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  afterward  shaken  with  fifteen  grains
of  chloroform,  the  latter  acquires  a  distinct  violet  tint.  Chloroform
may  also  be  applied  to  the  detection  of  iodine  in  the  several  varieties  of
cod-liver  oil,  the  amount  of  which  may  be  judged  by  the  depth  of  color
produced  ;  as  follows  :  Incinerate  in  an  iron  spoon  50  parts  of  the  speci-
men of  the  oil  with  5  of  caustic  potassa,  dissolved  in  15  of  water,  and
exhaust  the  cinder  with  the  smallest  possible  quantity  of  water.  Filter
the  solution,  acidulate  it  with  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids,  and  agitate  with
four  parts  of  chloroform.  After  a  time,  the  chloroform  is  deposited  of  a
violet  color,  more  or  less  deep  according  to  the  amount  of  iodine  pre-
sent. This  test  of  iodine  was  presented  by  M.  Rabourdin.  Dr.  A.
Overbeck  gives  the  following  very  delicate  test  for  iodine  :  Some  starch
or  sugar  is  poured  into  a  test-tube  with  concentrated  nitric  acid,  and
heated  over  a  spirit-lamp  very  gently  until  a  violent  evolution  of  gas
ensues.  The  spirit-lamp  is  then  removed,  and  the  gas,  which  now
evolves  without  a  continuation  of  the  application  of  heat,  is  conducted
into  the  fluid  to  be  tested,  to  which  a  solution  of  starch  has  been  added.
If  the  fluid  contains  only  a  millionth  of  iodide  of  potassium,  a  blue
coloration  directly  results.  By  a  farther  introduction  of  the  gas,  the
iodide  of  starch  precipitates  out  in  flocks,  and  deposits  itself,  when  at
rest,  as  a  compact,  massy  precipitate.  In  this  way  he  found  iodine  in
many  plants,  particularly  in  the  ashes  of  several  ranunculuses.  There
are  so  many  substances  incompatible  with  iodine,  that  its  preparations  are
best  given  in  simple  water  sweetened,  and  diluted  to  the  patient's  taste.
Iodine  is  much  subject  to  adulteration  :  oxide  of  manganese,  char-
coal, plumbago,  red  oxide  of  iron,  and  the  like,  are  often  fraudulently
added  to  it.  The  most  frequent  adulteration,  however,  is  water,  which
may  be  easily  detected  by  the  presence  of  visible  moisture  in  the  bottle,
or  by  the  iodine  adhering  to  the  inside  of  it.  The  Edinburgh  College
36


562  Materia  Medica.

has  given  a  test  which  detects  all  impurity  beyond  two  per  cent.  It  is
based  upon  the  fact  that  pure  iodine  diffused  in  water,  forms  a  colorless
solution  of  iodide  of  calcium  and  iodate  of  lime,  with  a  certain  propor-
tion of  quicklime.  Accordingly,  an  amount  of  quicklime  is  directed,
which  is  not  quite  sufficient  to  form  a  colorless  solution  with  iodine,  con-
taining only  two  per  cent,  of  impurity  ;  and  hence,  if  the  sample  con-
tain more  impurity,  the  lime  is  competent  to  produce  a  solution  without
color.  The  test  is  :  Thirty-nine  grains  of  the  iodine  suspected,  with  nine
grains  of  quicklime,  and  three  ounces  of  water,  when  heated  short  of
ebullition,  slowly  form  a  perfect  solution,  which  is  yellowish  or  brownish
if  the  iodine  be  pure,  but  colorless  if  there  be  above  two  per  cent,  of
water  or  other  impurity.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  Iodine  is  an  irritant  and  corro-
sive poison,  stimulating  the  mucous  membranes,  liver,  and  absorbent
glands,  exciting  the  sexual  organs,  and  producing  debility  of  the  diges-
tive functions,  muscular  weakness,  and  emaciation.  This  influence  upon
the  system,  in  which  its  poisonous  effects  are  developed,  is  termed
Iodism.  Its  symptoms  are  restlessness,  palpitation,  a  sense  of  constric-
tion  in  the  throat,  and  of  burning  along  the  gullet,  excessive  thirst,  pain
and  nausea  in  the  stomach,  vomiting  and  purging,  severe  cramps,  diu-
resis, priapism,  rapid  and  extreme  emaciation,  and  frequent  pulse.  From
four  to  six  grains  have  produced  these  symptoms,  hence  it  should  never
be  administered  in  large  doses,  and  when  these  effects  appear,  the  medi-
cine should  at  once  be  stopped.

In  small  or  medicinal  doses,  it  is  a  stimulant,  tonic,  alterative,  diu-
retic, emmenagogue,  and  diaphoretic.  It  affects  especially  the  absorb-
ent and  glandular  systems,  and  its  results  vary  according  to  the  dose,
combination,  etc. ;  it  has  been  detected  in  the  urine  soon  after  being
swallowed,  also  in  the  saliva,  perspiration,  milk,  and  blood,  and  always
in  the  form  of  hydriodic  acid,  or  an  iodide.  It  is  supposed  to  undergo
conversion  in  the  stomach  into  hydriodic  acid,  and  thus  absorbed.
Iodine  and  some  of  its  preparations  will  occasionally  produce  salivation,
soreness  of  the  mouth,  coryza,  and  often  pustular  eruptions.  Under  its
influence,  enlarged  glands  are  brought  to  their  normal  size,  and  stru-
mous ulcers  gradually  healed.  Occasionally  it  has  caused  a  rapid  and
permanent  wasting  away  of  the  mammse  or  testicles  ;  and  again  after  a
lapse  of  time,  these  organs  have  recovered  their  original  development.

It  is  employed  medicinally  in  various  forms  of  disease,  in  some  of
which  it  produces  astonishingly  beneficial  results.  The  diseases  in  which
it  appears  to  be  more  generally  efficacious,  are  bronchocele,  glandular
obstructions,  scrofula,  syphilis,  mercurio-syphilis,  strumous  ophthalmia,
ozcena,  ulcers  of  the  integuments,  enlargement  of  the  external  absorbent
glands,  chronic  enlargement  of  the  liver  and  spleen,  mammae,  testes,
and  uterus,  ovarian  tumors,  leucorrhea,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,
caries,  paralysis,  chorea,  rheumatism,  and  in  fact  all  diseases  of  a  hyper-


Iodinum.  563

trophical,  strumous  or  cachectic  character.  In  bronchocele  it  is  most
serviceable  in  the  early  congestive  stage,  or  in  the  middle  stage  of
gelatiniform  effusion ;  in  the  indurated  stage  of  the  thyroid  gland,  it  is
of  little  benefit.  In  this  affection  its  use  should  be  continued  uninter-
ruptedly, for  at  least  five  weeks,  and  if  no  good  effects  appear,  it  may
be  laid  aside.  It  should  always  be  combined  with  some  narcotic,  to
lessen  or  prevent  its  irritant  results.  The  tincture  diluted  with  three
times  its  volume  of  water,  has  been  recommended  as  an  injection  in
hydrocele,  after  removal  of  the  effused  fluid,  to  stimulate  the  tunica
vaginalis,  to  adhesive  inflammation.  In  erysipelatous  inflammations  it
has  been  advised  to  paint  the  inflamed  surface  with  a  strong  tincture  ;
likewise  in  chilblains,  and  cutaneous  scrofula.  Iodine  is  not  a  cumu-
lative medicine,  like  lead,  digitalis,  etc.,  hence,  whenever  its  effects
approach  iodism,  a  suspension  of  its  use  will  gradually  remove  them ;
however,  at  the  present  time,  these  effects  are  not  so  often  observed  as
among  its  early  investigators.  Yet,  as  some  persons  are  very  suscep-
tible to  its  influence,  the  approach  of  iodism  should  be  carefully  watched,
and  its  symptoms  checked.  In  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  cholera-
infantum,  colliquative  diarrhea  of  phthisis  and  scrofulous  diseases,  I
have  found  the  following  a  superior  remedy.  Take  of  iodine  one  and
a  half  grains,  sulphate  of  morphia  one-eighth  of  a  grain,  geraniin  twenty
grains — triturate  thoroughly  together  in  a  mortar,  form  into  a  pill  mass
with  simple  syrup,  or  extract  of  liquorice,  and  divide  into  ten  pills  ;  of
these,  one  pill  may  be  given  every  hour  or  two  to  an  adult.  In  hepatic
and  splenitic  affections,  leptandrin  may  be  substituted  for  the  geraniin.
In  the  Mexican  diarrhea  I  succeeded  in  curing  every  case  in  which  the
following  preparation  was  employed  :  Take  of  iodine  one  and  a  half
grains,  tannic  acid  ten  grains,  distilled  water  five  fluidrachms  ;  mix
together.  For  an  adult,  give  one  fluidrachm,  every  two  hours  in
syrup  of  ginger,  or  cinnamon  water ;  to  be  continued  daily.  Externally,
iodine  is  used  in  the  form  of  ointment  for  strumous  ulcers,  ophthalmia,
and  some  cutaneous  diseases.  A  caustic  iodine  is  recommended  as  an
application  to  stimulate  or  destroy  soft  and  fungous  granulations,  and  as
a  remedy  for  noli-me-tangere ;  it  is  made  by  adding  an  ounce  each  of
iodine  and  iodide  of  potassium,  to  two  ounces  of  distilled  water.  Iodine
is  contra-indicated  in  cerebral  congestion,  and  tendency  to  apoplexy,  in
menorrhagia,  in  disordered  stomach  or  bowels,  or  wherever  local  dis-
eases become  attended  with  symptomatic  fever,  or  with  incidental  febrile
affections.

Iodine  may  be  kept  in  a  state  of  solution  when  added  to  mixtures  in
the  form  of  tincture,  by  the  addition  of  syrup  of  orange  peel,  or  a  few
grains  of  tannic  acid.  When  given  internally  to  females  it  is  apt  to
increase  the  quantity  of  the  menstrual  discharge,  and  sometimes  to
multiply  the  periods  of  its  appearance ;  if  the  symptoms  are  not  very
severe  or  alarming  but  little  interference  will  be  required,  as  they  will


564  Materia  Medica.

cease  after  a  short  time ;  where  this  is  demanded,  a  cessation  of  the  use
of  the  remedy  will  most  generally  suffice.  In  the  employment  of  iodine,
if  the  urine  is  passed  in  quantity,  and  on  examination  is  found  to  con-
tain iodine,  and  the  strength  and  appetite  of  the  patient  gradually
return,  it  may  be  considered  indicative  of  a  beneficial  therapeutical
influence,  and  its  use  should  be  continued.  Dose  of  iodine  in  substance,
half  a  grain,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  in  pill  form;  of  the  tincture  from
five  to  fifteen  drops,  twice  a  day.  The  best  forms  for  internal  use  are
the  Compound  Tincture,  and  Compound  Solution.  When  given  in
powder,  it  should  be  united  with  opium,  and  formed  into  a  pill  with
extract  of  liquorice.  In  poisoning  by  iodine,  first  evacuate  the  stomach,
by  giving  an  emetic  in  starch  water,  and  afterward  administer  freely,
starch  water,  or  flour,  or  arrowroot  in  water.

Off.  Prep.  —  Emplastrum  Belladonnse  Compositum ;  Ferri  Iodidum  ;
Liquor  Ferri  Iodidi ;  Liquor  Iodini  Compositus ;  Potassii  Iodidum ;  Tinc-
tura  Iodini;  Tinctura  Iodini  Composita;  Unguentum  Iodidi  Compositum.


IPOM^EA  JALAPA.
Jalap.

Nat.  Ord. — Convolvulacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.


THE ROOT.


Description. — The  root  of  Jalap  is  a  roundish,  somewhat  pear-shaped
tuber,  externally  blackish,  internally  white,  with  long  fibers  proceeding
from  its  lower  part,  as  well  as  from  the  upper  root-stalks.  The  stems
are  several,  roundish,  smooth,  herbaceous,  of  a  reddish-brown  color,
much  disposed  to  twist,  and  rising  to  a  considerable  bight  upon  neighbor-
ing objects,  about  which  it  twines.  The  leaves  are  cordate,  entire,
smooth,  conspicuously  acuminate,  deeply  serrated  at  the  base,  the  lower
ones  sometimes  nearly  hastate,  or  with  diverging  angular  points,  the
under  surface  prominently  veined,  the  petioles  often  nearly  the  length
of  the  leaf.  The  peduncles  about  the  length  of  the  petioles,  each  one
supporting  two,  rarely  three  flowers.  The  calyx  is  ebracteate,  five-
leaved,  obtuse,  with  two  of  the  divisions  external.  The  corolla  is  fun-
nel-form, of  a  lilac-purple  color.  Stamens  five ;  anthers  oblong,  white,
somewhat  exserted.  Ovary  slender,  bilocular.  Style  slender;  stigma
simple  and  capitate. Seeds  not  known.

History. — It  is  only  within  a  few  years  that  any  certainty  has  existed
in  relation  to  the  plant  from  which  the  jalap  root  was  obtained.  It  was
first  spoken  of  in  1609,  as  Bryonia  Mechoacana  Nigricans,  then  it  was
regarded  by  Ray  as  Convolvulus  Americanus,  jalapium  dictus,  after
which  Tournefort,  being  misled  by  persons  who  stated  that  they  had  seen
the  plant  growing,  attributed  it  to  a  species  of  Mirabilis. Balfour  placed


Ipom^ea  jalapa.  565

it  as  the  Exogonium  Purga,  and  Linnaeus  named  it  Convolvulus  Jalapa,
and  thus  much  difference  of  opinion  existed,  until  in  1827,  when  Dr.  J.
R.  Coxe  of  Philadelphia,  having  received  roots  of  the  true  Jalap  from
South  America,  from  which  he  succeeded  in  producing  a  perfect  flower-
ing plant,  first  made  known  to  the  scientific  world  its  true  character.
The  name  of  Ipomaia  Purga  was  bestowed  upon  the  plant  by  Hayne  and
Wenderoth,  but  as  the  American  authorities  have  a  claim  prior  to  all
others,  it  may  be  considered  as  settled  that  Ipomoea  Jalapa,  the  name
originally  given  to  it  by  Nuttall,  is  looked  upon  as  the  officinal  species.
The  Jalap  plant  is  a  native  of  Mexico,  growing  at  a  bight  of  about  6000
feet  above  the  level  of  the  ocean,  near  the  city  of  Xalapa,  in  the  state
of  Vera  Cruz,  from  which  city  it  is  generally  exported,  and  from  which
it  also  derives  its  name.  It  is  usually  imported  in  bags  containing  one
or  two  hundred  pounds.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  and  is  gathered
at  all  seasons,  but  principally  in  March  and  April,  when  the  young
shoots  are  appearing.  The  plant  might  be  cultivated  in  the  southern
parts  of  the  United  States.

When  fresh,  the  root  is  black  externally,  white  and  milky  within,  and
varies  in  size  according  to  its  age,  from  that  of  a  walnut  to  that  of  a
moderate-sized  turnep.  It  is  dried  in  net  bags  over  the  fire,  sometimes
entire,  and  sometimes  in  sections.  It  is  imported  in  irregularly  round  or
pear-shaped  masses,  seldom  as  large  as  the  fist,  and  is  either  entire,  or
divided  into  longitudinal  or  transverse  slices.  It  is  ponderous,  hard,  dark-
brown  externally,  rough  and  wrinkled,  internally  grayish  diversified  by
irregular  concentric  darker  circles,  in  which  the  substance  is  denser  and
harder  than  in  the  intervening  spaces.  If  moist,  it  is  tough;  if  dry,  rather
brittle,  with  a  shining  undulated  fracture,  exhibiting  numerous  resinous
points,  distinctly  visible  with  the  microscope.  The  odor  of  jalap  is  faint  and
disagreeable,  but  stronger  on  rubbing  or  powdering  it,  and  the  taste  is
nauseous  and  sweetish,  succeeded  by  some  acridity.  It  is  often  attacked
by  insects,  but  its  active  portion  or  resin  is  left  untouched  by  them,
rendering  it,  consequently,  more  energetic ;  worm-eaten  jalap  may  be
employed  for  procuring  the  resin,  but  should  not  be  formed  into  powder,
as  it  would  be  above  the  proper  strength.  Jalap  is  rather  difficult  to
pulverize,  but  if  triturated  with  cream  of  tartar,  sugar  of  milk,  or  other
hard  salt,  the  process  of  pulverization  is  facilitated,  and  the  powder
rendered  much  finer.  When  in  powder,  the  color  is  a  pale  grayish-
brown,  and  if  inhaled,  it  irritates  the  nostrils  and  throat,  and  provokes
sneezing  and  coughing.  Its  solvents  are  water,  alcohol,  or  spirits.
Water  takes  up  but  a  small  portion  of  its  cathartic  principle,  but  con-
siderable of  an  amylaceous  and  mucilaginous  extractive  matter.  Alco-
hol dissolves  its  resin,  on  which  its  cathartic  virtues  depend.  Proof
spirits  or  diluted  alcohol  completely  extract  its  active  properties.
Analysis  of  the  commercial  jalap  has  detected  in  it,  resin  soluble  in
alcohol,  a  soft  resin  soluble  in  ether,  also,  colored  gummy  extract,  starch,


566  Materia  Medica.

albumen,  lignin,  numerous  salts,  and  uncrystallizable  sugar.  Jalap  root
is  seldom  adulterated  ;  the  best  quality  may  be  known  by  being  com-
pact, ponderous,  dry,  dark,  with  many  shining  lines  and  points ;  if  light,
whitish  internally,  spongy,  friable,  and  of  a  dull  fracture,  it  should  be
rejected.  Several  adulterations  are  spoken  of  by  authors,  but  they  can
usually  be  detected  without  difficulty.  The  resin  is  more  liable  to  be
adulterated  with  guaiacum,  resin  and  colophony,  and  which  may  be
detected  by  sulphuric  ether  which  does  not  dissolve  pure  jalap  resin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Jalap  is  an  irritant  and  cathartic,  operating
briskly,  producing  copious  liquid  stools  with  griping,  and  sometimes  ac-
companied with  nausea  and  vomiting.  Large  doses  produce  violent
hypercatharsis,  sometimes  terminating  fatally.  When  applied  to  a
wound  it  is  said  to  induce  purgation.  Notwithstanding  its  activity,  it  is
a  safe  and  convenient  purgative,  much  in  use  among  the  profession,  and
is  applicable  in  all  cases  where  it  is  desirable  to  produce  a  powerful
influence  on  the  bowels,  or  to  obtain  copious  evacuations.  In  intestinal
inflammations  it  should  not  be  used.  United  with  the  bitartrate  of
potassa,  its  hydragogue  properties  are  much  increased,  and  thus  proves
beneficial  in  dropsies,  as  well  as  in  some  forms  of  scrofula.  It  is  stated
that  the  aqueous  extract  of  jalap,  the  root  having  been  previously  ex-
hausted of  its  resin  by  alcohol,  will  exert  no  cathartic  influence,  but  will
operate  as  a  powerful  diuretic.  Three  grains  of  jalap  taken  an  hour
before  each  meal,  act  as  a  slight  nauseant,  destroying  a  desire  for  food
among  persons  who  are  apt  to  eat  too  freely.  If  jalap  is  digested  in
ether,  its  nauseous  taste  and  smell  will  be  wholly  removed,  without
lessening  its  cathartic  power.  A  biscuit  is  sometimes  made  for  those
to  whom  it  is  extremely  nauseous  and  disagreeable  ;  five  drachms  of
jalap,  thirty  of  sugar,  and  four  ounces  of  flour,  are  made  into  fifteen
biscuits  after  the  usual  mode  ;  one  biscuit  is  a  dose.  The  tendency  of
jalap  to  gripe  and  nauseate,  may  be  obviated  by  adding  to  the  dose  a
grain  or  two  of  camphor,  or  three  grains  of  cloves.  The  dose  of  jalap
in  powder  is  from  fifteen  to  thirty  grains  (the  aqueous  extract  ought
not  to  be  used,  except  as  a  diuretic)  ;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  four
fluidrachms  ;  the  resin,  or  alcoholic  extract  is  given  in  from  four  to  eight
grain  doses,  being  usually  rubbed  up  with  sugar,  or  in  emulsion,  for  the
purpose  of  lessening  its  disposition  to  produce  painful  irritation  of  the
intestinal  mucous  membrane.  As  a  hydragogue,  two  drachms  of  the
bitartrate  of  potassa  is  added  to  ten  or  thirty  grains  of  pulverized  jalap.
Off.  Prep.  —  Confectio  Sennse  Composita ;  Extractum  sive  Resina
Jalapge  ;  Pulvis  Jalapse  Compositus  ;  Tinctura  Jalapae  Composita.


Iris  Versicolor.  567

IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

Blue  Flag.

Nat. Ord. — Iridaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Monogynia.

THE RHIZOMA.

Description. — Iris  Versicolor  is  an  indigenous  plant,  with  a  fleshy,
horizontal,  fibrous  root  or  rhizoma.  The  stem  is  two  or  three  feet  in
hight,  terete,  flexuous,  round  on  one  side,  acute  on  the  other,  and  fre-
quently branched.  The  leaves  are  about  a  foot  long,  half  an  inch  to  an
inch  wide,  ensiform,  striated,  erect,  and  sheathing  at  base.  Bracts
scarious.  The  flowers  are  from  two  to  six  in  number,  and  usually  blue
or  purple,  though  varying  much  in  color.  Peduncles  are  of  different
lengths,  and  flattened  on  the  inside.  Sepals  spathulate,  beardless,  the
border  purple,  and  the  claw  variegated  with  green,  yellow,  and  white,
and  veined  with  purple.  Petals  erect,  varying  in  shape  from  spathulate
to  lanceolate,  usually  paler  than  the  outer,  entire  or  emarginate.  Stig-
mas three,  petaloid,  purple  or  violet,  bifid,  creiiate,  and  more  or  less
reflexed  at  the  point.  Stamens  three,  concealed  under  the  stigmas,
with  oblong-linear  anthers.  Capsule  three-celled,  three-valved,  and
when  ripe  oblong,  turgid,  three-sided,  with  roundish  angles.  Seeds
numerous,  flat.

History. — Blue  Flag  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  growing
in  low  wet  places,  in  meadows,  and  on  the  borders  of  swamps,  serving
to  adorn  them  with  its  large  and  beautiful  flowers,  which  make  their
appearance  in  June.  They  afford  a  fine  blue  infusion,  which  serves  as
a  test  of  acids  and  alkalies.  The  root  is  the  officinal  portion,  it  has  a
peculiar  odor,  augmented  by  rubbing,  and  a  nauseous  taste,  imparting
to  the  fauces  a  powerful  sense  of  heat  and  acrimony.  In  appearance  the
root  very  much  resembles  that  of  the  Acorus  Calamus.  Its  active  pro-
perties are  taken  up  by  alcohol  or  ether,  and  its  acrimony,  as  well  as
medicinal  activity,  is  impaired  by  age.  If  cut  when  fresh  into  slices,
dried  at  the  temperature  of  about  100°,  and  then  powdered  and  kept  in
bottles  or  tin  cans  excluded  from  the  air  and  light,  the  root  retains  its
virtues  unimpaired  for  a  long  time.  It  contains  mucilage,  oil,  and  resin,
from  the  former  of  which  it  derives  diuretic  properties,  by  decoction.
The  resin  is  of  a  light  brown  color,  of  a  faint  odor,  and  of  a  taste  resem-
bling that  of  the  root ;  when  perfectly  freed  from  oil  it  is  whitish  yellow.
Its  therapeutical  influences  are  not  positively  known.  The  oil  possesses
in  a  high  degree  the  taste  and  smell  of  the  root,  and  is  the  principle  to
which  it  owes  its  medicinal  activity.  The  oleo-resin  is  obtained  for
medical  purposes,  under  the  name  of  Iridin.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  one  among  our  most  valuable  medicinal
plants,  and  is  employed  almost  exclusively  by  Eclectics.  It  has  been
termed  the  Mercury  of  Eclectic  practice,  in  consequence  of  the  many


568  Materia Medica.

indications  it  is  capable  of  fulfilling.  It  is  cathartic,  alterative,  siala-
gogue,  vermifuge,  and  diuretic.  In  dropsy,  it  may  be  used  alone  in
doses  of  ten  grains  of  the  powdered  root  every  two  hours,  as  a  hydra-
gogue,  or  it  may  be  combined  with  corn  snakeroot,  Eryngium  Yucce-
folium.  In  anasarca  and  hydrothorax,  the  saturated  tincture  of  the
root,  taken  in  teaspoonful  doses,  every  two  or  three  hours,  until  its
hydragogue  influence  is  obtained,  will  be  found  serviceable  ;  in  some
instances  it  may  be  combined  with  an  equal  quantity  of  the  saturated
tincture  of  Euphorbia  Ipecacuanha.  In  scrofula,  and  syphilis,  whether
primary  or  secondary,  it  acts  as  a  powerful  and  efficacious  agent,  and
may  be  used  alone,  or  combined  with  mandrake,  poke,  black-cohosh,
and  other  alteratives.  In  chronic,  hepatic,  renal,  and  splenitic  affections,
five  or  ten  grains  of  the  powdered  root,  will  be  found  very  valuable.
Equal  parts  of  blue  flag  root,  mandrake  root,  and  prickly-ash  bark,
combined,  and  given  in  doses  of  ten  grains  every  two  or  three  hours,  to
fall  short  of  catharsis,  will  act  as  a  powerful  alterative,  frequently  caus-
ing a  copious  salivation  without  injury  to  the  teeth  or  gums.  In  chronic
rheumatism,  mercurio-syphilis,  dyspepsia,  tapeworm,  gonorrhea,  leucor-
rhea,  dysmenorrhea,  and  constipation,  it  has  been  used  with  positive  ad-
vantage, either  alone,  or  in  combination  with  other  agents.  A  writer  says,
"  The  root  of  the  Blue  Flag  extends  its  influence  through  every  part  of
the  system  in  small  doses  and  repeated  at  short  intervals;  it  seems  to  act
more  particularly  on  the  glandular  system,  exciting  them  to  a  discharge
of  their  respective  offices  ;  in  large  doses  it  evacuates  and  exhausts  the
system,  acting  on  the  liver,  and  the  alimentary  canal  throughout."

In  Eclectic  practice  salivation  is  not,  as  a  general  rule,  desired  for  the
cure  of  disease,  yet  we  have  many  articles  which  produce  it,  and  often
without  the  practitioner's  being  aware  of  the  fact,  and  hence,  when  it
does  occur,  the  cry  is  at  once  raised  that  Eclectics  use  mercury.  Sali-
vation caused  by  vegetable  agents  may  be  known  from  that  by  mercury,
by  the  absence  of  mercurial  fetor,  and  no  sponginess  of  the  gums  or
loosening  of  the  teeth.  The  dose  of  pulverized  blue  flag  is  from  five  to
twenty  grains  ;  of  the  saturated  tincture,  from  ten  to  sixty  drops.  In  some
persons,  and  when  exhibited  in  large  doses,  it  is  apt  to  occasion  much
distressing  nausea,  with  considerable  prostration,  these  effects  may  be
obviated  or  mitigated,  by  combining  it  with  a  few  grains  of  capsicum
or  ginger,  a  grain  of  camphor,  or  four  or  five  grains  of  caulophyllin.

There  are  several  species  of  Iris,  as  I.  Virginica,  I.  Lacustris,  etc.,
which  probably  possess  similar  properties,  and  which  are  often  collected
and  mixed  with  the  officinal  article.  The  Iris  Florentina,  or  Floren-
tine Orris,  is  said  to  be  emetic,  cathartic,  and  diuretic,  but  is  seldom
employed,  except  in  the  composition  of  tooth-powders,  and  to  conceal
an  offensive  breath.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Iridis  Hydro-alcoholicum ;  Extractum  Iridis
Fluidum  ;  Tinctura  Iridis  ;  Syrupus  Styllingise  Compositus.


Iridin.  569

IRIDIN.

Iridin.

THE OLEO-RESINOUS PRINCIPLE OF IRIS VERSICOLOR.

Preparation. — This  is  prepared  in  the  same  manner  as  Aletrin,  but
being  an  oleo-resin  cannot  be  reduced  to  powder.  I  had  the  pleasure
of  calling  the  attention  of  the  profession  to  this  article  in  1844,  about
the  same  time  I  introduced  the  podophyllin,  (to  remarks  on  which  I
refer  the  reader)  and  again  in  1846.  I  have  used  it  extensively  and
find  it  to  be  an  invaluable  medicine.  It  is  now  prepared  by  W.  S.  Mer-
rell  of  Cincinnati,  for  the  use  of  practitioners  generally.  It  is  soluble  in
alcohol,  but  insoluble  in  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  cathartic,  alterative,  sialagogue,  diuretic
and  anthelmintic.  I  have  used  it  more  or  less  extensively  for  several
years  in  combination  with  the  resin  of  podophyllum,  and  in  the  form  of
pill,  for  dropsy,  primary  and  secondary  syphilis,  chronic  visceral  affec-
tions, rheumatism,  gonorrhea,  and  many  female  affections.  It  is  not  as
nauseating,  when  given  alone,  as  podophyllin,  and  requires  rather  larger
doses.  One  grain  triturated  with  ten  grains  of  sugar,  may  be  given  in
three-grain  doses,  every  hour  or  two,  until  a  cathartic  effect  is  produced.
I  have  long  used  the  following  as  a  sialagogue  in  those  cases  of  glan-
dular diseases  which  seemed  to  resist  the  action  of  other  means,  viz  :
equal  parts  of  Iridin,  Podophyllin,  and  Xanthoxylin,  given  in  grain
doses  every  hour  or  two  until  ptyalism  was  produced.  By  trituration
with  sugar  or  lactin,  this  combination  becomes  more  active.  Iridin  is
not  as  prompt  in  its  effects  as  Podophyllin,  although  it  may  be  substi-
tuted for  this  in  all  instances  ;  and  its  alterative  influence,  though  slowly
developed  and  without  any  immediate  appreciable  effect,  is  yet  positive
and  certain.  For  the  last  six  years  I  have  used  it  in  preference  to  the
Podophyllin,  in  uterine  diseases  conjoined  with  Cimicifugin.  The  usual
dose  of  Iridin  is  from  one-half  of  a  grain  to  five  grains.  Physicians  will
occasionally  meet  with  patients  upon  whom  Podophyllin,  even  in  small
doses,  exerts  a  powerful  and  long  continued  influence,  sometimes  not
readily  obviated ;  in  such  cases,  Iridin  seems  to  me  to  be  more  espe-
cially indicated.  The  addition  of  capsicum  or  caulophyllin  to  iridin,
mitigates  any  harshness  of  action  which  it  may  produce.  A  combination
of  Iridin,  Podophyllin  and  Xanthoxylin,  or  Corydallia  is  a  most  powerful
and  certain  remedy  for  syphilis,  either  primary  or  secondary,  and  will
be  found  very  useful  in  scrofula.  Iridin  three  grains,  leptandrin  six
grains,  and  bitartrate  potassa  twenty  grains,  made  into  one  powder,
forms  a  hydragogue  cathartic  of  much  value  in  some  forms  of  dropsy.
Iridin  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  the  root  of  the  Iris  is  indicated.


570  Materia Medica.

JANIPHA  MANIHOT.

Tapioca.
Nat. Ord. — Eupliorbiaceas. Sex. Syst. — Moncecia  Monadelphia.

THE FECULA OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  the  Cassava  plant  of  the  West  Indies,  and  the
Mandioca  or  Tapioca  of  Brazil.  It  has  a  large,  white,  fleshy,  oblong,
tuberous  root,  often  weighing  thirty  pounds,  and  full  of  a  wheyish,  ven-
omous juice.  The  stems  are  white,  crooked,  brittle,  jointed,  pithy,
usually  six  or  seven  feet  high,  and  having  a  smooth,  white  bark ;  the
branches  are  crooked,  and  have,  on  every  side,  near  their  tops,  leaves
which  are  irregularly  placed  on  long  terete  petioles,  broadly  cordate  in
their  outline,  and  divided  nearly  to  their  base  into  five,  spreading,  lan-
ceolate, entire  lobes,  attenuated  at  both  extremities,  dark-green  above,
pale  glaucous  beneath  ;  the  midrib  strong,  prominent  and  yellowish-red
below,  with  several  oblique  veins,  connected  by  lesser  transverse  ones,
branching  from  it.  Stipules  small,  lanceolate,  acuminate,  caducous.
The  flowers  are  in  axillary  and  terminal  racemes.  Pedicels  with  small,
subulate  bracts  at  their  base.  Male  flowers  smaller  than  the  female.
Calyx  campanulate,  divided  into  five  spreading  segments,  purplish  exter-
nally, fulvous-brown  within.  Disk  orange-colored,  fleshy,  annular,  ten-
rayed.  Stamens  ten,  alternating  with  the  lobes  of  the  disk.  Filaments
shorter  than  the  calyx,  white,  filiform,  free.  Anthers  yellow,  linear-
oblong.  Female  flower  of  the  same  color  as  the  male,  deeply  five-parted,
the  segments  lanceolate-ovate,  spreading.  Disk  an  annular,  orange-
colored  ring,  in  which  the  purple,  ovate,  furrowed  ovary  is  imbedded;
style  short ;  stigmas  three,  reflexed,  furrowed  and  plaited,  white.  Cap-
sule ovate,  three-cornered,  tricoccous.  Seeds  elliptical,  black,  shining
with  a  thick  fleshy  funiculus.

History. — This  plant,  formerly  designated  by  botanists  as  the  Jatropha
Manihot,  until  separated  by  Kunth,  is  a  native  of  South  America,  and  is
cultivated  extensively  in  many  parts  of  it,  for  the  sake  of  its  root,  which
serves  as  an  article  of  food.  The  plant  grows  rapidly,  and  the  root
matures  in  about  eight  months.  There  are  two  varieties  of  the  plant ;
the  root  of  one  variety  is  fusiform,  brown  externally,  not  exceeding  six
ounces  in  weight,  with  a  sweet,  amylaceous  taste,  and  which  may  be
eaten  with  impunity.  This  is  termed  Sweet  Cassava.  The  root  of  the
other  and  more  common  variety,  is  much  larger,  knotty,  and  black
externally,  abounds  in  an  acrid  milky  juice,  has  a  bitter  taste,  and  is  a
deadly  narcotic  poison  in  the  recent  state.  This  is  called  Bitter  Cassava,
and  its  poisonous  properties  are  said  to  be  owing  to  the  presence  of
hydrocyanic  acid.  Both  varieties  abound  in  starch.  Tapioca  is  prepared
from  the  Bitter  Cassava.  The  root,  which  is  very  large,  white,  fleshy
and  tuberous,  is  reduced  to  a  pulp,  this  is  washed  with  cold  water  in


Jeffersonia  Diphtlla.  571

funnel-shaped  mat-filters,  the  starch  is  allowed  to  subside  in  the  milky-
fluid  which  passes  through,  and  is  then  elutriated  in  the  usual  manner,
and  finally  converted  into  the  granular  form  by  drying  it  on  hot  plates.
Should  any  of  the  volatile  poisonous  principle  remain  in  the  meal  pre-
vious to  drying  it,  the  heat  employed  for  this  purpose  entirely  removes
it.  Tapioca  is  a  very  pure  starch,  in  the  form  of  irregular  warty  grains,
seldom  larger  than  a  pea,  white,  tasteless  and  inodorous.  Boiling  water
dissolves  it  almost  entirely, — or,  if  in  small  proportion  to  the  tapioca,  it
forms  with  it  a  translucent,  tasteless  jelly,  and  firmer  than  is  made  with
most  varieties  of  starch.  Cold  water  partially  dissolves  it,  forming  a
liquid  which  yields  a  blue  precipitate  with  iodine.  Under  the  microscope
it  is  found  to  consist  of  aggregated  starch-globules,  about  the  two  thou-
sandth of  an  in«h  in  diameter,  partly  broken,  partly  entire,  the  broken
ones  only  being  soluble  in  cold  water,  more  uniform  than  the  granules  of
most  other  varieties  of  fecula,  with  a  distinct  hilum  which  is  surrounded
by  rings,  and  cracks  in  a  stellate  manner.  The  rupture  observed  in
some  of  the  granules,  is  owing  to  the  heat  employed  in  drying.

Properties  and  Uses. — Nutritive  and  demulcent.  Used  as  a  light  and
agreeable  nourishment  for  the  sick  ;  it  makes  an  excellent  nourishment
for  infants  about  the  time  of  weaning,  and  is  less  apt  to  turn  sour  on
their  stomach,  than  any  other  kind  of  farinaceous  food.  For  the  sick
and  convalescent,  lemon  juice  and  sugar  form  agreeable  additions  ;  and
in  low  states  of  disease,  or  debility,  it  may  be  improved  by  the  addition
of  wine,  nutmeg,  or  other  aromatic.


JEFFERSONIA  DIPHYLLA.

Twinleaf.

Nat.  Ord. — Berberidacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Octaudria  Monogynia.

THE BOOT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous,  perennial  plant,  sometimes  known
as  Ground-squirrel  Pea,  and  Rheumatism  Root.  The  rhizoma  is  horizontal,
with  matted  fibrous  radicles  ;  the  scape  or  stem  is  simple,  naked,  one-
flowered,  and  from  eight  to  fourteen  inches  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  in
pairs,  binate,  placed  base  to  base,  oval,  broader  than  long,  ending  in  an
obtuse  point,  smooth,  glaucous  beneath,  and  on  petioles  as  long  as  the
scape,  which  arise  from  the  rhizoma.  The  flowers  are  large,  regular,
white.  The  calyx  consists  of  four,  colored,  deciduous  sepals.  The
corolla  has  eight  flat,  oblong,  spreading,  incurved  petals.  The  stamens
are  eight,  with  oblong-linear  anthers  on  slender  filaments.  Ovary  ovoid,
soon  gibbous,  pointed  ;  stigma  two-lobed.  The  capsule  is  obovate,  or
somewhat  pear-shaped,  stipitate,  one-celled,  opening  half-way  round
horizontally,  making  a  persistent  lid.  Seeds  many  on  the  lateral  pla-
centa, with  a  fleshy  lacerate  aril  on  one  side,  oblong.


572  Materia  Medica.

History. — This  plant  is  found  from  New  York  to  Maryland  and  Vir-
ginia, and  in  many  parts  of  the  Western  States,  growing  in  limestone
soil,  in  woods,  and  near  streams  and  rivers,  flowering  in  April  and  May.
The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  it  is  yellow  like  the  Hydrastis,  but  much
larger,  it  has  a  pungent,  nauseous,  bitterish,  and  acrid  taste,  and  an  odor
resembling  Podophyllum.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  its  virtues.  It  has
not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diuretic,  alterative,  antispasmodic,  and  a
stimulating  diaphoretic.  Successfully  used  in  chronic  rheumatism,
secondary  or  mercurio-syphilis,  syphilitic  pains,  dropsy,  in  many  ner-
vous affections,  spasms,  cramps,  nervous  excitability,  and  even  during
pregnancy.  In  syphilitic  diseases  it  is  combined  with  corydallis.  As  a
gargle  it  has  been  beneficial  in  diseases  of  the  throat,  ulcers  about  the
fauces,  scarlatina,  ophthalmia,  and  indolent  ulcers.  It  is  administered
in  decoction  and  saturated  tincture.  Dose  of  the  decoction,  from  two  to
four  fluidounces,  three  times  a  day;  of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  three
fluidrachms,  three  times  a  day.

Off. Prep. — Decoctum  Jeffersonise.


JTJGLANS CINEREA.

Butternut.

Nat.  Ord. — Juglandaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Monoscia  Polyandria.

THE  INNER  BARK  OF  THE  ROOT,  AND  LEAVES.

Description. — This  tree,  also  known  as  White  Walnut,  Oil  Nut,  etc.,
is  indigenous,  and  grows  to  a  hight  of  from  thirty  to  fifty  feet,  with  a
trunk  three  or  four  feet  in  diameter  at  the  distance  of  five  feet  from  the
ground.  At  a  short  distance  from  the  ground,  the  stem  divides  into
numerous,  nearly  horizontal,  wide-spreading  branches,  covered  with  a
smooth,  gray  bark,  and  forming  a  large  tufted  head,  giving  to  the  tree
a  peculiar  appearance.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  from  twelve  to  twenty
inches  long,  and  consist  of  seven  or  eight  pairs  of  leaflets,  which  are  two
or  three  inches  in  length,  oblong-lanceolate,  rounded  at  the  base,  acu-
minate, finely  serrate  and  downy,  the  petioles  and  branchlets  downy
with  clammy  hairs.  The  male  and  female  flowers  are  distinct  upon  the
same  tree.  The  former  are  in  large  aments,  four  or  five  inches  long,
hanging  from  the  sides  of  the  last  year's  shoots,  near  their  extremities.
The  scales  which  compose  them  are  oblong  and  deeply-cleft  on  each  side
into  about  three  teeth  or  segments.  The  anthers  are  about  eight  or  ten
in  number,  oblong  and  nearly  sessile.  The  fertile  flowers  grow  in  a
short  spike  at  the  end  of  the  new  shoot ;  they  are  sessile,  and  universally
pubescent  and  viscid ;  when  fully  grown,  they  seem  to  consist  of  a  large
oblong  ovary  and  a  forked  feathery  style.  The  top  of  the  ovary,  how-
ever, presents  an  obscurely  four-toothed  calyx.  Within  this  is  a  corolla
of  four  narrow  lanceolate  petfds  growing  to  the  sides  of  the  style ;  the


JUGLANS ClNEREA.  573

style  divides  into  two  large,  diverging,  feathery,  rose-colored  stigmas
nearly  as  long  as  the  ovary.  The  fruit  is  sometimes  single,  suspended
by  a  thin  pliable  peduncle ;  sometimes  several  are  together  on  the  sides
and  extremity  of  the  same  peduncle,  of  a  green  color,  brown  when  ripe,
oblong-oval,  obtusely-pointed,  hairy,  and  extremely  viscid.  The  nut  or
nucleus  is  of  a  dark  color,  hard,  oblong,  pointed,  carinated  on  both  sides,
its  whole  surface  roughened  by  deep  indentures  and  sharp  prominences.
The  kernel  is  oily,  pleasant-flavored,  and  edible.

Juglans  Nigra,  or  Black  Walnut,  grows  from  sixty  to  ninety  feet  high,
with  a  diameter  of  from  three  to  six  feet,  with  a  brown  bark.  The  leaf-
lets are  numerous,  seven  to  ten  or  eleven  pairs,  ovate-lanceolate,  serrate,
subcordate  at  base,  taper-pointed  at  the  'apex,  smooth  above,  the  lower
surface  and  the  petioles  minutely  downy.  The  fruit  is  globose,  with
scabrous  punctures,  the  nut  corrugated,  and  its  kernel  sweet,  more  plea-
sant-tasted and  less  oily  than  the  butternut,  but  greatly  inferior  to  the
European  walnut,  Juglans  Regia.

History. — These  trees  are  common  to  North  America.  The  J.  Cinerea
is  found  in  Canada,  and  throughout  the  whole  northern,  eastern,  and
western  sections  of  the  United  States,  in  rich  woods,  on  elevated  river-
banks,  and  on  cold,  uneven  rocky  soils,  flowering  in  April  and  May,  and
ripening  its  fruit  in  September.  The  tree,  if  tapped  just  before  the
unfolding  of  the  leaves,  yields  a  richly-saccharine  juice,  from  which
sugar  may  be  obtained,  nearly  if  not  quite  equal  to  that  from  the  sugar-
maple.  The  wood  is  light,  of  a  reddish  hue,  but  on  account  of  its
durability  and  exemption  from  the  attacks  of  worms,  is  considerably
used  in  panneling  and  ornamental  work.  The  fruit,  when  quite  young,
is  made  into  pickles,  and  the  bark  is  employed  for  dying  wool  a  dark-
brown  color,  though  inferior  for  this  purpose  to  that  of  the  black  walnut.
In  the  recent  state  it  is  acrid,  and  when  applied  to  the  skin,  produces  a
rubefacient  effect.  The  inner  bark  is  the  medicinal  portion,  especially
of  the  root,  and  should  be  collected  in  May  or  June.  When  first  uncov-
ered on  the  tree,  the  inner  bark  is  pure  white,  but  soon  becomes  a
lemon,  and  ultimately  a  deep-brown  color;  it  is  of  a  fibrous  texture,  a
slight  odor,  and  a  peculiar,  bitter,  subacrid  taste.  Boiling  water  com-
pletely extracts  its  medical  virtues.  No  satisfactory  analysis  of  the
inner  bark  of  this  tree  has  been  made.

The  J.  Nigra  is  rarely  found  in  the  Northern  States,  but  is  more  com-
mon to  the  Middle  and  Western.  It  flowers  and  ripens  its  fruit  at  the
same  time  with  the  butternut.  The  duramen  of  its  wood  is  compact
and  heavy,  of  a  deep  violet-color,  surrounded  with  a  white  alburnum.
It  is  extensively  used  in  building,  and  for  cabinet-work.

Properties  and  Uses. — Butternut  is  a  pleasant  and  mild  cathartic,
operating  without  pain,  irritation,  or  subsequent  debility  of  the  alimen-
tary canal,  somewhat  of  the  cathartic  character  of  rhubarb,  but  without


574  Materia  Medica.

inducing  constipation  after  its  action.  It  is  especially  adapted  to  cases
of  habitual  constipation,  dysentery,  and  other  affections  of  the  bowels.
It  is  generally  used  in  the  form  of  an  extract,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to
thirty  grains.  A  strong  decoction  of  it  is  much  employed  in  some  sec-
tions of  the  country,  as  a  domestic  remedy  in  intermittent  and  remittent
fevers,  as  well  as  in  other  diseases  attended  with  congestion  of  the
abdominal  viscera ;  it  is  also  reputed  efficacious  in  murrain  of  cattle
and  yellow-water  in  horses.  The  juice  of  the  rind  of  the  black  walnut
(Juglans  Nigra)  is  said  to  remove  ringworm  and  tetter;  and  a  decoction
has  been  used  as  a  vermifuge.  Its  bark  is  acrid  and  styptic,  seldom
used  except  for  tinctorial  purposes.  The  European  walnut  [Juglans
Regia)  has  recently  been  found  by  Professor  Negrier,  of  Angers,  in  the
highest  degree  efficacious  in  scrofula.  He  gave  to  children  a  teacupful
of  a  strong  infusion  of  the  leaves,  or  six  grains  of  the  aqueous  extract,
or  an  equivalent  dose  of  a  syrup  prepared  from  it  two  to  four  times  a
day;  if  there  were  ulcers  or  sore  eyes,  a  strong  decoction  was  applied
to  them.  No  injury  was  ever  experienced  from  a  long-continued  use  of
the  remedy.  It  appears  to  act  as  a  moderately  aromatic  bitter  and
astringent.  The  above  American  species  would  probably  answer  as
good  a  purpose.  Jvglandln  is  the  name  of  an  agent  just  prepared  from  the
J.  Cinerea,  by  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell.  It  is  of  a  jet-black  color,  brittle  like
starch,  with  the  peculiar  odor  of  the  bark,  and  a  bitter,  somewhat  pun-
gent and  aromatic  taste,  with  a  stimulant  effect  on  the  fauces.  It  is
insoluble  in  water,  but  becomes  soluble  on  the  addition  of  ammonia  or
liquor  potassa;  and  the  addition  of  acids  to  the  solution  precipitates  the
juglandin.  Sulphate  of  iron  added  to  water  containing  juglandin,  dark-
ens it.  It  is  nearly  soluble  in  alcohol,  more  so  on  the  addition  of  ammo-
nia ;  partially  soluble  in  ether.  Muriatic  acid  turns  a  thin  layer  of  it
green;  sulphuric  acid,  reddish-black;  and  with  nitric  acid  it  effervesces,
and  becomes  yellowish-red.  So  far  as  employed,  this  article  has  answered
an  admirable  purpose  as  a  laxative  and  cathartic,  in  doses  of  from  one
to  five  grains;  and  will,  probably,  prove  an  invaluable  agent.  It  is
prepared  by  adding  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  bark  of  butternut  to
twice  its  volume  of  water,  and  distilling  off  the  alcohol;  the  juglandin
is  precipitated  in  the  water,  from  which  it  must  be  removed  and  dried.
Combined  with  Castile  soap  it  operates  more  promptly.
Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Juglandis.


JTJNIPERUS COMMUNIS.

Juniper.

Nat.  Ord. — Pinaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Monadelphia.

THE FRUIT OR BERRIES.

Description. — This  is  an  erect,  evergreen  shrub,  generally  small,  but
occasionally  attaining  a  hight  of  twelve  or  fifteen  feet,  with  numerous,


Juniperus  Communis.  575

very  close  branches,  the  extremities  of  which  are  smooth  and  angular.
The  leaves  are  attached  to  the  stem  or  branches  in  threes,  in  a  verticil-
late  manner,  linear-acerose,  sharply  mucronate,  entire,  shining-green  on
their  lower  surface,  channeled  and  glaucous  along  the  center  of  their
upper  surface ;  they  are  always  resupinate,  and  turn  their  upper  surface
toward  the  ground.  The  flowers  are  dioecious,  the  males  in  small  axil-
lary aments,  with  roundish,  acute,  stipitate  scales,  inclosing  several
anthers.  Female  flowers  are  on  a  separate  shrub,  having  a  small,  three-
parted  involucre  growing  to  the  scales,  which  are  three  in  number.  The
fruit  is  fleshy,  roundish-oblong,  berried,  of  a  dark-purplish  color,  formed
of  the  confluent  succulent  scales,  marked  with  three  prominences  or
vesicles  at  top,  ripening  the  second  year  from  the  flower,  and  containing
three  seeds.

History. — The  Juniper  is  a  native  of  Europe,  though  naturalized  in
some  parts  of  this  country,  growing  in  dry  woods  and  hills,  and  flower-
ing in  May.  The  fruit,  or  berries,  as  they  are  generally  called,  are  the
officinal  parts ;  those  which  are  imported  from  the  south  of  Europe  are
the  best. — the  American  berries  are  greatly  inferior  in  strength,  and  not
much  used.  They  are  globular,  more  or  less  shriveled,  about  the  size
of  a  pea,  marked  with  three  furrows  at  the  summit,  covered  with  a
glaucous  bloom,  beneath  which  they  are  of  a  shining,  blackish-purple
color,  and  containing  a  brownish-yellow  pulp,  and  three  angular  seeds.
They  have  an  agreeable,  aromatic  odor,  and  a  sweetish,  warm,  bitter,
slightly  terebinthinate  taste,  which  properties  they  owe  to  an  essential
oil,  the  oil  of  juniper,  which  is  obtained  by  distillation.  The  berries
impart  their  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  Beside  volatile  oil,  they  con-
tain resin,  gum,  wax,  sugar,  lignin,  water,  and  various  saline  sub-
stances.

Properties  and  Uses. — Both  the  berries  and  oil  are  gently  stimulant,
carminative,  and  diuretic.  The  oil  is  said  to  act  like  copaiba  in  arresting
mucous  discharges,  especially  from  the  urethra.  It  is  contained  in  the
spirituous  liquor  called  Hollands,  one  of  its  best  forms  as  a  diuretic.
Five  minims  of  the  oil,  with  one  fluidrachm  of  nitrous  ether,  given  three
times  a  day  in  any  common  vehicle,  produces  diuresis  in  dropsy  when
other  means  fail.  The  berries  are  used  principally  as  an  adjuvant  to
more  powerful  diuretics.  They  have  also  been  recommended  in  scor-
butic and  cutaneous  diseases,  catarrh  of  the  bladder,  and  atonic  condi-
tions of  the  uterus  and  alimentary  canal.  Dose  of  the  berries,  from
one  to  two  drachms ;  of  the  oil,  from  four  to  six  minims.

Off.  Prep.  —  Pilulee  Saponi  Compositae ;  Tinctura  Pinus  Pendulae
Composila.


576  Materia  Medica.

JUNIPERUS  SABINA.

Savin.

Nat.  Onl. — Pinaceas. Sex. Syst. — Dioecia  Monadelphia.

THE TOPS AND LEAVES.

Description. — Juniperus  Sabina,  is  an  evergreen,  very  compact  shrub,
growing  from  three  to  fifteen  feet  in  hight,  with  a  disposition  to  spread
horizontally  rather  than  to  form  a  stem.  The  branches  are  slender,
round,  tough,  the  bark  of  the  young  branches  light-green,  that  of  the
trunk  rough  and  reddish  brown.  The  leaves  closely  invest  the  younger
branches,  are  numerous,  small,  erect,  firm,  smooth,  pointed,  of  a  dark-
green  color,  glandular  in  the  middle,  opposite,  and  imbricated  in  four  rows.
The  flowers  are  male  and  female  on  different  trees.  The  fruit  is  a  deep
bluish-purple,  almost  black,  about  the  size  of  a  currant,  of  an  ovoid
shape,  marked  with  tubercles,  the  remains  of  the  calyx  and  petals,  and
containing  three  seeds.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  southern  Europe,  and  is  said  to
grow  wild  around  our  north-western  lakes.  The  extremities  of  the
branches  and  leaves  are  the  officinal  parts.  When  dried  they  fade  very
much  in  color;  they  have  a  strong,  peculiar,  rather  unpleasant  odor,
especially  when  bruised,  and  a  disagreeable,  bitter,  resinous,  acrid  taste.
They  impart  their  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  Their  properties  are  owing
to  an  essential  oil,  oil  of  Savin,  which  is  obtained  by  distillation;  it  is  limpid
and  colorless.  They  are  also  said  to  contain  gum,  tannic  or  gallic  acid,
resin,  chlorophylle,  fixed  oil,  bitter  extractive,  lime,  and  salts  of  potassa.
Properties  and  Uses. — Emmenagogue,  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  anthel-
mintic, and  abortive.  In  over-doses  it  will  produce  gastro-enteritis.
Useful  in  menorrhagia,  and  said  to  be  beneficial  in  preventing  threatened
abortion.  Care  must  be  taken  in  its  administration,  as  it  may  produce
fatal  results.  It  should  never  be  given  when  much  general  or  local
inflammation  exists,  and  it  should  never  be  used  during  pregnancy.
Sometimes  used  for  worms,  with  pink  and  senna.  The  oil  (oleum
sabince),  given  two  or  three  times  a  day,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  fifteen
drops  on  sugar,  is  said  to  produce  abortion,  and  it  is  apt  to  violently
affect  the  stomach  and  bowels,  bringing  life  into  extreme  danger.  It  is
sometimes  combined  with  oils  of  tansy,  pennyroyal,  and  hemlock,  as  an
emmenagogue  and  abortivant;  dose,  from  two  to  four  drops.  Exter-
nally, the  leaves  in  the  form  of  cerate,  have  been  used  as  a  stimulant
to  indolent  ulcers,  and  to  maintain  a  discharge  from  blistered  surfaces ;
and  mixed  with  an  equal  weight  of  verdigris,  the  powder  has  been  used
for  destroying  venereal  warts.  Dose  of  powdered  leaves,  from  five  to
fifteen  grains,  three  times  a  day  ;  of  the  infusion,  from  half  a  fiuidounce
to  two  fluidounces.

Of.  Prep. — Ceratum  Sabinse  ;  Decoctum  Sabinae ;  Tinctura  Caulo-
phylli  Composita ;  Unguentum  Sabinae.


JUNIPERUS VlRGINIANA.  577

JUNIPERUS  VlRGINIANA.

Red  Cedar.

Nat.  Ord- — Pinaceas. Sex.  St/st. — Dioecia  Monadelphia.

THE LEAVES AND EXCRESCENCES.

Description. — Juniperus  Virginiana  is  an  evergreen  tree  of  slow
growth,  seldom  attaining  a  very  large  size,  though  sometimes  rising  forty
or  fifty  feet  in  hight,  with  a  stem  twelve  or  thirteen  inches  in  diameter,
straight  and  decreasing  rapidly  from  the  ground,  giving  off  many  hori-
zontal branches ;  its  surface  generally  unequal,  and  disfigured  by  knots,
and  the  crevices  and  protuberances  they  occasion.  The  small  twigs  are
covered  with  minute,  densely  imbricated  leaves.  These  leaves  are  fleshy,
ovate,  concave,  rigidly  acute,  with  a  small  depressed  gland  on  the  mid-
dle of  their  outer  side,  growing  in  pairs  which  are  united  at  the  base  to
each  other,  and  to  the  pairs  above  and  below  them.  (A  singular  variety
sometimes  appears  in  the  young  shoots,  especially  those  which  issue
from  the  base  of  the  trees;  this  consists  in  an  elongation  of  the  leaves
to  five  or  six  times  their  usual  length,  while  they  become  spreading,
acerose,  remote  from  each  other,  and  irregular  in  their  insertion,  being
either  opposite  or  ternate ;  such  shoots  are  so  dissimilar  to  the  parent
tree  that  they  have  repeatedly  been  mistaken  for  individuals  of  a  differ-
ent species.)  The  barren  flowers  grow  in  small  oblong  aments,  formed
by  peltate  scales  with  the  anthers  concealed  within  them.  The  fertile
flowers  have  a  proper  perianth,  which  coalesces  with  the  germ,  and
forms  a  small,  roundish  berry,  with  two  or  three  seeds,  covered  on  its
outer  surface  with  a  bright  blue  powder.

History. — The  Red  Cedar  grows  in  all  latitudes  of  the  United  States,
from  that  of  Burlington,  Vermont,  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico;  it  inhabits
dry  rocky  situations,  and  is  most  abundant  and  vigorous  in  the  southern
States  and  maritime  parts,  and  flowers  in  April  and  May.  The  interior
wood  is  of  a  reddish  color,  fine-grained  and  compact,  very  light  and
durable,  and  is  much  used  for  tubs,  pails,  lead  pencils,  fences,  etc.  The
tops  and  leaves  are  the  officinal  parts ;  they  have  a  peculiar,  not  un-
pleasant odor,  and  a  strong,  bitterish,  somewhat  pungent  taste.  Their
virtues  reside  chiefly  in  an  essential  oil,  and  are  readily  imparted  to  alco-
hol. The  leaves  bear  a  close  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Juniperus
Sabina,  for  which  they  are  often  but  incorrectly  employed,  and  from
which  they  can  be  distinguished  only  by  the  difference  of  odor.  Analy-
sis has  found  in  them  volatile  oil,  gum,  tannic  acid,  albumen,  bitter
extractive,  resin,  chlorophylle,  fixed  oil,  lime  and  lignin.  Excrescences
are  often  found  on  the  small  branches,  known  as  Cedar  Apples,  and
produced,  like  galls,  by  the  puncture  of  an  insect;  they  have  a  some-
what aromatic  odor,  and  a  bitterish  taste.  These  are  sometimes  pow-
dered, and  administered  successfully  as  a  vermifuge,  in  doses  of  from
ten  to  twenty  grains,  three  times  a  day,  in  some  convenient  vehicle.
37


578  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Same  as  the  Juniperus  Sabina,  but  less  ener-
getic, and  used  in  the  same  diseases ;  also  in  scalding  of  urine,  and
derangement  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder,  with  spearmint  and  marsh-
mallows.  The  oil  makes  a  valuable  external  stimulating  application  for
rheumatic  pains,  bruises,  etc.  Dose  of  the  leaves,  from  one  to  two
drachms ;  of  the  oil,  from  ten  to  fifteen  drops.

The  excrescences  or  cedar  apples,  as  they  are  called,  which  are  some-
times found  on  the  tree,  are  decided  anthelmintics.  The  following  makes
a  pleasant  and  excellent  vermifuge  and  tonic,  for  pale,  sickly  children ;
I  have  used  it  with  much  success  in  hundreds  of  cases :  Take  of  cedar
apples  one  pound;  of  black  alder  berries,  (Prinos  Verticillatus)  one  pint
by  measure  ;  digest  these  for  fourteen  days,  in  one  quart  of  alcohol,  and
one  pint  of  molasses.  The  more  recent  the  articles,  the  better.  Dose,
one  fluidrachm,  three  times  a  day,  for  a  child  one  or  two  years  old  ;  it
is  laxative,  tonic  and  vermifuge.
Off.  Prep.  — Linimentum  Olei.


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.

Sheep  Laurel.

Nat. Ord. — Ericaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant  is  known  by  various  names  in  different  sec-
tions of  the  country,  as  Laurel,  Lambkill,  Ivy,  Big-leaved  Ivy,  Spoon-
wood,  Calico-bush,  Mountain  Laurel,  etc.  It  is  a  beautiful  shrub,  from
four  to  eight  feet  high,  sometimes  attaining  the  hight  of  a  small  tree;
usually  with  very  crooked  stems,  covered  with  a  light-colored  rough
bark.  The  leaves  are  irregularly  alternate  and  ternate,  evergreen,  coria-
ceous, very  smooth,  with  the  under  side  somewhat  paler,  ovate-lanceo-
late, acute  at  each  end,  entire,  on  long  petioles  at  the  ends  of  the
branches,  and  from  two  to  three  inches  long.  The.  flowers  are  numerous,
white  or  variously  tinged  with  red,  very  showy,  clammy,  and  are  dis-
posed in  splendid  terminal,  viscid-pubescent,  simple  or  compound  corymbs,
with  opposite  branches.  Pedicels  glutinous,  pubescent,  with  ovate,  acu-
minate bracts.  Calyx  small,  five-parted,  persistent,  with  oval  acute
segments.  Corolla  large,  monopetalous,  with  a  conical  tube,  a  cyathiform
limb,  and  an  erect,  shallowy  five-lobed  margin ;  at  the  circumference  of
the  limb,  on  the  inside,  are  ten  niches  or  pits,  accompanied  with  corre-
sponding prominences  on  the  outside ;  in  these  depressions  the  anthers
are  found  lodged  at  the  time  when  the  flower  expands.  The  stamens  are
ten,  hypogynous,  bent  outwardly  so  as  to  lodge  their  anthers  in  the
niches  of  the  corolla,  but  liberating  them  during  the  period  of  flower-
ing and  striking  against  the  sides  of  the  stigma;  anthers  two-celled,
with  two  terminal  pores. The  ovary  is  roundish,  supporting  a  slender,


Kalmia  Latifolia.  579

declinate  style  longer  than  the  corolla;  stigma  obtuse.  Fruit  a  dry  cap-
sule, which  is  roundish,  depressed,  five-celled,  five-valved,  the  valves
alternating  with  the  divisions  of  the  calyx.  The  seeds  are  numerous
and  minute.

History. — Sheep-Laurel  is  found  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  on
rocky  hills  and  mountains,  and  in  damp  soil,  sometimes  forming  dense  thick-
ets, with  a  profusion  of  beautiful  rose-colored  flowers  which  appear  in  June
and  July,  forming  a  contrast  with  its  dark  shining  green  leaves.  The
leaves  have  poisonous  narcotic  properties,  and  prove  fatal  to  sheep  and
some  other  animals,  while  goats,  deer  and  partridges  feed  upon  them  with
impunity.  Where  partridges  which  have  fed  upon  them,  have  been  eaten,
it  is  said  to  have  caused  nausea,  temporary  blindness,  pain  in  the  head,
dyspnoea,  pallid  countenance,  cold  extremities,  feeble  pulse,  and  even
death.  An  emetic  of  mustard  with  warm  water,  has  relieved  some  of
the  above  symptoms,  by  removing  the  poison  from  the  stomach.  It  is
very  doubtful,  however,  whether  these  symptoms  were  caused  by  the
poisoned  flesh  of  the  birds,  as  numerous  persons  eat  partridges  that  have
been  feeding  on  the  laurel,  without  the  least  inconvenience.  The  pre-
sumption is  that  the  poisonous  character  of  the  flesh  was  caused  by  a
peculiar  state  of  animal  decomposition.  The  Indians  are  said  to  use  the
expressed  juice  of  the  leaves,  or  a  strong  decoction,  for  the  purpose  of
committing  suicide.  The  leaves  are  the  officinal  parts,  and  yield  their
virtues  to  alcohol  or  water.  They  contain  gum,  tannic  acid,  resin,  chlo-
rophylle,  fatty  matter,  a  substance  resembling  mannite,  an  acrid  prin-
ciple, wax,  extractive,  albumen,  yellow-coloring  matter,  lignin,  and  salts
of  potassa,  lime,  and  iron.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  immoderate  doses,  Sheep-laurel  is  a  poison-
ous narcotic,  producing  vertigo,  dimness  of  sight,  great  depression  of
the  action  of  the  heart,  and  cold  extremities.  In  medicinal  doses  it  is
sedative,  antisyphilitic,  and  astringent.  Internally,  either  in  powder,
decoction,  or  tincture,  it  is  an  efficacious  remedy  in  primary  or  secondary
syphilis,  and  will  likewise  be  found  invaluable  in  febrile  and  inflamma-
tory diseases,  and  hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  allaying  all  febrile  and
inflammatory  action,  and  lessening  the  action  of  the  heart.  In  active
hemorrhages,  diarrhea,  and  dysentery,  it  has  been  employed  with  excel-
lent effect.  I  have  extensively  used  this  agent,  and  regard  it  as  one  of
our  most  efficient  agents  in  syphilis  ;  and  have  likewise  found  it  very
valuable  in  inflammatory  fevers,  jaundice,  and  ophthalmic  neuralgia  and
inflammation.  The  remedy  must  always  be  used  with  prudence,  and
should  any  of  the  above-mentioned  symptoms  appear,  the  dose  must  be
diminished,  or  its  use  suspended  for  a  few  days.  In  cases  of  poisoninc
by  this  article,  stimulants,  as  brandy,  whisky,  etc.,  must  be  given,  with
counter-irritation  to  the  spine  and  extremities.  Sheep  poisoned  by  eat-
ing the  leaves,  have  been  saved  by  administering  a  gill  or  two  of  whisky
to  them. Externally,  the  fresh  leaves  stewed  in  lard,  or  the  dried  leaves


580  Materia Medica.

in  powder  mixed  with  lard  to  form  an  ointment,  are  said  to  be  beneficial
in  tinea-capitis,  psora,  and  other  cutaneous  affections.  Some  time  since  I
treated  a  case  of  syphilis  of  five  weeks'  standing,  which  had  not  received
any  kind  of  treatment  during  that  period.  The  patient,  at  the  time  I
saw  him,  had  several  chancres,  the  surface  of  the  body  and  head  was
covered  with  small  red  pimples,  elevated  above  a  jaundiced  skin,  and  he
was  in  a  very  debilitated  condition  ;  I  administered  a  saturated  tincture  of
the  leaves  of  Kalmia,  and  touched  the  chancres  with  tincture  of  muriate
of  iron,  and  effected  a  cure  in  four  weeks,  removing  the  jaundice  at  the  same
time.  The  saturated  tincture  of  the  leaves  is  the  best  form  of  adminis-
tration, it  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  twenty  drops,  every  two
or  three  hours ;  the  decoction  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  half  a
fluidounce  to  a  fiuidounce  ;  and  of  the  powdered  leaves  from  ten  to  thirty
grains.  There  are  other  species  of  Kalmia,  as  K.  Glauca  or  Swamp
Laurel,  and  K.  Angustifolia,  or  Narrow-leaved  Laurel,  which  probably
possess  similar  properties.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Kalmiae ;  Syrupus  Phytolaccse  Compositus ;
Tinctura  Kalmiae.


KINO.

Kino.

THE INSPISSATED  JUICE  OF  PTEKOCARPUS MARSUPIUM,  AND OTHER PLANTS.

Description. — For  a  long  time  the  origin  of  Kino  was  unknown,  but  it
has  recently  been  ascertained  to  be  the  product  of  a  lofty  tree,  growing
upon  the  mountains  of  the  Malabar  coast  of  Hindostan,  named  Pterocar-
pus  Marsupium,  belonging  to  the  Natural  Order  Fabaceee.  It  has  an  erect,
very  high  trunk,  rarely  straight.  The  outer  layer  of  bark  is  brown,
spongy,  falling  off  in  flakes,  and  the  inner  is  red,  fibrous,  and  astringent.
The  branches  are  spreading,  horizontal,  numerous,  extending  far.  The
leaves  are  sub-bifarious,  alternate,  pinnate  with  an  odd  one,  eight  or  nine
inches  long ;  leaflets  five,  six,  or  seven,  alternate,  elliptic,  emarginate,
firm,  deep-green  and  shining  above,  less  so  below,  from  three  to  five
inches  long,  and  two  or  three  broad.  The  petioles  are  round,  smooth,
waved  from  leaflet  to  leaflet,  and  five  or  six  inches  long ;  stipules  none.
Panicles  terminal,  very  large ;  ramifications  bifarious,  like  the  leaves.
Peduncles  and  pedicels  round,  a  little  downy.  Bracts  small,  caducous,
solitary  below  each  division  and  sub-division  of  the  panicle.  Flowers
very  numerous,  white,  with  a  small  tinge  of  yellow.  Vexillum  with  a
long  slender  claw,  very  broad  ;  sides  reflexed,  waved,  curled,  veined ;
keel  two-petalled,  adhering  slightly  for  a  little  way  near  the  middle,
waved,  etc.,  same  as  the  vexillum.  Stamens  ten,  united  near  the  base,
but  soon  dividing  into  two  parcels  of  five  each  ;  anthers  globose,  two-
lobed. Ovary  oblong,  pedicelled,  hairy,  generally  two-celled; cells


Kino.  681

transverse,  and  one-seeded.  Style  ascending.  Legume  on  a  long  peti-
ole, three-fourths  orbicular,  the  upper  remainder,  which  extends  from
the  pedicel  to  the  remains  of  the  style,  is  straight,  the  whole  surrounded
with  a  waved,  veiny,  downy,  membranous  wing,  swelled,  rugose,  and
woody  in  the  center,  where  the  seed  is  lodged,  not  opening ;  generally
one  but  sometimes  two-celled. Seeds  single,  reniform.

History. — Kino  is  the  juice  of  the  tree  obtained  by  making  longitudi-
nal incisions  in  the  bark  ;  it  flows  abundantly,  and  of  a  red  color,  and  by
drying  it  in  the  sun,  it  cracks  into  irregular  angular  masses,  which  are
placed  into  wooden  boxes for  exportation. It  sometimes  comes  to  this
country  direct  from  the  East  Indies,  but  more  generally  from  England.
East  India  Kino,  which  is  the  ordinary  kino  of  the  shops,  is  usually  in
small,  irregular,  angular,  shining  fragments,  in  size  between  a  pin's  head
and  a  pea,  of  a  dark-reddish-brown  or  blackish  color,  opake,  very  brittle,
easily  pulverizable,  and  affording  a  reddish  powder,  much  lighter  colored
than  the  drug  in  its  aggregate  state,  and  which  becomes  brownish  on
being  kept  for  some  time. It  is  inodorous,  and  of  an  intense,  pure
astringent,  with  barely  perceptible  bitterness,  and leaving  a  sweetish
after-taste  in  the  mouth. It  burns  without  fusion  or  softening,  and  with
but  little  flame  and  frothing,  leaving  a  scanty  gray  ash. Boiling  water
dissolves  -a  large  proportion  of  it,  forming  when cold,,  a  permanent,
intense  blood-red  solution  ;  and  which  yields,  with  sesquichloride  of  iron,
a  dark-green,  coarsely  flocculent  precipitate,  which  is  so  abundant  as  to
render  the  whole  liquid  pulpy. Acetate  of  lead  affords  a  gray  precipi-
tate, and  tartar  emetic  a  gradually  formed  lake-red  muddy  jelly. Cold
water  forms  with  it  a  clear  cherry-red  solution,  leaving  a  crumbly,  gray-
ish residuum. Alcohol  dissolves  about  two-thirds  of  it,  and  forms  a  deep
brownish-red  tinctui'e,  which  is  not  disturbed  by  water. By  long  stand-
ing, the  tincture  gelatinizes,  and  loses  its  astringency. Proof  spirit  is  a
less  complete  solvent,  but  the  tincture  is  less  apt  to  gelatinize. Alkalies
favor  its  solubility  in  water,  but  change  its  nature,  and  destroy  its  astrin-
gency. When  chewed,  Kino  softens  in  the  mouth,  slightly  adheres  to
the  teeth,  and  colors  the  saliva  blood -red. It  is  found  to  contain  75  per
cent,  of  tannin,  and  peculiar  extractive,  24  of  red  gum,  one  of  insoluble
matter, and according  to Buchner  catechuin  or  catechuic  acid. Its
aqueous  solution  is  incompatible  with  gelatin,  the  soluble  salts  of  iron,
silver,  lead,  antimony,  bichloride  of  mercury,  and  the sulphuric,  nitric
and  muriatic  acids.

There  are  many  other  exudations  known  in  commerce  as  Kino,  some
of  which  are  used  principally  for  the  purpose  of  adulterating  the  finer
sorts ;  among  the  most  important  are  the  African  Kino,  Dhak-tree  Kino,
Botany  Bay  Kino,  Jamaica  Kino,  and  South  American  Kino.

The  African  Kino,  is  at  present  very  rarely  seen  in  commerce  ;  from
specimens  sent  home  by  Mungo  Park  during  his  last  journey,  it  was


582  Materia  Medica.

decided  an  exudation  from  the  Pterocarpus  Erinaceus,  a  tree  growing
in  Senegal,  and  upon  the  banks  of  the  Gambia,  on  the  western  coast  of
Africa.

The  Dhak-tree  Kino  is  the  product  of  the  Butea  Frondosa,  a  magnifi-
cent leguminous  tree  of  the  East  Indies.  The  juice  naturally  exudes
from  fissures  in  the  branches  of  the  tree,  and  concretes  into  red  tears
which  become  black  under  the  action  of  the  sun.  They  are  irregularly
angular,  seldom  so  large  as  a  grain  of  barley,  apparently  black  and
opake,  but  really  of  an  intense  garnet-red  color,  translucent  in  thin
pieces,  and  frequently  have  fibers  of  bark  adhering  to  one  of  their  faces.
Their  taste  is  very  astringent,  brittle  when  chewed  without  adhering  to
the  teeth,  and  tinge  the  saliva  red.  Their  relations  to  water,  alcohol,
and  other  chemical  reagents  are  very  nearly  similar  to  those  of  ordinary
Kino.  They  contain  from  73  to  90  per  cent,  of  tannin.  This  Kino  is
much  used  in  the  arts  in  India,  and  would  undoubtedly  answer  as  well
in  medicine  as  the  Kino  of  commerce.  It  is  seldom  imported  into
England,  and  never,  at  present,  into  this  country.

The  Botany  Bay  Kino  is  the  concrete  juice  of  the  Eucalyptus  Resi-
nifera,  or  Brown  Gum  tree  of  New  Holland,  a  fine  tall  tree  belonging
to  the  Natural  Order,  Myrtacece,  and  Sexual  System,  Icosandria  Mono-
gynia.  When  the  bark  of  this  tree  is  wounded,  a  red  juice  flows  so
profusely  that  sixty  gallons  may  be  collected  from  one  tree.  Mr.  White
states  that  five  hundred  pounds  of  Kino  may  be  obtained  in  one  year
from  a  single  tree.  The  juice  concretes  into  a  resinous-like  substance,  on
the  branches  and  trunk,  which  is  at  first  reddish  and  translucent,  but
ultimately  chocolate-colored  and  opake.  It  is  in  irregular  masses,  free
from  impurity,  generally  covered  with  a  reddish  powder  from  attrition,
compact,  very  brittle,  deep  brownish-black,  resinous  in  luster,  and
opake  even  in  thin  fragments.  It  is  more  bitter  and  less  astringent
than  ordinary  Kino,  and  tinges  the  saliva  a  dirty-lake  red.  It  is  easily
powdered,  the  powder  being  of  an  umber  color  ;  softens  and  swells  up
by  heat,  and  burns  with  a  dense  flame  or  white  smoke  before  it  becomes
perfectly  charred.  Cold  water  does  not  readily  act  upon  it,  slowly  ac-
quiring a  pale-yellowish  tint  after  an  hour  or  two,  with  but  little  change
in  the  appearance  of  the  Kino  ;  boiling  water  dissolves  considerable  of
it,  forming  a  deep  cherry-red  solution,  which,  on  cooling,  precipitates  a
copious  brick-colored  deposit,  if  the  solution  be  made  with  one  part  of
the  Kino  to  twenty-five  of  water.  The  remaining  solution  is  yellowish-
brown,  and  yields  a  deep-green  turbid  fluid  with  sesquichloride  of  iron,
and  a  grayish-yellow  precipitate  with  acetate  of  lead.  Alcohol  dissolves
it  in  large  proportion,  forming  a  deep  yellowish  brown  tincture.  It  is
not  so  common  in  Europe  as  it  was  some  years  since,  and  is  seldom  seen
in  this  country.

Jamaica  or  West  India  Kino,  is  presumed  to  be  the  product  of  the
Coccoloba  Uvifera,  or  Sea-side  grape,  belonging  to  the  Natural  Order,


i


Krameria  Triandria.  583

Polygonaceae,  obtained  by  evaporating  a  decoction  of  the  wood  and  bark.
This  tree  grows  in  the  West  Indies  and  neighboring  parts  of  the  conti-
nent. The  evaporated  fluid  while  in  a  semi-liquid  state  is  poured  into
gourds,  and  allowed  to  harden.  When  removed  from  the  gourd,  it
breaks  into  fragments  of  various  sizes,  having  a  tendency  to  the  rectan-
gular form,  and  about  as  large  as  a  small  cherry.  Their  consistence  is
uniform,  their  surface  smooth  and  shining,  and  their  color  a  very  dark
reddish-brown.  They  are  not  so  shining  nor  so  black  as  the  common
Kino ;  are  opake  in  mass,  translucent  and  ruby-red  in  thin  fragments.
They  are  readily  fractured  and  pulverized,  forming  a  dull-reddish  pow-
der, much  paler  than  the  commercial  drug.  They  are  inodorous,  but
very  astringent  and  bitterish,  very  slightly  adhering  to  the  teeth  when
chewed,  and  coloring  the  saliva  red.  Cold  water  dissolves  89  per  cent.,
and  officinal  alcohol  94  per  cent.  It  contains  about  41  per  cent,  of
tannin.

The  South  American,  Columbia,  or  Caraccas  Kino  is  probably  de-
rived from  the  Coccoloba  Uvifera,  which  grows  upon  the  continent  as
well  as  in  the  islands.  It  is  imported  in  heavy  masses,  and  closely  re-
sembles the  Jamaica  Kino,  in  color,  luster,  taste,  and  other  properties,
with  the  exception  that  it  is  nearly  equally  soluble  in  cold  water  and
alcohol ;  without  any  adhesive  matter  to  impede  filtration  in  the  aque-
ous solution,  and  wanting  a  minute  proportion  of  resinous  matter.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Kino  is  a  pure  and  energetic  astringent,  and
may  be  used  to  fulfill  all  the  indications  for  which  catechu  is  employed.
It  is  not  considered  so  efficacious  in  chronic  dysentery  as  catechu,  but  is
preferred  internally  in  menorrhagia,  and  as  a  topical  application  in  leu-
corrhea,  relaxed  sore-throat  and  aphthae  of  the  mouth  or  fauces.  An
infusion  thrown  into  the  nostril  has  suppressed  hemorrhage  from  the
Schneiderian  membrane  :  and  the  powder  on  lint  has  suppressed  a
hemorrhage  from  a  wound  in  the  palate,  which  had  resisted  various
means.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains ;  of  the  tincture,
from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms.

Off.  Prep. — Pilulee  Camphorae  Compositae ;  Tinctura  Kino.


KRAMERIA TRIANDRIA.

Rhatany.

Nat.  Orel. — Polygalacea?,  Decandolle  ;  Krameriacea?,  Lindley.  Sex.  Syst. —
Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Rhatany  is  a  suffruticose  plant,  with  a  horizontal,  very
long  and  branched  root,  with  a  thick  bark,  reddish-brown  externally,
and  red  internally. The  stem  is  round,  procumbent,  much  branched,


584  Materia Mkdica.

taper  ;  the  branches  are  two  or  three  feet  long,  white  and  silky  when
young,  but  black  and  naked  when  old.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  sessile,
oblong-ovate,  pointed,  entire,  and  covered  on  both  surfaces  with  silky
hairs.  The  flowers  are  lake-colored,  solitary,  axillary,  and  on  short
peduncles.  The  calyx  consists  of  four  red  sepals,  the  inferior  largest,
hairy  externally,  but  smooth  and  shining  on  the  inner  surface.  The
corolla  is  formed  of  four  petals,  the  two  upper  separate,  spathulate,  the
two  lateral,  roundish  and  concave.  Stamens  three,  hypogynous,  with
small,  urceolate  anthers,  having  two  openings  at  their  apex.  The  ovary
is  ovate,  supporting  a  small  red  style,  crowned  with  a  simple  stigma.
The  fruit  is  a  dry,  globose  berry  or  drupe,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,
covered  with  stiff  reddish-brown  hairs,  and  furnished  with  one  or  two
seeds.

History. — This  species  of  Krameria  is  a  native  of  Peru,  usually  grow-
ing in  dry  argillaceous  and  sandy  places,  on  the  sides  of  mountains,
flowering  throughout  the  year,  but  most  freely  in  October  and  Novem-
ber. It  was  long  known  to  the  natives  as  a  powerful  astringent,  pre-
vious to  its  discovery  in  1780  by  Ruiz.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part;
it  is  dug  up  after  the  rains  in  large  quantities,  and  after  being  well  dried
are  exported,  principally  to  Portugal,  where  they  are  employed  to  adul-
terate red  wines.  Sometimes  an  extract  is  prepared  from  them,  which
is  exported  and  used  in  a  similar  manner.  As  imported,  it  consists  of  a
short  root-stock  from  half  to  two  inches  in  diameter  ;  and  several  roots
proper,  which  are  simple  or  branched,  one  or  two  feet  long,  and  between
the  thickness  of  a  goosequill  and  that  of  a  man's  thumb.  Its  bark  is
dark  brownish-red,  wrinkled,  and  warty  on  the  root-stock,  brittle,  inodo-
rous, and  of  a  strongly  astringent  and  slightly  bitterish  taste.  The
woody  interior  is  yellowish-red,  dense,  tough,  and  of  the  same  taste,
but  much  weaker.  Cold  water,  rectified,  or  proof  spirit,  readily  extracts
its  active  constituents.  In  powder  it  is  of  a  reddish  color.  The  bark
contains  more  of  the  medical  virtues  than  the  ligneous  or  woody  part.
By  maceration,  boiling  water  takes  up  the  virtues  of  the  root,  forming
a  turbid  solution  on  cooling,  in  consequence  of  the  deposition  of  apo-
theme  taken  up  by  the  water  when  heated.  If  boiled,  a  still  greater
quantity  of  apotheme  is  dissolved,  and  a  large  amount  of  tannin  becomes
insoluble  in  cold  water,  and  without  medicinal  virtue,  in  consequence
of  its  combination  with  the  dissolved  starch,  or  by  the  action  of  the  at-
mosphere converting  it  into  apotheme.  Hence,  the  decoction,  and  the
extract  formed  from  it,  contain  much  less  soluble  and  active  matter,
than  that  from  the  cold  infusion,  and  are  therefore  ineligible  prepara-
tions. By  displacement,  cold  water  removes  all  the  astringent  virtues
of  rhatany,  forming  a  clear  deep-red  infusion,  from  which  an  active  and
almost  perfectly  soluble  extract  may  be  obtained  by  careful  evapora-
tion. Alcohol  takes  up  but  little  more  of  its  astringent  principle  than
cold  water,  with  much  inert  matter. Rhatany  root  consists  of  tannin  in


Lactuca  Sativa — Lactuca  Virosa.  535

a  state  of  purity,  in  a  state  of  apotheme,  deprived  of  its  astringency,  and
insoluble  from  the  action  of  the  air,  and  in  a  state  of  extractive  or  a
combination  of  tannin  and  apotheme,  also  lignin,  an  acid  termed
Krameric  acid,  and  small  proportions  of  gum,  starch,  saccharine  matter,
etc.  Its  preparations  are  incompatible  with  the  mineral  acids,  and  most
of  the  metallic  salts.

Properties  and  Uses. — Rhatany  is  a  powerful  astringent,  with  some
slight  tonic  virtues.  It  may  be  employed  internally  with  advantage,  in
menorrhagia,  hematemesis,  passive  hemorrhages,  chronic  diarrhea,
leucorrhea,  chronic  mucous  discharges,  colliquative  perspiration,  and
incontinence  of  urine.  Also  as  an  energetic  styptic  in  epistaxis,  hemor-
rhage from  the  cavity  of  an  extracted  tooth,  or  the  surface  of  a  wound,
and  as  a  local  application  to  prolapsus  ani,  fissure  of  the  anus  and  leu-
corrhea. As  an  application  to  spongy  and  bleeding  gums,  to  redden
and  consolidate  them,  as  well  as  to  preserve  the  teeth,  the  following
paste  will  be  found  unsurpassed:  Take  of  prepared  chalk,  and  powdered
cinchona,  of  each,  equal  parts ;  combine  them  with  a  sufficient  quantity
of  equal  parts  of  the  tinctures  of  rhatany  and  myrrh,  to  form  a  paste.
Use  daily  with  a  brush.  Dose  of  the  powder  from  ten  grains  to  thirty;
of  the  tincture  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms ;  of  the  infusion  from  one
to  four  fluidounces;  of  the  extract  from  ten  to  twenty  grains.

Of.  Prep.  —  Extractum  Krameriae;  Infusum  Kramerise;  Tinctura
Krameriae.


LACTUCA  SATIVA.

Lettuce.
LACTUCA  VIROSA.

Strong-scented  Lettuce.

Nat.  Ord.  —  Asteraceaj ;  Cichoraese,  Lindley.  Composite  Cichoracese,  De
Candolle. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE HERB, AND INSPISSATED JUICE LACTUCARIUM.

Description. — Lactuca  Sativa  has  an  annual,  tap-shaped  root,  with  an
erect,  round  stem,  simple  below,  branching  above,  and  about  two  feet  in
hight.  The  lower  leaves  are  obovate,  rounded  at  the  end,  and  undulating;
the  upper  are  smaller,  sessile,  cordate,  and  toothed ;  both  are  shining,
and  of  a  yellowish-green  color.  The,  flowers  are  pale-yellow,  small,  and
disposed  in  an  irregular  terminal  corymb.  Before  the  flower-stem
begins  to  shoot,  the  plant  contains  a  bland,  pellucid  juice,  has  little  taste
or  smell,  and  is  much  used  as  a  salad  for  the  table ;  but  during  the
period  of  inflorescence  it  abounds  in  a  peculiar  milky  juice,  which
readily  escapes  from  incisions  in  the  stem,  and  has  been  found  to  pos-
sess decided  medicinal  properties.


5S6  Materia Medica.

Lactuca  Virosa  has  a  tap-shaped  root,  with  a  solitary  stem,  two  or
three  feet  high,  erect,  round,  smooth,  sparingly  leafy,  scarcely  branched;
panicled  at  the  top ;  a  little  prickly  below.  The  leaves  are  horizontal,
nearly  smooth,  finely  toothed ;  radical  ones  numerous,  obovate,  undi-
vided, depressed ;  those  of  the  stem  smaller,  often  lobed  ;  arrow-shaped
and  clasping  at  their  base  ;  the  midrib  of  all  more  or  less  beset  under-
neath with  prominent  prickles ;  such  as  often  occur-on  the  margin  also.
Flower-heads  numerous,  panicled,  with  abundance  of  small,  heart-shaped,
pointed  bracteas.  Involucral  scales  downy  at  the  tip,  destitute  of  any
keels  or  ribs.  Corolla  small,  light-yellow.  Pappus  rough.  There  are
many  varieties  of  lettuce  which  differ  much  from  each  other;  as  an
application  to  all  of  them,  it  may  be  said,  that  they  have  large,  milky,
frequently  wrinkled  leaves,  usually  of  a  pale-green,  but  varying  to  a
light-red.  The  radical  leaves  are  roundish  and  toothed  at  the  margin ;
those  of  the  stem  obovate  or  cordate.  The  stem  is  round,  leafy,  corym-
biform  at  top,  with  numerous  bright-yellow  flowers.

History. — The  native  country  of  this  plant  is  unknown  ;  but  it  is
cultivated  in  all  parts  of  the  civilized  world.  The  Lactuca  Elongala  of
our  country,  was  presumed  for  a  time  to  possess  narcotic  principles
similar  with  the  others,  but  on  investigation  it  has  been  ascertained  to  be
nearly  if  not  entirely  inert.  Lactucarium  or  lettuce-opium  is  obtained
from  these  plants,  by  cutting  across  their  stems,  at  the  time  of  inflo-
rescence, when  a  milky  fluid  exudes  from  the  surface  of  the  cut;  this
is  absorbed  by  cotton  or  a  piece  of  sponge,  and  is  pressed  out  into  a
small  vessel,  when,  by  exposure  to  the  air,  it  concretes.  By  making
another  cut  at  a  short  interval  below  the  first,  and  so  proceeding  six  or
seven  times  daily,  or  even  oftener,  the  whole  juice  of  the  plant  may  be
obtained.  There  are  several  other  modes  recommended  for  procuring
the  lactucarium,  but  no  one  of  them  obtains  an  article  equal  to  that
collected  by  the  above  plan.  After  the  middle  period  of  inflorescence,
the  juice  becomes  thicker  but  deteriorated  in  its  medicinal  principles.
A  single  plant  of  L.  Sativa  is  said  to  yield  seventeen  grains  of  lactuca-
rium, while  a  plant  of  L.  Virosa  gives  fifty-six  grains.  As  found  in  the
shops,  lactucarium  is  in  roundish,  compact,  rather  hard  masses,  weighing
several  ounces,  of  a  reddish-brown  color  externally,  of  a  bitter,  nar-
cotic and  somewhat  acid  taste,  and  an  odor  approximating  that  of  opium.
It  is  asserted  that  two  other  varieties,  the  L.  Scariola,  and  L.  Allissima,
furnish  a  superior  article  of  lettuce-opium.

Lactucarium  does  not  attract  moisture  from  the  atmosphere  ;  is  soft-
ened by  heat,  and  at  a  high  temperature  burns  with  a  large  white  flame.
Cold  water  takes  up  about  a  sixth  of  it,  forming  a  deep-brown  infusion;
boiling  water  a  third,  and  proof  spirit,  alcohol  and  ether  a  much  larger
proportion.  The  addition  of  acetic  acid  to  water  or  alcohol  improves
their  solvent  powers  upon  this  article.  It  contains  neither  morphia  nor
narcotine,  but  is  found  to  consist  of  lactucin,  volatile  oil,  a  yellowish-red


Lactuca  Sativa  —  Lactuca  Virosa.  587

tasteless  resin,  a  greenish-yellow  acrid  resin,  crystallizable  and  uncrys-
tallizable  sugar,  gum,  pectic  acid,  albumen,  a  brown  basic  substance,  a
principle  like  humus-extractive,  a  concrete  oil  or  wax,  one  part  of  which
is  soluble  in  ether,  and  fusible  only  at  212°,  and  the  other  insoluble  in
ether  and  fusible  at  167°,  and  numerous  salts,  particularly  oxalates.

Lactucin  is  obtained  by  treating  finely-powdered  lactucarium  with
alcohol  acidulated  with  one  fifteenth  of  acetic  acid,  adding  an  equal
volume  of  water,  and  precipitating  the  mixture  with  a  slight  excess  of
subacetate  of  lead ;  filter  the  solution  and  free  it  from  the  lead  by  sul-
phureted-hydrogen  gas,  filter,  evaporate  by  a  gentle  heat  not  exceeding
144° — treat  the  extract  with  absolute  alcohol,  then  distil  it  off,  and
again  exhaust  with  ether,  which  by  distillation  or  spontaneous  evapora-
tion, forms  crystals  of  an  obscure  acicular  character.  When  pure  they
are  colorless,  inodorous,  intensely  bitter,  easily  fusible,  soluble  in  sixty
or  eighty  parts  of  cold  water,  more  soluble  in  ether,  still  more  so  in
alcohol,  and  easily  soluble  in  acids,  especially  acetic  acid,  but  without
neutralizing  them.  In  regard  to  this  being  the  active  principle  of  lac-
tucarium, there  is  yet  much  dispute ;  several  analysts  have  differed  in
their  results  and  conclusions.  The  most  recent  analysis  is  by  Ludwig,
who  in  connection  with  several  other  principles,  obtained  lactucic  acid
and  lactucin.  "  To  obtain  these  principles,  eighty  parts  of  lactucarium
in  fine  powder,  were  triturated  with  eighty  of  pure  cold  diluted  sulphuric
acid,  and  then  mixed  with  four  hundred  parts  of  alcohol  of  0.851;  the
liquor  was  filtered,  shaken  with  hydrate  of  lime  till  it  yielded  no  precipi-
tate with  baryta- water  or  oxalate  of  potassa,  then  decolorized  with  pure
animal  charcoal,  and  evaporated ;  the  brown  tenacious  mass,  thus
obtained,  (alcoholic  extract)  was  treated  with  boiling  water,  which  left
behind  a  viscid  substance  ;  the  aqueous  solution  was  treated  with  animal
charcoal,  and  on  being  evaporated  yielded  a  mixture  of  lactucic  acid
and  lactucin  ;  these  were  separated  by  dissolving  the  mixture  in  boiling
water,  which  on  cooling  deposited  the  latter  in  white  crystalline  scales,
and  gave  up  the  former  upon  subsequent  evaporation.  Lactucic  acid  is
of  difficult  crystallization,  light-yellow,  strongly  bitter,  without  sour
taste,  of  an  acid  reaction,  and  readily  soluble  in  alcohol  and  water.  It
has  as  much  claims  as  any  other  discovered  substance  to  be  considered
the  active  principle  of  lactucarium.  Lactucin,  purified  by  animal  char-
coal, is  in  white  pearly  scales,  the  solution  of  which  exhibits  no  reaction
with  subacetate  or  acetate  of  lead,  or  solution  of  iodine.  It  is  dissolved
without  change  of  color  by  concentrated  sulphuric  acid."  Thridace,  is
the  inspissated  expressed  juice  obtained  by  collecting  the  stalks  near  the
flowering  period,  depriving  them  of  their  leaves,  and  then  subjecting
them  to  pressure.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Lactucarium  has  never  been  thoroughly  and
satisfactorily  investigated  in  relation  to  its  therapeutical  influences ;
indeed,  various  experimenters  differ  in  their  views  on  this  point,  some


588  Materia  Medica.

asserting  it  to  be  a  stimulant  and  others  a  sedative.  It  is,  when
employed  at  all,  usually  given  as  a  calmative  and  hypnotic,  and  as  a
substitute  for  opium,  to  which  it  is  to  be  preferred  in  many  instances,
on  account  of  its  freedom  from  unpleasant  after-effects,  as  constipation,
excitement  of  the  brain,  etc.  However,  it  is  not  considered  equal  in
power  to  opium.  The  most  energetic  lactucarium  is  said  to  be  obtained
from  L.  Virosa,  and  L.  Altissima.  Moderate  doses  of  it  act  as  a  nar-
cotic poison  on  the  lower  animals,  and  ten  or  twenty  grains' swallowed
by  a  dog  will  cause  sleep,  or  the  watery  solution  injected  into  a  vein
occasions  sleep,  coma,  and  death.  Dose  of  lactucarium  in  pill  or  pow-
der, which  is  the  most  efficient  mode  of  administration,  from  five  to
twenty  grains ;  of  the  tincture,  thirty  to  sixty  drops ;  of  the  alcoholic
extract,  one  to  five  grains.  The  article  is  seldom  used  in  medical  prac-
tice on  account  of  its  high  price,  its  uncertain  power,  and  its  liability  to
adulteration.

LARIX AMERICANA.

American  Larch.

Nat. Orel. — Pinacese  or  Conifene. Sex.  Si/st. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  is  the  Pinus  Pendula,  Pinus  Microcarpa,  and  Abies
Americana  of  various  botanists,  and  is  known  by  the  several  names  of
Black  Larch,  Tamarac,  Hackmetack,  etc.  The  tree  has  a  straight  and
slender  trunk,  with  slender  horizontal  branches  and  attains  the  bight  of
eighty  or  a  hundred  feet.  The  leaves  are  short,  one  or  two  inches  long,
very  slender,  almost  thread-form,  soft,  deciduous,  without  sheaths  and
in  fascicles  of  from  twenty  to  forty,  being  developed  early  in  the  spring
from  lateral  scaly  and  globular  buds,  which  produce  (the  same  or  the
second  year)  growing  shoots  on  which  the  leaves  are  scattered.  The
cones  are  oblong,  of  few  rounded  scales,  inclining  upward,  from  half  an
inch  to  an  inch  in  length,  and  of  a  deep  purple-color.  Scales  thin  and
inflexed  on  the  margin.  Bracts  elliptical,  often  hollowed  at  the  sides,
abruptly  acuminate  with  a  slender  point,  and  together  with  the  scales,
persistent.

History.  —  This  is  a  beautiful  tree,  more  common  throughout  New
England ;  it  is  found  in  swamps  and  moist  places,  and  flowers  in  April
and  May.  It  may  be  distinguished  from  the  pines,  by  the  branches
being  without  leaves  for  nearly  half  the  year.  Its  wood  is  very  heavy,
strong  and  durable,  and  is  the  most  valuable  of  all  the  pines  or  spruces.
The  bark  is  the  part  used  as  medicine.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  decoction  of  the  bark  of  this  tree  is  said  to
be  laxative,  tonic,  diuretic,  and  alterative,  and  is  recommended  in
obstructions  of  the  liver,  rheumatism,  jaundice,  and  some  cutaneous  dis-
eases ;  a  decoction  of  the  leaves  has  been  employed,  in  piles,  hemopty-


Laurus  Sassafras.  589

sis,  monorrhagia,  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  and  externally  in  cutaneous
diseases,  ulcers,  burns,  etc. In  dropsy,  combined  with  spearmint,  juni-
per berries  and  horseradish,  it  has  proved  valuable. Dose  of  decoction,
from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  two  to  four  times  a  day.
Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Pinus  Pendulse  Composita.


LAURUS  SASSAFRAS.

Sassafras.

Nat.  Ord. — Lauraceai. Sex.  Syst. — Enneandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  small  indigenous  tree,  varying  in  hight  from
ten  to  forty  feet,  and  having  a  trunk  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  covered
with  a  rough,  deeply-furrowed  and  grayish  bark  —  that  on  the  twigs,
however,  being  smooth  and  beautifully  green.  The  leaves  are  alternate,
petiolate,  membranous,  bright-green,  smooth  above,  finely  downy
beneath,  especially  when  young,  very  variable  in  form,  from  ovate  and
entire  to  three-lobed,  or  lobed  only  on  one  side,  all,  however,  tapering  to
the  base.  The  greater  number  are  three-lobed,  and  their  mean  length
is  four  or  five  inches.  The  flowers  appear  before  the  leaves,  are  fre-
quently dioecious,  small,  of  a  pale  greenish-yellow  color,  and  are
arranged  in  naked,  downy  corymbose  racemes  which  are  terminal  and
axillary,  and  have  subulate,  deciduous  bracts  at  their  base.  The  calyx
is  six-parted,  permanent  at  base.  The  sterile  flowers  have  nine  stamens,
the  fertile  only  six  with  a  simple  style.  The  fruit  is  an  oval  drupe  of  a
deep -blue  color  when  ripe,  about  as  large  as  a  pea,  and  supported  in  the
permanent  base  of  the  calyx  on  the  thick,  red,  clavate  peduncle.

History.  —  Sassafras  is  a  well-known  tree  growing  throughout  the
United  States,  and  extending  into  Mexico,  and  flowering  in  the  latter
part  of  April  or  early  in  May.  Its  flowers  have  a  weak,  agreeable  odor,
and  are,  as  well  as  the  twigs,  much  used  in  domestic  practice,  in  decoc-
tion, as  a  purifier  of  the  blood  in  spring.  The  officinal  parts  are  the
bark  and  the  pith.  The  root  is  largely  exported,  it  consists  of  a  brown-
ish-white wood,  and  an  external  spongy  bark,  both  of  which  are  recog-
nized as  officinal  by  the  foreign  authorities.  The  bark  of  the  root,  is
the  part  generally  employed  in  this  country,  it  is  by  far  the  most  active
part  of  the  whole  tree.  It  is  found  in  the  shops,  in  small  irregular
pieces,  of  a  grayish-brown  ■  color  on  the  surface,  rusty-brown  within,
very  brittle,  of  an  agreeable  odor,  and  a  powerful,  peculiar,  warm,  aro-
matic, sweetish  taste.  It  owes  its  properties  to  a  volatile  oil,  which  may
be  separated  by  distillation  with  water.  Hot  water,  in  infusion,  or
alcohol  takes  up  its  active  properties,  but  boiling  dissipates  them.  The
bark  contains  a  heavy  and  light  volatile  oil,  camphorous  matter,  fatty
matter,  resin,  wax,  a  principle  resembling  tannic  acid,  called  Sassafrid,


590  Materia  Medica.

tannic  acid,  gum,  albumen,  starch,  red  coloring-matter,  lignin,  and  salts.
The  pith  of  the  extremities  of  the  branches  is  in  light,  spongy,  slender,
and  cylindrical  pieces,  with  a  mucilaginous,  slightly  sassafras-flavored
taste.  It  is  full  of  gummy  substance,  affords  a  clear  but  viscid  muci-
lage in  water,  much  less  tenacious  than  that  of  gum  arabic,  and  which
is  not  affected  by  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sassafras  is  a  warm  aromatic  stimulant,  altera-
tive, diaphoretic,  and  diuretic.  It  is  generally  used  in  combination  with
other  alteratives  whose  flavor  it  improves,  in  syphilitic  affections,  chronic
rheumatism,  scrofula,  and  many  cutaneous  eruptions.  The  mucilage  of
the  pith  is  used  as  a  local  application  in  acute  ophthalmia,  and  as  a
demulcent  drink  in  disorders  of  the  chest,  bowels,  kidneys,  and  bladder.
The  oil  is  used  to  afford  relief  in  the  distressing  pain  attending  men-
strual obstructions,  and  that  following  parturition,  in  doses  of  from  five
to  ten  drops,  on  sugar ;  also  used  in  diseases  of  the  kidneys  and  bladder.
Externally,  as  a  rubefacient,  in  painful  swellings,  sprains,  bruises,  rheu-
matism, etc.,  and  is  said  to  check  the  progress  of  gangrene.

Off.  Prep.  —  Infusum  Sassafras  Medullee ;  Lotio  Sassafras;  Pilulae
Saponi  Compositse ;  Syrupus  Sarsaparillse  Compositus.


LAVANDULA  VERA,  AND  LAVANDULA SPICA.

Lavender.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiacese. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

the  flowers/

Description. — Lavandula  Vera,  of  De  Candolle,  is  a  small  shrub  gene-
rally one  or  two  feet  high,  but  sometimes  growing  to  even  six  feet.  The
leaves  are  oblong-linear,  or  lanceolate,  entire,  opposite,  sessile,  tapering
to  the  base,  when  young  hoary  and  revolute  at  the  edges ;  upper  ones
linear-lanceolate,  the  highest  shorter  than  the  calyx  and  the  lower  petio-
lated.  The  flowers  are  of  a  lilac  color,  small,  in  terminal,  cylindrical
spikes  consisting  of  interrupted  whorls,  in  which  the  florets  are  from  six
to  ten,  each  whorl  being  furnished  with  two  small,  ovate  bracts.  The
corolla  is  tubular,  and  divided  into  two  lips,  the  uppermost  of  which  is
larger  and  bifid,  the  lower  declining,  and  of  three  segments.  The  sta-
mens are  four,  with  small,  simple  anthers.  The  style  is  slender,  and
covered  by  a  bilobate  stigma.

Lavandula  Spica  of  De  Candolle  is  more  dwarfish  and  more  hoary
than  the  last.  The  leaves  are  oblong-lanceolate,  somewhat  spathulate,
entire,  much  narrowed  at  the  base,  hoary  on  both  sides.  Spikes  some-
what interrupted.  Bracts  linear-subulate,  shorter  than  the  calyx.  This
plant  is  not  used  in  medicine,  but  yields  what  is  called  Oil  of  Spike,
much  used  in  the  preparation  of  artistical  varnishes  and  by  porcelain
painters.


Ledum Latifolium.  591

History. — Lavandula  Vera  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe,  growing
in  dry,  barren  lands.  It  is  extensively  cultivated  in  this  country,  and
flowers  in  July  and  August.  When  too  thickly  planted,  the  plant  suffers
from  a  disease  which  is  removed  by  thinning  them.  All  parts  of  the
plant  are  aromatic,  but  the  flowers  only  are  officinal ;  they  are  cut  when
they  begin  to  bloom,  and  dried  in  the  shade.  They  have  a  rich,  pecu-
liar fragrance,  which  is  retained  long  after  drying,  and  a  strong,  bitter,
aromatic,  somewhat  camphoraceous  taste.  Alcohol  extracts  their  virtues,
which  probably  depend  upon  their  volatile  oil,  from  half  a  drachm  to
two  drachms  of  which  may  be  obtained  from  a  pound  of  the  fresh  flowers.

Properties.  —  Lavender  is  an  aromatic  stimulant  and  tonic,  but  is  sel-
dom given  in  its  crude  state,  but  in  its  officinal  preparations,  which  see.
Off.  Prep. — Oleum  Lavandulae;  Tinctura  Lavandulae  Composita.


LEDUM  LATIFOLIUM.

Labrador  Tea.

Nat.  Ord. — Ericaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description.  —  Ledum  Latifolium  is  an  evergreen  shrub,  with  an
irregularly  branched  stem  from  two  to  five  feet  in  hight ;  the  branches
are  woolly.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  sub-sessile,  entire,  one  or  two
inches  in  length,  and  nearly  one-third  as  wide,  obtuse,  elliptical  or
oblong,  smooth  above,  clothed  with  a  dense,  rusty  wool  beneath,  with
revolute  or  replicate  margins.  The  flowers  are  large,  white,  in  dense
terminal  corymbs  of  about  a  dozen  flowers  ;  pedicels  nearly  as  long  as
the  leaves,  filiform,  pubescent.  Calyx  very  minute.  Corolla  white,  and
consists  of  five  spreading,  obovate,  obtuse  petals.  Stamens  five  or  ten,
as  long  as  the  petals;  filaments  slender,  smooth  ;  anthers  small,  opening
by  two  simple  terminal  pores.  Ovary  roundish  ;  style  straight,  about  as
long  as  the  stamens ;  stigma  small,  obtuse.  Capsule  ovate-oblong*,
subpubescent,  five-celled,  five-valved ;  valves  splitting  from  the  base
upward,  with  the  margins  infiexed  and  connivent ;  receptacles  linear,
extending  into  the  cells  of  the  capsule.  Seeds  minute,  terminating  in  a
membrane  at  each  extremity.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  North  America,  and  is  found  in
the  northern  parts  of  the  United  States  and  in  Canada,  growing  in  cold
bogs,  and  damp  mountain  woods,  flowering  in  June  and  July.  It  is
also  found  in  the  mountainous  regions  of  more  southern  latitudes.  The
leaves  have  a  pleasant  odor  and  taste,  and  were  substituted  for  tea-
leaves  during  the  revolutionary  war.  Its  virtues  are  extracted  by  water
in  infusion,  and  alcohol.

Ledum  Palustre  or  Marsh  Tea,  inhabiting  swamps  and  wet  places  in
the  northern  parts  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America,  may  be  known


592  Materia  Medica.

by  its  linear  leaves,  having  uniformly  ten  stamens,  and  especially  by  its
oval  pods.  The  leaves  have  a  balsamic  odor,  and  an  aromatic,  camphor-
ous,  bitter  taste,  and  contain  among  other  ingredients,  volatile  oil  and
tannin. Water  by  infusion,  or  alcohol  extracts  its  properties.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Ledum  Latifolium  is  pectoral  and  tonic  ;  and
is  useful  in  coughs,  irritations  of  the  pulmonary  membranes,  and  in
dyspepsia.  Reputed  also  to  possess  similar  but  less  energetic  properties
than  the  Ledum  Palustre,  which  is  supposed  to  possess  narcotic  powers.
An  infusion  of  the  leaves  has  been  successfully  employed  in  decoction
in  pertussis,  dysentery,  and  to  allay  irritation  in  exanthematous  diseases.
In  leprosy,  scabies,  and  various  cutaneous  affections,  the  decoction  inter-
nally and  externally  has  been  beneficially  used.  When  placed  among
clothes,  they  are  said  to  prevent  the  attacks  of  moths.  A  strong  decoction,
used  externally,  will  kill  lice  and  other  insects.  Dose  of  the  infusion  of
either  of  the  above  plants,  from  2  to  4  fluidounces,  3  or  4  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Ledi.

LEONURUS  CARDIACA.

Motherwort.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE TOPS AND LEAVES.

Description. — Leonurus  Cardiaca  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  stems  from
two  to  five  feet  in  hight,  wand-like,  minutely  downy,  acutely  quadran-
gular, with  intermediate  channels,  purplish,  and  beset  with  numerous
pairs  of  opposite,  long-stalked,  rough,  dark-green,  somewhat  downy
leaves,  arranged  in  four  vertical  rows.  The  lower  stem-leaves  are
palmate-lobed,  and  broadest ;  the  upper  ones  acutely  three-lobed  ;  those
about  the  summit  lanceolate  and  undivided  ;  all  of  them  toothed,  cunei-
form at  base.  The  flowers  are  purplish  or  whitish-red,  and  are  disposed
in  numerous,  axillary  whorls.  Calyx  rigid  and  bristly.  Corolla  purplish,
the  upper  lip  clothed  with  dense,  white,  shaggy,  upright  hairs;  the  lower
deeply  colored,  variegated,  smooth,  in  three  nearly  equal  entire  lobes;
the  middle  lobe  obcordate.  Stamens  didynamous  ;  anthers  approximated
in  pairs,  with  parallel  transverse  cells  and  naked  valves,  and  sprinkled
with  shining  dots.  Achenia  oblong,  ribbed,  and  roughened  on  the  ribs,
the  apex  prolonged  into  a  very  slender  thread-like  beak,  bearing  the
pappus  of  copious  soft  and  white  capillary  bristles.

History.  — Motherwort  is  an  exotic  plant,  but  extensively  introduced
into  this  country,  growing  in  fields  and  pastures,  and  flowering  from
May  to  September.  It  is  supposed  to  be  a  native  of  Tartary,  and  may
probably  be  indigenous  to  the  northern  sections  of  this  country.  After
blossoming,  the  inner  involucre  closes  for  a  time,  the  slender  beak  elon-
gates and  raises  up  the  pappus  while  the  fruit  is  forming  ;  the  whole
involucre  is  then  reflexed,  exposing  to  the  wind  the  naked  fruits  with


Leptandra Virgimca.  593

the  pappus  displayed  in  an  open  globular  head.  The  root  sends  forth  a
number  of  small,  long  fibers  of  a  dark- yellowish  color.  The  whole  plant
is  officinal.  It  has  a  peculiar,  aromatic,  not  disagreeable  odor,  and  a
slightly  aromatic,  bitter  taste,  and  yields  its  properties  to  water  or
alcohol. The  plant  has  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Motherwort  is  emmenagogue,  nervine,  anti-
spasmodic and  laxative.  It  is  usually  given  in  warm  infusion  in
amenorrhea  from  colds  ;  and  in  suppressed  lochia,  we  have  found  it
superior  to  any  other  remedy.  Likewise  useful  in  hysteria.  The  ex-
tract is  recommended  in  nervous  complaints,  pains  peculiar  to  females,  in
irritable  habits,  delirium  tremens,  typhoid  stages,  with  morbid  nervous
excitability,  all  chronic  diseases  attended  with  restlessness,  wakefulness,
disturbed  sleep,  spinal  irritation,  and  neuralgic  pains  in  the  stomach  and
head,  and  in  liver  affections.  Combined  with  Ictodes  and  Cimicifugin,  it
forms  a  superior  antispasmodic,  nervine  and  emmenagogue.  Externally,
it  may  be  used  as  a  fomentation  to  the  bowels,  in  suppressed  or  painful
menstruation,  etc.  Dose  of  decoction,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces,
every  one,  two  or  three  hours  ;  of  the  extract,  from  three  to  six  grains,
every  two  or  four  hours.  The  root  in  infusion  is  diuretic.  The  seeds  have
been  given  in  half  teaspoonful  doses  in  water,  in  bilious  colic,  and,  it  is
said,  will  pass  through  the  bowels  when  quicksilver  will  not ;  they  must
not  be  pulverized. This,  however,  requires  more  satisfactory  evidence.

Off.  Prep.  —  Decoctum  Leonuri ;  Extractum  Leonuri  Hydro-alco-
holicum  ;  Pilulse  Leonuri  Compositse.


LEPTANDRA  VIRGINICA.

Leptandra.
Nat.  Orel. — Scrophulariaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  This  is  the  Veronica  Virginica  of  Linnaeus,  and  is
known  also  by  the  names  of  Culver's  Physic,  Tall  Speedwell,  Blackroot,
etc.  It  is  an  indigenous,  perennial  plant,  with  a  simple,  straight,  smooth
herbaceous  stem,  from  two  to  five  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  whorled
in  fours  to  sevens,  short-petioled,  lanceolate,  acuminate,  finely  serrate,
and  flaucous  beneath.  The  flowers  are  white,  numerous,  nearly  sessile,
and  disposed  in  long,  terminal,  and  verticillate,  sub-terminal  spikes.
Spikes  panicled,  crowded;  bracts  very  small.  Calyx  four  parted.  Corolla
small,  nearly  white,  with  a  deeply  four-cleft,  spreading  border,  the  lateral
or  lower  segments  narrower  than  the  others,  tubular,  pubescent  inside ;
tube  of  the  corolla  longer  than  its  limb  and  much  longer  than  the  calyx.
Stamens  two,  very  much  exserted.  Capsule  oblong-ovate,  not  notched,
opening  by  four  teeth  at  the  apex,  many-seeded.

History. — This  plant  grows  throughout  the  United  States,  in  limestone
countries,  and  in  rich  moist  places,  woods,  thickets  and  barrens,  and
38


594  Materia  Medica.

flowers  in  July  and  August.  The  root  is  perennial,  horizontal,  irregular,
woody,  about  as  thick  as  the  finger,  from  six  to  twelve  inches  long,
blackish  externally,  brownish  internally,  with  many  long  slender,  dark
fibers,  issuing  horizontally  in  every  direction.  It  is  the  officinal  part,
and  should  be  gathered  in  the  fall  of  its  second  year.  When  fresh  it  has
a  faint  odor  and  a  bitter,  nauseous  taste,  which  is  somewhat  lessened  by
drying,  and  yields  its  active  properties  to  boiling  water,  or  still  better  to
alcohol.  Age  impairs  its  virtues.  It  has  not  been  satisfactorily  ana-
lyzed, but  is  said  to  contain  an  essential  oil,  bitter  extractive,  tannin,
gum,  resin,  and  woody  fiber.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  fresh  root  is  too  drastic  and  uncertain  for
medicinal  use,  producing  vomiting,  bloody  stools,  dizziness,  vertigo,  and
in  pregnant  females,  abortion,  unless  used  with  much  care.  A  decoc-
tion or  extract  of  the  fresh  root  is  highly  recommended  in  intermittent
fever;  my  colleague,  Prof.  W.  Byrd  Powell,  who  has  tested  it,  states
that  it  removes  the  disease,  and  leaves  the  system  in  a  condition  to  repel
a  fresh  attack  or  relapse ;  but  it  must  be  used  with  caution,  as  it  is  apt
to  produce  unpleasant  symptoms.  The  dried  root  is  laxative,  chola-
gogue  and  tonic  ;  and  is  employed  with  much  success  in  all  hepatic
affections,  as  it  causes  the  liver  to  act  with  great  energy,  and  without
active  catharsis.  In  all  febrile  diseases  it  is  an  excellent  laxative,  and
may  be  given  daily  in  tablespoonful  doses  of  the  infusion,  repeated  every
hour,  until  one  or  two  moderate  evacuations  are  procured;  it  is  pecu-
liarly applicable  to  bilious  and  typhoid  fevers,  causing  discharges  of  a
black,  tarry  and  morbid  character,  without  debilitating  the  tone  of  the
bowels  or  of  the  general  system.  It  has  been  successfully  employed  in
leprosy  and  cachectic  diseases,  and  its  effects  in  these  instances,  may,
probably,  be  owing  to  its  influence  on  the  biliary  apparatus.  As  a  laxa-
tive and  tonic  in  small  doses,  it  is  very  valuable  in  dyspepsia,  especially
when  connected  with  an  inactive  condition  of  the  liver,  and  torpid  and
debilitated  bowels,  likewise  in  all  functional  diseases  of  the  liver,  as
above  remarked.  It  exerts  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  absorbent
system,  and  in  combination  with  cream  of  tartar,  has  been  successfully
used  in  obstinate  cases  of  dropsy.  In  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  it  lias
proved  very  beneficial  as  a  cathartic,  one  active  dose  frequently  effecting
a  cure.  By  some  it  is  said  to  possess  narcotic  properties,  and  that,
during  its  operation,  it  will  frequently  be  necessary  to  rouse  the  patient
lest  he  fall  into  a  deep  sleep.  I  have  never  witnessed  this  effect.  Dose
of  the  powdered  root  as  a  cathartic,  from  twenty  to  sixty  grains,  which
maybe  given  in  sweetened  water;  of  the  infusion,  in  typhoid  stages,
half  a  fluidounce  every  hour,  until  it  operates,  and  to  be  repeated  daily.
Dose  of  the  hydro-alcoholic  extract,  which  is  its  best  form  of  adminis-
tration, from  one  to  five  grains  in  form  of  pills.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Leptandrae  Hydro-alcoholicum  ;  Extractum
Leptandrte  Fluidum  ;  Leptandrin  ;  Tinctura  Leptandrae.


Leptandrin.  595

LEPTANDRIN.
Leptandrin.

THE RESINOUS PRINCIPLE OF LEPTANDRA VIRGINICA.

Preparation.  —  Leptandrin  may  be  prepared  as  follows:  Take  of
coarsely-powdered  Leptandra  any  quantity,  alcohol  90  per  cent.,  a  suf-
ficient quantity.  By  percolation,  obtain  a  saturated  tincture.  Place  the
tincture  in  a  still,  and  distil  off  the  alcohol,  and  while  hot  add  the  resi-
duum slowly  and  gradually  to  cold  water,  equal  to  two  or  three  times  its
volume.  Allow  this  to  stand  for  seven  or  eight  days,  when  the  resinous
matter  will  precipitate  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  in  a  semi-liquid  mass,
while  the  water  will  hold  in  solution  most  of  the  extractive  and  coloring
matter.  Remove  this  water,  and  to  the  residue  add  a  fresh  supply  of
cold  water,  subjecting  it  to  another  washing.  Then  carefully  remove
the  water,  after  having  allowed  all  the  resinous  matter  to  precipitate,
which  last  must  be  dried  in  shallow  tin  or  porcelain  plates  by  a  mode-
rately-continued heat,  until  it  becomes  perfectly  friable  on  cooling,  and
which  generally  requires  several  days.  In  the  preparation  of  this  arti-
cle, high-proof  alcohol  must  be  employed,  on  account  of  the  large
amount  of  extractive  matter  present,  which  is  soluble  in  water,  and
which,  according  to  the  proportion  of  water  present  in' the  tincture,  pre-
vents the  precipitation  of  the  leptandrin.  Care  must  be  taken  likewise
in  the  application  of  heat,  as  too  great  a  heat,  say  above  175°  or  180p
will  render  the  precipitate  inert,  or  materially  affect  its  character.  The
above  is  the  process  usually  employed  in  the  preparation  of  leptandrin  ;
it  may  be  obtained,  however,  by  adding  the  tincture  to  four  times  its
weight  of  water,  distilling  off  the  alcohol,  and  setting  aside  the  residue  for
several  days,  until  all  the  leptandrin  precipitates.  Remove  the  water,
and  dry  the  precipitate  as  above,  having  previously  washed  it  in  fresh
water  to  remove  extractive,  etc.  Roots  of  the  second  year's  growth,
are  said  to  afford  the  most  leptandrin.

History. — Leptandrin,  according  to  its  mode  of  preparation,  is  a  jet-
black  resinous  substance,  resembling  pure  asphaltum,  or  of  a  grayish-
brown  color,  with  a  peculiar,  faint  cyanic  smell  and  taste,  somewhat
bitter,  but  not  disagreeable.  In  its  aggregate  form,  it  has  a  vitreous
fracture,  is  unalterable  in  a  dry  atmosphere,  and  is  without  acid  or  alkaline
reactions.  Its  powder  has  a  black,  glistening,  soot-like  appearance,  and
coalesces  in  a  warm  and  moist  air.  When  first  made  it  is  soluble  in
alcohol,  though  as  with  many  other  resins  upon  exposure  to  atmospheric
influence,  it  becomes  imperfectly  soluble  in  alcohol,  but  perfectly  so
upon  the  addition  of  aqua  ammonia.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  but  the
addition  of  liquor  potassa  or  aqua  ammonia,  renders  it  completely  solu-
ble, from  which  solutions  it  is  precipitated  by  acids.  Ether  takes  up  a
portion  of  it,  and  aqua  ammonia  added  perfectly  dissolves  it,  leaving


596  Materia  Medica.

the  ether  floating  above  of  a  light  reddish-yellow  color.  It  is  lighter  than
chloroform,  and  is  insoluble  in  it.  Spirits  of  turpentine  takes  up  a  small
portion,  forming  a  dirty-white  liquid ;  acetic  acid  likewise  dissolves  a
small  proportion.  None  of  the  above  agents  have  been  tried  with  heat.
Nitric  acid  turns  leptandrin  a  brownish-yellow  color;  muriatic  acid,  a
light  yellowish-green ;  and  sulphuric  acid,  reddish-brown.  Heat  semi-
liquefies  it,  and  it  burns  with  a  bright  white  flame,  giving  out  a  sweet,
balsamic,  rather  agreeable  odor,  somewhat  resembling  balm  of  Gilead
buds  when  burned,  or  incense.  This  valuable  agent  was  first  prepared
and  introduced  to  the  profession  by  W.  S.  Merrell,  of  Cincinnati.

Properties. — Leptandrin  is  a  powerful  cholagogue,  with  but  slight  lax-
ative influence ;  except  given  in  very  large  doses  its  cathartic  powers  are
but  very  feeble.  It  is  one  of  the  most  efficacious  and  important  agents
among  those  peculiar  to  Eclectic  practice,  being  the  only  known  medi-
cine that  efficiently  stimulates  and  corrects  the  hepatic  secretions,  and
functional  derangements  of  the  liver,  without  debilitating  the  system  by
copious  alvine  evacuations.  It  may  be  safely  and  efficaciously  employed
in  the  treatment  of  diarrhea,  cholera-infantum,  some  forms  of  dyspepsia,
typhoid  fever,  and  all  diseases  connected  with  biliary  derangements.
Combined  with  podophyllin  it  is  a  prompt  and  effectual  remedy  in  epi-
demic dysentery,  often  effecting  a  permanent  cure  in  from  twelve  to
eighteen  hours  ;  in  dysentery  with  irritable  bowels,  it  may  be  used  alone
with  advantage,  or  combined  with  camphor,  as  in  such  cases  its  union
with  podophyllin  is  contra-indicated.  In  intermittents  it  renders  the
action  of  quinia,  when  united  with  it,  more  certain,  and  prevents  the
liability  to  a  return  of  the  disease,  at  least  for  the  season,  and  is  likewise
highly  beneficial  in  infantile  remittent  fever,  and  in  periodic  diseases
generally,  of  an  obstinate  character,  in  which  quinia  alone  seems  to
produce  but  little  or  no  result.  It  may  also  be  used  in  many  other  com-
binations with  much  advantage,  as  with  Hydrastin,  or  dried  beef's  gall,
in  some  dyspeptic  affections,  jaundice,  piles,  etc.,  or  with  Iridin,  Bapti-
sm, Phytolaccin,  Corydallin,  Caulophyllin,  and  other  active  principles,
in  various  forms  of  disease.  Dose  of  Leptandrin,  from  one-half  of  a
grain  to  five  or  six  grains,  every  three  or  four  hours,  according  to  the
action  or  effect  desired.  Some  practitioners  neglect  the  use  of  this
agent,  because  it  does  not  act  so  powerfully  as  podophyllin,  and  hence
lose  the  influence  of  a  very  important  remedy  in  functional  derangements
of  the  liver,  and  other  organs  essential  to  digestion.  In  relation  to  this
article,  a  late  Professor  in  the  Eclectic  school,  observes :

"This  is  not  strictly  speaking  a  cathartic.  It  is  aperient,  alterative,
and  tonic.  Its  effects  on  the  liver  are  peculiar.  In  cases  of  children
afflicted  with  summer  complaint,  where  there  is  evidently  a  lack  of  the
proper  biliary  secretion,  but  where,  owing  to  the  already  irritated  condi-
tion of  the  bowels,  the  ordinary  medicines  for  arousing  the  liver  are


Leptandrin.  597

inadmissible,  this  article  seems  to  be  the  very  thing  needed.  While  it  acts
freely  upon  the  liver,  instead  of  purging  it  seems  only  to  change  the
discharges  from  the  light  and  watery  or  slimy  condition,  to  a  darker  and
apparently  bilious  state,  rendering  them  more  and  more  consistent,
until  they  become  perfectly  natural,  'without  having  been  arrested
entirely,  or  at  any  time  aggravated.  It  at  the  same  time  seems  to  act
as  a  tonic,  restoring  the  tone  of  the  stomach  and  increasing  the  strength
and  activity  of  digestion. It  is  a  most  valuable  remedy  in  dyspepsia.

"  The  dose  is  from  one-fourth  to  one  grain  every  one  or  two  hours  in
acute  cases,  and  from  one  to  two  grains  three  times  a  day  in  chronic
cases.  It  is  valuable  to  combine  with  Podophyllin  as  a  remedy  in  dys-
pepsia and  chronic  hepatitis.

"In  the  epidemic  dysentery,  which  has  prevailed  for  the  past  two  sea-
sons, in  many  parts  of  our  country,  this  article  has  been  of  great  service.
It  was  usually  given  with  the  best  success  after  evacuating  the  bowels
freely,  with  a  combination  of  Podophyllin  and  Leptandrin  or  Rhubarb.
For  this  purpose,  give  from  one-half  of  a  grain  to  one  grain  every  hour,
gradually  lengthening  the  intervals  as  the  discharges  become  darker.
Though  it  may  not  be  applicable  in  all  cases  of  dysentery,  it  is  doubtless
one  of  the  most  useful  articles  in  this  dangerous  disease."

In  cholera-infantum,  a  disease  which  sometimes  sets  at  defiance  all
the  skill  of  the  physician,  I  have  met  with  excellent  success  by  the  fol-
lowing combination  :  Take  of  Leptandrin  six  grains,  Quinia  three  grains,
Camphor  one  grain  and  a  half,  Ipecacuanha  three-fourths  of  a  grain.
Mix  and  divide  into  twelve  powders,  of  which  one  may  be  given  every
two  or  three  hours,  and  its  use  continued  thus  for  several  days.  Its
action  at  first  is  to  increase  the  alvine  passages  and  apparently  augment
the  disease,  but  in  a  few  days  the  character  of  the  evacuations  change,
become  more  and  More  normal,  as  well  as  more  regular  in  their  appear-
ance ;  after  which,  one  or  two  powders  per  day  for  a  week,  will  render
the  cure  permanent.  This  powder,  in  large  doses  for  adults,  will  be
found  very  efficacious  in  painful  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  as  well  as  in
6evere  pains  depending  upon  intestinal  irritation.  The  following  has  also
been  of  advantage  in  cholera-infantum  :  Triturate  together,  Charcoal  one
drachm,  with  Leptandrin  three  grains,  and  divide  into  twelve  powders,
of  which  one  powder  is  to  be  given  every  two  or  three  hours  until  the
evacuations  become  more  natural,  after  which,  give  one  or  two  powders
a  day  for  a  few  days.

Off.  Prep. — Pilulas  Baptisiae  Composites ;  Pilulae  Leptandrini  Com-
positae ;  Pulvis  Leptandrini  Compositus.


598  Materia  Medica.

LIATRIS  SPICATA.

Button  Snakeroot.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Gay-feather,
Devil' s-bit,  etc.,  has  a  perennial,  tuberous  root,  and  an  erect,  annual  stem
from  two  to  five  feet  in  hight,  mostly  stout  and  very  leafy.  The  leaves
are  linear,  glabrous,  alternate,  punctate,  ciliate  at  base,  the  lower  ones
from  three  to  five-nerved,  and  narrowed  at  base.  The  /lowers  are  ses-
sile, and  of  a  bright-purple  color  ;  the  heads  are  many  and  densely
crowded  in  a  long,  terminal  spike,  and  from  eight  to  twelve-flowered.
Scales  of  the  cylindrical  bell-shaped  involucre  oblong  or  oval,  appressed,
with  slight  scarious  margins.  Achenia  pubescent,  obconic.  Pappus
permanent,  colored,  barbellate,  not  evidently  plumose  to  the  naked  eye.
Receptacle  naked.  This  plant  is  found  in  moist  places  in  the  middle  and
southern  states,  and  is  found  in  abundance  in  the  prairies.

Liatris  Squarrosa  or  Blazing  Star,  has  also  a  perennial  tuberous  root,
with  a  stem  two  to  three  feet  high,  thickly  beset  with  long-linear,  nerved
leaves,  the  lower  ones  being  attenuated  at  the  base.  The  heads  are  few,
sessile  or  nearly  so,  with  brilliant  purple  flowers  ;  racemes  flexuous,  leafy,
involucre  ovate-cylindric  ;  scales  of  the  involucre  large,  numerous,  squar-
rose-spreading,  outer  ones  larger,  leafy,  inner  ones  mucronate-acumi-
nate,  scarcely  colored.  Pappus  plumose.  This  plant  is  likewise  found
in  the  middle  and  southern  states,  growing  in  dry  soil,  and  is  known  in
the  south  by  the  name  of  Rattlesnake' s  Master.

Liatris  Scariosa  or  Gay -feather,  has  a  perennial,  tuberous  root,  with
a  stout,  scabrous-pubescent  stem,  from  four  to  five  feet  in  hight,  and
whitish  above.  The  leaves  are  numerous,  lanceolate,  tapering  at  both
ends,  glabrous,  with  rough  margins,  entire,  lower  ones  on  long  petioles
and  from  three  to  nine  inches  long,  upper  ones  from  one  to  three  inches
in  length,  by  from  one  to  three  lines  in  width.  Heads  from  five  to  twenty,
an  inch  in  diameter,  in  a  long  raceme,  with  from  twenty  to  forty  purple
flowers.  Involucre  globose -hemispherical ;  scales  of  the  involucre  obo-
vate  or  spathulate,  very  obtuse,  with  dry  and  scarious  margins,  often
colored.  Pappus  scabrous.  This  plant  is  found  in  dry  woods  and  sandy
fields  from  New  England  to  Wisconsin,  and  extending  southward.

History. — All  the  above  plants  are  splendid  natives,  and  flower  through
August  and  September.  There  are  several  other  species  of  this  genus
which  appear  to  possess  medical  properties  analogous  to  each  other,  and
which  deserve  further  investigation,  as  the  L.  Odoratissima,  L.  Cylin-
dracea,  L.  Graminifolia,  etc.  The  roots  are  the  officinal  parts  ;  they  are
all  tuberous,  with  fibers  of  an  acrid,  bitterish,  pungent  taste,  and  an
aromatic,  terebinthinate  odor,  which  properties  are  owing  to  the  presence


LlGUSTRUM VuLGARE.  599

of  a  peculiar  balsamic  resin  ;  water  partially  extracts  its  virtues,  but
alcohol,  wholly.  They  have  not  been  analyzed.  The  resin  obtained
from  them  might,  probably,  prove  a  valuable  agent.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  plants  are  diuretic,  with  tonic,  stimulant,
and  emmenagogue  properties.  A  decoction  of  them  is  very  efficacious
in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  and  nephritic  diseases,  in  doses  of  from  two  to  four
fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  it  is  also  reputed  beneficial  in
scrofula,  dysmenorrhea,  amenorrhea,  after-pains,  etc.  It  is  likewise  of
advantage  in  sore-throat,  used  as  a  gargle,  and  in  injection  has  proved
useful  in  leucorrhea.  Said  to  be  beneficial  in  Bright's  disease,  in  con-
nection with  Lycopus  Virginicus  and  Aletris  Farinosa  ;  equal  parts  of
each  in  decoction.  These  plants  are  celebrated  for  their  alexipharmic
powers  in  bites  of  venomous  snakes  ;  Rush  states,  that  when  bitten,  the
inhabitants  of  the  Southern  States  bruise  the  bulbous  roots,  and  apply
them  to  the  wound,  at  the  same  time  drinking  freely  of  a  decoction  of
them  in  milk. This  requires  corroboration.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Liatris.


LlGUSTRUM  VULGARE.

Privet.

Nat. Ord. — Oleacese. Sex.  Syst.— Diandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  also  called  Privy,  Prim,  etc.,  is  a  smooth
shrub,  growing  five  or  six  feet  high,  with  wand-like  branches.  The  leaves
are  dark-green,  one  or  two  inches  in  length,  and  about  half  as  wide,  oppo-
site, entire,  smooth,  lanceolate  and  obovate,  obtuse  or  acute,  and  on
short  petioles.  The  flowers  are  small,  numerous,  white,  and  disposed  in
tetramerous,  thyrsoid,  terminal  panicles.  Calyx  minutely  four-toothed,
deciduous,  short-tubular  ;  corolla  funnel-form,  tube  short,  limb  with  four
spreading,  ovate,  obtuse  lobes.  Stamens  two,  on  the  tube  of  the  corolla ;
anthers  large,  exserted.  Style  very  short;  stigma  two-cleft.  Berries
spherical,  black,  in  conical  bunches,  two-celled,  and  from  two  to  four-
seeded  ;  seeds  convex  on  one  side,  angular  on  the  other.

History. — Privet  is  found  growing  wild  in  woods  and  thickets,  and
along  the  roadsides  from  New  England  to  Virginia,  and  West  to  Mis-
souri, flowering  in  May  and  June.  It  is  used  in  England  for  hedges,
from  which  place  it  is  supposed  to  be  introduced  ;  but  it  is  indigenous
in  Missouri.  It  is  often  cultivated  in  gardens.  The  leaves  are  the
officinal  parts  ;  they  have  but  little  odor,  but  an  astringent,  bitter  taste.
Water  or  alcohol  extracts  their  virtues. They  have  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Privet  leaves  are  astringent ;  a  decoction  of
them  is  very  valuable  in  chronic  bowel  complaints,  ulceration  of  stomach


600  Materia  Medica.

and  bowels,  as  a  gargle  for  ulcers  of  mouth  and  throat,  and  as  an  in-
jection for  ulcerated  ears  with  offensive  discharges,  leucorrhea,  gleet,
and  ulceration  of  the  bladder,  likewise  in  diabetes.  They  may  be  em-
ployed either  in  decoction  or  powder.  Dose  of  the  powdered  leaves,
from  thirty  to  sixty  grains,  three  times  a  day ;  of  the  decoction,  from
two  to  four  fluidounces.  The  flowers  have  been  employed  for  similar
purposes  with  the  leaves.  The  berries  have  a  sweetish  bitter  taste,  are
reputed  cathartic,  and  to  color  the  urine  brown ;  they  have  been  used
for  dyeing.  Probably  the  bark  will  be  found  equal,  if  not  superior  in
efficacy,  to  the  leaves.  On  analysis  it  was  found  to  contain  a  peculiar
substance  called  ligustrin,  also  sugar,  mannite,  muco-saccharine  matter,
starch,  chlorophylle,  bitter  extractive,  bitter  resin,  tannin,  albumen  and
salts.  It  is  deserving  further  attention.
Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Ligustri.


LILIUM  CANDIDUM.

Meadow  Lily.

Nat.  Ord. — Liliacese. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  This  plant  has  a  perennial  root  or  bulb,  consisting  of
imbricated  fleshy  scales,  from  which  arises  a  thick  stem  from  three  to
four  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  scattered  lanceolate,  and  narrowed
at  the  base.  The  flowers  are  large,  snow-white,  campanulate,  smooth
inside,  and  disposed  in  a  terminal  raceme.

History. — This  is  an  exotic,  a  native  of  Syria  and  Asia  Minor,  and  is
much  cultivated  in  this  country  on  account  of  its  beautiful  white  flowers,
which  have  long  been  regarded  as  the  emblems  of  purity,  and  which
appear  in  June  and  July.  The  bulb  is  the  part  used,  it  is  inodorous,
but  has  a  peculiar,  disagreeable,  somewhat  bitter  and  mucilaginous
taste.  It  contains  a  large  proportion  of  mucilage,  and  a  small  quantity
of  an  acrid  principle  which  is  dissipated  by  heat.  Water  extracts  its
virtues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Meadow  Lily,  or  White  Lily  as  it  is  sometimes
called,  is  mucilaginous,  demulcent,  tonic,  and  astringent.  Useful  in
leucorrhea  and  prolapsus  uteri,  the  decoction  taken  internally,  and  em-
ployed in  injection  ;  it  is  more  decided  in  its  effects,  when  combined
with  life-root  (Senecio  Gracilis).  Boiled  in  milk,  it  forms  an  excellent
poultice  for  ulcers,  external  inflammations,  tumors,  etc.  The  recent
root  is  stated  to  have  been  useful  in  dropsy.  The  flowers  have  an
agreeable  odor,  which  is  imparted  to  oil  or  lard  ;  and  a  liniment  or
ointment  is  sometimes  prepared  from  them,  and  used  as  a  soothing  ap-
plication in  external  inflammations.  The  petals  contain  .a  fragrant  oil,
which  has  been  thought  beneficial  in  earache,  and  uterine  pains.


LlNUM UsiTATIbblMUM.  (501

LINUM USITATISSIMUM.

Flaxseed.

Nat.  Ord. — Linaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Pentagynia.

THE SEEDS.

Description. — Flax  is  an  annual  plant,  very  smooth,  with  a  slender
fibrous  root,  and  one  or  more  erect,  slender,  delicate,  and  round  stems,
one  or  two  feet  high,  and  branching  at  the  top.  The  leaves  are  small,
alternate,  sessile,  lanceolate,  acute,  entire,  three-veined,  and  of  a  pale-
green  color  ;  the  lowermost  short  and  blunt.  The  flowers  are  several,
large,  of  a  delicate-blue  color,  erect,  and  disposed  in  a  terminal  corym-
bose panicle,  and  are  supported  on  long  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  per-
sistent, and  has  five  lanceolate,  erect  sepals,  which  are  three-nerved  at
base,  and  imbricated  in  aestivation.  The  corolla  consists  of  five  thin,
delicate,  crenate,  oblong  or  obovate,  striated  petals,  readily  dropping  off,
glossy,  broad  above,  narrow  below,  and  contorted  in  aestivation.  The
stamens  are  five,  subulate,  erect,  as  long  as  the  calyx,  united  at  base,
and  supporting  two-celled  sagittate  anthers.  The  ovary  is  superior,
ovate,  and  surmounted  by  five  blue,  slender  styles.  The  fruit  is  a
globular  capsule,  about  the  size  of  a  small  pea,  having  the  persistent
calyx  at  the  base,  crowned  with  a  sharp  spine,  having  five  cells  contain-
ing two  seeds  each,  divided  from  each  other  by  a  false  dissepiment.
Seeds  elliptical,  smooth,  brown,  and  shining.

History. — The  native  country  of  Flax  is  unknown,  though  supposed  to
be  derived  from  Egypt,  or  from  Central  Asia.  It  was  known  at  a  very
early  period,  as  it  is  mentioned  in  the  ninth  chapter,  thirty-first  verse,  of
Exodus,  as  growing  in  Egypt.  At  present  it  is  naturalized  in  nearly  all
civilized  countries.  It  flowers  in  June  and  July,  and  ripens  its  seeds  in
August.  The  seeds,  as  well  as  the  oil  they  yield  by  expression  are
officinal.  The  seeds  are  small,  oval,  oblong,  flattened  on  the  sides  with
acute  edges,  somewhat  pointed  at  one  end,  about  a  line  in  length,
smooth,  shining,  of  a  brown  color  externally,  and  yellowish-white
within.  They  are  devoid  of  smell,  and  have  an  oily  mucilaginous  taste,
and  consist  of  a  mucilaginous  tegument  and  oleaginous  cotyledons.
When  the  teguments  or  husks  are  steeped  in  hot  water,  a  peculiar
gummy  or  mucilaginous  matter  is  obtained,  viscid,  inodorous,  and  almost
tasteless  ;  alcohol  added  to  this  infusion  forms  a  white  flaky  precipitate,
and  subacetate  of  lead  affords  a  copious  dense  precipitate.  In  prepar-
ing the  infusion  the  seeds  should  not  be  bruised  as  the  mucilage  resides
only  in  their  external  coat.  When  flaxseed  mucilage  is  dried  it  forms  a
brown  gummy  mass,  containing  in  100  parts,  52.70  of  arabin  or  soluble
gum,  29.89  of  an  insoluble  azotiferous  gummy  principle,  and  10.30  of
moisture,  and  yields  7. 1 1  per  cent,  of  ashes.  Vauquelin  found  in  it  free
acetic  acid,  silica,  and  various  salts  of  potassa  and  lime.


602  Materia  Medica.

The  internal  portion  of  the  seed,  or  nucleus,  contains  a  peculiar  oil,
called  Linseed  Oil,  and  which  is  obtained  from  the  seeds  by  expression
without  the  aid  of  heat.  It  is  rather  thick,  of  a  pale  amber  color,  inclin-
ing to  green,  of  a  feeble,  peculiar,  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  nauseous
taste.  Its  density  varies  from  0.927  to  0.934.  It  resists  a  cold  of  4°
F.,  without  concreting;  on  exposure  to  the  action  of  the  air,  it  slowly
becomes  thicker,  and  gradually  hardens  into  a  firm  elastic  varnish — on
which  account  it  is  highly  useful  in  painting,  in  the  formation  of  printers'
ink,  and  other  important  applications.  It  boils  at  600°  F.,  is  soluble  in
forty  parts  of  cold  alcohol,  five  of  boiling,  and  in  one  part  and  a  half  of
ether  ;  becomes  rancid  with  facility ;  and  is  saponified  by  the  alkalies.
When  prepared  on  the  large  scale,  the  seeds  are  roasted  before  expres-
sion, in  order  to  destroy  the  gummy  matter  contained  in  their  tegument.
Oil  Cake,  is  the  cake  or  refuse  which  remains  after  the  expression  of  the
oil,  as  it  retains  the  mucilaginous  matter  of  the  husk,  it  is  much  used  for
fattening  cattle.  Flaxseed  Meal  is  the  seeds  finely  ground ;  it  is  of  a
dark-gray  color,  highly  oleaginous,  and  when  mixed  with  hot  water
forms  a  soft  adhesive  mass,  much  used  by  practical  chemists  for  luting.
Flaxseed,  according  to  Meyer,  contains  fixed  oil,  wax,  resin,  extractive,
gum,  tannin,  azotized  mucilage,  starch,  albumen,  gluten,  and  various
salts.

Properties  and  Uses. — Flaxseed  is  used  as  a  demulcent  and  emollient.
Half  an  ounce  of  the  seeds  not  bruised,  infused  in  half  a  pint  of  boiling
water,  forms  a  mucilage  which  is  very  useful  in  urinary  diseases,  cough,
catarrh,  dysentery,  and  inflammatory  affections  of  the  lungs,  intestines,
and  urinary  passages.  When  not  contra-indicated,  the  addition  of
lemon  juice  improves  the  flavor;  it  may  be  sweetened  with  loaf-sugar  or
honey.  A  decoction  of  flaxseed,  or  of  flaxseed  meal  forms  an  excellent
laxative  enema ;  and  the  meal  mixed  with  hot  water  forms  an  excellent
emollient  poultice.  Dose  of  the  infusion,  one  or  two  pints  daily.  Lin-
seed oil  in  doses  of  two  fluidounces  twice  a  day,  is  said  to  have  cured
severe  cases  of  piles  within  two  or  three  weeks ;  while  using  it,  liquors
and  stimulating  diet  are  to  be  avoided.  It  is  likewise  reputed  beneficial
when  internally  administered  in  dysentery,  colic,  and  lumbricus.  Used
as  an  enema  it  is  advantageous  in  dysentery,  hemorrhoids  and  ascarides;
and  combined  with  lime-water,  it  forms  the  Carron  Oil,  an  excellent
application  to  burns.  One  pint  of  linseed  oil,  combined  with  half  an
ounce  each  of  oils  of  origanum  and  wintergreen,  forms  a  pleasant  ca-
thartic ;  to  be  given  in  the  same  doses  as  castor  oil.  The  oil  is  consti-
tuted of  a  large  proportion  of  oleic  acid,  together  with  margaric  acid  and
Glycerine.

Off.  Prep. — Cataplasma  Lini;  Linimentum  Calcis.


LlQUIDAMBAR StYRACIFLUA.  603

f

LlQUIDAMBAR  STYRACIFLUA.

Sweet  Gum.

Nat  Orel. — Altingiacea?,  Lindley.  Balsamacea?.  Sex.  Syst — Monoecia  Poly-
andria.

THE CONCRETE JUICE.

Description. — The  Sweet  Gum  tree  attains  the  Light  of  from  fifty  to
sixty  feet,  with  a  diameter  of  from  three  to  five  feet.  It  is  covered
with  a  gray,  deeply  furrowed  bark,  with  corky  ridges  on  the  branchlets.
The  leaves  are  palmate,  deeply  five  to  seven-lobed,  rounded,  smooth  and
shining,  of  a  rich  green  color;  the  lobes  finely  glandular,  serrate  and
acuminate  ;  the  veins  villous  at  their  bases.  When  bruised  the  leaves
are  fragrant,  and  turn  crimson  or  deep-red  in  autumn.  Sterile  flowers
in  several  globular  heads  arranged  in  a  conical  cluster,  naked  or  achla-
mydeous;  aments  monoecious,  roundish,  surrounded  with  a  four-leaved
involucre ;  stamens  numerous,  intermixed  with  minute  scales ;  filaments
short;  anthers  numerous,  oblong,  subsessile.  Fertile  flowers  consist  of
two-celled  ovaries,  subtended  by  minute  scales,  all  more  or  less  cohering
and  hardening  in  fruit,  forming  a  spherical  catkin  or  head ;  catkins
racemed,  nodding,  inclosed  in  the  bud  by  a  four-leaved  deciduous  in-
volucre. Styles  two,  long.  Fruit  a  kind  of  strobile,  composed  of  the
indurated  scales  and  capsules.  Capsules  or  pods  two-beaked,  two-celled,
opening  between  the  two  awl-shaped  or  prickly  diverging  styles.  Seeds
small,  several,  amphitropous,  with  sparing  albumen  and  a  straight  em-
bryo ;  cotyledons  foliaceous.

History. — This  is  a  large  and  beautiful  tree,  with  fine-grained  wood,
growing  throughout  the  United  States  in  moist  woods  from  Connecticut
and  New  Jersey,  southward;  but  found  in  greater  abundance  in  the
Southern  and  Middle  States.  In  warm  latitudes,  when  wounded  in  the
summer,  a  balsamic  juice  flows  from  its  trunk ;  it  is  of  the  consistence
of  thin  honey,  more  or  less  transparent,  of  a  yellowish-white  color,  of  a
peculiar,  agreeable,  balsamic  odor,  and  a  bitter,  wai-m,  and  acrid  taste.
It  concretes  into  a  soft  resinous  mass,  assuming  a  darker  color,  and  is
known  as  Sweet  Gum,  or  Liquidamber  (Liquidum  Liquidambar  Styraci-
fluae).  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  oils,  lard  or  fats.  According  to  M.
Bonastre,  it  contains  a  colorless  volatile  oil,  a  semi-concrete  substance
which  rises  in  distillation  and  is  separated  from  the  water  by  ether,  a
minute  proportion  of  benzoic  acid,  a  yellow  coloring  substance,  an  oleo-
resin,  and  a  peculiar  principle,  insoluble  in  water  and  cold  alcohol,  for
which  he  proposes  the  name  of  styracine.  The  proportion  of  benzoic
acid  is  greatly  increased  by  time.

Properties  and  Uses. — It  probably  possesses  virtues  similar  to  the  con-
crete juice  of  Styrax  officinale,  which  see.  It  makes  an  elegant  and
agreeable  ointment  when  melted  with  equal  parts  of  lard  or  tallow,


604  Materia Medica.

which  I  have  found  decidedly  useful  in  hemorrhoids,  psora,  ringworm
of  the  scalp,  porrigo  scutulata,  and  many  other  cutaneous  affections ;
also  in  that  indolent  species  of  ulcer,  known  as  "  fever  sores  on  the
legs."  In  anal  fistula,  it  maintains  an  increased  discharge,  softens  the
callosity  of  the  walls  of  the  sinus,  and  produces  a  normal  result,  and
effects  this  without  pain  to  the  patient.  If  necessary,  in  fistula,  a  little
creosote,  or  other  stimulant  may  be  added  to  it.  This  employment  of
sweet  gum  is  not  generally  known,  and  Eclectics  would  do  well  to  avail
themselves  of  its  use  in  the  above  diseases.  It  is  also  used  in  chronic
catarrh,  coughs,  and  pulmonary  affections.


LIRIODENDRON  TULIPIFERA.

Tulip  Tree.
Nat.  Onl. — Magnoliaceae. Sex.  St/st. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE  BARK.

Description. — This  tree  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Poplar,  White
Poplar,  Yellow  Poplar,  and  White-wood.  It  is  ordinarily  about  eighty
feet  high,  with  a  diameter  of  two  or  three  feet,  but  in  favorable  situa-
tions it  frequently  attains  a  bight  of  one  hundred  and  forty  feet,  with  a
diameter  of  eight  or  nine  feet.  The  trunk  is  perfectly  straight  and  cylin-
dric,  and  is  covered  with  a  bark  of  a  brown  or  grayish-brown  color,  smooth
when  young,  but  rugged  and  furrowed  when  old.  At  the  top  it  divides
rather  abruptly  into  coarse,  crooked  branches,  in  somewhat  regular
order,  giving  a  symmetrical  aspect  to  the  tree  ;  the  bark  of  the  young
branches  is  bluish  or  of  a  reddish  tinge.  The  leaves  are  large,  bright
green,  alternate,  on  long  petioles,  smooth,  shining,  three  lobed,  the
lateral  lobes  ovate,  the  middle  one  truncated  and  horizontally  notched
at  its  summit.  In  the  larger  leaves,  the  lateral  lobes  are  furnished  with
a  tooth-like  projection,  or  additional  lobe  at  some  distance  below  their
apex.  There  is  a  variety  with  the  lobes  of  its  leaves  not  pointed,  but
very  obtuse.  The  flowers  are  large,  solitary,  terminal,  tulip-shaped,
variegated  with  different  colors,  greenish-yellow  externally,  orange
within,  and  from  four  to  six  inches  in  diameter.  Bracts  two,  triangular,
falling  off  as  the  flower  expands.  The  calyx  is  double,  the  inner  and
proper  sepals  being  three,  large,  oval,  concave,  veined,  of  a  pale-green
color,  spreading  at  first,  but  afterward  reflexed.  The  corolla  consists  of
six,  seven,  or  more  petals,  which  are  obtuse,  concave,  veined,  of  a  pale
yellowish-green  color,  and  marked  with  an  irregular  indented  crescent
of  a  bright  orange  on  both  sides  toward  the  base.  Stamens  numerous,
with  short  filaments,  and  long,  linear,  adnate  anthers.  The  pistil  is  a
large,  conical,  acute  body,  its  upper  half  covered  with  minute,  blackish,
recurved  stigmas  ;  its  lower  furrowed,  being  a  mass  of  coalescing  styles
and ovaries. The  fruit consists of  numerous, long, narrow  scales,


LlRIODENDRON TuLIPIFERA.  605

attached  to  a  common  axis,  imbricated  in  a  conical  form,  attached  at  the
base  to  a  common  receptacle,  and  containing  each  two  seeds ;  the  upper
portion  of  each  scale  is  winged.  The  seeds  are  ovate,  blackish,  one  or
both  often  abortive.

History.  — This  is  one  of  the  most  magnificent  and  remarkable  trees
of  the  American  forests,  on  account  of  its  size,  its  striking  foliage,  its
beautiful  flowers,  its  useful  wood,  and  its  medicinal  properties.  It  is
found  in  rich  soils  from  New  England  to  Florida,  attaining  its  greatest
size  in  the  Middle  and  South-western  States,  and  its  flowers  appear  in
the  latter  part  of  May,  or  early  in  June.  The  wood  is  compact,  of  fine
grain,  light,  and  easily  worked,  and  is  much  used  for  a  variety  of
purposes  ;  it  has  the  property  of  resisting  moist  atmospheric  influences,
as  well  as  the  attacks  of  worms.  The  bark  of  the  root  or  trunk  is  the
officinal  part.  It  is  of  a  yellowish-white  color  when  its  epidermis  is
removed,  the  root-bark  being  the  darkest.  It  is  very  light  and  brittle,
of  a  peculiar  rather  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  bitter,  pungent,  aromatic
taste.  Age  impairs  its  properties.  Water  or  alcohol  takes  up  its  active
properties,  which  are  dissipated  by  long  boiling.  The  bark  should  be
collected  during  the  winter.  The  virtues  of  the  bark  appear  to  reside
in  a  volatile  principle,  which  escapes  during  boiling,  and  to  which  the
name  of  liriodendrin  was  given  by  its  discoverer,  the  late  Professor  J.
P.  Emmet.  It  may  be  obtained  by  macerating  the  powdered  bark  in
alcohol,  boiling  the  tincture  with  magnesia  till  it  assumes  an  olive-green
color,  then  filtering,  concentrating  by  distillation  till  the  liquid  becomes
turbid,  and  finally  precipitating  the  liriodendrin  by  the  addition  of  cold
water.  In  the  pure  state  it  is  white,  solid,  crystallizable,  brittle,  insolu-
ble in  water,  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,  fusible  at  180°,  volatilizable
and  partly  decomposed  at  270°,  slightly  aromatic,  with  a  warm,  bitter,
pungent  taste.  It  is  precipitated  from  infusion  or  decoction  by  alkalies,
and  from  its  alcoholic  solution  by  water ;  and  does  not  unite  with  acids
nor  alkalies.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tulip  tree  bark  is  an  aromatic,  stimulant  tonic,
and  has  proved  beneficial  in  intermittents,  chronic  rheumatism,  chronic
diseases  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  worms,  and  hysteria.  In  hysteria,
combined  with  a  small  quantity  of  Laudanum,  it  is  said  to  be  certain,
speedy,  and  effectual,  and  also  to  abate  the  hectic  fever,  night-sweats,
and  colliquative  diarrhea  of  phthisis.  The  warm  infusion  is  diaphoretic,
and  under  certain  states  of  the  system  has  proved  diuretic.  Dose  of
the  powdered  bark,  from  a  scruple  to  two  drachms ;  of  the  saturated
tincture,  which  is  the  best  form  of  administration,  one  fluidrachm;  of
the  infusion,  from  one  to  two  fluidounces ;  of  liriodendrin,  from  five  to
ten  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Liriodendroni;  Vinum  Hydrastii  Compositum.


COG  Materia Medica.

LOBELIA INFLATA.

Lobelia.

Nat.  Ord. — Lobeliacete. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND SEEDS.

Description. — This  plant,  generally  known  as  Wild  or  Indian  Tobacco,
is  an  annual  or  biennial  indigenous  plant,  more  commonly  the  latter,
with  a  fibrous,  yellowish-white  root,  and 'an  erect,  angular,  very  pubescent
or  hairy  stem,  from  six  inches  to  two  feet  in  bight,  and  much  branched
toward  the  top.  The  leaves  are  scattered,  alternate,  sessile,  ovate  or
oblong,  unequally  serrate,  and  hairy.  Thefiowers  are  numerous,  small,
in  leafy  terminal  racemes,  and  supported  on  short  peduncles,  each
arising  from  the  axil  of  a  small  bract.  The  calyx  is  five-toothed,  the
segments  being  linear,  pointed,  and  as  long  as  the  corolla.  The  corolla
is  of  a  pale-blue  color,  monopetalous,  but  cleft  on  its  upper  side  nearly
to  its  base,  bilabiate,  with  the  upper  lip  divided  into  two  lanceolate  seg-
ments, and  the  lower  into  three  oval  ones.  Anthers  united  into  an
oblong,  curved  body,  purple;  filaments  white.  Style  filiform ;  stigma
curved,  two-lobed,  and  inclosed  by  the  anthers.  Gupsule  two-celled,
ovoid,  inflated,  striated,  ten-angled,  and  crowned  with  the  persistent
calyx. Seeds  numerous,  small,  oblong,  brown.

History. — This  is  a  very  common  weed,  growing  in  fields  and  by  the
roadsides  throughout  the  United  States,  and  flowering  from  July  to
September,  or  until  the  occurrence  of  frost.  The  whole  plant  possesses
medicinal  activity,  but  the  leaves  and  seeds  are  more  usually  employed.
The  root  is  said  to  be  the  most  active  part  of  the  plant.  The  proper
time  for  gathering  the  plant  is  in  August  or  September,  when  the  cap-
sules are  numerous.  It  should  be  dried  in  the  shade  with  care,  when  it
may  be  kept  whole,  or  in  the  state  of  powder.  When  dried  it  has  a
faint,  irritating,  rather  unpleasant  odor,  and  a  strong,  acrid,  nauseous
taste,  very  much  resembling  tobacco,  producing  a  burning  acrid  impres-
sion upon  the  tongue  and  fauces,  attended  with  nausea  and  a  flow  of
saliva.  The  powdered  leaves  are  of  a  greenish  color  —  the  seeds  in
powder,  brownish.  It  yields  its  properties  to  water  by  infusion,  alcohol,
ether,  or  vinegar.  Heat  dissipates  its  active  principles,  hence  it  should
never  be  boiled.  It  contains  an  odorous  volatile  principle,  lobelic  acid,
gum,  resin,  chlorophylle,  fixed  oil,  lignin,  salts  of  lime  and  potassa,  oxide
of  iron,  and  a  peculiar  alkaline  principle,  named  Lobelina,  of  which  the
seeds  contain  double  the  amount  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  plant.

The  fixed  oil  of  lobelia  may  be  obtained  by  bruising  the  seed  between
heated  rollers,  and  pressing  while  hot  in  a  strong  linen  cloth,  between
proper  iron  plates.  Its  consistence  is  nearly  like  that  of  linseed  oil,  and
possesses  the  drying  qualities  common  to  the  fixed  oils.  It  possesses
all  the  medical  properties  0f  the  seed.


LOEKLIA INFLATA.  607

Lobelina  may  be  obtained  by  bruising  one  pound  of  lobelia  seed  in  a
mortar,  and  then  adding  eight  pints  of  alcohol,  and  one  pint  of  acetic  acid ;
digest  with  the  heat  of  the  sun  for  several  days,  or  until  the  seeds  are
deprived  of  their  acrimony,  and  strain.  Evaporate  the  tincture,  to  two
pints,  and  filter;  then,  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  evaporate  to  an
extract.  This  extract  is  then  to  be  triturated  with  magnesia  and  water,
and  after  repeated  agitation  for  several  hours,  is  strained  through  calico,
and  then  filtered.  This  liquor,  which  holds  the  lobelina  in  solution  is
then  shaken  repeatedly  with  fresh  portions  of  sulphuric  ether,  until  the
water  settling  below  is  deprived  of  its  acrimony.  The  ethereal  solution
must  now  be  drawn  off  with  a  syphon,  or  carefully  decanted,  and  then
left  to  evaporate  spontaneously.  The  residue  is  impure  lobelina,  of  a
reddish-brown  color,  and  a  honey-like  consistence.  To  obtain  it  pure,
the  residue  is  treated  with  water,  to  which  a  slight  excess  of  sulphuric
acid  is  added,  and  then  boiled  with  animal  charcoal,  saturating  with
magnesia,  filtering,  agitating  repeatedly  with  fresh  portions  of  ether,  till
the  aqueous  portion  is  deprived  of  acrimony,  then  carefully  decanting
off  the  ethereal  solution  as  before,  or  drawing  it  off  with  a  syphon,  and
then  evaporated  again  spontaneously.  The  lobelina  thus  obtained  is  a
yellowish  liquid,  lighter  than  water,  of  an  odor  rather  aromatic,  and  an
extremely  acrid  and  permanent  taste.  It  is  readily  soluble  in  alcohol  or
ether,  but  less  so  in  water.  Ether  will  remove  it  from  its  aqueous  solu-
tion, and  upon  evaporation  the  lobelina  may  be  again  obtained.  Its
reaction  is  decidedly  alkaline,  and  with  sulphuric,  nitric  and  muriatic
acids,  it  forms  soluble  and  crystallizable  salts,  but  not  crystallizable
with  acetic,  and  probably  tartaric  and  citric  acids.  It  is  instantly  pre-
cipitated from  its  solution  by  tannic  acid,  with  which  it  forms  an  insoluble
compound.  Unless  combined  with  acids,  it  is  decomposed  by  boiling.
It  possesses  the  active  properties  of  the  plant  in  a  concentrated  form.
As  an  emetic,  three  to  ten  drops,  sufficiently  diluted  with  water,  will
generally  operate.  With  vinegar,  or  citric  acid  and  honey,  it  forms  an
oxymel  which  is  very  beneficial  in  bronchitis  and  cynanche  trachealis.
By  some  it  is  considered  as  the  narcotic  (?)  principle  of  lobelia.

Lobelia  was  known  to  the  Penobscot  Indians,  and  was  also  extensively
used  by  the  people  of  New  England  in  domestic  practice,  long  before  the
time  of  Samuel  Thomson,  its  assumed  discoverer.

Properties  and  Uses. — Lobelia  is  emetic,  nauseant,  expectorant,  relax-
ant, sedative,  antispasmodic,  and  secondarily  cathartic,  diaphoretic,  and
astringent.  There  is  much  discordance  of  opinion  among  medical  men
as  regards  its  narcotic  properties,  many  denying  that  it  holds  any  such
influences  whatever.  When  chewed,  lobelia  produces  a  disagreeable
sense  of  burning  and  distension,  which  extends  into  the  esophagus,
terminating  in  nausea  and  vomiting,  with  oppressive  prostration,  relaxa-
tion of  the  muscular  system,  and  a  languid  pulse.  In  doses  of  ten  or
twenty  grains  of  the  leaves  or  seeds,  it  is  a  prompt  and  efficient  emetic,


608  Materia Medica.

and  may  be  given  in  all  cases  where  emesis  is  indicated ;  its  action  is
somewhat  modified  by  a  combination  with  ipecacuanha  and  other  vege-
table emetics,  and  rendered  safer  and  more  effectual.  In  very  small
doses  it  excites  diaphoresis,  increases  expectoration,  diminishes  cough,
and  counteracts  spasmodic  action.  In  all  diseases  of  the  respiratory
organs,  as  croup,  pneumonia,  pertussis,  catarrh,  asthma,  and  those  fits
of  dyspnoea  resembling  asthma,  it  will  be#  found  useful  either  as  an
emetic,  or  expectorant.  As  with  ipecacuanha  so  with  lobelia,  it  will  be
found  very  useful  in  all  febrile  diseases,  especially  during  their  earlier
stages,  as  it  relaxes  the  system,  modifies  arterial  excitement,  and  pro-
duces diaphoresis,  thus  tending  to  equilibriate  the  circulation,  and
assisting  the  vital  powers  to  eliminate  morbid  humors.  As  an  expec-
torant it  may  be  used  in  tincture  combined  with  tincture  of  bloodroot,
syrup  of  senega,  oxymel  of  squill,  wine  of  ipecacuanha,  etc.  In  all
cases  where  relaxation  of  the  system  is  desired,  either  to  subdue  spasm,
or  otherwise,  lobelia  will  be  found  a  very  valuable  article — probably  no
remedy  is  more  effectual.  Spasmodic  movement  is  incompatible  with
nervous  and  muscular  relaxation,  hence  we  find  prompt  relief  in  epi-
lepsy, hysteria,  cramps,  tetanus,  chorea,  convulsions,  etc.,  by  the  exhi-
bition of  lobelia  in  doses  sufficient  to  excite  nausea  and  relaxation.
Rigidity  of  the  os  uteri  has  often  been  overcome  by  the  employment  of
this  drug  internally,  or  as  an  enema.  In  strangulated  hernia,  and  other
intestinal  obstructions,  it  has  been  found  an  excellent  relaxant  when
used  in  injection;  and  on  this  account  it  is  highly  beneficial  in  fractures,
dislocations,  and  tedious  labors.  It  may  be  given  internally,  and  applied
in  fomentation  externally ;  the  oil  may  be  used  externally  likewise  for
the  purpose  of  causing  relaxation.

Externally,  the  infusion  has  been  found  useful  in  ophthalmic  affec-
tions ;  and  the  tincture  is  a  valuable  local  application  to  sprains,  bruises,
rheumatic  pains,  erysipelas,  and  erysipelatous  inflammations,  tetter,  and
other  forms  of  cutaneous  disease,  as  well  as  a  remedy  for  the  poison  from
ivy  or  dogwood.  A  poultice  of  powdered  lobelia  and  slippery-elm  bark,
with  a  weak  ley- water  will  be  found  valuable  in  erysipelatous  diseases,
bites  and  stings  of  poisonous  insects,  spasmodic  affections  of  the  limbs,
pains,  and  to  produce  muscular  relaxation.

The  oil  of  lobelia,  as  prepared  by  W.  S.  Merrell,  is  valuable  in  tetanus
and  some  other  extreme  cases,  as  it  is  easy  to  introduce  enough  upon
the  tongue  to  relax  the  whole  system  immediately.  On  account  of  its
tendency  to  produce  inflammation  of  the  stomach,  it  should  not  be  em-
ployed alone  as  a  common  emetic,  but  a  few  drops  of  it  should  be  tritu-
rated with  sugar,  and  diffused  in  chamomile,  boneset,  or  other  emetic
infusion.  One  drop  of  the  oil  triturated  with  one  scruple  of  sugar,  and
divided  into  from  six  to  twelve  doses,  will  be  found  highly  useful  as  an
expectorant,  nauseant,  sedative,  and  diaphoretic,  when  given  every  one
or  two  hours,  as  may  be  required. As  a  local  application,  much  benefit


Ltcopus  Virginicus.  609

may  be  derived  from  it,  where  a  particular  nerve  is  to  be  quieted,  or  a
muscle  to  be  relaxed.  An  excellent  liniment  may  be  made  of  a  mixture
of  half  an  ounce  each  of  oils  of  amber  and  sassafras,  a  drachm  of  oil
of  lobelia,  and  half  a  drachm  of  ethereal  oil  of  capsicum.  To  be  used  in
painful  neuralgic  and  rheumatic  affections.  As  an  emetic,  dose  of  the
powder,  from  twenty  to  sixty  grains  ;  of  the  tincture,  from  two  to  four
fluidrachms.  As  a  nauseant  and  expectorant,  from  five  to  twenty  grains.
When  lobelia  does  not  act  as an  emetic,  it  is  very  apt  to  purge.

There  are  two  other  species  of  lobelia,  the  Blue  lobelia,  Lobelia  Syphi-
litica, and  the  Red  lobelia,  L.  Cardinalis.  The  first  is  diaphoretic,  emetic
and  cathartic  ;  also  diuretic  and  antisyphilitic,  and  a  strong  infusion  of  it
has  cured  gonorrhea.  It  has  likewise  been  used  in  dropsy,  diarrhea,
and  dysentery.  The  root  is  the  part  used  ;  dose,  from  twenty  to  sixty
grains  of  the  powder.  The  L.  Cardinalis  is  said  to  be  anthelmintic,
nervine,  and  antispasmodic.  These  two  varieties  are  seldom,  if  ever,
used  in  medicine.

Off.  Prep. — Acetum  Lobeliae ;  Cataplasma  Lobeliae  et  Ulmus ;  Enema
Lobelias  Composita ;  Extractum  Lobeliee  Fluidum  ;  Extractum  Lobeliae
Fluidum  Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Stillingias  Compositum ;  Lotio  Lobe-
liae Composita;  Oleum  Lobelias;  Pilulas  Aloes  Composites;  Pulvis  Lobe-
lias Compositus ;  Tinctura  Hydrastis  Compositae  ;  Tinctura  Lobeliae ;
Tinctura  Lobelias  Composita ;  Tinctura  Lobelias  et  Capsici ;  Tinctura  San-
guinarias  Acetata;  Tinctura  Sanguinarias  Composita;  Tinctura  Viburni
Composita.


LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.

Bugleweed.

Nat. Ord. — Lamiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  as  Paul's  Betony,  and  Water
Ilorehound,  is  indigenous,  with  a  perennial,  creeping  fibrous  root,  from
which  arises  an  erect,  herbaceous,  furrowed,  somewhat  pubescent,
obtusely  quadrangular  stem,  nearly  simple,  and  from  one  to  two  feet  in
hight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  sessile,  broad-lanceolate,  attenuated  and
entire  at  both  extremities,  remotely  serrate  in  the  middle,  somewhat
rough,  purplish,  and  beset  with  glandular  dots  on  their  under  surface.
The  flowers  are  minute,  sessile,  in  axillary  whorls,  with  two  subulate
bracts  at  the  base  of  each  flower.  The  calyx  is  tubular,  four-cleft,
shorter  than  the  seeds,  persistent ;  segments  ovate-lanceolate  and  ac\ite.
Corolla  white,  tubular,  with  four  small  round  lobes,  twice  as  long  as  the
calyx,  the  emarginate  segment  broader  than  the  others.  Stamens  two,
as  long  as  the  corolla,  inserted  on  the  tube  near  the  base  of  the  upper
segment.  Anthers  erect,  two-lobed,  pale-purple.  The  ovary  is  superior,
39


610  Materia  Medica.

quadrangular,  somewhat  furrowed,  with  a  filiform  style,  somewhat
exserted,  and  terminated  by  a  two-cleft  stigma,  the  lobes  of  which  are
acute.  Seeds  four,  longer  than  the  calyx,  obovate,  compressed,  and
crenate  at  the  top.

History. — Bugleweed  is  found  growing  throughout  the  greater  part  of
the  United  States,  in  moist  and  shady  situations,  flowering  in  July  and
August.  It  has  a  peculiar,  balsamic,  terebinthinate  odor,  and  a  disa-
greeable, slightly  bitter  taste.  It  imparts  its  properties  to  boiling  water
in  infusion.  The  whole  herb  is  officinal.  It  has  not  been  analyzed,
but,  probably,  its  virtues  depend  upon  a  volatile  oil  and  tannic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  exact  medicinal  virtues  of  this  plant  are
not  fully  understood.  It  appears  to  possess  sedative,  tonic,  astringent,
and  narcotic  properties,  and  has  been  successfully  used  in  incipient
phthisis,  hemoptysis,  and  other  hemorrhages  ;  it  allays  irritation,  dimin-
ishes the  frequency  of  the  pulse,  and  lessens  cough.  It  acts  somewhat
like  digitalis,  in  abating  the  velocity  of  the  pulse,  but  is  devoid  of  the
dangerous  effects  resulting  from  the  use  of  that  drug.  It  is  peculiar  to
Eclectics  in  the  treatment  of  diabetes,  having  cured  when  all  other
means  were  useless ;  and  has  been  beneficial  in  chronic  diarrhea  and
dysentery,  inflammatory  diseases  of  drunkards,  diseases  of  the  heart,
and  intermittents.  Dose  of  the  powrder,  from  one  to  two  drachms;  of
the  infusion,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.

The  Lycopus  Europeus,  a  European  species,  but  naturalized  in  this
country,  has  long  been  employed  as  a  febrifuge  ;  and  the  most  obstinate
intermittents  have  been  cured  by  two-drachm  doses  of  the  dried  plant.  It
is  frequently  collected  and  sold  for  L.  Virginicus,  but  may  be  distinguished
by  its  acutely  quadrangular  stem,  its  narrow  lanceolate  leaves  of  which  the
lower  are  somewhat  pinnatifid,  its  more  crowded  flowers,  and  the  acute
segments  of  its  calyx,  armed  with  short  spines.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Lycopus.


LYTHRUM  SALIC  ARIA.

Loosestrife.
Nat.  Ord. — Lythraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Dodecandria  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  name  of  Purple-willow-
herb,  is  an  elegant  perennial,  with  a  woody  root,  sending  up  several
erect,  leafy,  slender,  reddish  stems,  three  or  four  feet  high,  downy,
herbaceous,  quadrangular,  or  even  hexangular  near  the  root.  The
leaves  are  mostly  opposite,  occasionally  in  whorls  of  three  or  four,
in  which  cases  the  number  of  angles  in  the  stem  is  likewise  in-
creased ; they  are  also nearly  sessile,  lanceolate,  acute,  entire,  from


Lythrum  Salicaria.  611

three  to  six  inches  in  length,  and  about  one-fourth  as  wide,  the
upper  ones  diminished  to  bracts,  cordate  at  the  base,  and  downy  on  the
under  surface,  and  at  the  margin.  The  flowers  are  large,  numerous,
nearly  sessile,  inodorous,  purple,  axillary,  crowded  and  whorled  in  a  ter-
minal, interrupted  wand-like  spike,  six  in  each  whorl.  The  calyx  is
inferior,  cylindrical,  striated,  downy  or  hairy,  with  twelve  marginal  teeth,
six  of  which  are  long,  subulate,  erect,  and  reddish  ;  the  others  minute,
ovate,  concave,  and  inflected.  The  petals  are  six,  elliptic-oblong,  equal,
waved.  Stamens  twelve,  filiform,  the  six  alternate  ones  shorter,  bearing
red,  roundish  anthers,  with  green  or  yellow  pollen.  The  ovary  is  ovate-
oblong,  with  a  simple  style  and  capitate  stigma.  The  capsule  is  small,
elliptical,  two-celled,  many-seeded,  and  inclosed  in  the  tube  of  the
calyx.

History. — This  plant  is  found  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  being  an
inhabitant  of  Europe,  Asia,  North  America,  and  New  Holland,  growing
in  wet  situations,  and  in  this  country  bearing  purple  flowers  in  July  and
August.  It  is  inodorous,  but  has  a  herbaceous,  mucilaginous,  some-
what astringent  taste.  It  yields  its  properties  to  water.  It  has  not  been
analyzed,  but  probably  contains  tannin  and  much  mucilage.  It  renders
boiling-  water  very  mucilaginous,  and  its  decoction  is  blackened  by  sul-
phate of  iron.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Demulcent  and  astringent.  Very  useful  in
diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  other  affections  of  the  bowels,  where  this  class
of  remedies  is  indicated  ;  used  freely  in  decoction.  Externally,  it  is  very
beneficial  as  a  local  application  in  ophthalmia,  leucorrhea,  gleet,  ulcers,
and  some  forms  of  cutaneous  disease  ;  used  either  as  a  wash,  or  in  form
of  poultice.  Dose  of  the  powder,  one  drachm,  two  or  three  times  a  day ;
of  the  decoction,  one  or  two  fluidounces.  The  Decodon,  or  L.  Verticil-
latum,  or  Swamp  Willow-herb,  bearing  purple  flowers,  possesses  similar
properties  to  the  above ;  it  is  said  to  cause  abortion  in  mares  and  cows
browsing  it  in  winter,  and  may,  perhaps,  exert  a  medicinal  influence  on
the  female  uterus.  It  grows  in  swamps  throughout  the  United  States
and  Canada,  has  a  stem  woody  at  the  base,  often  prostrate,  and  rooting
at  the  summit,  three  to  eight  feet  long,  or  when  erect  from  two  to  three
feet  in  bight,  and  from  four  to  six-angled.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  or
in  whorls  of  three,  lanceolate,  on  short  petioles,  acute  at  base,  from  three
to  five  inches  long,  gradually  acuminate  and  acute  at  apex.  The  flowers
are  large,  purple,  in  axillary  subsessile  umbels  of  three  or  more,  appa-
rently whorled,  constituting  a  long,  leafy,  terminal  and  showy  panicle.
Calyx  short,  broadly  campanulate,  with  five  erect  teeth,  and  five  elon-
gated, spreading,  horn-like  processes.  Petals  five  or  six.  Stamens  ten,
alternate  ones  very  long  ;  style  filiform  ;  capsule  globose,  included,  three-
celled,  many  seeded.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Lythri.


612  Materia Medica.

MAGNESIA. (Magnesia  Usta.)
Magnesia.

Preparation. — Magnesia,  or  Calcined  magnesia,  as  it  is  more  usually
termed,  is  obtained  by  placing  carbonate  of  magnesia  in  an  earthen
vessel,  and  exposing  it  to  a  red-heat  for  two  hours,  or  until  all  the  car-
bonic acid  is  expelled,  by  which  process  the  earth  is  obtained  pure.  A
very  intense  heat  is  not  required  for  the  calcination,  but  merely  sufficient
to  expel  the  water  and  carbonic  acid ;  if  a  higher  heat  is  kept  up,  the
magnesia  obtained  will  be  hard,  dense,  less  readily  soluble  in  acids,  and
less  beneficial  as  a  medicine.  The  expulsion  of  the  carbonic  acid  may
be  known  by  mixing  a  little  of  the  magnesia  with  water,  when  on  the
addition  of  muriatic  acid,  no  effervescence  ensues.

History. — Magnesia  is  a  pure  white  powder,  of  various  degrees  of
density,  obscurely  alkaline,  inodorous,  and  of  an  earthy  taste  ;  it  attracts
from  twelve  to  twenty  per  cent,  of  moisture  from  the  air,  passing  from
the  caustic  to  the  slaked  condition,  but  it  does  not  absorb  carbonic  acid
in  a  corresponding  degree.  Water  sprinkled  on  it  is  absorbed  to  the
extent  of  about  18  per  cent.,  but  without  heat  being  evolved,  and  when
thrown  into  water,  it  crackles  slightly.  Its  specific  gravity  is  about  2.3.
Trituration  greatly  increases  its  specific  gravity,  so  that  a  bottle  which
would  only  contain  one  ounce  of  it  when  not  triturated,  will,  by  this
process,  readily  hold  four  ounces,  or  four  times  the  quantity.  The
density  of  the  magnesia  is  increased  by  employing  a  high  temperature
during  calcination.  It  is  soluble  in  5142  parts  of  water  at  60°,  in
36,000  parts  of  boiling  water.  It  unites  with  acids,  occasioning  much
heat,  and  forms  sails,  some  of  which  are  soluble  ;  the  nitrate  and  muriate
of  magnesia  are  very  deliquescent,  and  soluble  in  alcohol.  It  is  precip-
itated from  its  saline  solutions,  in  the  state  of  a  hydrate,  by  the  pure
alkalies,  and  in  the  state  of  a  carbonate  by  the  carbonates  of  soda  and
potassa ;  the  bicarbonates  of  alkalies,  and  ordinary  carbonate  of  ammonia
cause  no  precipitate.  Magnesia  is  a  metallic  oxide,  consisting  of  one
equivalent  of  magnesium  12,  and  one  of  oxygen  8=20,  (Mg  O.)

Henry's  magnesia  is  usually  considered  the  best ;  its  method  of  pre-
paration is  not  known;  some  suppose  its  softness,  density,  and  ready
miscibility  with  water,  to  be  owing  to  its  being  prepared  by  precipitation
of  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  magnesia  by  caustic  potassa  ;  others  suppose
the  precipitation  to  be  accomplished  with  carbonate  of  soda  ;  and  others
again  to  the  employment  of  an  intense  heat.  If  equivalent  quantities
of  crystallized  sulphate  of  magnesia,  and  crystallized  carbonate  of  soda
be  boiled  together  in  water,  the  mixture  evaporated  to  dryness,  the
residual  salts  calcined,  and  the  sulphate  of  soda  dissolved  out  by  water,
the  magnesia  obtained  will  be  dense.  Husband's  magnesia  stands  next
to  Henry's,  and  Ellis's  last.

Magnesia  is  subject  to  adulteration  with  lime,  alumina,  silica,  and,


Magnesia  Carbonas.  613

from  careless  calcination  or  preservation,  carbonate  of  magnesia.  If
carbonate  of  magnesia  be  present,  the  addition  of  muriatic  acid  will
cause  effervescence  ;  silica  may  be  detected  by  the  same  acid,  which
slowly  dissolves  the  magnesia  but  does  not  touch  the  silica.  Alumina
may  be  detected  by  dissolving  fifty  grains  of  magnesia  in  a  fluidounce
of  muriatic  acid, — if  alumina  be  present,  ammonia  added  in  excess  will
cause  a  precipitate  of  the  adulteration.  A  neutral  solution  of  pure  mag-
nesia in  a  dilute  acid,  is  not  disturbed  by  the  addition  of  oxalate  of
ammonia,  or  bicarbonate  of  potassa ;  but  if  lime  be  present,  both  cause
precipitates  ;  the  first  of  oxalate  of  lime,  the  second  of  carbonate.  Ad-
herent sulphate  of  magnesia  is  indicated  in  the  muriatic  solution  of
magnesia,  by  the  chloride  of  barium,  which  precipitates  a  white  sulphate
of  baryta.

Properties  and  Uses. — Magnesia  is  antacid,  antilithic,  and  laxative.  It
is  useful  in  dyspepsia  with  acidity,  and  is  preferable  to  the  carbonate,  as
it  can  be  given  in  a  much  smaller  dose,  and  does  not  occasion  flatulence  ;
its  laxative  qualities  likewise  give  it  some  advantage  over  alkaline  reme-
dies. In  all  cases  attended  with  acidity  and  constipation  it  will  be  found
useful.  It  acts  as  an  antilithic,  first  by  correcting  gastric  acidity,  and
secondly  by  forming  with  free  lithic  acid,  or  lithate  of  ammonia,  the
more  soluble  lithate  of  magnesia.  It  is  on  this  account  beneficial  in
gout,  and  rheumatic  gout,  frequently  giving  material  relief.  It  is  apt  to
lodge  in  the  bowels,  if  no  acid  be  present,  hence,  in  this  case,  it  should
be  followed  by  a  draught  or  two  of  lemonade.  It  is  often  united  with
rhubarb  as  a  laxative  and  antacid.  Freshly  precipitated  hydrate  of
magnesia,  is  a  good  antidote  to  arsenious  acid,  though  inferior  to  the
hydrated  peroxide  of  iron.  The  following  is  recommended  in  cases  of
poisoning,  in  which  the  nature  of  the  poison  is  unknown :  after  freely
evacuating  the  stomach  by  emetics,  give  the  following  mixture  in  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  water — Calcined  magnesia,  pulverized  charcoal,  and
sesquioxide  of  iron,  of  each,  equal  parts,  mixed  together.  It  is  per-
fectly innocuous,  and  as  its  ingi-edients  are  antidotes  to  the  most  active
and  commonest  poisons,  it  is  very  likely  to  be  efficacious.  Dose,  as  a
laxative  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm;  as  an  antacid,  or  antilithic,
from  ten  to  thirty  grains  twice  a  day.


MAGNESLE  CARBONAS.

Carbonate  of  Magnesia.
Preparation.  —  Carbonate  of  Magnesia  rarely  occurs  as  a  native
mineral,  but  is  usually  prepared  on  a  large  scale,  by  decomposing  the
sulphate  of  magnesia  with  carbonate  of  soda.  Dissolve  four  pounds
nine  ounces  of  carbonate  of  soda,  and  four  pounds  of  sulphate  of  mag-
nesia, separately,  in  two  gallons  [Imperial  measure)  of  distilled  water ;
mix  the  solutions,  then  boil  for  two  hours,  constantly  stirring  it  with  a


614  Materia  Medica.

spatula,  and  adding  a  little  distilled  water  now  and  then,  so  as  nearly  to
preserve  the  measure ;  then  pour  off  the  liquor,  collect  the  precipitate,
wash  it  thoroughly  with  boiling  distilled  water,  and  dry  it.

Some  of  the  best  manufacturers  are  said  to  prepare  it  according  to  the
following  method ;  a  solution  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  parts  of
crystallized  carbonate  of  soda  is  gradually  added  to  a  saturated  solution
of  one  hundred  parts  of  sulphate  of  magnesia,  constantly  stirring  the
solutions.  The  mixture  is  then  heated  to  ebullition,  in  order  to  com-
plete the  precipitation  of  the  magnesia,  which  is  subsequently  washed
with  tepid,  and  finally  with  cold  water,  until  the  washings  no  longer
give  a  precipitate  with  the  salts  of  baryta.  When  it  is  sufficiently
washed,  the  carbonate  is  allowed  to  drain  for  one  or  two  days  on  large
linen  filters,  and  is  then  placed  in  wooden  molds  with  a  porous  bottom
of  brick  or  gypsum,  and  subjected  to  pressure  in  order  to  give  it  the
square  and  compact  form  into  which  it  is  usually  wrought.

History. — Carbonate  of  Magnesia  is  made,  in  this  country,  from  the
bittern  of  salt  works,  which  consists  principally  of  sulphate  of  magnesia,
and  chloride  of  magnesium.  But  the  greater  part  of  that  used  is  im-
ported from  Scotland,  from  which  place  it  comes  to  us  in  cases  of  one
hundred  and  twenty  pounds  each.  Officinal  Carbonate  of  magnesia  is
a  pure  white  powder,  loose,  and  granular  if  dense,  but  somewhat  coher-
ent, like  starch,  if  light,  —  inodorous,  nearly  tasteless,  smooth  to  the
touch,  permanent  in  the  air,  and  feebly  alkaline  in  its  action  on  vegeta-
ble colors.  It  is  soluble  in  2493  parts  of  cold,  and  9000  parts  of  hot
water ;  it  is  more  soluble  in  cold  water  if  it  be  charged  with  carbonic
acid,  forty-eight  parts  of  water  being  then  sufficient.  It  is  soluble  in
diluted  nitric,  muriatic,  sulphuric,  or  carbonic  acids,  and  effervescence
takes  place.  It  is  decomposed  by  strong  heat,  all  the  acids,  potassa,
soda,  lime,  baryta,  strontia,  the  sulphate,  phosphate,  nitrate,  or  muriate
of  alumina,  and  by  acidulous  or  metallic  salts.

There  are  two  kinds  of  this  salt  in  commerce,  the  light  and  the  heavy.
Its  density  is  said  to  depend  upon  the  strength  of  the  solutions  from
which  it  is  first  precipitated,  and  its  fineness  and  softness  to  the  touch,
upon  the  use  of  carbonate  of  soda  in  its  preparation.  The  light  carbo-
nate is  the  kind  manufactured  in  Scotland.  Carbonate  of  magnesia
varies  in  its  composition  with  the  mode  of  preparation.  Berzelius,  whose
doctrine  is  most  current,  supposes  it  to  be  a  compound  of  three  equiva-
lents of  the  hydrated  neutral  carbonate,  with  one  equivalent  of  hydrated
magnesia.  According  to  Phillips,  four  equivalents  of  the  carbonate  are
combined  with  one  of  the  bi-hydrate,  and  four  of  water.

The  impurities  of  carbonate  of  magnesia,  are  similar  to  those  of  mag-
nesia, and  usually  occur  from  carelessness  in  the  process  of  manufac-
turing. If  water  in  which  carbonate  of  magnesia  is  boiled  changes
turmeric  paper,  it  contains  an  alkaline  carbonate. If  chloride  of  barium


Magnesia  Sulphas.  615

causes  a  precipitate  in  the  water,  it  indicates  the  presence  of  a  sulphate,
or  carbonate,  or  both.  If  nitrate  of  silver  produces  a  precipitate,  a  chlo-
ride is  present,  probably  of  sodium.  Alumina  is  separated  from  the
muriatic  acid  solution  by  an  excess  of  ammonia  —  the  solution  to  be
made  in  an  excess  of  the  acid.  And  after  the  alumina  has  been  thrown
down,  if  lime  be  present,  the  addition  of  oxalate  of  ammonia  will  cause
a  precipitate  of  oxalate  of  lime.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Carbonate  of  Magnesia  is  antacid,  antilithic,
and  by  combining  with  acid  in  the  stomach,  it  becomes  generally  cathar-
tic ;  but  produces  no  purgative  effect,  if  it  undergoes  no  change  in  the
alimentary  canal.  Hence,  it  is  always  useful  to  give  it  in  combination
with  lemonade  or  lemon  juice.  Useful  in  cases  of  acid  stomach,  gout,
and  where  the  urine  contains  an  excess  of  uric  acid  ;  but  from  its  lia-
bility to  produce  flatulence,  in  consequence  of  the  extrication  of  its
carbonic  acid  in  the  stomach  and  bowels,  it  is  inferior  to  the  calcined
magnesia.  Dose,  as  an  antacid  and  antilithic,  one  or  two  scruples  ;  as
a  cathartic,  one  or  two  drachms  in  water  or  milk.  It  is  a  useful  agent
for  diffusing  camphor  and  volatile  oils  through  water  in  preparing  several
of  the  medicated  waters.

Of.  Prep. — Liquor  Magnesiee  Citratis.


MAGNESLE  SULPHAS.
Sulphate  of  Magnesia. (Epsom- Salts.)

Preparation.  —  Sulphate  of  Magnesia,  commonly  known  as  Epsom-
Salts,  is  one  of  the  constituents  of  sea  water,  and  of  some  saline  springs.
For  its  artificial  manufacture,  several  processes  are  followed,  the  most
important  of  which  are  as  follows  : — When  prepared  from  bittern  water,
or  the  residual  brine  after  crystallizing  salt  from  sea  water,  it  is  accom-
plished by  simple  evaporation  and  crystallization.  A  little  sulphuric
acid  is  added  to  the  bittern  in  order  to  convert  the  chloride  of  mag-
nesium, which  forms  part  of  its  saline  ingredients,  into  the  sulphate.  It
is  then  carefully  evaporated,  and  the  sulphate  of  magnesia  crystallizes
first,  leaving  behind  the  chlorides  of  magnesium  and  calcium.  It  is
then  collected,  and  any  impurities  it  may  contain  removed  by  washing
the  crystals  in  water,  or  by  chemically  precipitating  the  impurities,
filtering,  and  evaporating.  However,  the  sulphate  of  magnesia  obtained
by  this  process  is  very  apt  to  be  impure  and  deliquescent.

It  is  also  prepared  from  dolomite,  a  magnesian  limestone,  composed
of  carbonate  of  lime  and  carbonate  of  magnesia  ;  the  carbonates  may  be
converted  into  sulphates,  and  the  latter  separated  by  means  of  the  infe-
rior solubility  of  the  sulphate  of  lime.  Or  the  dolomite  may  be  calcined,
thereby  driving  off  the  carbonic  acid,  and  converting  the  remaining
earths  into  hydrates  ;  then  muriatic  acid  is  added  in  such  quantity  as  to


616  Materia Medica.

unite  with  the  caustic  lime  only,  and  the  chloride  of  calcium  being  re-
moved by  solution  in  water  the  magnesia  is  converted  into  the  sulphate
by  means  of  sulphuric  acid.  It  is  likewise  prepared  from  magnesite,  a
siliceous  hydrate  of  magnesia,  which  is  found  in  veins  in  the  serpentine
and  other  magnesian  rocks  so  common  in  the  neighborhood  of  Baltimore
and  southern  Pennsylvania.  This  mineral  is  finely  powdered,  and  the
powder  saturated  with  sulphuric  acid.  The  whole  mass  is  then  dried
and  calcined  at  a  red-heat,  for  the  purpose  of  changing  any  existing  sul-
phate of  iron  into  red  oxide.  It  is  then  dissolved  in  water,  and  sulphuret
of  lime  added  to  separate  any  remaining  portion  of  iron.  The  salt  is
crystallized  and  dissolved  a  third  time  in  order  to  purify  it.  In  this
manner  sulphate  of  magnesia  is  extensively  prepared  at  Baltimore,  and
is  usually  very  pure  and  clean.  Sulphate  of  magnesia  also  occurs  as  a
native  production,  being  found  abundantly  in  many  of  the  great  caverns
of  the  western  states.  It  is  found  in  long,  slender,  prismatic  crystals;
as  an  efflorescence  on  certain  rocks  and  soils,  or  it  occurs  in  masses  of
six,  eight,  or  ten  pounds.

History. — Sulphate  of  Magnesia  was  discovered  in  1694  by  Grew,  who
prepared  it  from  the  saline  waters  of  Epsom  in  England,  from  whence
it  has  derived  its  familiar  name,  Epsom- Salts  ;  at  present  it  is  usually-
met  with  in  small  acicular  crystals,  transparent  and  colorless,  inodorous,
of  a  cooling,  saline,  bitter,  disagreeable  taste,  and  slightly  efflorescent  in
dry  air.  When  slowly  crystallized  it  forms  large  rhombic  or  quadran-
gular prisms,  often  truncated  on  the  obtuse  edges,  and  terminated  by
two  or  four  converging  planes,  somewhat  like  the  crystals  of  sulphate  of
Zinc,  and  sulphate  of  Soda.  A  moderate  heat  causes  it  to  fuse  in  its
water  of  crystallization ;  a  higher  temperature  renders  it  anhydrous ;  and
at  a  full  red-heat  the  anhydrous  salt  melts  into  an  enamel.  It  is  insolu-
ble in  alcohol,  soluble  in  its  own  weight  of  water  at  60°,  and  in  three-
fourths  of  its  weigh},  at  212°.  It  is  decomposed  by  potassa,  soda,  and
their  carbonates;  by  lime,  baryta,  strontia,  and  their  soluble  salts.  Am-
monia partially  decomposes  it,  forming  with  the  remaining  salt  a  double
sulphate.  The  bicarbonates  of  potassa  and  soda,  decompose  it  by  the
aid  of  heat.  It  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  acid  40,  one  of  base  20,  and
seven  of  water  63=123,  its  combining  number. (Mg  0+S03  +7  Aq.)

This  salt  is  liable  to  various  impurities,  but  as  now  prepared  is  gener-
ally quite  free  from  them.  Iron,  and  chloride  of  magnesium  are,  pro-
bably, the  most  common  impurities  at  present  met  with.  Iron  may  be
detected  by  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium,  and  the  chloride  of  magnesium
by  rendering  the  salt  moist.  If  sulphuric  acid  be  added  to  the  sulphate,
and  muriatic  acid  gas  is  not  evolved,  the  absence  of  all  chlorides  is  indi-
cated. To  detect  the  presence  of  sulphate  of  soda,  ten  grains  of  the
salt  are  to  be  dissolved  in  a  fluidounce  of  water,  and  treated  with  a  solu-
tion of  sesquicarbonate  of  ammonia ;  280  minims  of  a  solution  of  one


Magnolia  Glauca.  617

part  of  phosphate  of  soda  in  twenty  parts  of  water  are  then  added,  which
precipitates  97  per  cent,  of  the  magnesia  in  a  pure  sulphate,  leaving  a
little  magnesia  in  the  solution.  Filter  the  solution,  and  add  to  it  more
of  the  phosphate  of  soda  solution,  if  no  more  magnesia  is  thrown  down,
the  salt  must  contain  something  else  than  sulphate  of  magnesia.

Properties  and  Uses. — Refrigerant,  cathartic  and  diuretic.  Chiefly
used  in  febrile  and  inflammatory  affections,  or  in  cases  where  a  refriger-
ant, mild  laxative  effect  is  desired.  It  may  be  dissolved  in  eight
times  its  quantity  of  water.  The  addition  of  four  or  five  drops  of
sulphuric  acid  to  the  dose  covers  the  bitter  taste  of  the  salt,  causes  it  to
sit  easier  on  the  stomach,  counteracts  its  refrigerant  effects,  does  not
impair  its  energy,  completely  removes  its  tendency  to  gripe  or  irritate
the  rectum,  and  prevents  it  from  interfering  with  the  appetite  or  diges-
tion. M.  Combes  states  that  the  bitterness  of  this  salt  may  be  removed,
by  the  following  means  :  Take  of  Sulphate  of  Magnesia,  one  ounce,
powder  of  roasted  coffee,  two  and  a  half  drachms,  water  about  sixteen
ounces.  Place  in  a  vessel  (not  a  tin  one),  and  boil  for  two  minutes,
remove  from  the  fire,  and  let  the  mixture  infuse  for  some  minutes,  so  as
to  allow  time  for  the  development  of  the  aroma;  then  strain  and  sweeten
to  the  taste.  By  this  process  the  salt  is  not  decomposed.  Should  it  be
required  to  increase  the  amount  of  the  sulphate  without  augmenting  the
proportion  of  coffee,  two  or  three  grains  of  tannic  acid  should  be  added
to  the  boiling  decoction.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  two  drachms  to
two  ounces. Very  seldom  used  by  Eclectics.


MAGNOLIA  GLAUCA.

Magnolia.
Nat.  Ord. — Magnoliacese. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  tree  is  known  by  several  names,  as  White  bay,
Beaver-tree,  Sweet  Magnolia,  Swamp  Sassafras,  etc.  In  the  Northern
States  it  is  often  nothing  more  than  a  shrub,  from  four  to  ten  feet  high  ;
in  the  south  it  often  attains  the  hight  of  forty  feet.  Its  average
hight  is  about  twenty-five  feet.  The  trunk  is  covered  with  a  smooth
grayish  bark,  and  that  of  the  young  twigs  is  a  bright,  smooth  green,
scarred  with  rings  at  the  insertion  of  the  leaves  by  the  fall  of  the
deciduous  stipules ;  the  branches  are  crooked  and  much  divaricated.
The  leaves  are  alternate,  petiolate,  oval,  obtuse,  entire,  coriaceous,
smooth,  thick,  opake,  yellowish-green  on  their  upper  surface,  and
with  the  exception  of  the  midrib,  of  a  beautiful  pale  glaucous  color
beneath  ;  when  young  they  are  covered  with  a  silken  pubescence.  The
flowers  are  large,  solitary,  terminal,  cream-colored,  of  a  grateful  odor,
and  stand  on  a  short  incrassated  peduncle.  The  calyx  is  composed  of
three,  spathulate,  obtuse,  concave  sepals ;  the  corolla  consists  of  from


618  Materia  Medica.

eight  to  fourteen,  obovate,  obtuse  and  concave  petals,  which  are  con-
tracted at  their  base.  The  stamens  are  very  numerous,  and  are  inserted
in  common  with  the  petals  on  the  sides  of  a  conical  receptacle  ;  filaments
very  short ;  anthers  linear,  mucronated,  two-celled,  opening  inwardly.
Ovaries  collected  into  &  cone,  each  divided  by  a  furrow,  and  tipped
with  a  brownish,  linear,  recurved  style.  Fruit  a  small,  squarrose,
fleshy  cone,  about  an  inch  in  length,  of  a  green  color  tinged  with
red.  These  cones  consist  of  numerous  imbricated  cells,  each  contain-
ing a  bright  red  seed,  and  open  longitudinally  at  the  back  for  the
escape  of  the  seed.  The  seeds  are  obovate,  and  on  the  opening  of
the  capsule  at  maturity,  are  connected  to  the  cone  by  a  funiculus,  or
white  slender  thread  formed  of  spiral  vessels,  which  suspends  them  for
some  time  after  they  have  fallen  out.  The  M.  Glauca  is  found  growing
in  swamps  and  morasses  along  the  seaboard,  from  Massachusetts  to  the
Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  is  seldom  met  with  at  any  great  distance  from  the
seaboard.  It  flowers  in  May,  June,  or  July  according  to  the  latitude.
At  the  south  it  is  known  as  White  bay,  or  Sweet  hay.  The  fragrance  of  its
flowers  is  usually  agreeable,  but  to  some  persons  it  is  not  only  unpleasant,
but  absolutely  deleterious,  causing  oppressed  breathing  and  faintness.

Magnolia  Acuminata,  or  Cucumber  Tree,  is  much  larger  than  the
preceding,  often  growing  to  the  bight  of  sixty  or  eighty  feet,  with  a
diameter  of  from  four  to  six  feet.  The  leaves  are  oval,  acuminate,
pubescent  beneath,  five  or  six  inches  in  length  by  three  or  four  in
breadth.  The  flowers  are  five  or  six  inches  in  diameter,  bluish,  some-
times yellowish-white,  slightly  odorous,  with  from  six  to  nine  obovate,
rather  obtuse  petals.  The  cones  are  about  three  inches  long,  cylindric,
bearing  some  resemblance  to  a  small  cucumber.  This  tree  grows  near
the  Falls  of  Niagara,  and  in  the  mountainous  regions  in  the  interior  of
the  country  from  New  York  to  Georgia ;  it  is  more  abundant  in  the
Southern  States. Its  flowers  appear  in  May  and  June.

Magnolia  Tripetala,  or  Umbrella  Tree,  the  M.  Umbrella  of  Lamark,
is  a  small  tree  not  exceeding  thirty  feet  in  hight,  and  almost  always
having  an  inclined  trunk.  Its  leaves  are  from  sixteen  to  twenty  inches
long,  by  six  or  eight  in  width,  thin,  obovate,  somewhat  wedge-shaped,
entire,  acute  at  both  extremities,  silky  when  young,  and  often  appear-
ing whorled  at  the  ends  of  the  branches  in  the  form  of  an  umbrella,
displaying  a  surface  thirty  inches  or  more  in  diameter.  The  flowers  are
terminal,  white,  seven  or  eight  inches  in  diameter,  with  from  five  to
twelve,  narrow  lanceolate,  acute  petals,  of  which  the  three  outer  are
reflexed.  The  fruit  is  conical,  rose-colored,  and  from  four  to  five  inches
in  length.  This  tree  is  found  growing  in  shady  situations,  in  strong,
deep,  fertile  soil,  in  the  same  range  of  country  as  the  M.  Acuminata,
being,  however,  more  generally  confined  to  the  lower  grounds.  It  also
flowers  in  May  and  June.


MALVA Sl'LVESTRIS.  619

History. — All  the  species  of  Magnolia  are  possessed  of  similar  medici-
nal virtues,  which  are  found  in  the  bark  and  fruit. The  bark  only  is
officinal,  and  that  of  the  root  is  considered  the  most  efficient,  though
probably  without  much  reason. It  has  an  aromatic  odor,  and  a  spicy,
bitter,  pungent  taste,  without  any  astringency. When  dried,  or  by  long
keepino-,  its  volatile  aromatic  principle  is  much  diminished,  but  without
any  loss  of  its  bitterness. It  has  not  been  analyzed  but  probably  con-
tains volatile  oil,  resin,  and  magnolin.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  its  virtues.
Properties  and  Uses. — Magnolia  Bark  is  an  aromatic  tonic  bitter  of
considerable  power,  and  appears  likewise  to  possess  antiperiodic  proper-
ties. Intermittent  fevers  have  been  cured  by  it  after  cinchona  had  failed.
It  is  not  so  apt  to  disagree  with  the  stomach  and  bowels,  nor  to  induce
fullness  of  the  head  as  the  Peruvian  bark,  and  can  be  continued  a  longer
time  with  more  safety  in  all  respects. Its  curative  agency  is  said  to  be
favored  by  the  diaphoretic  action  which  generally  follows  its  administra-
tion. In  dyspepsia,  with  loss  of  tone  in  the  stomach,  it  is  very  useful  as
a  tonic,  and  has  also  proved  highly  beneficial  in  the  treatment  of  remit-
tents having  a  typhoid  character. A  warm  infusion  acts  as  a  gentle
laxative  and  sudorific ;  a  cold  one  as  a  tonic  and  antiperiodic,  as  does
also  the  tincture  and  powder. The  powder  is  considered  the  preferable
form  of  administration. The  bark  of  the  M.  Tripetala,  chewed  as  a
substitute  for  tobacco,  has  cured  an  inveterate  tobacco  chewer  of  the
filthy  habit,  and  deserves  a  further  trial  among  those  who  wish  to  break
up  the  pernicious  practice. The  bark  in  powder  may  be  administered
in  half  drachm  or  drachm  doses,  to  be  repeated  five  or  six  times  a  day  ;
the infusion  may  be  taken  in  wineglassful  doses,  repeated  five  or  six
times  a  day. It  is  used  in  the  above  forms  of  disease,  as  well  as  in
chronic  rheumatism. The  tincture,  made  by  adding  an  ounce  of  the
powder  to  a  pint  of  brandy,  and  allowing  it  to  macerate  for  ten  or  twelve
days,  may  be  given  in  tablespoon  doses  three  times  a  day,  for  the  same
purposes. A  tincture  made  by  adding  two  ounces  of  the  cones  to  a  pint
of  brandy,  has  long  been  used  as  a  domestic  remedy  for  dyspepsia  and
chronic  rheumatism ;  it  is  given  three  or  four  times  a  day  in  doses  of
from  one  to  four  fluidrachms. Magnolia  is  contra-indicated  whenever
inflammatory  symptoms  are  present.


MALVA  SYLVESTRIS.

Common  Mallow.

Nat.  Ord.— Malvaceae Sex.  SysL— Monadelphia  Polyandria.


THE HERB.


Description. — This  is  a  perennial  herbaceous  plant,  sometimes  called
High-mallow;  it  has  a  tapering,  branching,  whitish  root,  and  a  round,
hairy,  branching,  usually  erect  stem,  from  one  to  three  feet  in  hight.


620  Materia Medica.

The  leaves  are  alternate,  petiolate,  cordate,  deep-green,  soft  and  downy,
serrated,  plaited,  with  seven  acute  lobes  ;  the  uppermost  with  fewer,
but  deeper,  and  more  acute  lobes,  than  the  lower  ones.  The  flowers
are  large,  numerous,  of  a  shining  purple,  veiny,  on  simple,  aggregate,
hairy  axillary  stalks.  The  calyx  is  five-cleft.  Petals  five,  inversely
cordate,  and  three  times  as  long  as  the  calyx.  Stamens,  indefinite,  mon-
adelphous. Pollen  large,  whitish. Ripe  carpels  reticulated  at  the  back.

Malva  Rotundifolia,  or  Low-mallow,  called  by  children  who  are
fond  of  eating  the  fruit,  cheeses,  has  a  fusiform  root  and  prostrate  stem,
with  leaves  of  a  fine,  delicate  texture,  roundish,  cordate,  or  somewhat
uniform,  crenate,  obtusely  five  or  seven-lobed,  and  on  long  hairy
petioles.  The  flowers  are  pale-pink,  with  deeply-notched  petals,  and
stand  on  aggregate,  axillary  peduncles.  The  fruit  is  depressed-globose,
and  composed  of  the  numerous  carpels  arranged  circularly.

History. — The  M.  Sylvestris  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  naturalized
in  this  country,  growing  abundantly  in  fields,  roadsides,  and  waste
places,  and  flowering  from  May  to  October.  The  whole  plant,  especially
the  root,  abounds  in  mucilage.  The  M.  Rotundifolia,  a  very  common,
troublesome  plant  growing  around  dwellings  and  in  cultivated  grounds,
together  with  other  species  of  this  genus,  possesses  similar  properties,
and  may  be  substituted  for  each  other.  The  herb  and  flowers  are
inodorous,  with  a  weak,  herbaceous,  mucilaginous  taste.  Water  extracts
their  mucilage,  and  the  solution  is  precipitated  by  acetate  of  lead.  The
root  and  seeds  may  be  also  used,  as  they  contain  much  mucilage.  An
infusion  or  tincture  of  the  flowers  is  blue,  and  is  turned  red  by  acids,
and  green  by  alkalies,  and  may  hence  be  used  as  tests  for  these  articles.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Emollient  and  demulcent.  Infusion  and
decoction  used  in  catarrhal,  dysenteric  and  nephritic  complaints.  Also
used  as  an  emollient  injection,  and  the  herb  in  the  form  of  poultice  to
external  inflammations.  They  may  be  employed  in  all  cases  where
mucilaginous  liquids  are  required.


MARANTA  ARUNDINACEA.

Arrowroot  Plant.

Nat. Orel. — Marantacese. Sex.  Syst. — Monandria  Monogynia.

THE FECULA OF THE RHIZOMA, ARROWROOT.

Description. — The  root  or  rhizoma  of  this  plant  is  perennial,  tuberous,
fleshy,  horizontal,  nearly  cylindrical,  scaly,  from  six  inches  to  twelve,
or  more,  in  length,  and  furnished  with  numerous  long  white  fibers.  It
sends  forth  several  tuberous,  jointed,  curved,  wdfite,  scaly  stoles,  the
points  of  which  sometimes  rise  above  the  ground,  and  become  new
plants.  The  stems  are  several,  annual,  slender,  much  branched,  finely
hairy,  jointed,  leafy,  and  about  two  or  three  feet  in  bight. The  leaves


Maranta  Arundinacea.  621

are  alternate,  with  long,  leafy,  hairy  sheaths,  ovate,  lanceolate,  slightly
hairy  underneath,  pale-green  on  both  sides,  and  about  four  inches  long.
The  flowers  are  white,  and  disposed  in  a  long,  loose,  spreading,  terminal
panicle,  "with  long  linear  sheathing  bracts  at  the  ramifications.  Calyx
green,  smooth,  and  consists  of  three  small  lanceolate  leaves.  Corolla
white,  small,  monopetalous,  with  a  tube  longer  than  the  calyx,  and  a
double  border,  of  which  the  three  outermost  segments  are  smallest,  and
the  two  inner  obovate,  and  slightly  emarginate.  Ovary  three-celled,
hairy.  Fruit  nearly  globular,  with  three  obsolete  angles,  the  size  of  a
small  currant.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  West  Indies,  from  which  it  has
been  introduced  and  cultivated  in  the  East  Indies,  in  Sierra  Leone,  and  in
our  Southern  States.  The  plant  is  readily  propagated  by  cuttings  of  the
root.  Arrowroot  is  obtained  from  the  various  portions  of  the  root,
which  are  dug  up  when  a  year  old,  washed,  beaten  into  a  pulp,  and
stirred  in  cold  water;  the  fibers  are  removed  by  the  hand,  and  the
milky  liquor,  which  holds  the  starch  suspended,  is  passed  through  a  fine
sieve,  the  starch  allowed  to  subside,  and  then  after  washing  it  with  a
fresh  portion  of  water,  it  is  dried  without  heat,  or  in  the  sun.  This
constitutes  West  Indian  arrowroot,  of  which  the  finest  comes  from  the
Bermudas.  Arrowroot  is  obtained  likewise  from  other  plants,  as  the
M.  Allouya,  and  M.  Xobilis  of  the  West  Indies  ;  the  M.  Indka,  and  the
Curcuma  Anguslifolia  of  the  East  Indies.  West  Indian  arrowroot  is  in
the  form  of  a  light  white  powder,  or  of  small,  irregular,  friable  grains
varying  in  size  from  a  millet  seed  to  a  pea.  It  is  inodorous,  nearly
tasteless,  has  a  firm  feel  when  pressed  between  the  fingers,  and  when
rubbed  produces  a  faint  crackling  sound.  If  musty,  it  should  be  rejected.
Musty  arrowroot,  having  been  thoroughly  washed  with  two  successive
portions  of  cold  water,  and  then  dried  upon  frames  of  muslin  in  a  warm
place,  has  been  rendered  quite  sweet.  Examined  by  the  microscope,
arrowroot  is  found  to  consist  of  minute  pearly  globules  or  granules,
which  are  rarely  spherical  or  ovate,  generally  elliptical,  sometimes  of
the  form  of  a  levigating  muller,  and  of  various  sizes.  A  few  attain  the
750th  of  an  inch,  and  many  are  only  the  2000th  of  an  inch  in  their
longest  diameter ;  their  breadth  is  generally  two-thirds  of  their  length.
Arrowroot  presents  all  the  chemical  relations  of  wheat  and  potato  starch,
though  it  makes  a  firmer  jelly  with  the  same  quantity  of  boiling  water,
nine  parts  in  this  respect  being  equivalent  to  fourteen  of  common  starch.
According  to  Prout,  anhydrous  arrowroot  is  composed  of  44.0  per  cent.
of  carbon,  6.22  of  hydrogen,  and  49.78  of  oxygen  or  C12  Hid  O10,
corresponding  with  the  elementary  composition  of  amylin,  one  of  the
principles  of  wheat  starch.

West  Indian  arrowroot  is  sometimes  adulterated  with  wheat  or  potato
starch,  or  with  the  East  Indian  variety  of  arrowroot.  Muriatic  acid  has
been  proposed  as  a  test  of  their  presence. When  potato  or  wheat  starch


622  Materia Medica.

is  rubbed  with  twice  their  weight  of  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  of  muriatic
acid  and  water,  a  mucilage  is  quickly  formed  so  thick  and  tenacious  that
the  mortar  in  which  the  trituration  is  effected  may  be  raised  by  the
pestle  ;  with  rice  flour,  or  arrowroot,  this  result  does  not  ensue  short  of
25  or  30  minutes.  It  is  said  that  from  four  to  six  per  cent,  of  the  impu-
rity may  thus  be  detected.  But  the  microscope  affords  the  best  means  of
determining  these  adulterations,  by  observing  the  form  of  their  granules.
Thus  the  true  arrowroot  granules  are  rarely  oblong,  somewhat  ovate-
oblong,  or  irregularly  convex,  with  very  fine  rings,  a  circular  hilum
which  cracks  in  a  linear  or  stellate  manner,  and  small  mammillary  pro-
cesses occasionally  projecting  from  them.  [See  above  for  size,  etc.)  The
East  India  arrowroot  granules  are  of  unequal  size,  ovate  or  oblono--
ovate,  flattened,  and  often  furnished  with  a  very  short  neck  or  nipple-
like projection;  the  rings  are  numerous,  close,  and  very  fine,  and  the
hilum,  which  is  situated  at  the  narrow  extremity,  is  circular,  small,  and
indistinct.  (See  description  of  Tapioca.)  The  Tacca  Fecula  from  the
South  Sea  islands,  consists  of  circular,  mullen-shaped,  or  polyhedral
granules,  with  few  and  not  very  distinct  rings,  and  a  small,  circular
hilum,  which  is  cracked  in  a  linear  or  stellate  manner.  Florida  arrowroot
consists  of  granules  forming  the  half,  the  third,  or  the  quarter  of  a  solid
sphere.  The  potato-starch  granules  are  very  unequal  in  size,  ovate,  or
for  the  most  part  elliptical,  and  from  the  7000th  to  the  300th  of  an  inch
in  length. (See  Canna.)

East  Indian  arrowroot,  is  chiefly  prepared  from  a  plant  growing
throughout  India,  and  particularly  on  the  Malabar  coast,  the  Curcuma
Angustifolia ;  it  is  prepared  by  a  process  similar  to  that  followed  in  the
West  Indies.  It  is  commonly  Avhite,  sometimes  pale-yellow,  less  crepi-
tating between  the  fingers  than  the  best  West  Indian  kind,  more  fre-
quently damaged  by  impurities,  and  composed  of  rather  larger  globules,
unequal  in  size,  egg-shaped,  compressed,  faintly  rugous  at  their  larger
end.  and  with  little  processes  attached  to  their  sides.  It  is  lighter  than
maranta  arrowroot,  does  not  so  quickly  make  a  jelly,  and  is  of  low
value,  being  in  demand  only  among  starch-makers.

Properties  and  Uses. — Arrowroot  is  nutritive  and  demulcent.  Used
as  an  article  of  diet  in  certain  chronic  diseases,  during  convalescence
from  fevers,  bowel  complaints,  diseases  of  the  urinary  organs,  and  for
infants  after  weaning.  It  may  be  given  in  the  form  of  jelly,  variously
seasoned  with  sugar,  lemon  juice,  fruit  jellies,  essences  or  aromatics.
Potato  starch  is  sometimes  substituted  for  it,  but  it  is  more  apt  to  cause
acidity.  Arrowroot  is  superior  to  every  other  kind  of  farinaceous  food,
except  tapioca  and  tous-les-mois.  Its  jelly  has  no  peculiar  taste,  and  is
less  liable  to  become  acid  in  the  stomach,  and  is  generally  preferred  by
young  infants  to  all  others,  except  tapioca.  Tous-les-mois  makes  a
stiffer  jelly.  A  tablespoonful  of  arrowroot  may  be  formed  into  a  paste
with  a  little  cold  water,  and  then  enough  boiling  water  gradually  added


Marmor  Album  —  Maerubium  Vulgare.  623

with  brisk  agitation  to  make  a  pint.  It  may  be  seasoned  with  any  of  the
above-named  articles  if  not  contra-indicated.  For  children  it  is  usually
prepared  with  milk.

MARMOR  ALBUM.

White  Marble.

WHITE GRANULAR CARBONATE OF LIME.

History. — White  Marble  is  known  from  most  other  minerals  by  its  pure
white  color,  its  crystalline  structure,  and  the  effervescence  it  presents
when  touched  with  nitric  or  muriatic  acids.  It  is  tasteless,  inodorous,
brittle,  pulvcrizable,  and  insoluble  in  water  or  alcohol.  Its  specific
gravity  varies  from  2.7  to  2.8.  When  exposed  to  a  full  red-heat,  it
acquires  an  earthy  appearance,  loses  about  44  per  cent,  of  carbonic  acid,
and  is  converted  into  lime.  It  dissolves  less  rapidly  in  acetic  acid  than
in  nitric  or  muriatic  ;  it  also  dissolves  with  effervescence  in  sulphuric
acid,  and  forms  an  insoluble  salt.  When  pure  it  consists  of  one  equiva-
lent of  acid  or  22.12  parts,  and  one  of  lime,  or  28.5  parts  (Ca  O+CO2.)

It  is  sometimes  rendered  impure  by  the  presence  of  magnesia.  To
detect  this,  the  marble  must  be  dissolved  in  diluted  muriatic  acid,  taking
care  that  the  marble  neutralizes  the  muriatic  acid,  or  else  the  magnesia
will  not  be  thrown  down  on  account  of  the  formation  of  muriate  of  am-
monia. To  this  neutral  muriatic  solution  add  ammonia,  and  if  magnesia
be  present,  it  will  be  precipitated.  If  strontia  or  baryta  be  an  impurity,
a  solution  of  sulphate  of  lime  will  cause  a  pi-ecipitate.

Properties  and  Uses. — Marble  is  used  for  obtaining  acid,  as  well  as
for  making  several  officinal  preparations.  Common  marble  is  sufficiently
pure  for  the  former  purpose,  but  not  for  the  latter.  The  Dolomitic
marbles  contain  considerable  proportions  of  magnesia,  and  are  therefore
unfit  for  pharmaceutic  use.  The  finest  and  purest  variety  of  marble  is
that  of  Carrara,  sometimes  called  Statuary  Marble.

Off.  Prep.  —  Aqua  Acidi  Carbonici ;  Potassse  Bicarbonas ;  Sodae
Bicarbonas.

MARRUBIUM  VULGARE.
Hoarhound.

Nat. Ord. — Lamiaccae. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Hoarhound  has  a  perennial  fibrous  root,  and  numerous,
annual  bushy  stems,  which  are  erect,  quadrangular,  leafy,  clothed  with
fine  woolly  pubescence,  branching  from  the  bottom,  and  from  one  to  two
feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  roundish-ovate,  crenate-dentate,  wrinkled,
veiny  above,  hoary  on  the  under  surface,  one  or  two  inches  in  diameter
and  supported  in  pairs  upon  strong  footstalks;  the  upper  ones  nearlv


624  Materia Medica.

sessile.  The  flowers  are  small,  white,  in  sessile,  axillary,  hairy,  and
dense  whorls.  The  calyx  is  tubular,  five  to  ten-nerved,  nearly  equal,
with  five  or  ten  recurved,  acute,  spiny  teeth,  the  alternate  ones  shorter;
orifice  of  the  tube,  hairy.  The  corolla  is  tubular,  with  a  labiate  margin,
of  which  the  upper  lip  is  bifid,  the  under  reflected  and  three-cleft,  with
the  middle  segment  broad,  and  slightly  scolloped.  Stamens  four,  didy-
namous,  included  beneath  the  upper  lip  of  the  corolla;  anthers  with
divaricating,  somewhat  confluent  lobes,  all  nearly  of  the  same  form.
Style  with  short  obtuse  lobes.  Achenia  obtuse.  Seeds  four,  lying  in  the
bottom  of  the  calyx.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  but  has  been  naturalized
in  some  parts  of  the  United  States.  It  grows  on  dry,  sandy  fields,  waste
grounds,  road-sides,  and  banks  of  rubbish,  especially  in  warm,  dry  situ-
ations, and  flowers  in  July  and  August.  The  whole  plant  has  a  white,
hoary  appearance.  The  whole  herb  is  officinal,  it  has  a  peculiar,  rather
agreeable,  vinous,  balsamic  odor,  and  a  very  bitter,  aromatic,  somewhat
acrid,  and  persistent  taste.  Its  bitterness  is  extracted  by  alcohol  or
water.  It  contains  resin,  tannic  acid,  volatile  oil,  a  peculiar  crystalliza-
ble  bitter  principle,  and  lignin.  The  bitter  principle  is  insoluble  in  water,
soluble  in  ether,  more  so  in  hot  than  cold  alcohol,  is  perfectly  neutral,
and  melts  like  resin  when  heated.

Properties  and  Uses. — Hoarhound  is  a  stimulant  tonic,  expectorant,
and  diuretic.  It  is  used  in  the  form  of  syrup,  in  coughs,  colds,  chronic
catarrh,  asthma,  and  all  pulmonary  affections.  The  warm  infusion  will
produce  diaphoresis,  and  sometimes  diuresis,  and  has  been  used  with
benefit  in  jaundice,  asthma,  hoarseness,  amenorrhea,  and  hysteria ;  the
cold  infusion  is  an  excellent  tonic  in  some  forms  of  dyspepsia,  acts  as  a
vermifuge,  and  will  be  found  efficacious  in  checking  mercurial  ptyalism.
In  large  doses  it  purges.  It  enters  into  the  composition  of  several
syrups  and  candies.  Dose  of  the  powder,  one  drachm ;  of  the  infusion,
or  syrup,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.

Off.  Prej). — Infusum  Marrubii ;  Syrupus  Aralise  Compositus.


MARUTA  COTULA. (Anthemis  Cotvla.)

Mayweed.
Nat.  Ord.  —  Asteraceas, (Lindley,)  or  Composite, Sub-tribe, Anthemideae.
Sex.  Syst. — Syngcnesia  Superflua.

FLOWERS.

Description. — Maruta  Cotula  has  an  annual,  crooked,  tapering,  fibrous
root,  with  one  or  more  stems,  erect,  branched,  bushy,  leafy,  angular,
furrowed,  nearly  smooth,  solid,  and  rising  from  one  to  two  feet  high.
Branches  corymbose.  Leaves  alternate,  sessile,  bright-green,  smooth,
or  slightly  hairy,  bipinnatifid  and  cut;  the  segments  narrow,  fiat,  a  little


Mel.  625

succulent,  spreading  and  rather  distant,  not  crowded  or  parallel,  some-
what bristle-pointed.  Flower-heads  solitary,  on  terminal,  striated,
slightly  downy  peduncles.  Involucre  hemispherical,  imbricated,  hairy,
rouch  ;  the  scales  linear,  pale-green,  scarious  on  the  margin.  Florets
of  the  disk,  bright-yellow,  numerous;  those  of  the  rays  white,  ligulate.
Receptacle  conical,  covered  with  short,  bristly  chaff.  Central  florets
tubular,  flandular,  five-toothed,  with  five-stamina.  Ovary  obovate,  with
a  filiform,  bifid  style.  Stigmas  two,  reflexed.  Seeds  brown,  obovate,
quadrangular,  ribbed.

History. — Mayweed  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  extensively  culti-
vated in  this  country,  where  it  is  known  by  several  other  names,  as  Wild
Chamomile,  Dog-fennel,  etc.  It  may  be  found  growing  in  all  waste
places,  in  hard,  dry  soils,  especially  along  road-sides.  Its  flowers  are
white,  and  appear  from  June  until  September.  Every  part  of  the  plant
is  acrid  and  fetid,  and  according  to  Linnaeus  is  grateful  to  toads,  drives
away  fleas,  and  is  annoying  to  flies. The  whole  plant  is  officinal.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  emetic,  antispasmodic,  emmenagogue  and
epispastic.  The  cold  infusion  or  extract  may  be  substituted,  as  a  tonic
and  antispasmodic,  in  all  cases,  for  the  foreign  article.  The  extract
may  be  used  in  sick  headache,  and  in  convalescence  from  fevers.  A
warm  infusion  may  be  used  as  an  emetic  or  diaphoretic.  It  has  been
efficient  in  amenorrhea.  The  fresh  plant  bruised  and  applied  to  the
skin,  will  cause  vesication,  and  the  sores  heal  readily.  A  powerful
epispastic  is  made  by  bruising  the  fresh  leaves  of  M.  Cotula  and  Poly-
gonum Punctatum,  equal  parts,  and  moistening  them  with  a  small  quan-
tity of  spirits  of  turpentine.  Dose  of  the  infusion,  from  one  to  four
fluidounces,  as  often  as  required.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Anthemidis  Cotulae.


MEL.

Honey.

A LIQUID PREPARED BY APIS MELLIFICA.

History. — The  Apis  Mellifica,  or  honey  bee,  belongs  to  the  order
Hymenoptera  of  the  class  of  insects.  In  the  wild  state  it  dwells  in  the
hollows  of  trees  in  large  communities,  consisting  of  males,  females,  and
neuters.  The  neuters  only  collect  honey,  they  suck  it  from  the  nectaries
of  flowers  by  means  of  their  proboscis,  convey  it  into  a  proper  recep-
tacle, and  discharge  it  into  the  cells  of  the  honeycomb,  somewhat  altered
in  its  sensible  qualities.  It  is  yet  undetermined,  however,  whether
honey  is  a  secretion  of  the  bee,  or  exists  already-formed  in  the  plant.
The  nectaries  of  flowers,  it  is  well  known,  contain  a  saccharine  substance,
which  is  taken  up  by  the  insect,  and  the  honey  formed  is  also  affected
in  its  flavor  and  character  by  the  nature  of  the  plants  which  predominate
40


626  Materia  Medica.

m  the  vicinity  of  the  hive — yet  some  change  is  undoubtedly  undergone
in  the  organs  of  the  bee,  as  there  is  an  appreciable  difference  between
the  saccharine  matter  of  the  nectaries  and  honey.  Hone}'  of  a  superior
quality  is  obtained  by  allowing  it  to  drain  from  the  comb;  and  if  it  be
from  a  hive  of  young  bees  before  they  have  swarmed,  it  is  called  Virgin
honey.  After  the  first  honey  is  collected,  an  inferior  quality  is  procured
by  submitting  the  comb  to  pressure,  or  by  fusion  in  the  vapor-bath.
The  greater  proportion  of  the  honey  used  in  the  maritime  towns  and
cities  of  this  country  is  imported  from  Cuba;  though  large  quaniitics  of
it  are  collected  at  home.

At  first  honey  is  fluid,  thick,  viscid,  colorless,  or  of  the  palest  straw
tint,  of  a  peculiar  fragrant  odor,  and  of  a  corresponding,  very  sweet
taste.  On  being  kept  it  forms  a  crystalline  deposit,  and  ultimately
becomes  concrete  from  the  formation  of  numberless  granular  crystals.
Its  flavor  varies  according  to  the  flowers  from  which  it  was  collected,  and
its  specific  gravity  is  about  1.333.  In  a  great  measure  it  is  soluble  in
water,  and  not  so  readily  soluble  in  alcohol.  Boiling  alcohol  dissolves
it,  and  on  cooling  deposits  crystals  of  grape  sugar.  It  is  said  to  contain
crystallizable  sugar  analogous  to  that  of  grapes,  and  two  other  kinds  of
sugar,  one  of  which  is  changed  by  acids,  and  has  the  property  of  turn-
ing the  rays  of  polarized  light  to  the  right;  and  the  other,  not  acted  on
by  acids,  and  possessed  of  a  strong  left-handed  rotating  power.  Of
these  two  sugars,  the  first  is  not  always  present  in  honey,  as  it  is  sup-
posed to  be  changed,  in  time,  into  granular  sugar;  it  is  more  abundant  in
honey  taken  from  the  comb.  The  second  is  similar  to  that  uncrystal-
lizable  sugar  formed  by  the  reaction  of  acids  on  cane  sugar,  being  iden-
tical with  it  in  composition,  like  it  uncrystallizable,  and  very  sensitive  to
the  action  of  alkalies ;  but  differs  by  the  impossibility  of  convening  it  into
granular  sugar,  and  by  having  nearly  twice  the  rotating  power  of  com-
mon uncrystallizable  sugar.  Beside  these  saccharine  principles,  honey
also  contains  an  aromatic  principle,  an  acid,  wax,  and  a  little  niannite.
Diluted  with  water  honey  undergoes  the  vinous  fermentation,  and  if
yeast  be  added  it  forms  the  alcoholic  liquor  called  Mead ;  nitric  acid
converts  it  into  oxalic  acid.  Inferior  honey  contains  a  large  proportion
of  uncrystallizable  sugar  and  vegetable  acid.  Honey  is  occasionally
adulterated  with  starch,  especially  the  inferior  kinds,  in  order  to  give
them  a  white  appearance.  This  may  be  detected  by  diluting  with  water,
which  dissolves  the  honey  and  leaves  the  starch  at  the  bottom  of  the
vessel.  The  tincture  of  iodine  will  determine  the  nature  of  the  deposit.
Sometimes  water  is  added  to  increase  its  bulk,  which  may  be  known  by
the  great  thinness  of  the  honey,  and  its  tardiness  to  crystallize.  If  not
very  pure,  honey  is  apt  to  ferment  in  warm  weather,  acquiring  a  deeper
color  and  a  pungent  taste.

Mel  despumatum  or  clarified honey  is  generally  obtained  from  the
inferior  qualities;  the  process  of  clarification is entirely unnecessary


Melia  Azedarach.  627

with  fine  honey.  It  may  be  purified  by  melting  the  honey  by  means  of
a  water-bath,  the  wax  and  other  light  impurities  float  to  the  surface,
and  may  be  skimmed  off,  while  the  heavier  substances,  if  present,  sink
to  the  bottom,  from  which  the  honey  may  be  decanted.  The  French
clarify  honey  as  follows  :  Take  of  honey  3000  parts,  water  750  parts,
powdered  and  washed  carbonate  of  lime  96  parts.  Mix  them  in  a  suit-
able vessel,  and  boil  for  three  minutes,  stirring  constantly.  Then  add
96  parts  of  animal  charcoal  previously  washed,  heated  to  redness,  pow-
dered and  sifted,  and  boil  for  a  few  minutes.  Lastly,  add  the  whites  of
two  eggs  beat  up  with  500  parts  of  water,  and  bring  the  liquid  to  the
boiling  point.  Remove  the  vessel  from  the  fire,  and  after  the  liquid  has
cooled  for  fifteen  minutes,  strain  it  through  flannel,  and  repeat  the
straining  till  the  liquid  passes  perfectly  clear.  Should  it  not  have  the
proper  consistence,  it  should  be  sufficiently  concentrated  by  a  quick
boiling.  The  use  of  the  carbonate  of  lime  is  to  saturate  any  acid  in  the
honey  which  might  favor  the  formation  of  glucose,  and  thus  increase
the  tendency  to  granulation.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Honey  is  nutritious,  antiseptic,  diuretic,  and
demulcent.  Used  in  urinary  affections,  and  as  an  addition  to  gargles,
lotions,  injections,  etc.  It  is  said  that  the  Indians  make  an  infusion  of
the  honey  bee,  and  give  a  gill  of  it  every  half  hour,  in  strangury,  sup-
pression of  urine,  etc. ;  and  it  is  further  added,  that  this  infusion  has  the
power  of  destroying  the  sexual  propensity.  A  very  excellent  prepara-
tion for  coughs,  especially  during  febrile  or  inflammatory  attacks,  is
composed  of  honey,  olive  oil,  lemon  juice,  and  sweet  spirits  of  nitre,  of
each,  one  fluidounce;  to  be  taken  several  times  a  day,  in  half  fluidrachm
or  fluidrachm  doses.  A  tincture  of  honey  bees  is  made  by  collecting  a
quantity  of  the  living  insects  in  a  vial,  agitating  them  roughly  so  as  to
irritate  them,  and  while  in  that  condition  they  are  to  be  covered  with
alcohol ;  in  a  few  days  it  will  be  ready  for  use.  In  doses  of  five,  ten,
or  fifteen  drops,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  this  is  highly  recommended
in  many  diseases  of  the  bladder  and  kidneys,  as  well  as  in  some  uterine
affections.  Some  practitioners  assert  that  it  will  produce  abortion  in  the
pregnant  female,  if  its  use  be  too  long  continued,  or  when  employed
too  freely.

Off.  Prep.  —  Pilulse  Ferri  Carbonatis ;  Tinctura  Opii  Camphorata  ;
Unguentum  Plumbi  Compositum.


MELIA AZEDARACH.
Pride  of  China.

Nat.  Ord. — Meliaceas. Sex.  Si/st. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  beautiful  tree,  also  known  by  the  names  Bead-
tree,  Pride  of  India,  etc. ;  it  attains  the  hight  of  thirty  or  forty  feet,  with


628  Materia Medica.

a  trunk  fifteen  or  twenty  inches  in  diameter,  and  spreading  branches.
The  bark  on  the  trunk  and  large  branches  is  scabrous.  The  roots  are
horizontal,  rather  superficial,  and  extend  to  a  considerable  distance.
The  leaves  are  large,  alternate,  unequally  bipinnate ;  the  leaflets  opposite,
smooth,  ovate,  acute,  denticulate,  dark-green,  with  an  odd  one  at  the
end.  The  flowers  are  fragrant,  of  a  lilac-color,  forming  a  terminal,
drooping  panicle,  from  the  axils  of  the  upper  leaves.  The  calyx  is  very
small,  and  is  formed  of  five  obtuse,  slightly-pubescent  sepals,  united  at
base.  The  petals  are  five,  pale-pink  inside,  deep  lilac  outside,  much
longer  than  the  calyx,  spreading,  oboval,  and  obtuse.  The  stamens  are
united  into  a  tube,  which  is  rather  shorter  than  the  petals,  dilated  at
base,  of  a  dark-violet  color,  and  ten-toothed ;  each  tooth  being  bifid,  it
appears  twenty-toothed,  except  on  close  inspection.  The  anthers  are
yellow,  bilocular,  alternate  with  the  dentures  of  the  tube,  and  attached
to  its  inner  surface.  The  ovary  is  globular,  surmounted  by  a  thick  style,
which  is  terminated  by  a  small  five-lobed  stigma.  The  fruit,  is  a  fleshy
berry  or  drupe,  of  an  ovoid  shape,  about  the  size  of  a  cherry,  of  a  yel-
lowish color,  and  containing  an  elongated  bony  nut,  which  is  five-celled,
each  cell  containing  one  seed.

History. — This  tree  is  a  native of  many  parts  of  Asia,  but  is  exten-
sively cultivated  in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe  and  the  United  States ;
it  does  not  grow  to  any  great  extent  north  of  Virginia,  and  flowers  early
in the  spring. Its  name  of  Bead-tree,  was  derived  from  the  hard  nuts
contained  in  its berries,  which  are  extensively  used  in  Roman  Catholic
countries  for  the  purpose  of  making  rosaries. The  fruit  is  sweetish,  and
is  reputed  powerfully  vermifuge  ;  the  pulp  of  the fruit  formed  in  the
middle  ages  the  basis  of  an  ointment  for  the  destruction  of  lice  and  other
parasitic  insects. The  recent bark of the root  is the  part  usually
employed  by  practitioners  in  the  south  ;  it  has  a  nauseous,  bitter  taste,
and  an  unpleasant,  virose  smell,  and  yields  its  properties  to  boiling  water.
A  fluid-extract  might  possibly  be  prepared  from  it,  for  more  general  use.
Properties  and  Uses. — The bark  is  anthelmintic,  and  in  large  doses,
narcotic  and  emetic. It  is  said  that  if  gathered  at  the  season  when  the
sap  is  rising,  it  will  cause  narcotic  symptoms  similar  to  spigelia. Useful
in  verminose  fevers,  and  infantile  remittents  which  resemble  them,  with-
out being  dependent  on  the  presence  of  worms. Dose  of  the  powdered
bark,  twenty  grains  ;  of  the  decoction,  (which  is  the  best  form  for  admin-
istration, two  ounces  of  the  bark  to  one  pint  of  water,  and  boiled  down
to  half  a  pint,)  a  tablespoonful  every  few  hours,  till  the  desired  effect  is
produced,  to  be  followed  by  an  active  cathartic. An  ointment  prepared
from  the  pulp  of  the  berry,  is  said  to  be  employed  in  Persia,  in  cases  of
tinea-capitis,  and  other  obstinate  cutaneous  affections. The  nuts  yield
an  oil  by  expression,  which  is  said  to  be  anthelmintic,  and  useful  as  an
application  to  rheumatic  and  spasmodic  affections,  and  foul  ulcers.


Melissa  Officinalis.  629

MELISSA  OFFICINALIS.

Balm.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Balm  has  a  perennial  root,  which  sends  up  annually
several  erect,  quadrangular  steins,  usually  branched  toward  the  base,  and
a  foot  or  two  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  broadly  ovate  or  cordate,
deeply  serrate,  pubescent  above  and  smooth  beneath,  the  lower  ones  on
long  petioles,  the  upper  nearly  sessile.  The  flowers  are  white  or  yellow-
ish, upon  short  peduncles,  and  in  axillary,  dimidiate  whorls  ;  bracts  few,
ovate-lanceolate,  petiolate.  The  calyx  is  tubular,  pentangular,  and  bila-
biate, with  the  upper  lip  three-toothed  and  flattened,  the  lower  cut  into
two  pointed  teeth.  The  corolla  is  tubular  and  bilabiate,  the  upper  lip
less  convex  and  notched,  the  lower  three-cleft. Stamens  ascending.

History. — Balm  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe,  but  introduced
into  this  country,  growing  in  gardens,  and  in  fields,  by  the  sides  of  fences,
roads,  and  lanes,  flowering  in  June  and  July.  The  whole  plant  is  offi-
cinal, and  should  be  collected  before  the  appearance  of  the  flowers.
When  fresh,  its  odor  very  much  resembles  that  of  lemons,  but  when
dried,  it  is  nearly  inodorous  ;  its  taste  is  somewhat  austere  and  slightly
aromatic,  with  a  faint  astringency,  and  a  degree  of  persistent  bitterness.
Boiling  water  extracts  its  virtues.  Balm  contains  a  bitter  extractive  sub-
stance, a  little  tannin,  gum,  and  a  peculiar  volatile  oil.  A  pound  of  the
plant  yields  about  four  grains  of  the  oil,  which  is  yellowish,  or  reddish-
yellow,  very  liquid,  975  in  density,  and  possessing  the  fragrance  of  the
plant  in  a  veiy  high  degree.  The  Nepeta  Cilriodora,  a  powerful  emmen-
agogue,  is  sometimes  cultivated  and  employed  by  mistake  for  balm.  It
has  the  same  odor,  but  may  be  distinguished  by  having  both  surfaces  of
its  leaves  hairy.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Balm  is  moderately  stimulant,  diaphoretic,
and  antispasmodic.  A  warm  infusion  drank  freely,  has  been  service-
able as  a  diaphoretic  in  febrile  diseases,  and  painful  menstruation,  and  to
assist  the  operation  of  other  diaphoretic  medicines  ;  in  combination  with
ipecacuanha  and  nitre,  it  forms  a  valuable  diaphoretic.  It  is  also  occa-
sionally used  to  assist  menstruation.  When  given  in  fevers,  it  may  be
rendered  more  agreeable  by  the  addition  of  lemon  juice.  The  infusion
may  be  taken  ad  libitum.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Melissae.


630  Materia  Medica.

MENISPERMUM  CANADENSE.

Yellow  Parilla.

Nat.  Ord. — Menispennaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Polyandria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Sarsaparilla,
Moonseed,  Vine-maple,  etc.  ;  it  has  a  perennial,  horizontal,  woody,  very
long  root,  of  a  beautiful  yellow  color  externally,  and  a  round,  striate
climbing  stem,  greenish-yellow  when  young,  and  from  eight  to  twelve
feet  in  length.  The  leaves  are  roundish,  cordate,  peltate,  three  to  seven-
angled  or  lobed,  smooth,  the  petiole  inserted  near  the  base  and  from
three  to  five  inches  long,  and  white  lines  radiating  from  the  petiole  on
the  upper  surface  to  each  angle,  glaucous  green  above,  paler  below,
entire,  and  four  or  five  inches  in  diameter.  The  Jlowers  are  small,  yel-
low, and  disposed  in  axillary  clusters  ;  sepals  four  to  eight,  in  a  double
row  ;  petals  four  to  seven,  minute,  retuse,  shorter  than  the  sepals.  Sta-
mens twelve  to  twenty  in  the  sterile  flowers  ;  anthers  four-celled.  Pistils
two  to  four  in  the  fertile  flowers,  raised  on  a  short  stalk,  one  or  two
ripening  into  round  drupes.  Imperfect  stamens  are  sometimes  found  in
the  fertile  flowers.  Drupes  about  four  lines  in  diameter,  black  with  a
bloom  resembling  frost-grapes,  one-seeded. Seeds  crescent,  compressed.

History. — The  use  of  this  plant  is  principally  confined  to  Eclectics,  its
virtues  being  unknown  to  Allopaths.  It  grows  in  woods  and  hedges  near
streams,  from  Canada  to  Carolina  and  west  to  the  Mississippi,  flowering
in  July.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  it  has  a  bitter,  persistent,  but  not
unpleasant  acrid  taste,  and  yields  its  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  It  has
not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Yellow  Parilla  is  tonic,  laxative,  alterative  and
diuretic.  In  small  doses,  no  obvious  effects  are  produced  on  the  general
system  ;  but  in  larger  doses,  a  slight  increase  of  the  volume  of  the  pulse
may  be  perceived,  as  well  as  an  increase  of  the  appetite,  and  the  action
of  the  bowels.  In  excessive  doses,  purging  and  vomiting  will  follow,
but  no  other  unpleasant  effect.  It  is  a  superior  laxative  bitter.  It  is
much  esteemed  as  a  remedy  in  scrofulous,  cutaneous,  arthritic,  rheuma-
tic, syphilitic,  and  mercurial  diseases.  Said  to  be  superior  to  the  imported
Sarsaparilla.  Likewise  employed  in  dyspepsia,  general  debility,  and
chronic  inflammation  of  the  viscera.  Externally,  the  decoction  has  been
used  with  good  effect  as  an  embrocation  in  gouty  and  cutaneous  affec-
tions. Dose  of  the  decoction,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces  three  times  a
day  ;  of  the  extract,  from  two  to  six  grains  three  or  four  times  a  day ;
of  the  saturated  tincture,  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm.

The  Franklin  Pharmaceutical  Institute  of  the  City  of  New  York,
advertise  the  active  principle  of  this  root,  under  the  name  of  Menisperine ;
it  is  stated  to  be  a  powder  of  a  whitish-brown  color,  with  a  not  unplea-


Mentha Piperita.

sant,  bitter  taste,  and  is  recommended  as  an  alterative,  tonic,  nervine  and
laxative.  Said  to  be  valuable  in  the  treatment  of  scrofulous,  cutaneous,
syphilitic,  and  mercurial  diseases,  and  superior  to  sarsaparilla  as  an  alter-
ative. Dose  from  one  to  three  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day.  I
have  not  been  made  acquainted  with  the  process  of  manufacture,  nor  do
I  even  know  whether  it  is  a  secret  preparation ;  but  I  have  no  doubt,
from  the  known  virtues  of  Yellow  Parilla  root  as  an  alterative,  that  if
its  active  principle  can  be  obtained,  it  will  prove  a  decidedly  valuable
medicine.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Menispermi ;  Syrupus  Rumicis  Compositus.


MENTHA  PIPERITA.

Peppermint.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Peppermint  is  a  perennial,  herbaceous  plant,  with  a
creeping  root,  and  a  quadrangular,  channeled,  purplish,  nearly  erect  stem,
with  short  recurved  hairs,  and  about  two  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are
opposite,  on  short  petioles,  ovate,  serrate,  acute,  smoother  on  the  upper
than  the  under  side,  of  a  dark  shining  green  color  above  and  paler
beneath  ;  the  midrib  is  furnished  with  short  hairs.  The  flowers  are
small,  purple,  and  disposed  in  short  terminal,  lax,  obtuse  spikes,  inter-
rupted and  leafy  below.  The  bracts  are  subulate,  lanceolate,  and  fringed,
the  outer  ones  as  long  as  the  calyx.  The  peduncles  are  either  smooth,
or  slightly  hairy  above.  The  calyx  is  tubular,  slender,  furrowed,  and
covered  with  pellucid  dots,  the  base  quite  smooth,  five-cleft,  with  the
segments  dark-purple,  erect,  subulate,  fringed.  The  corolla  is  tubular,
longer  than  the  calyx,  with  its  border  divided  into  four  segments,  of
which  the  uppermost  is  broadest  and  notched  at  its  apex.  The  stamens
are  subulate,  straight ;  the  anthers  concealed  within  the  tube  of  the
corolla.  The  ovary  is  four-lobed,  superior,  supporting  a  slender  style
longer  than  the  calyx  and  terminated  by  a  bifid  stigma.  The  seeds  are
four,  lodged  in  the  calyx.

History. — Peppermint  is  a  native  of  England,  from  whence  it  has
been  introduced  into  this  country,  where  it  is  largely  cultivated  for  the
sake  of  its  oil.  It  also  grows  wild  in  wet  places.  It  flowers  from  July
to  September.  It  is  said  that  the  roots  must  be  transplanted  every  three
years  in  order  to  preserve  the  fragrance  of  the  plant.  The  whole  herb
is  officinal,  and  should  be  collected  when  the  flowers  commence  their
appearance,  and  dried  in  the  shade.  In  the  recent  state  all  parts  of  the
plant  have  a  peculiar,  powerful,  penetrating,  diffusive,  aromatic  odor,
and  an  agreeable,  warm,  aromatic,  pungent,  camphorous,  bitterish  taste,


632  Materia  Medica.

followed  by  a  singular  sensation  of  coolness  when  air  is  admitted  into
the  mouth.  Both  the  odor  and  taste  are  retained  when  the  plant  is  dried,
and  may  be  preserved  for  a  long  time.  Its  virtues  depend  upon  a  vola-
tile oil,  which  is  contained  in  little  vesicles  existing  throughout  the  plant,
and  visible  in  the  leaves  ;  and  which  may  be  obtained  by  distillation
with  water.  It  also  contains  a  portion  of  tannic  acid,  as  its  infusion
becomes  dark-green  with  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron.  Its  virtues
are  taken  up  in  infusion  by  water,  and  more  readily  by  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Peppermint  is  a  powerful,  diffusive  stimulant,
antispasmodic,  carminative,  and  stomachic.  Used  in  the  treatment  of
gastrodynia,  flatulent  colic,  hysteria,  spasms  or  cramps  of  the  stomach,
to  allay  the  griping  of  cathartics,  to  check  nausea  and  vomiting,  and  to
disguise  the  unpleasant  taste  of  other  medicines.  The  fresh  herb
bruised,  and  applied  over  the  bowels,  will  often  allay  sick  stomach,  and
is  useful  in  the  cholera  of  children.  The  infusion  may  be  drank  freely  ;
but  the  most  usual  form  of  administration  is  the  essence,  made  by  dis-
solving one  fluidrachm  of  the  oil  in  one  fluidounce  of  alcohol.  Dose,
from  ten  to  sixty  drops  in  sweetened  water.

Of.  Prep.  —  Aqua  Menthae  Piperitae  ;  Extractum  Rhei  Fluidum  ;
Infusum  Menthae  Piperitae  ;  Mistura  Camphorae  Composita ;  Mistura
Cajuputi  Composita  ;  Oleum  Menthae  Piperitae  ;  Pulvis  Rhei  Compositus;
Tinctura  Olei  Menthae  Piperitae.


MENTHA  VIRIDIS.

Spearmint.

Nat. Ord. — Lamiaeese. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Spearmint  has  a  perennial  creeping  root,  from  which
arises  annually  several  herbaceous,  erect,  branched,  acutely  four-angled,
smooth,  purplish  stems  from  two  to  three  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are
of  a  bright-green  color,  lanceolate,  oblong,  acute,  incisely  serrate,  nearly
sessile,  opposite,  and  sometimes  a  little  hairy  beneath.  The  stems  and
branches  are  terminated  by  long  spikes  of  verticillate  flowers,  the  whorls
of  which  are  somewhat  distant,  and  furnished  with  narrow,  lanceolate
bracts  ;  the  pedicels  are  smooth.  The  spikes  are  slender,  loose,  cylin-
drical, interrupted,  and  attenuated  above.  The  calyx  is  campanulate,
usually  smooth,  with  five  equal  teeth,  and  sprinkled,  equally  with  the
leaves,  with  minute  dots.  The  corolla  is  funnel-shaped,  smooth,  and  of
a  light-purple  color  ;  the  stamens  are  generally  shorter  than  the  corolla,
with  roundish  anthers.  The  ovary  is  four-lobed,  with  a  filiform  style,
having  a  bifid  stigma. The  seeds  are  four,  small,  and  often  abortive.

History. — Spearmint  is  a  native  of  Europe,  but  like the  preceding
species  of  mint,  is  extensively  cultivated  in  various  moist  places  in  this


Menyanthes  Trifoliata.  633

country  for  the  sake  of  its  oil,  and  for  domestic  use.  It  flowers  in  July
and  August.  The  whole  plant  is  officinal,  and  should  be  gathered  for
medical  use,  just  as  the  flowers  appear  in  dry  weather,  and  carefully
dried  in  the  shade.  If  gathered  to  obtain  their  oil,  it  should  be  done
after  the  flowers  have  expanded.  It  has  a  peculiar,  strong,  aromatic
odor,  and  a  warm,  aromatic,  slightly  bitter  taste,  weaker  than  that  of
peppermint,  but  like  it  leaving  a  cool  sensation  in  the  mouth  when  air  is
admitted.  These  properties  are  retained  for  some  time  by  the  dried  plant.
Its  virtues  .are  owing  to  a  volatile  oil,  which  may  be  obtained  by  dis-
tillation with  water.  Alcohol  extracts  its  virtues,  also  water  by  infusion.
Properties  and  Uses. — The  carminative,  antispasmodic,  and  stimulant
properties  of  Spearmint  are  somewhat  inferior  to  those  of  Pepper-
mint; its  principal  employment  is  for  its  diuretic  and  febrifuge  virtues.
As  a  febrifuge,  it  is  superior  to  peppermint,  and  may  be  used  freely  in
warm  infusion.  The  cold  infusion  is  beneficial  in  high  color  or  scalding
of  urine,  difficult  micturition,  etc.;  it  may  be  used  alone,  or  in  combina-
tion with  marsh-mallow  root.  A  saturated  tincture  of  the  fresh  herb
with  gin  has  been  found  serviceable  in  gonorrhea,  strangury,  sup-
pressed urine,  gravel,  and  as  a  local  application  to  painful  hemorrhoids.
The  oil  is  diuretic,  stimulant,  antispasmodic,  and  rubefacient,  and  is
used  externally  in  rheumatic  and  other  pains.  Dose,  same  as  pepper-
mint.

Off.  Prep. — Aquae  Menthae  Viridis  ;  Infusum  Mentha^  Viridis  ;  Mis-
tura  Camphoree  Composita ;  Pilulae  Taraxaci  Compositae  ;  Pilulae  Saponi
Compositae  ;  Tinctura  Menthae  Viridis  ;  Tinctura  Olei  Menthae  Viridis.


MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.

Buckbean.

Nat.  Orel. — Gentianaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Bog-bean,
Marsh-trefoil,  Water-shamrock,  etc.;  it  has  a  perennial,  long,  round,
horizontal,  branching,  dark-colored  root  or  rhizoma,  about  as  thick  as
the  finger,  and  sending  out  numerous  fibers  from  its  under  surface ;  it  is
regularly  intersected  by  joints  about  half  an  inch  from  each  other,  and
which  are  formed  by  the  breaking  off  of  the  old  petioles  and  their  sheaths.
The  scape  is  erect,  round,  smooth,  from  six  to  twelve  inches  high,  longer
than  the  leaves,  and  terminated  by  a  conical  raceme  of  flowers.  The
leaves  are  ternate,  and  stand  upon  long  striated  petioles  which  proceed
from  the  end  of  the  root,  and  are  furnished  at  their  base  with  sheathino-
stipules  ;  the  leaflets  are  obovate,  obtuse,  entire  or  bluntly  denticulate,
very  smooth,  green  on  their  upper  surface,  and  paler  beneath.  The
flowers  are  of  a  pale  lilac  or  flesh  color  on  thick  pedicels,  with  ovate-


634  Materia  Medica.

concave  bracts  at  base.  The  calyx  is  erect,  somewhat  campanulate,
five-parted,  persistent.  The  corolla  is  funnel-shaped,  with  a  short  tube,
deeply  cleft  into  five  spreading  or  recurved,  pointed  segments,  of  a
white  color  tipped  with  rose,  smooth  externally,  and  covered  on  the
inner  surface  with  dense,  white,  shaggy  fibers.  The  stamens  are  five,
shorter  than  the  corolla,  and  alternate  with  its  segments ;  anthers  red
and  oblong-sagittate.  The  ovary  is  ovate,  supporting  a  slender  style
longer  than  the  stamens,  and  terminating  in  a  bifid  and  compressed
stigma.  The  fruit  is  an  ovate,  succulent,  two-valved,  one-celled  capsule,
containing  numerous  minute,  roundish  seeds.

History. — Buckbean  is  a  native  of  Europe  and  America,  growing  in
moist  boggy  soils,  or  even  in  ponds  and  ditches,  in  temperate  or  cold
climates,  and  in  this  country  flowering  in  May.  In  England  it  flowers
in  June  and  July.  The  whole  plant  is  medicinal,  but  the  leaves  and
root  only  are  the  officinal  parts.  The  odor  of  the  leaves  is  faint  and
disagreeable,  and  the  whole  plant  has  an  intensely  bitter  taste.  Water
or  alcohol  takes  up  its  active  properties.  It  contains  albumen,  cliloro-
phylle,  a  peculiar  substance  precipitable  by  tannin,  but  soluble  in  water,
fecula,  malic  acid,  bitter  extractive,  etc.  Its  virtues  depend  on  a  bitter
principle,  called  menyanthin,  which  may  be  obtained  sufficiently  pure  for
use  by  treating  the  spirituous  extract  of  the  plant  with  hydrated  oxide
of  lead,  removing  the  lead  by  hydrosulphuric  acid,  filtering  and  evaporat-
ing the  liquor,  exhausting  the  residue  with  alcohol,  and  again  evaporat-
ing with  a  gentle  heat.  It  has  a  pure  bitter  taste,  is  soluble  in  water  or
alcohol,  but  not  in  pure  ether,  and  is  chemically  neuter.

Properties  and  Uses. — Buckbean  is  tonic  and  astringent  in  small  doses;
in  large  ones  cathartic,  and  sometimes  emetic,  especially  when  fresh.
It  has  been  given  in  dyspepsia,  intermittent  and  remittent  fevers  with
advantage  ;  and  has  been  highly  recommended  in  chronic  rheumatism,
hepatalgia,  dropsy,  worms,  and  some  cutaneous  diseases,  and  as  a  tonic  in
scrofula  and  various  cachectic  affections.  Dose  of  the  powdered  leaves
or  root  as  a  tonic,  from  twenty  to  thirty  grains;  of  an  infusion,  prepared
with  half  an  ounce  of  the  root  to  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  from  one  to
two  fli*idounces  ;  of  the  extract  five  or  ten  grains,  to  be  repeated  three
or  four  times  a  day.  As  a  purgative,  sixty  grains  of  the  powder,  or  a
gill  of  the  infusion  will  generally  answer,  and  will  occasionally  cause
vomiting.


MITCHELLA  REPENS.

Partridgeberry.

Nat. Ord. — Rubiacese. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE VINE.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  evergreen  herb,  with  a  perennial
root,  from  which  arises  a  smooth and  creeping stem,  furnished  with


Momoedica  Elatekium.  635

roundish-ovate,  or  slightly  heart-shaped,  petiolate,  opposite,  flat,  coria-
ceous, dark-green  and  shining  leaves,  usually  variegated  with  whitish
lines.  The  flowers  are  white,  often  tinged  with  red,  very  fragrant,  in
pairs,  with  their  ovaries  united.  Calyx  four-parted.  Corolla  funnel-
form,  two  on  each  double  ovary,  limb  four-parted,  spreading,  densely
hairy  within.  Stamens  four,  short,  inserted  on  the  corolla.  Style  slender;
stigmas  four.  Fruit  a  dry  berry-like  double  drupe,  crowned  with  the
calyx-teeth  of  the  two  flowers,  each  containing  four  small  and  seed-like
bony  nutlets.  Some  plants  bear  flowers  with  exserted  stamens  and
included  styles;  others,  conversely,  those  with  included  stamens  and
exserted  styles.

History. — This  plant  is  indigenous  to  the  United  States,  growing  in
dry  woods,  among  hemlock-timber,  and  in  swampy  places,  flowering  in
June  and  July.  The  leaves  bear  some  resemblance  to  clover,  and
remain  green  through  the  winter.  The  fruit  or  berry  is  bright  scarlet,
edible,  but  nearly  tasteless,  dry  and  full  of  stony  seeds,  and  also  remains
through  the  winter.  The  plant  is  sometimes  called  Checkerberry,
Winter-clover,  Deerberry,  Squaw-vine,  Oneberry,  etc.  The  whole  plant
is  officinal,  and  imparts  its  virtues  to  boiling  water  or  alcohol.  It  has
not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Partridge-berry  is  parturient,  diuretic  and
astringent.  Used  in  dropsy,  suppression  of  urine,  and  diarrhea,  in  de-
coction. It  seems  to  have  an  especial  affinity  for  the  uterus,  and  is
highly  beneficial  in  all  uterine  diseases.  It  is  said  that  the  squaws
drink  a  decoction  of  this  plant  for  several  weeks  previous  to  their  con-
finement, for  the  purpose  of  rendering  parturition  safe  and  easy.  It
appears  to  exert  a  powerful  tonic  and  alterative  influence  on  the  uterus.
The  remedy  is  peculiarly  Eclectic,  not  being  noticed  or  used  by  other
practitioners.  Dose  of  a  strong  decoction,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces,
two  or  three  times  a  day.  The  berries  are  a  popular  remedy  for  diar-
rhea, and  dysury.  Used  as  follows,  partridge-berry  is  highly  recom-
mended as  a  cure  for  sore  nipples  :  Take  two  ounces  of  the  herb,  fresh
if  possible,  and  make  a  strong  decoction  with  a  pint  of  water,  then
strain,  and  add  as  much  good  cream  as  there  is  liquid  of  the  decoction.
Boil  the  whole  down  to  the  consistence  of  a  soft  salve,  and  when  cool,
anoint  the  nipple  with  it  every  time  the  child  is  removed  from  the  breast.
Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Mitchellae  ;  Syrupus  Mitchellse  Compositus.


MOMORDICA  ELATERIUM.

Wild  Cucumber.

Nat.  Orel. — Cucurbitaceae. Sex,  Syst. — Moncecia  Monadelphia.

THE  FECULENCE  OF  THE  JUICE  OF  THE  FKUIT. ELATERIUM.

Description. — The  Wild  or  Squirting  Cucumber  is  a  perennial  plant,
with  a  large  fleshy  root,  from  which  proceed  several  thick,  round,  rough,


636  Materia  Medica.

trailing  stems,  divided  into  many  branches,  but  destitute  of  tendrils.  The
leaves  are  large,  rough,  irregularly  cordate,  somewhat  lobed,  crenate-
toothed,  hairy,  of  a  grayish -green  color  above,  paler  beneath,  and  sup-
ported on  long  petioles.  The  flowers  are  axillary,  of  a  straw-yellow  color,
and  both  male  and  female  on  the  same  plant.  The  males  are  on  short  pe-
duncles, the  female,  sessile  on  the  ovary.  The  calyx  five-cleft,  with  a  very
short  tube.  The  corolla  is  composed  of  five  acute  segments,  tomentose  and
veined  with  green.  The  stamens  are  short,  inserted  into  the  base  of  the
corolla,  and  support  recurved,  double-headed,  orange-colored  anthers ;
the  style  is  short,  cylindrical,  three-cleft,  and  terminated  by  an  oblong
stigma.  The  fruit  is  watery,  of  a  coriaceous  texture,  pendulous,  oblong,
like  a  small  oval  cucumber,  obtuse  at  each  end,  of  a  greenish  or  grayish
color,  about  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  an  inch  thick,  and  closely  set  with
short  bristles.  When  fully  ripe  it  separates  from  the  peduncle  with  vio-
lence, and  expels  its  juice  and  seed  with  considerable  force,  through  an
opening  at  the  base,  where  it  was  attached  to  the  footstalk,  and  which
is  owing  to  the  sudden  contraction  of  the  sides  of  the  pepo.

History.  —  The  Wild  Cucumber  is  the  Ecbalium  Elaterium  of  some
botanists  ;  it  is  a  native  of  the  South  of  Europe,  growing  on  poor  soils,
in  waste  places,  and  flowering  in  July.  It  has  been  extensively  culti-
vated in  England  for  medicinal  purposes,  where,  however,  it  perishes
in  the  winter  ;  and  being  a  hardy  plant  it  will  grow  in  most  parts  of  the
United  States,  without  much  attention.  The  officinal  part  of  the  plant
is  the  juice  around  the  seeds,  and  which,  when  properly  prepared,  forms
the  elaterium  of  commerce.  It  must  be  collected  a  little  before  the  period
of  ripening.  When  the  fruit  is  sliced  and  placed  upon  a  sieve,  a  per-
fectly limpid  and  colorless  juice  flows  out,  which  after  a  short  time
becomes  turbid,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  begins  to  deposit  a
sediment.  This  when  collected  and  carefully  dried,  is  very  light  and  pul-
verulent, of  a  yellowish-white  color,  slightly  tinged  with  green.  It  is  the
genuine  elaterium,  and  was  found  by  Clutterbuck  to  purge  violently  in  the
dose  of  one-eighth  of  a  grain.  But  the  quantity  contained  in  the  fruit
is  exceedingly  small ;  Clutterbuck  obtained  only  six  grains  from  forty
pepos  or  cucumbers.  Commercial  elaterium  is  a  much  weaker  medicine,
owing  in  part,  perhaps,  to  adulteration,  but  much  more  to  the  mode  in
which  it  is  prepared.  In  order  to  increase  the  product,  the  juice  of  the
fruit  is  often  expressed  with  force ;  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it
is  sometimes  evaporated  so  as  to  form  an  extract,  instead  of  being
allowed  to  deposit  the  active  matter.  The  French  elaterium  is  prepared
by  expressing  the  juice,  clarifying  it  by  rest  and  filtration,  and  then
evaporating  it  to  a  suitable  consistence.  As  the  liquid  which  remains
after  the  deposition  of  the  sediment  is  comparatively  inert,  it  will  be
readily  perceived  that  the  preparation  of  the  French  Codex  must  be
relatively  feeble. The following are the directions of  the London


Momordica.  Elaterium.  637

College,  with  which  those  of  the  Dublin  College  essentially  correspond.
"Slice  ripe  wild  cucumbers,  express  the  juice  very  gently,  and  pass  it
through  a  very  fine  hair  sieve  ;  then  set  it  aside  for  some  hours  until  the
thicker  part  has  subsided.  Reject  the  thinner,  supernatant  part,  and  dry
the  thicker  part  with  a  gentle  heat."  As  this  process  is  performed  at
Apothecaries'  Hall,  the  juice  after  expression,  is  allowed  to  stand  for
about  two  hours,  when  the  supernatant  liquor  is  poured  off,  and  the
matter  deposited  is  carefully  dried,  constituting  the  finest  elaterium.
Another  portion  of  a  paler  color,  is  deposited  by  the  decanted  liquor.
It  is  incorrectly  denominated  by  the  London  and  Dublin  Colleges
Extractum  Elaterii,  as  it  is  neither  an  extract,  strictly  speaking,  nor  an
inspissated  juice.  In  the  Pharmacopoeias  of  the  United  States  and
Edinburgh,  it  is  named  simply  Elaterium.  As  the  plant  is  not  cultivated
in  this  country  for  medicinal  purposes,  our  text-books  very  properly
adopt  as  officinal,  the  medicine  as  it  is  found  in  commerce.  It  is  brought
chiefly  from  England ;  but  probably  some  of  the  elaterium  prepared  in
Malta,  reaches  our  market  also.  As  elaterium  is  insoluble  in  water,
the  inquiry  has  arisen  as  to  what  kept  it  in  a  state  of  solution  in  the
juice.  Dr.  A.  T.  Thomson  suggests  that  the  elaterium  does  not  exist
in  a  formed  state  in  the  juice,  and  is  the  result  of  an  absorption  of  oxygen
by  the  fluid,  as  this  is  at  first  nearly  colorless  and  transparent,  and  does
not  become  turbid  or  make  any  deposit  until  it  has  been  exposed  to  the
action  of  the  air;  if  the  progress  of  this  change  be  examined  by  means
of  a  microscope,  it  will  be  seen  that  there  is  a  gradual  formation  of
minute  crystals,  mingled  with  vegetable  matters.  The  elaterium  of  the
shops,  therefore,  consists  of  these  crystals,  elaterin,  mixed  with  green
coloring  matter,  cellular  tissue,  starch,  etc.,  and  according  to  the  care
taken  in  the  preparation,  will  be  the  proportional  quantity  of  this  active
principle,  as  it  varies  from  five  to  forty-four  per  cent.

Good  Elaterium  is  in  lie-ht,  thin,  friable,  flat  or  somewhat  curled  fraer-
ments,  of  a  pale,  grayish-green  color,  charging  to  yellowish  by  exposure,
often  bearing  the  impression  of  the  muslin  upon  which  it  was  dried,
having  a  faint,  animal  odor,  and  of  an  intensely  bitter,  somewhat  acrid
taste.  It  is  pulverulent  and  inflammable,  and .  so  light  that  it  swims
upon  water.  Alcohol  is  its  best  solvent.  Dr.  Paris  found  it  to  contain
28  per  cent,  of  starch,  2fi  extractive  matter,  25  ligneous  fiber,  5  gluten,
a  little  moisture,  and  12  of  chlorophylle  and  elaterin  in  union.  Accord-
ing to  Mr.  Hennel,  100  parts  of  elaterium  contain  44  of  elaterin,  17  of
chlorophylle,  6  of  starch,  27  of  lignin,  and  6  of  saline  matters.

When  elaterium  is  of  inferior  quality  it  is  dark-colored,  much  curled,
rather  hard,  breaking  with  difficulty  or  presenting  a  resinous  fracture  ;
it  does  not  yield  over  6  per  cent,  of  elaterin,  while  the  best  elaterium
yields  from  15  to  25  per  cent.  The  Maltese  Elaterium  is  of  a  pale  color,
frequently  without  the  slightest  tinge  of  green,  in  larger  pieces,  soft,
friable,  inodorous,  sinks  in  water,  and  is  often  mixed  with  starch  or  chalk.


638  Materia  Medica.

Elaterin  is  the  principle  in  which  the  active  properties  of  the  drug
reside.  It  may  be  obtained  by  thoroughly  exhausting  elaterium  with
boiling  alcohol,  concentrating  the  tincture  to  the  consistence  of  thin  oil,
or  so  long  as  no  separation  takes  place,  and  then  pouring  it  while  hot
into  a  weak  boiling  solution  of  potassa.  The  potassa  retains  the  chloro-
phylle  or  green  resin  in  solution,  and  the  elaterin  crystallizes  as  the
liquor  cools.  When  pure,  elaterin  is  in  very  delicate,  colorless  crys-
tals, which  are  striated  sattiny  prisms,  with  a  rhombic  base.  It  is  per-
manent in  the  air,  inodorous,  but  of  an  extremely  bitter  and  somewhat
acrid  taste,  insoluble  in  water  and  alkaline  solutions,  soluble  in  alcohol,
and  hot  olive  oil,  and  slightly  soluble  in  ether,  diluted  acids,  and  fixed
oils.  It  fuses  at  a  temperature  between  300°  and  400°,  and  at  a  higher
temperature  it  is  decomposed,  with  the  evolution  of  thick,  white,  acrid
vapors,  having  an  ammoniacal  odor.  It  is  a  neutral  body  containing  no
azote,  but  having  the  constitution  C20  Hi4  Os.

Elaterium  is  seldom  adulterated  ;  its  variableness  of  strength  depends
probabty  more  upon  its  mode  of  preparation,  or  the  time  of  its  collection.
It  should  be  light,  pale  grayish-green,  and  friable,  not  brown  or  com-
pact, should  not  effervesce  with  acids,  and  should  yield  from  15  to  25
per  cent,  of  elaterin  on  analysis.

Properties  and  Uses. — Elaterium  is  a  powerful  hydragogue  cathartic,
operating  with  great  violence  in  doses  of  a  few  grains,  causing  diffuse
inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  characterized  by  vomiting,
griping  pain,  and  profuse  diarrhea.  In  ordinary  medicinal  doses  it  pro-
duces copious  watery  evacuations,  attended  with  considerable  depression
of  the  circulation  and  nervous  system,  and  most  generally  nausea  and
vomiting.  Hence,  it  is  often  used  in  dropsy,  to  aid  in  removing  the
effused  fluid,  as  a  revulsive  in  cerebral  affections,  and  wherever  a  hydra-
gogue or  revellent  effect  is  indicated.  It  also  increases  the  flow  of  urine.
The  dose  of  the  common  commercial  article  is  from  a  quarter  to  half  a
grain,  administered  every  hour  or  two  until  it  operates ;  of  Clutterbuck's
elaterium,  which  is  the  best,  and  is  so  named  because  it  is  prepared
after  the  process  recommended  by  Clutterbuck,  from  one-eighth  of  a
grain  to  one-tenth,  every  three  or  four  hours;  of  elaterin,  from  one-six-
teenth of  a  grain  to  one-twelfth,  and  is  best  given  in  solution.  An
excellent  purgative  solution  is  made  with  one  grain  of  elaterin,  a  fluid-
ounce  of  alcohol,  and  four  drops  of  nitric  acid ;  of  which  from  thirty
to  forty  drops  may  be  given  diluted  with  water.
Off.  Prep. — Pilulse  Gambogiae  Compositae.


Monarda  Punctata  —  Monotropa  Uniflora.  639

MONARDA PUNCTATA.

Horsemint.

Nat. Ord. — Larniaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

the  herb.

Description.  —  Horsemint  is  an  indigenous  perennial  or  biennial  plan,
with  a  fibrous  root,  and  a  stem  two  or  three  feet  high,  herbaceous,
obtusely  four-angled,  whitish,  downy,  and  branching.  The  leaves  are
oblong-lanceolate,  remotely-serrate,  smooth,  punctate,  tapering  to  a
short  petiole.  The  flowers  are  yellow,  spotted  with  red  or  brown,  and
disposed  in  numerous  dense,  axillary  whorls,  having  lanceolate,  yellow-
ish and  purple,  sessile  bracts,  obtuse  at  the  base,  and  longer  than  the
whorls.  Calyx  tubular,  downy ;  calyx-teeth  unequal,  short  and  rigid,
awnless.  Corolla  nearly  smooth,  yellow  with  brown  spots,  the  upper
lip  villous  at  the  apex,  somewhat  vaulted,  and  spotted  with  purple ;  the
tube  scarcely  exceeding  the  calyx.  Stamens  two,  not  exceeding  the
upper  lip  of  the  corolla.

History. — This  plant  is  found  growing  in  light  and  sandy  soils  from
New  Jersey  to  Florida,  and  in  the  Western  States  to  Louisiana,  flower-
ing from  June  to  September.  The  whole  plant  has  an  aromatic  odor
and  a  warm,  pungent,  somewhat  bitter  taste,  and  abounds  in  a  powerful
volatile  oil  on  which  its  active  virtues  depend.  The  oil  may  be  obtained
from  the  fresh  herb  by  distillation  with  water.  The  plant  yields  its
virtues  to  alcohol  or  infused  in  boiling  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Horsemint  is  stimulant,  carminative,  sudorific,
diuretic  and  anti-emetic.  The  infusion  or  essence  used  in  flatulence,
nausea,  vomiting,  and  as  a  diuretic  in  suppression  of  the  urine,  and  other
urinary  disorders.  The  warm  infusion  is  a  stimulating  diaphoretic,  and
has  acquired  some  reputation  as  an  emmenagogue;  it  maybe  drank
freely.  The  M.  Didyma  and  M.  Squarrosa  may  be  used  as  substitutes
for  the  above.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Monardse ;  Oleum  Monardae.


MONOTROPA  UNIFLORA.

Iceplant.

Nat.  Ord.  —  Ericaceae ;  Suborder,  Monotropese.  Sex.  Syst.  —  Decandria
Monogynia.

the root.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Ova-ova,  Bird's
Nest,  Pndian-pipe,  Fit-plant,  etc.,  has  a  dark-colored,  fibrous,  perennial
root,  matted  in  masses  about  as  large  as  a  chestnut-burr,  from  which
arise  one  or  more  short,  ivory-white  stems,  from  four  to  eight  inches
high,  furnished  with  sessile,  lanceolate,  white,  semi-transparent,  approxi-


640  Materia  Medica.

mate  leaves  or  bracts,  and  bearing  a  large,  white,  terminal,  solitary
flower,  which  is  at  first  nodding,  but  becomes  upright  in  fruit.  The
calyx  is  represented  by  from  two  to  four  scale-like  deciduous  bracts,  the
lower  rather  distant  from  the  corolla.  The  corolla  is  permanent,  and
composed  of  five  distinct,  erect,  fleshy  petals,  which  are  narrowed  below
and  have  a  small  nectariferous  pit  at  the  base.  Stamens  ten,  sometimes
eight;  anthers  short  on  the  thickened  apex  of  the  hairy  filament,  two-
celled,  opening  by  transverse  chinks.  Stigma  five-crenate,  depressed,
beardless.  Pod  or  capsule  five-celled,  five-valved ;  seeds  numerous,
invested  with  an  arillus-like  membrane.

History. — This  is  a  singular  plant,  found  in  various  parts  of  the  Union
from  Maine  to  Carolina,  and  westward  to  Missouri,  growing  in  shady,
solitary  woods,  in  rich  moist  soil,  or  soil  composed  of  decayed  wood  and
leaves,  and  near  the  base  of  trees,  on  whose  roots  it  is  said  to  be  para-
sitic. The  Avhole  plant  is  ivory-white  in  all  its  parts,  resembling  frozen
jelly,  and  is  very  succulent  and  tender,  so  much  so  that  when  handled
it  dissolves  and  melts  away  in  the  hands  like  ice.  The  flowers  are  ino-
dorous, and  appear  from  June  until  September;  their  resemblance  to  a
pipe  has  given  rise  to  the  names  Indian  Pipe,  or  Pipe-plant.  The  root
is  the  part  used;  it  should  be  gathered  in  September  and  October,  care-
fully dried,  pulverized,  and  kept  in  well-stopped  bottles.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Iceplant-root  is  tonic,  sedative,  nervine,  and
antispasmodic.  It  has  also  been  employed  in  febrile  diseases,  as  a
sedative,  and  diaphoretic.  The  powder  has  been  employed  in  instances
of  restlessness,  pains,  nervous  irritability,  etc.,  as  a  substitute  for  opium,
without  any  deleterious  influences.  It  is  reputed  to  have  cured  remit-
tent and  intermittent  fevers,  and  to  be  an  excellent  antiperiodic.  In
convulsions  of  children,  epilepsy,  chorea,  and  other  spasmodic  affections,
its  administration  has  been  followed  with  prompt  success;  hence  its  com-
mon name,  Fit  or  Convulsion-root.  The  juice  of  the  plant,  alone  or
combined  with  rose-water,  has  been  found  an  excellent  local  application
to  obstinate  ophthalmic  inflammations,  to  ulcers,  and  as  an  injection  in
gonorrhea,  inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  bladder.  Dose  of  the
powdered  root,  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm,  two  or  three  times  a  day.

This  plant  is  undoubtedly  one  of  great  value,  and  deserving  of  more
confidence  and  attention  than  is  at  present  bestowed  upon  it.  It  is  not
the  Mesembryanthemum  Crystallinum  or  Iceplant  of  Europe,  which  has  a
creeping  stem  a  foot  or  more  in  length,  with  large,  ovate,  wavy,  frosted
leaves,  and  white  flowers ;  and  the  whole  plant  is  covered  over  with
frost-like,  warty  protuberances,  which  give  a  very  singular  aspect  to  it.


Morus  Rubra.  641

MORUS  RUBRA.

Red  Mulberry.

Nat.  Ord. — Urticacea? ;  Suborder,  Moreae. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Tetrandria.

THE FRUIT.

Description. — Morus  Rubra,  or  the  Bed  Mulberry,  is  but  a  shrub  in
the  northern  and  New  England  States,  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  high,
but  in  the  Middle  and  Western  States  it  attains  an  elevation  of  from
fifty  to  sixty  feel,  with  a  diameter  of  two  feet,  and  covered  with  a  gray-
ish, furrowed,  much  broken  bark.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  rounded  or
subcordate  at  base,  acuminate,  equally  serrate,  either  ovate  or  three-
lobed,  rough  above  and  pubescent  beneath,  thick,  dark-green,  from  four
to  six  inches  long,  and  about  two-thirds  as  wide.  The  flowers  are  small,
monoecious,  rarely  dioecious ;  the  sterile  ones  in  loose  spikes  ;  calyx  four-
parted  ;  the  fertile  ones  in  dense  spikes ;  calyx  four-parted ;  styles  two,
filiform,  stigraatic  down  the  inside.  Ovary  two-celled,  one  of  the  cells
smaller  and  disappearing.  Achenium  ovate,  compressed,  inclosed  within
the  succulent,  berry-like  calyx.  Fertile  spikes  cylindric,  constituting  a
dark-red,  thickened,  oblong  and  juicy,  compound  berry  or  fruit.  The
sterile  spikes  are  rather  slender.

History.  —  The  red  mulberry  is  indigenous  to  the  United  States,
growing  in  rich  woods,  flowering  in  May,  and  ripening  its  fruit  in  July.
The  wood  of  the  tree  is  fine-grained,  strong,  and  durable.  The  fruit  is
oblong-oval,  of  a  dark-red  color,  almost  black,  and  consists  of  minute
berries  united  together  and  attached  to  a  common  receptacle,  each  con-
taining a  single  seed,  the  succulent  envelope  of  which  is  formed  by  the
calyx.  It  somewhat  resembles  a  blackberry,  is  inodorous,  but  with  a
sweet,  mucilaginous,  acidulous  taste,  and  is  very  juicy.  They  are  said
to  consist  of  bitartrate  of  potassa,  pectine,  sugar,  lignin,  coloring  matter
and  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Mulberries  possess  very  slightly  nutritive  qual-
ities ;  they  are  refrigerant  and  laxative,  and  their  juice  forms  a  pleasant
and  grateful  drink  for  patients  suffering  under  febrile  diseases,  as  it
checks  thirst,  relieves  febrile  heat,  and  when  taken  freely,  gently  relax
the  bowels.  A  syrup  made  from  the  juice,  and  added  to  water,  answers
the  same  purpose,  and  forms  a  pleasant  addition  to  gargles  in  quinsy.  If
the  berries  are  eaten  to  excess  they  are  apt  to  induce  diarrhea.  The
bark  of  the  tree  is  said  to  be  cathartic  and  anthelmintic,  having  expelled
tapeworm.  The  Morus  Nigra  of  Europe  possesses  similar  properties.
The  Morus  Alba,  a  native  of  China,  with  white  fruit  which  is  sweeter
and  less  grateful  than  the  others,  is  the  kind  cultivated  as  a  source  of
food  for  the  silk-worm.
41


642  Materia  Medica.

MOSCHUS.
Musk.

History. — This  article  is  obtained  from  the  Moschus  Moschiferus,  a
wild  ruminating  animal,  rather  larger  than  the  domestic  goat,  and
approaching  the  deer  in  its  characters,  and  which  is  an  inhabitant  of
Central  Asia.  At  the  posterior  part  of  its  abdomen,  there  is  a  small
sack  situated  immediately  under  the  skin,  which  opens  a  little  in  front  of
the  preputial  orifice,  and  which  is  filled  with  a  thick  fluid,  abounding
particularly  in  the  rutting  season.  This  fluid,  in  the  dried  state,  is  musk.
It  is  removed  from  the  animal  in  its  containing  bag,  and  dried  in  this
state  for  exportation.  The  musk-bag,  or  pod  is  usually  plano-convex ;
and  in  general  the  plain  surface  is  a  bare  membrane,  while  the  convex
surface  is  covered  with  stiff  hairs  ;  but  sometimes  the  hairy  and  mem-
branous parts  are  reversed.  It  weighs,  along  with  its  contents,  between
five  and  nearly  ten  drachms,  and  contains  on  an  average  two  drachms
and  two-thirds  of  musk.  Musk  is  in  the  form  of  irregular,  reddish
black,  rather  unctuous  grains,  possessing  an  overpowering,  most  pene-
trating, diffusive  odor,  and  a  bitterish,  corresponding  taste.  Rectified
account  of  its  high  price,  and  the  extreme  difficulty  of  obtaining  a  pure
article  ;  as  nearly  all  the  musk  of  the  shops,  at  the  present  day,  is  an
artificial  or  factitious  article.  Camphor,  cinnamon,  almond  syrup,  wax,
etc.,  when  mixed  with  musk,  destroy  its  odor.

Musk  is  inflammable,  burning  with  a  white  flame,  and  leaving  a  light-
spongy  charcoal.  In  some  individuals  its  odor  produces  headache  and
other  disagreeable  symptoms,  and  has  even  given  rise  to  convulsions.
It  consists  of  a  great  number  of  proximate  principles,  as  stearin,  elain,
cholesterin,  a  peculiar  fixed  acid,  resin,  osmazome,  numerous  salts,  and
free  ammonia  combined  with  an  odoriferous  principle,  and  which  has
not  yet  been  separately  detached.  Ether  is  said  to  be  a  good  solvent ;
and  the  emulsion  or  syrup  of  bitter  almonds,  or  cherry  laurel-water,
very  much  diminishes  its  odor.

From  its  high  price,  musk  is  very  liable  to  adulterations;  indeed  it  is
very  rare  that  the  pure  article  can  be  had  at  the  shops  in  this  country.
These  adulterations  are  very  difficult  to  detect.  Musk  which  burns
with  difficulty,  which  has  a  feeble  odor,  and  a  color  either  pale  or
entirely  black,  which  feels  gritty  to  the  finger,  is  very  moist,  or  contains
obvious  impurities,  should  be  rejected.

Properties  and  Uses. — Musk  is  stimulant  and  antispasmodic  ;  it  in-
creases the  vigor  of  the  circulation,  and  exalts  the  nervous  energy,
without  causing  any  great  derangement  of  the  purely  cerebral  functions.
It  is  asserted  to  have  been  used  with  much  advantage  in  the  following
diseases :  in  all  spasmodic  affections,  typhus,  and  low  forms  of  fever,
obstinate  hiccough,  pertussis,  convulsions  of  infants,  epilepsy,  hysteria,


Mucuna  Pruriens.  643

asthma,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  chorea,  colic,  etc.  Fifteen  grains  of
musk  combined  with  extract  of  valerian,  and  hydro-alcoholic  extract
of  cimicifuga,  of  each,  fifteen  grains,  and  divided  into  fifteen  pills,  will
be  found  beneficial  in  pneumonia  accompanied  by  delirium,  and  in  the
involuntary  movements  observed  in  low  typhoid  fevers.  One  pill  may
be  given  every  hour  or  two,  until  there  is  a  marked  improvement  in  the
symptoms.  In  small  doses  musk  is  hypnotic.  If  its  use  is  long  con-
tinued it  imparts  its  peculiar  odor  to  the  secretions.  It  should  always
be  given  in  substance,  either  in  the  form  of  pill  or  emulsion.  Dose
from  five  to  twenty  grains,  every  two  or  three  hours.  Nitre,  cochineal
of  each  two  grains,  musk  one  grain,  mix  and  form  a  powder.  This
powder  given  and  repeated  every  two  or  three  hours  is  said  to  be  very
useful  in  some  low  forms  of  fever,  and  in  febrile  or  inflammatory  affec-
tions with  spasmodic  action  or  delirium.  An  artificial  musk  is  prepared,
by  carefully  adding,  drop  by  drop,  three  parts  of  fuming  nitric  acid  to
one  of  unrectified  oil  of  amber.  The  acid  is  decomposed,  and  the  oil
converted  into  an  acid  resin,  which  must  be  kneaded  under  pure  water,
until  all  excess  of  acid  is  removed.  The  substance  which  remains  is  of
a  yellowish-brown  color,  viscid,  and  an  odor  similar  to  musk,  for  which
it  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  in  doses  of  from  fifteen  to  thirty  grains.


MUCUNA  PRURIENS.

Cowhage.
Nat. Ord. — Fabaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Decandria.

THE BRISTLES OF THE PODS.

Description. — This  plant  has  a  perennial  and  fibrous  root,  from  which
arises  a  herbaceous,  climbing,  cylindrical,  tomentose  stem,  divided  into
many  branches,  and  which  rises  to  a  considerable  hight,  twining  round
the  trees  in  its  vicinity.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  on  long  petioles,
about  a  foot  from  each  other,  and  pinnately-trifoliate ;  the  central  leaflet
is  rhomboidal;  the  two  lateral  ones,  oblique  at  the  base,  dilated  exter-
nally ;  all  of  them  are  entire,  ovate,  acuminate,  smooth  on  the  upper
surface,  and  hairy  beneath.  The  flowers  are  large,  inodorous,  of  a
purplish  or  violet  color,  somewhat  resembling  those  of  the  pea  in  form,
and  are  usually  collected  by  threes  in  long,  pendulous,  axillary  racemes.
The  calyx  is  hairy,  pink,  campanulate,  bilabiate,  the  lower  lip  trifid,  and
the  upper  entire,  semi-ovate.  The  corolla  consists  of  a  vexillum,  which
is  roundish,  concave,  and  double  the  length  of  the  calyx,  but  shorter
than  the  other  petals.  The  carina  is  straight,  obtuse,  and  furnished  on
each  side  of  the  apex  with  a  short  spur.  The  aloz  are  oblong,  and  as
long  as  the  carina.  The  stamens  are  ten,  diadelphous,  five  of  them  sup-
porting oblong,  linear  anthers,  and  the  others  ovate,  hirsute  ones.  The
ovary  is  oblong,  villous,  and  furnished  with  a  slender  style,  with  a  small


644  Materia  Medica.

orbicular  stigma.  The  legume  is  a  coriaceous  pod  about  three  or  four
inches  long,  the  thickness  of  the  finger,  compressed,  curved  like  the
letter  S,  thickly  set  with  short,  reddish-brown,  brittle,  stinging  hairs,
somewhat  terete  and  keeled  ;  when  handled  or  rubbed  on  the  skin,
they  produce  an  intense  itching  sensation.  The  seeds  are  oval-oblong,
brown  or  variegated,  with  a  white  hilum.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  West  Indies,  and  other  tropical
parts  of  South  America  ;  it  is  found  in  woods,  along  river  courses,  upon
fences,  and  in  waste,  neglected  places.  The  East  Indian  species,  Mucuna
Prurita,  is  entirely  distinct  from  the  one  under  consideration.  The  offi-
cinal part  of  the  plant  is  the  hair  of  the  pods,  which  are  generally
imported  into  this  country  attached  to  pod,  and  from  which  they  are
carefully  removed,  so  that  they  do  not  fasten  to  the  operator's  hands.

Properties  and  Uses. — Cowhage  is  a  mechanical  anthelmintic,  acting
by  penetrating  the  body  of  the  worms ;  its  decoction  or  tincture  has  no
anthelmintic  properties.  It  is  used  in  the  treatment  of  intestinal  worms,
which  are  expelled  alive.  It  has  no  effect  on  tenia,  but  appears  more
serviceable  in  removing  the  lumbrici  and  ascarides.  Dose,  from  one
drachm  to  half  an  ounce  in  syrup  or  molasses,  and  followed,  a  few  hours
afterward,  by  a  purgative.  The  application  of  oil  is  the  best  to  allay  the
heat  and  itching  it  produces  when  rubbed  on  the  skin.  Cowhage  has
been  recommended  in  the  form  of  an  ointment,  as  a  cutaneous  irritant,
in  the  place  of  croton  oil,  and  tartar-emetic,  also  as  a  good  medium  for
the  endermic  application  of  various  substances,  as  muriate  of  morphia.
The  proportions  are,  seven  grains  and  a  half  of  the  hairs  of  cowhage  to
an  ounce  of  lard.  This  must  be  rubbed  in  from  ten  to  twenty  minutes  ;
seven  or  eight  grains  are  usually  sufficient.  The  immediate  effect  is  the
production  of  a  sensation  resembling  stinging  with  nettles  ;  but  the  burn-
ing sensation  and  the  itching  diminish  during  the  friction,  and  entirely
pass  off  in  less  than  half  an  hour.  The  skin  generally  becomes  covered
with  white  fiat  papulce,  which  soon  disappear,  leaving  a  sensation  of  heat.
It  produces  no  inconvenience,  and  children  bear  it  easily.


MYRICA  CERIFERA.

Bayberry.

Nat.  Ord. — Myricaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Dicecia  Tetrandria.

THE BARK AND WAX. BAYBERRY WAX.

Description. — This  plant,  known  also  by  the  names  of  Wax  Myrtle,
Wax-berry,  etc.,  is  a  branching,  half-evergreen  shrub  from  one  to  twelve
feet  in  hight,  and  covered  with  a  grayish  bark.  The  leaves  are  glabrous,
cuneate-lanceolate,  rather  acute  or  obtuse,  distinctly  petiolate,  margin
entire,  but  more  frequently  remotely  dentate,  particularly  toward  the


Myrica  Cerifera.  64:5

end,  paler  and  with  distinct  veinlets  beneath,  generally  twisted  or  revo-
lute  in  their  mode  of  growth,  shining  and  resinous,  dotted  on  both  sides,
and  from  an  inch  and  a  half  to  two  and  a  half  inches  in  length,  by  half
an  inch  to  three-quarters  wide.  The  flowers  appear  in  May  before  the
leaves  are  fully  expanded.  The  males  grow  in  aments,  which  are  ses-
sile, erect,  from  six  to  nine  lines  in  length  ;  originating  from  the  sides
of  the  last  year's  twigs.  Every  flower  is  formed  by  a  concave  rhom-
boidal  scale,  containing  three  or  four  pairs  of  roundish  anthers  on  a
branched  footstalk.  The  females,  which  are  on  a  different  shrub,  are
less  than  half  the  size  of  the  males,  and  consist  of  narrower  scales,  with
each  an  ovate  ovary,  and  two  filiform  styles.  To  these  aments  succeed
clusters  or  aggregations  of  small  globular  fruits  resembling  berries,
which  are  at  first  green,  but  finally  become  nearly  white.  They  consist
of  a  hard  stone  inclosing  a  dicotyledonous  kernel.  The  stone  is  studded
on  its  outside  with  small  black  grains  resembling  fine  gunpowder,  over
which  is  a  crust  of  dry  greenish-white  wax,  fitted  to  the  grains  and
giving  the  surface  of  the  fruit  a  granulated  appearance.  The  fruit  is
persistent  for  two  or  three  years.

History. — This  plant  is  found  in  damp  places  in  many  parts  of  the
United  States,  and  is  very  abundant  in  New  Jersey.  The  bark  of  the
root  is  the  officinal  part ;  boiling  water  extracts  its  astringent  principles,
and  alcohol  its  stimulating.  It  probably  contains  tannin,  gallic  acid,
extractive  matter,  and  lignin.  The  root  should  be  collected  late  in  the
fall,  cleansed  from  dirt  and  foreign  substances,  and  then  while  fresh,
pounded  with  a  hammer  or  club  to  separate  the  bark,  which  should  be
thoroughly  dried  without  exposure  to  a  wet  or  moist  atmosphere,  then
pulverized,  and  kept  in  darkened  and  well-closed  vessels.  The  berries
of  this  plant  are  studded  over  with  small,  black  granulations,  and
covered  by  a  white,  mealy  crust,  consisting  of  a  kind  of  wax,  which  is
separated  by  placing  the  berries  in  boiling  water,  when  it  will  melt  and
collect  on  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  and  on  becoming  cool,  congeals  into  a
concrete  substance.  Bayberry  or  Myrtle  Wax,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,
is  of  a  pale,  grayish-green  color,  somewhat  diaphanous,  more  brittle,  and
at  the  same  time  more  unctuous  to  the  touch  than  beeswax,  of  a  feeble
odor,  and  a  slightly  bitterish  taste.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  scarcely
soluble  in  cold  alcohol,  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol,  but  not  permanently
so  in  boiling  ether,  and  slightly  so  in  oil  of  turpentine.  One  hundred
parts  of  wax  contain  eighty-seven  parts  of  cerin,  and  thirteen  of  myricin.
The  wax  boiled  with  ether,  may  be  obtained  colorless  as  the  liquid  cools,
while  the  ether  holds  the  green  substance  in  solution.  A  bushel  of  bay-
berries  will  yield  about  four  pounds  of  wax.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bayberry  Bark  is  astringent  and  stimulant,  and
in  drachm  doses,  it  is  apt  to  occasion  emesis.  The  bark  has  been  suc-
cessfully employed  in  scrofula,  jaundice,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  other


646  Materia  Medica.

diseases  where  astringent-stimulants  were  indicated.  The  powdered
bark,  combined  with  bloodroot,  forms  an  excellent  application  to  indolent
ulcers,  and  has  likewise  been  employed  as  a  snuff  for  the  cure  of  some
forms  of  nasal  polypus.  In  the  form  of  poultice,  with  elm,  or  alone,  it
is  a  valuable  application  to  scrofulous  tumors  or  ulcers.  The  decoction
is  beneficial  as  a  gargle  in  sore  mouth  and  throat,  and  is  of  service  in
injection,  in  leucorrhea  and  fistula,  and  also  as  a  wash  for  ulcers,  tinea-
capitis,  etc.  It  also  forms  an  excellent  gum  wash,  for  tender,  spongy,
and  bleeding  gums.  The  leaves  are  reputed  antispasmodic,  antiscor-
butic and  astringent.  Probably  the  M.  Pennsylvanica,  M.  Carolinensis,
and  M.  Gale,  possess  similar  properties.  The  Bayberry  Wax  is  astrin-
gent and  slightly  narcotic,  and  has  been  successfully  employed  in  epi-
demic typhoid  dysentery.  It  is  also  used  in  the  form  of  plaster,  as  an
application  to  scrofulous  and  other  ulcers.  Dose  of  the  powdered  bark,
from  twenty  to  thirty  grains ;  of  the  wax,  one  drachm  ;  of  the  decoction
of  the  leaves  or  bark,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Cataplasma  Myricae  ;  Decoctum  Myricee  ;  Extractum
Myricae  ;  Emplastrum  Myricae  ;  Lotio  Lobelias  Composita  ;  Pulvis  Ascle-
piee  Compositus ;  Pulvis  Myricae  Compositus ;  Unguentum  Myricae.


MYRICIN.
Myricin.

DRIED  ALCOHOLIC  EXTRACT  OF  BATBERRT  BARK.

Preparation. — I  am  indebted  to  Drs.  Hill  &  Co.,  of  this  city,  for  a
description  of  the  mode  of  preparing  this  article.  Make  a  saturated
tincture  of  Bayberry  Bark,  filter,  distil  off  a  portion  of  the  alcohol,
evaporate  the  remainder  by  means  of  a  water-bath  until  the  mass  is  of  a
syrupy  or  semifluid  consistence,  then  spread  it  in  thin  layers  on  glass  or
metallic  plates,  and  allow  it  to  dry  by  spontaneous  evaporation,  which
will  require  several  weeks.

Some  manufacturers  precipitate  the  myricin  from  the  tincture,  by
water,  similar  to  the  method  employed  for  obtaining  podophyllin ;  the
article  obtained  by  this  process  is  lighter  colored  than  that  had  by  the
above,  and  the  yield  is  much  less,  beside  a  great  portion  of  the  astrin-
gency  of  the  myricin  is  taken  up  by  the  water,  and  the  agent  possesses
merely  stimulant,  with  but  slight  astringent  virtues.

History. — The  profession  are  indebted  to  Messrs.  F.  D.  Hill  &  Co.,  of
this  city,  for  first  preparing  and  introducing  this  elegant  article  to  their
notice.  It  forms  a  light  grayish-brown  powder,  with  a  peculiar,  spicy
smell,  and  a  peculiar,  bitterish-astringent  taste,  with  some  degree  of  per-
sistent pungency.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  partially  soluble  in  ether,
and  its  astringency  is  taken  up  by  water,  the  rest  being  insoluble.
Sulphate  of  iron  forms  a  black inky  liquid  with  the  water  in  which


Myeistica  Moschata.  647

myricin  has  been  agitated. It  is  perfectly  soluble  in  water  to  which
ammonia  has  been  added.

Properties  and  Uses. — Myricin  is  a  stimulant  and  astringent,  and  will
be  found  a  very  advantageous  remedy  in  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery,
in  dysentery  with  typhoid  symptoms,  and  in  colliquative  diarrhea  of
phthisis  ;  in  scarlatina  it  may  be  given  with  advantage,  while  a  decoc-
tion of  the  bark  is  employed  as  a  gargle  ;  it  will  likewise  be  found  a
useful  remedy  for  aphthous  affections,  when  given  internally,  and  applied
locally.  It  forms  an  efficacious  application  to  tender,  spongy,  bleeding
gums,  and  an  excellent  snuff  for  polypus,  also  for  headache  and
catarrhal  affections.  It  is  likewise  beneficial  in  jaundice,  and  in  combi-
nation with  leptandrin  and  apocynin,  I  have  successfully  treated  several
cases  of  this  affection.  In  some  instances  of  cholera,  it  will  be  service-
able, given  in  combination  with  geraniin.  Combined  with  leptandrin,
podophyllin,  or  some  other  cathartic,  it  may  be  employed  with  benefit
in  the  latter  stages  of  typhoid  fever.  Dose,  from  two  to  ten  grains  of
the  powder,  which  may  be  repeated  as  often  as  required.


MYRISTICA  MOSCHATA.

Nutmeg.
Nat.  Ord. — Myristicaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Monadelphia.

THE KERNELS OF THE FRUIT.

Description. — This  is  a  tree  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  feet  high,
having  a  grayish-brown  and  somewhat  smooth  bark,  abounding  in  a
yellow  juice,  and  furnished  with  many  whorls  of  spreading  branches.
The  leaves,  which  are  alternate  and  on  petioles  from  half  to  three-fourths
of  an  inch  long,  plane  above,  are  oblong,  approaching  to  elliptical,  sub-
bifarious,  glabrous,  rather  obtuse  at  the  base,  acuminate,  quite  entire,
aromatic,  dark-green  and  somewhat  glossy  above,  paler  beneath,  with
simple  parallel  veins,  and  from  three  to  six  inches  long.  The  Jlowers
are  male  and  female  upon  different  trees,  minute,  and  pale  yellowish  ;
the  males  are  disposed  in  axillary,  solitary  clusters,  from  three  to  five
on  a  peduncle.  The  calyx  is  urceolate  and  petaloid,  thick  and  of  a
fleshy  texture,  indistinctly  reddish-pubescent,  dingy  pale-yellow,  and
divided  into  three  erect  teeth.  The  stamens  are  united  into  a  thickened,
whitish,  cylindrical  column,  about  as  long  as  the  calyx,  the  upper  half
bearing  from  six  to  ten  connate,  linear-oblong,  two-celled  anthers,  free
at  their  base,  and  opening  longitudinally.  The  peduncles  and  pedicels
are  glabrous,  the  latter  having  a  quickly  deciduous,  ovate  bract  at  its
summit,  often  pressed  close  to  the  flower.  The  female  Jlowers  are
scarcely  different  from  the  male,  except  that  the  pedicel  is  frequently
solitary.  Pistil  solitary,  shorter  than  the  calyx,  broadly  ovate,  a  little
tapering  upward  into  a  short  style,  and terminating in  a  two-lobed


648  Materia  Medica.

persistent  stigma.  The  fruit  is  pyriform,  pendent,  having  a  fleshy  pericarp
opening  by  two,  nearly  equal,  longitudinal  valves,  yellowish,  almost
white  within,  four  or  five  lines  thick,  and  abounding  in  an  astringent
juice.  The  arillus  (mace),  is  thick,  between  horny  and  fleshy,  much
laciniated,  folded  and  anastomosing  toward  the  extremity,  almost
enveloping  the  nut,  and  so  tightly  as  to  form  inequalities  on  its  surface ;
when  fresh,  it  is  brilliant  scarlet;  when  dry,  much  more  horny,  of  a
yellow-brown  color,  and  very  brittle.  The  nut  is  oval  or  broadly  ovate,
with  a  hard,  rugged,  dark-brown,  shining  shell,  marked  by  the  mace,
pale  and  smooth  within,  and  about  half  a  line  thick ;  it  closely  envelops
the  seed,  and  its  inner  coat  dips  down  into  the  substance  of  its  albumen,
giving  it  a  marbled  appearance.  The  seed  or  nutmeg  is  oval,  pale-brown,
quite  smooth  when  fresh,  but  soon  becomes  shriveled,  with  irregular,
vertical  lines  or  furrows  on  its  surface.  Its  substance  or  albumen  is
firm,  fleshy,  and  whitish,  being  traversed  by  veins  of  a  red-brown  color,
abounding  in  oil.  Near  the  base  of  the  albumen,  and  imbedded  in  a
cavity  in  its  substance,  is  the  embryo,  which  is  small,  fleshy,  yellowish-
white,  rounded  below,  and  where  is  found  the  hemispherical  radicle  ;  its
cotyledons  of  two,  large,  somewhat  foliaceous,  plicate  lobes,  in  the  center
of  which  is  seen  the  plumule.

History. — The  nutmeg  tree  is  a  native  of  the  Molucca  Isles,  and  is
cultivated  in  Sumatra,  French  Guiana,  the  Mauritius,  and  various  West
Indian  islands.  The  tree  is  produced  from  the  seed,  and  does  not
flower  until  the  eighth  or  ninth  year,  when  it  continues  to  bear  fruit  and
flowers  together,  for  sixty  or  seventy  years.  Its  cultivation  is  said  to
require  but  little  trouble.  In  the  East  Indies  three  crops  are  gathered
annually.  The  fruit  is  gathered  by  hand  and  is  never  used  whole,  on
account  of  its  acridity;  the  outer  pulpy  coat  is  removed  with  a  knife,  and
thrown  away,  the  arillus  is  then  carefully  separated,  flattened,  and  dried
in  the  sun,  sprinkled  with  sea- water,  and  again  partially  dried;  in  this  pro-
cess it  changes  from  its  original  crimson  color  to  a  brownish-yellow,  and
constitutes  the  mace  of  commerce.  The  nuts  require  more  attention,  as
they  are  liable  to  be  attacked  by  insects ;  they  are  first  exposed  to  the
sun  for  a  few  days,  and  then  slowly  dried  by  a  slow  fire  for  a  length  of
time,  until  the  seed  becomes  perfectly  detached  from  the  shell ;  this  is
then  broken  and  the  seeds  steeped  in  a  mixture  of  lime  and  water,  to
protect  them  from  insects  and  prevent  the  volatilization  of  their  aroma,
and  thus  prepared  they  constitute  the  nutmegs  of  commerce.  The  kernel
of  the  fruit,  or  nutmeg,  and  the  arillus  of  the  nut,  or  mace,  are  the
officinal  parts.  Nutmegs  reach  this  country  from  the  East  Indies,  from
Europe,  and  a  small  portion  from  the  West  Indies.

The  finer  kinds  of  nutmeg  are  small,  short,  of  an  olive  shape,  firm,
heavy,  externally  marked  with  reticulated  furrows,  and  lightish  brown
or  white,  from  having  been  dipped  for  preservation  in  milk  of  lime;
internally  grayish-red,  and  beautifully  marbled  with  darker  brownish-


Myristica  Moschata.  649

red  veins,  from  which  oil  may  be  easily  expressed  with  the  point  of  a
warm  knife.  They  have  a  strong,  peculiar,  delightfully  fragrant  odor,
and  a  powerful,  bitter,  warm  aromatic  taste.  Their  virtues  are  extracted
by  alcohol  or  ether.  According  to  Bonastre,  they  contain  54  per  cent.
of  lio-nin,  24  of  stearin,  7.6  of  elain,  6.0  of  volatile  oil,  2.4  of  starch,  1
of  gum,  and  0.8  of  an  acid  substance.  By  distillation  with  water,  the
volatile  oil  may  be  obtained.  The  small,  round  heavy  nutmeg  is
esteemed  superior  to  those  which  are  larger,  longer,  lighter,  less  mar-
bled, and  not  so  oleaginous.  It  makes  a  grayish-brown,  somewhat
fatty  powder.  All  inferior  nutmegs  may  be  recognized  by  the  above
description.

The  powder  of  nutmegs  beaten  to  a  pulp  with  a  little  water,  and
pressed  between  heated  plates,  yields  from  ten  to  thirty  per  cent,  of  a
fragrant,  orange- colored,  concrete  oil,  commonly,  but  incorrectly  called
Oil  of  Mace.  It  is  the  Myristicce  Adeps  of  the  Edinburgh  Pharmaco-
poeia, and  the  Myristicce  Oleum  of  the  London.  The  best  quality  of
this  oil  is  imported  from  the  East  Indies  in  stone  jars  ;  it  is  in  rectangu-
lar cakes,  enveloped  in  the  leaves  of  some  plant.  It  has  the  consistence
of  suet,  and  possesses  the  odor  and  taste  of  the  nutmeg.  It  is  soluble
in  four  parts  of  boiling  alcohol,  which  deposits  the  solid  part  of  the  oil,
myristicin,  in  silky  crystals.  The  crude  fat  likewise  contains  a  soft,
yellowish  or  brownish  oily  substance,  soluble  in  cold  alcohol  or  ether,
and  a  volatile  oil.  Myristicin  is  insoluble  in  cold  alcohol  or  ether,  melts
at  88°,  and  is  a  compound  of  Myristicic  acid  and  glycerin.  An  inferior
concrete  oil  is  prepared  in  Holland  from  spoiled  nutmegs.  An  artificial
preparation  is  made  by  mixing  together  various  proportions  of  suet,
palm  oil,  wax,  spermaceti,  etc.,  coloring  the  mixture,  and  flavoring  it
with  the  volatile  oil  of  nutmeg.

Mace  is  in  the  shape  of  a  flat  membrane  irregularly  slit,  smooth,  soft,
flexible,  of  a  reddish  or  orange-yellow  color,  and  an  odor  and  taste
closely  resembling  those  of  nutmeg.  It  is  seldom  used  in  medicine.  It
contains  a  small  quantity  of  volatile  oil,  a  fixed,  odorous,  yellow  oil,
soluble  in  ether,  insoluble  in  boiling  alcohol  ;  a  fixed,  odorous,  red  oil,
soluble  in  every  proportion  in  alcohol  or  ether;  a  peculiar  gummy  matter,
analogous  to  gum  and  amidin,  constituting  one-third  of  the  whole,  and  a
small  proportion  of  ligneous  fiber.  On  distillation,  mace  affords  a  vola-
tile oil,  and  by  pressure  a  fixed  oil,  less  concrete  than  that  of  nutmegs.
Inferior  mace  may  be  known  by  its  brittleness,  by  its  being  whitish  or
pale-yellow,  and  having  but  little  taste  and  odor.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Both  nutmeg  and  mace  possess  aromatic
stimulating  properties,  and  are  occasionally  used  to  remove  flatulency,
correct  the  nausea  arising  from  other  drugs  and  to  allay  nausea  and
vomiting.  The  nutmeg  forms  a  very  agreeable  addition  to  various
drinks  for  convalescents,  as  well  as  to  some  articles  of  diet ;  it  is  gener-
ally grated  over  them,  or  mixed  with  them. Applied  locally,  grated


650  Materia  Medica.

nutmeg  mixed  with  lard  has  been  found  an  excellent  application  in  piles —
and  the  nutmeg  roasted  is  used  in  some  parts  of  the  country  internally,
as  a  domestic  remedy  for  leucorrhea.  I  have  known  the  following  pre-
paration to  cure  several  cases  of  intermittent  fever,  and  have  been
assured  of  its  almost  universal  success  in  this  disease.  It  is  also  recom-
mended for  the  cure  of  other  forms  of  fever.  Char  a  nutmeg  by  hold-
ing it  in  the  flame,  and  permitting  it  to  burn  by  itself  without  disturb-
ance; when  charred,  pulverize  it,  combine  it  with  an  equal  quantity  of
burnt  alum,  and  divide  the  mixture  into  three  powders.  On  the  com-
mencement of  the  chill  give  a  powder — if  this  does  not  break  it,  give  the
second  powder  on  the  approach  of  the  next  chill,  and  if  not  cured,  the  third
powder  must  be  given  as  the  succeeding  chill  comes  on.  Usually  the
first  powder  effects  a  cure,  and  it  is  seldom  that  the  three  powders  are  re-
quired. The  bowels  should  always  be  acted  upon  by  a  purgative  previous
to  their  administration.  It  is  certainly  deserving  attention,  though  I  do
not  pretend  to  account  for  its  action.  Dose  of  nutmeg  or  mace,  from
five  to  twenty  grains.  Larger  doses  possess  narcotic  qualities,  and  in
doses  of  two  or  three  drachms,  stupor  and  delirium  have  been  produced.
Off.  Prep.  — Tinctura  Lavandulae  Composita.


MYROSPERMUM  PERUIFERUM.
Balsam  of  Peru.

Nat.  Orel.  —  Leguminosae,  (Be  Candolle) ;  Amyridacea?,  (Lindley).  Sex.
Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE JUICE OF MTROSPERMUM PERUIFERUM.

Description. — This  is  the  Myroxylon  Peruiferum  of  Linnaeus  ;  it  is  a
large  tree,  having  the  trunk  and  branches  covered  with  a  gray,  coarse,
thick,  compact  bark,  of  a  pale  color  internally,  and  filled  with  a  fragrant
resin.  The  branches  are  almost  horizontal.  The  leaves  are  alternate,
and  composed  of  two  to  five  pairs  of  nearly  opposite  leaflets,  which  are
ovate-lanceolate,  acute,  coriaceous,  somewhat  obtuse  and  emarginate  at
the  apex,  smooth,  shining  above,  hairy  beneath,  entire,  with  pellucid
dots,  and  on  short  petioles  ;  many  leaves  terminate  unequally.  The
flowers  spring  from  the  axils  of  the  leaves  in  long,  tomentose,  erect
racemes,  longer  than  the  leaves,  with  slender  peduncles  and  a  small
bract  at  the  base  of  each.  The  calyx  is  campanulate,  dark-green,  nearly
equally  five-toothed,  with  the  odd  tooth  remote  from  the  others.  The
corolla  is  formed  of  five  white  petals,  the  upper  one  reflexed,  broad,
roundish,  emarginate,  and  twice  the  size  of  the  others ;  the  remaining
four  distinct,  linear-lanceolate,  reflexed,  spreading.  Stamens  ten,  dis-
tinct, spreading,  shorter  than  the  petals,  with  elongate,  sulcate,  mucro-
nate  anthers.  The  ovary  is  oblong,  pedicellate,  with  a  short,  subulate,
crooked style,  bearing a simple  stigma. The  fruit  is a  pendulous,


Myrospermum  Peruiferum.  651

yellowish  legume,  somewhat  clavate  and  curved,  and  terminating  by  the
persistent  curved  style.  It  contains  a  single  seed,  which  is  crescent-
shaped  and  enveloped  in  a  yellow  liquid  balsam,  which  hardens  into
resin.

History. — Although  the  above  is  generally  considered  to  be  the  tree
which  yields  Balsam  of  Peru,  yet  there  has  been  much  uncertainty  as
to  the  particular  species,  and  even  at  the  present  time  the  question  is  not
satisfactorily  determined.  It  is  probable  that  the  balsam  is  obtained
from  more  than  one  species  of  Myrospermum,  as  it  presents  varieties  in
commerce,  that  seem  to  show  a  difference  of  origin.  The  above  tree  is
a  native  of  several  parts  of  South  America,  and  grows  in  low,  warm,
sunny  situations,  especially  amidst  the  Peruvian  forests  on  the  banks  of
the  Maranon,  flowering  from  August  to  October.  By  the  natives  it  is
called  Quinquino.  The  tree  abounds  in  a  balsamic  juice,  which  flows
copiously  on  an  incision  being  made  in  the  bark,  and  is  collected  on  rags
which  are  placed  in  the  incisions,  and  replaced  by  others,  as  they  be-
come saturated.  The  rags  are  then  boiled  in  water,  from  the  top  of
which  the  balsam  is  skimmed  off,  as  it  rises,  and  put  into  vessels  for
purification  and  exportation.  It  usually  comes  to  this  country  in  tin
canisters,  with  a  whitish  scum  upon  its  surface,  and  a  deposit  which  is
dissolved  by  heat.

Balsam  of  Peru  is  opake,  of  a  dark  reddish-brown  color,  syrupy,  or
of  the  consistence  of  molasses,  of  an  agreeable  balsamic  odor,  and  an
acrid,  aromatic,  bitterish  taste,  leaving  a  prickling  sensation  in  the  throat
when  swallowed.  Its  specific  gravity  is  about  1.155.  On  exposure  to
the  air  it  does  not  dry  up ;  it  burns  when  exposed  to  flame,  with  a
white  smoke,  and  diffusing  a  fragrant  odor.  It  is  soluble  in  a  large  pro-
portion of  alcohol,  but  only  partially  in  ether ;  it  is  miscible  with  water
by  means  of  mucilage.  Boiling  water  removes  from  it  a  crystalline
acid,  supposed  by  Stolze  to  be  benzoic  acid,  and  by  Fremy,  cinnamic.
Various  analyses  have  been  made  but  none  of  them  are  satisfactory.
Supposed  to  contain  an  oily  substance,  called  Cinnameine,  resinous  mat-
ter, benzoic  acid,  extractive,  moisture,  etc.

There  is  likewise  a  variety  of  Peruvian  balsam,  of  a  pale-yellowish
color,  syrupy,  highly  fragrant,  and  of  a  bitterish,  acrid,  somewhat  aromatic
taste.  It  is  called  White  Peruvian  Balsam,  and  is  said  to  be  procured
from  the  fruit,  by  expression.  When  dried,  it  constitutes  the  Dry
Peruvian  Balsam,  or  Indian  Opobalsamum,  and  is  of  a  reddish,  pulver-
izable,  resinoid  character.  Balsamito,  is  the  name  of  a  tincture  of  the
fruit  of  the  tree  in  rum,  and  is  said  to  possess  stimulant,  diuretic,  and
anthelmintic  properties.  The  natives  of  Central  America  employ  it  as
a  wash  to  remove  freckles,  and  as  a  local  application  to  indolent  or  gan-
grenous ulcers.  Neither  of  these  varieties  reach  the  markets  of  this
country.


652  Materia  Medica.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Balsam  of  Peru  is  a  stimulating  tonic  and
expectorant,  acting  more  especially  on  mucous  tissues.  It  has  been
recommended  in  chronic  catarrh,  asthma,  pulmonary  complaints  gene-
rally, mucous  inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  gonorrhea,  leu-
corrhea,  gleet,  and  chronic  diarrhea.  Externally,  it  forms  an  excellent
application  to  indolent  ulcers,  wounds,  ringworm  of  the  scalp,  and  other
cutaneous  affections.  It  may  be  applied  alone,  or  in  ointment  made  by
melting  it  with  an  equal  part  by  weight  of  tallow.  The  dose  is  from
ten  to  thirty  drops,  and  is  best  given  diffused  in  water  by  means  of  sugar
and  the  yelk  of  egg,  or  gum  arabic.


MYROSPERMUM TOLUIFERUM.
Balsam  of  Tolu.

Nat. Ord. — LeguminosEe. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE JUICE OF MYROSPERMUM TOLUIFERUM.

Description.  —  There  has  been  no  detailed  description  given  of  this
tree.  It  is  supposed  to  resemble  the  M.  Peruiferum,  differing  in  its
leaflets,  which,  according  to  Richard,  are  thin,  membranous,  obovate,
with  a  lengthened  and  pointed  apex,  and  the  terminal  ones  being  larger
than  the  others.

History.  —  As  with  the  preceding  article,  so  with  the  present,  it  is
involved  in  considerable  obscurity  ;  it  being  uncertain  whether  the
same  trees  which  yield  Balsam  of  Peru,  furnish  likewise  that  of  Tolu.
Some  consider  that  the  two  balsams  are  derived  from  the  same  species,
and  that  they  differ  merely  on  account  of  their  mode  of  collection  and
preparation.

The  M.  Toluiferum,  which  is  undoubtedly  one  species  from  which
Tolu  is  obtained,  is  found  in  several  parts  of  South  America,  especially
on  the  elevated  plains  and  mountains  near  Carthagena,  Tolu,  and  in  the
Magdalena  province  of  Colombia.  The  balsam  is  said  to  be  procured
by  making  incisions  into  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  and  as  it  exudes,  it  is
received  into  vessels  of  various  kinds,  in  which  it  concretes.  It  is
brought  from  Carthagena,  contained  in  calabashes,  earthen  jars  or  glass
vessels.  When  first  imported,  it  is  usually  soft  and  tenacious,  but  by
age  becomes  hard  and  brittle,  resembling  resin.  It  is  shining,  translu
cent,  of  a  pale  yellowish-red  or  brown  color,  very  fragrant,  and  a  warm
sweetish,  pungent,  rather  agreeable  taste.  It  softens  when  chewed
and  exposed  to  heat,  melts  readily ;  when  inflamed  it  evolves  an  agree
able  odor.  It  is  wholly  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether  and  the  volatile  oils
and  like  Balsam  of  Peru,  gives  up  its  acid  to  boiling  water.  By  distil
lation  with  water  a  small  quantity  of  volatile  oil  is  obtained,  and  if  the
heat  be  continued,  its  acid  sublimes.  When  dissolved  in  the  smallest
quantity  of  a  solution  of  potassa,  it  is  said  to  lose  its  characteristic  odor,


Myrtus  Pimenta.  653

and  acquire  that  of  the  clove-pink.  Its  chemical  composition  has  not
been  satisfactorily  ascertained,  but  appears  to  be  similar  to  that  of  the
Balsam  of  Peru,  differing  only  in  its  greater  tendency  to  become  resin-
ous. The  pure  volatile  oil,  called  Tvlene,  is  a  hydro-carbon  (Cio  Hs).
Guibourt  observes  that  as  the  balsam  solidifies,  it  becomes  less  odorous,
and  holds  more  acid ;  and  thinks  that  the  acid  is  increased  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  oil.

Properties  and  Uses. — Balsam  of  Tolu,  like  that  of  Peru,  is  a  stimu-
lant tonic  and  expectorant,  and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  it,  in
chronic  catarrhs,  and  other  pulmonary  affections  not  inflammatory  in
their  character.  It  is  usually  preferred  on  account  of  its  more  agree-
able flavor,  and  for  which  it  is  often  added  to  expectorant  mixtures.
The  vapor  of  an  ethereal  solution  of  this  balsam  is  said  to  be  beneficial
in  old  and  obstinate  coughs,  when  inhaled.  Two  parts  of  Tolu,  three
of  almond  oil,  four  of  gum  arabic,  and  sixteen  of  rose-water,  make  an
excellent  liniment  for  excoriated  nipples.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty
grains,  frequently  repeated,  and  given  in  tincture,  syrup,  or  similar  to
Balsam  of  Peru.

Of.  Prep.  —  Mistura  Sanguinarise  Composita ;  Syrupus  Tolutanus  ;
Tinctura  Tolutani ;  Tinctura  Benzoini  Composita.


MYRTUS  PIMENTA.
Pimento.

Nat.  Ord. — Myrtaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Monogynia.

THE UNRIPE BERRIES.

Description.  —  This  tree,  the  Eugenia  Pimenta  of  De  Candolle,  is  a
handsome  evergreen,  with  a  straight  trunk  about  thirty  feet  high,  much
branched  toward  the  top,  and  covered  with  a  smooth  gray  bark ;  the
twigs  are  compressed,  the  younger  and  the  pedicels  downy.  The  leaves
are  opposite,  on  short  petioles,  oblong-lanceolate,  smooth,  shining,
pointed,  deep-green,  about  four  inches  long,  and  when  recent  abound  in
an  essential  oil,  and  have  an  aromatic  taste.  The  flowers  are  small,
numerous,  and  disposed  in  axillary  and  terminal  panicles  upon  trichoto-
mous  stalks.  The  calyx  is  formed  of  four  roundish  sepals.  The  petals
are  four,  reflected,  greenish-white.  The  stamens  are  numerous,  longer
than  the  petals,  of  the  same  color,  with  rounded,  white  anthers.  The
style  is  simple,  with  an  obtuse  stigma.  The  fruit  is  a  smooth,  shining,
succulent  berry,  crowned  with  the  persistent  calyx,  of  a  black  or  pur-
plish color  when  ripe,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  and  containing  two  reni-
form,  flattish  seeds.

History.  —  The  Pimento  tree  is  a  native  of  Mexico,  the  West  Indies,
and  other  parts  of  South  America.  It  is  abundant  in  Jamaica.  The
tree  bears  fruit  when  three  years  old,  and  arrives  at  maturity  at  seven;


654  Materia Medica.

it  grows  best  in  a  calcareous  soil,  covered  with  a  light  mold.  The
unripe  berries  are  the  officinal  part,  and  are  more  generally  known  by
the  name  of  Allspice.  Other  names,  as  Jamaica  Pepper,  Bayberry,  etc.,
have  been  given  to  them.  They  are  gathered  just  before  they  are  ripe,
and  carefully  dried  in  the  sun,  and  then  put  into  bags  or  casks  for
exportation.  When  these  trees  are  in  blossom  they  exhale  a  most
delicious  fragrance.

Pimento,  or  allspice  when  dried,  becomes  brownish-black,  round,
wrinkled,  and  umbilicate  at  the  apex.  It  consists  of  an  external,  hard,
brittle  rind,  which  is  yellowish  internally,  and  which  presents  two  cells
when  broken,  each  containing  a  dark-brown  hemispherical  seed.  Its
odor  is  strongly  aromatic,  combining  that  of  cinnamon,  cloves,  and  nut-
meg, and  the  taste  is  warm,  aromatic,  pungent,  and  slightly  astringent.
Boiling  water  takes  up  the  aroma,  and  alcohol  all  the  active  properties.
The  infusion  is  brown,  and  has  an  acid  reaction  on  litmus  paper.  The
berries  are  found  to  contain  a  volatile  oil,  which  may  be  obtained  by
distillation,  a  green  fixed  oil,  of  a  burning  aromatic  taste,  a  concrete,
yellowish,  flaky,  oleaginous  substance,  tannin,  gum,  resin,  uncrystalliz-
able  sugar,  coloring-matter,  malic  and  gallic  acids,  saline  matters,
moisture,  and  lignin.  The  seeds  contain  only  half  the  proportion  of
volatile  oil,  and  three  times  as  much  astringent  extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — Pimento  is  a  warm  aromatic  stimulant  and  car-
minative, and  may  be  used  where  such  agents  are  indicated.  It  is
seldom  employed  in  medicine,  but  is  used  largely  as  a  hot  aromatic  in
cookery ;  and  sometimes  it  is  added  to  other  medicines  to  render  them
more  agreeable.  A  tincture  has  been  recommended  as  a  local  appli-
cation in  chilblains.  .Dose  of  the  powder,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains ;
of  the  tincture,  from  one  to  two  fluidrachms;  of  the  oil,  from  two  to
five  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Pimentae  ;  Tinctura  Guaiaci  Ammoniata.


NABALUS  ALBUS.

Lion's Foot.
Nat. Ord. — Compoaita?, Tribe  Cichoraceae. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE PLANT.

Description.—  This  plant,  also  known  as  White- Lettuce,  and  Rattlesnake
Root,  is  the  Prenanthes  Alius  of  Linnteus.  It  is  an  indigenous  peren-
nial herb,  with  a  smooth,  somewhat  glaucous  stem,  corymbose-panicu-
late at  the  summit,  stout,  purplish,  often  deeply  so  in  spots,  and  from
two  to  four  feet  in  bight.  The  radical  leaves  are  angular-hastate,  often
more  or  less  deeply  three  to  five-lobed;  the  uppermost  cauline  ones,
lanceolate,  and  between  these  the  intermediate  forms,  hastate  and  ovate,


Nectandra Rodi^ei.  655

petiolate,  and  all  irregularly  dentate.  Heads  pendulous,  glabrous  ;  invo-
lucre of  eight  linear  scales,  nine  to  twelve-flowered ;  scales  purplish ;
corollas  whitish. Pappus  brown.

There  is  a  variety  of  the  above  plant,  Nabalus  Serpentaria  or  Prenan-
thes  Serpentaria,  with  rough  dentate  leaves,  of  which  the  radical  are  pal-
mate, the  cauline  with  long  footstalks,  sinuate-pinnatifid,  disposed  to  be
three-lobed,  with  the  middle  lobe  three-parted  and  the  upper,  lanceolate.
The  racemes  are  terminal,  somewhat  panicled,  short,  and  nodding,  with
an  eight-cleft  calyx,  and  twelve  florets ;  it  is  about  two  feet  high,  with
purple  flowers.

History. — This  plant  is  found  in  moist  woods  and  shades,  in  rich  soils,
from  New  England  to  Iowa,  and  from  Canada  to  Carolina,  flowering  in
August.  The  variety  N.  Serpentaria  is  common  to  the  mountainous
districts  of  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  and  other  sections  of  the  United
States,  and  is  considered  more  active  than  the  JY.  Alius.  The  root,
leaves,  and  juice  of  the  plant  are  employed. It  has  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Said  to  be  an  antidote  to  the  bite  of  the  rattle-
snake, and  other  poisonous  serpents.  The  milky  juice  of  the  plant  is
taken  internally,  while  the  leaves  steeped  in  water  are  to  be  applied  to
the  wound,  and  frequently  changed.  A  decoction  of  the  root,  which  is
bitter,  has  been  successfully  used  in  the  bite  of  the  rattlesnake,  also  in
dysentery.  This  plant  is  deserving  further  and  more  accurate  investi-
gation.


NECTANDRA  RODLEI.

Bebeeru.

Nat. Ord. — Lauraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Dodecandria  Monogynia.

THE ALKALOID CONTAINED IN THE BARK.

Description. — This  is  a  magnificent  forest  tree,  growing  from  sixty  to
eighty  feet  in  hight,  branching  near  the  summit,  and  covered  with  a
smooth  ash-gray  bark.  The  leaves  are  nearly  opposite,  smooth,  shining,
coriaceous,  five  or  six  inches  long,  and  two  or  three  broad.  The  Jlowers
are  obscure,  whitish-yellow,  cordate,  and  disposed  in  axillary  panicles.
The  fruit  is  a  globular  berry,  about  six  inches  in  circumference,  having
a  woody,  grayish-brown,  speckled  pericarp,  and  a  seed  with  two  large
plano-conyex  cotyledons,  which  is  yellow  when  freshly  cut,  and  possesses
an  acid  reaction  and  an  intensely  bitter  taste.  The  fruit  abounds  in
bitter  starch.

History. — This  tree  is  a  native  of  British  Guiana,  and  its  bark  has
been  recently  brought  into  notice  by  Dr.  Rodie,  as  a  powerful  tonic  and
febrifuge.  It  is  in  flat  pieces  of  one  or  two  feet  in  length,  from  two  to
six  inches  broad,  and  about  four  lines  in  thickness,  hard,  heavy,  brittle,
with  a  rough  fibrous  fracture,  dark-cinnamon-brown  and  rather  smooth


656  Materia Medica.

internally,  and  covered  externally  Avith  a  brittle  grayish-brown  epider-
mis. It  has  little  or  no  odor,  but  a  strong  persistent  bitter  taste,  with
considerable  astringency.  The  fruit  is  as  large  as  a  small  apple,  obovate,
or  obcordate,  somewhat  compressed,  consisting  of  an  external  brittle
shell,  and  an  interior  fleshy  kernel.  It  is  likewise  intensely  bitter.  The
Sulphate  of  Bebeerina  is  obtained  from  the  bark  and  seeds.  The  pro-
cess for  obtaining  it  is  essentially  the  same  as  that  for  sulphate  of  quinia.
The  bark  is  at  first  freed  of  tannin  and  coloring  matter  by  boiling  it  with
carbonate  of  soda ;  it  is  then  exhausted  by  boiling  in  water  acidulated
with  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  alkaline  matter  is  thrown  down  from  the
concentrated  acid  liquor  by  means  of  carbonate  of  soda.  The  impure
bases  thus  separated  are  washed,  dissolved,  and  neutralized  with  weak
sulphuric  acid,  and  the  solution  is  treated  with  animal  charcoal,  concen-
trated, filtered  again,  and  finally  evaporated  in  thin  layers  in  fiat  ves-
sels. Any  excess  of  acid  must  be  carefully  avoided,  otherwise  the  salt
will  be  charred  on  evaporating  it  to  dryness.

The  sulphate  of  bebeerina  of  the  shops,  contains  both  bebeerina  and
Sipeerina,  another  alkaline  principle  also  discovered  by  Dr.  Rodie.  It
occurs  in  thin,  somewhat  glittering  scales  of  a  brownish-yellow  color,
(sometimes  with  a  greenish  tinge,)  and  forming  a  yellow  powder.  It  is
inodorous  and  has  an  intensely  bitter,  persistent,  and  somewhat  astrin-
gent taste.  Like  the  Sulphate  of  Quinia  it  requires  an  excess  of  acid
for  its  perfect  solution;  hence  the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  diluted  sul-
phuric acid  renders  its  solution  more  complete.  It  is  also  soluble  in
spirit.  When  well  prepared,  the  scale-like  particles  should  be  glittering
and  translucent,  and  ought,  when  incinerated  to  leave  no  ash,  or  a  mere
trace  only.  In  this  way,  sulphate  of  lime,  the  only  important  impurity
which  has  been  found  in  it,  may  be  easily  detected.  When  carefully
dried,  it  contains  90.83  per  cent,  of  base,  and  9.17  of  sulphuric  acid.

Pure  Bebeerina  may  be  obtained  as  follows :  Decompose  the  commer-
cial sulphate  by  ammonia,  and  carefully  wash  the  alkaline  precipitate
with  cold  water,  and  while  still  moist,  triturate  it  with  an  equal  weight
of  freshly  precipitated  and  moist  hydrated  oxide  of  lead.  The  magma
thus  formed  is  then  dried  over  the  water-bath,  and  the  alkali  is  taken  up
by  absolute  alcohol.  On  distilling  off  the  spirit,  the  organic  base  is  left
in  the  form  of  a  transparent  orange-yellow  resinous  mass,  containing
Sipeerina.  This  is  dried,  pulverized,  and  treated  with  successive  por-
tions of  pure  ether,  which  dissolves  the  bebeerina,  leaving  the  sipeerina
behind.  The  ether  is  distilled  and  evaporated,  and  pure  bebeerina  is
obtained  in  the  form  of  a  translucent,  amorphous,  but  homogeneous  resi-
nous looking  substance,  of  a  pale-yellow  color,  and  possessed  of  all  the
properties  of  an  organic  alkali.  Bebeerina  does  not  crystallize ;  it  is
very  soluble  in  alcohol,  less  so  in  ether,  and  very  sparingly  in  water.
When  heated  it  fuses ;  and  the  heat  being  continued,  it  swells  up,  giving
off  vapors  of  a  strong  peculiar  odor  and  burns  without  residue.  It  forms


NECTANDRA B.ODI.EI.  657

non-crystallizable  salts  with  acids. With  bichromate  of  potassa  and  sul-
phuric acid  it  gives  a  black  resin,  and  a  yellow,  with  nitric  acid.

M.  A.  De  Planta,  has  still  further  purified  Bebeerina,  and  obtained  it
in  a  colorless  powder,  inodorous,  unalterable  in  the  air,  highly  electric,
very  soluble  in  water,  but  dissolving  more  easily  in  ether,  and  in  all  pro-
portions in  alcohol.  He  takes  the  bebeerina  obtained  by  the  above  pro-
cess of  Maclagan  and  Tilley,  and  treats  it  with  acetic  acid,  which  imper-
fectly dissolves  it;  to  the  filtered  liquor  he  adds  an  excess  of  acetate  of
lead,  and  then  potassa,  until  a  precipitate  is  formed.  The  combination
of  bebeerina  and  oxide  of  lead,  which  is  thus  obtained,  is  dried  in  a
water-bath,  and  exhausted  with  ether.  On  distilling  away  the  ether,
after  filtering,  the  bebeerina  is  left  in  the  form  of  a  syrupy  mass,  having
a  slightly  yellow  color.  It  is  dissolved  in  absolute  alcohol,  and  the  solu-
tion in  a  concentrated  state,  added  drop  by  drop,  to  cold  water  kept
constantly  agitated.  It  forms  a  thick  precipitate,  which  may  be  collected
on  a  filter,  washed  and  dried  without  agglutinating.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bebeerina  and  its  sulphate,  is  a  tonic  and  anti-
periodic,  and  is  applicable  to  the  same  forms  of  disease  as  those  in
which  quinia  is  employed.  It  increases  the  appetite,  raises  the  pulse  a
little,  and  improves  the  tone  of  the  constitution  generally,  with  but  little
tendency  to  produce  ringing  in  the  ears,  headache,  vertigo,  or  other  ner-
vous symptoms,  as  is  the  case  with  quinia,  except  when  given  in  large
or  frequently  repeated  doses.  It  has  been  used  with  success  in  inter-
mittent and  remittent  fevers,  but  is  inferior  to  quinia,  although  a  valu-
able substitute  for  it.  It  has  been  found  of  decided  benefit  in  periodic
headache,  and  other  periodic  neuralgias,  as  well  as  in  atonic  dyspepsia,
and  general  debility.  It  seems  to  be  specially  applicable  to  persons  of  a
strumous  or  phthisical  habit,  and  in  the  latter  stages  of  phthisis  has
strengthened  the  system,  improved  the  appetite,  and  checked  night-
sweats.  In  strumous  ophthalmia,  and  in  pregnancy  requiring  tonic  treat-
ment, it  has  been  highly  prized  by  many  practitioners.  The  dose  of
Sulphate  of  Bebeerina  is  from  one  to  three  grains  as  a  tonic,  and  from
five  to  twenty  as  a  febrifuge.  It  may  be  given  in  pill  with  conserve  of
roses,  or  in  solution.  Half  a  drachm  of  the  sulphate,  twenty-five
minims  of  elixir  vitriol,  a  fiuidounce  each,  of  syrup,  and  tincture  of
orange  peel,  and  four  fluidounces  of  water,  mixed  together,  form  an
excellent  solution  for  general  tonic  purposes  ;  of  this  a  tablespoonful  may
be  given  three  times  a  day,  each  dose  containing  about  two  and  a  half
grains  of  the  salt.
42


658  Materia Medica.

NEPETA  CATARIA.

Catnip.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceaa. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE TOPS AND LEAVES.

Description. — Catnip  or  Catmint  is  a  perennial  herbaceous  plant,  with
an  erect,  quadrangular,  branching,  hoary-tomentose  stem  from  one  to
three  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  petiolate,  cordate,  pubes-
cent, coarsely  crenate-serrate,  green  above,  and  whitish  beneath.  The
jlowers  are  many,  white  or  purplish,  the  lower  lip  dotted  with  crimson,
and  are  disposed  in  whorled  spikes,  which  are  slightly  pedunculated.
Calyx  dry,  striate,  tubular,  obliquely  five-toothed.  Corolla  naked  and
dilated  in  the  throat,  two  lipped,  twice  the  length  of  the  calyx  ;  the
upper  lip  rather  concave,  erect,  notched  or  two-cleft;  the  lower  spreading,
three-cleft,  the  middle  lobe  largest  and  crenate.  Stamens  four,  ascending
under  the  upper  lip ;  anthers  approximate  in  pairs,  the  cells  divergent.

History. — Catnip  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  abundantly  naturalized
in  this  country  ;  it  is  found  growing  in  dry,  neglected  situations,  about
old  buildings  and  fences,  and  in  cultivated  grounds,  flowering  from  June
to  September.  The  tops  and  leaves  are  officinal,  they  have  a  strong,
peculiar,  rather  unpleasant  odor,  and  a  bitter,  somewhat  aromatic  taste,
yielding  the  active  virtues  to  boiling  water.  The  names  of  this  plant,  in
all  languages,  indicate  the  fondness  of  cats  for  it,  upon  whom  it  is  said
to  exert  an  aphrodisiac  influence.  Its  active  constituents  are  volatile
oil,  and  that  variety  of  tannin  which  produces  a  greenish  color  with  the
salts  of  iron.

Properties  and  Uses. — Catnip  is  diaphoretic  and  carminative  in  warm
infusion ;  tonic,  when  cold.  It  is  also  antispasmodic,  emmenagogue,
and  diuretic.  In  warm  infusion  it  is  used  in  febrile  diseases  as  a  diapho-
retic, and  to  promote  the  action  of  other  diaphoretics,  as  well  as  to  allay
spasmodic  action  and  produce  sleep  ;  it  is  also  given  as  a  carminative
and  antispasmodic  in  the  flatulent  colic  of  children ;  and  as  an  emmen-
agogue or  uterine  tonic,  it  has  proved  decidedly  beneficial  in  amenor-
rhea and  dysmenorrhea,  and  has  likewise  been  successfully  employed
in  nervous  headache,  hysteria,  and  nervous  irritability.  The  leaves
chewed,  or  held  in  contact  with  the  diseased  tooth,  are  said  to  relieve
toothache.  A  warm  infusion  of  saffron  and  catnip  is  a  very  popular  and
beneficial  remedy  in  colds,  febrile  and  exanthematous  diseases  to  which
infants  and  young  children  are  subject.  A  fluid  extract  of  catnip,
valerian,  and  scullcap,  forms  an  excellent  agent  for  the  cure  of  nervous
headache,  restlessness,  and  many  other  nervous  symptoms.  The  ex-
pressed juice  of  the  herb,  given  in  doses  of  a  tablespoonful  two  or  three
times  a  day,  is  decidedly  a  superior  remedy  in  amenorrhea,  often  restor-
ing the  menstrual  secretion  after  other  means  have  failed.  The  leaves
are  frequently  used  in  fomentation  as  a  local  application  to  painful  and


NEPETA GlECIIuMA —  NlCOTIANA TABACUM.  659

inflammatory  affections.  Of  the  dried  leaves  in  powder,  two  drachms
may  be  given  for  a  dose  in  some  liquid,  as  cold  or  warm  water;  the
infusion,  made  by  adding  an  ounce  of  the  dried  herb  to  a  pint  of  boiling
water,  covering  it,  and  allowing  it  to  stand  for  a  few  minutes,  may  be
drank  as  freely  as  the  stomach  will  permit.
Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Nepetse.

NEPETA  GLECHOMA.

Ground  Ivy.

Nat. Ord. — Labiaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  the  Glechoma  Hederacea  of  Linnaeus,  is  a
perennial  gray,  hairy  herb,  with  a  prostrate,  creeping  stem,  radicating
at  base,  square,  and  varying  in  length  from  a  few  inches  to  one  or  two
feet.  The  leaves  are  petiolate,  opposite,  roundish,  cordate-reniform,
crenate,  hairy,  and  glaucous  on  both  sides ;  floral  leaves  of  the  same
form.  The  flowers  are  bluish-purple,  about  three  together  in  axillary
whorls.  The  corolla  is  about  three  times  as  long  as  the  calyx,  with  a
variegated  throat.  Calyx  long,  curved,  villous,  with  the  limb  oblique,
and  the  teeth  lanceolate-subulate,  the  upper  being  the  largest.  Bracts
scarcely  so  long  as  the  pedicel.  The  two  anthers  of  each  pair  of  stamens
meet  with  their  two  divaricate  cells,  forming  the  appearance  of  a  cross.

History. — This  plant  is  indigenous  in  Europe  and  the  United  States,
where  it  is  found  growing  in  shady,  grassy  places,  in  orchards,  along
fences  and  hedges,  and  on  the  sides  of  moist  meadows,  flowering  in  May
and  August.  The  leaves  are  the  parts  used,  and  yield  their  virtues,  by
infusion,  to  boiling  water.  They  have  a  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  rough,
bitterish,  somewhat  aromatic  taste. It  is  also  called  Gill-over-the-ground.

Properties  and  Uses. — Ground  Ivy  is  stimulant,  tonic,  and  pectoral,
and  has  been  recommended  in  diseases  of  the  lungs,  and  kidneys,
asthma,  jaundice,  hypochondria,  and  monomania.  An  infusion  of  the
leaves  is  highly  recommended  in  lead  colic,  and  it  is  stated  that  painters
who  make  use  of  it  often  are  never  troubled  with  that  affection.  The
fresh  juice  snuffed  up  the  nose,  is  said  to  cure  the  most  inveterate  head-
ache. Dose  of  the  powdered  leaves,  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm  ;
of  the  infusion  one  or  two  fluidounces.


NICOTIANA  TABACUM.

Tobacco.

Nat.  Ord. — Solanaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Tobacco  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  large  fibrous  root,
and  an  erect,  round,  hairy,  viscid  stem  branched  toward  the  top,  and


660  Materia Medica.

from  three  to  five  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  numerous,  alternate,
sessile,  large,  ovate  or  lanceolate,  acuminate,  entire,  viscid,  pubescent,
and  of  a  pale-green  color.  The  lower  cauline  leaves  are  somewhat
decurrent,  often  two  feet  long,  and  four  inches  broad,  and  diminish  in
size  as  they  approach  the  top.  The  flowers  are  rose-colored,  and  dis-
posed in  loose  terminal  panicles,  upon  long  footstalks,  and  are  furnished
with  long,  linear,  acute  bracts  at  the  divisions  of  the  peduncle.  The
calyx  is  urceolate,  hairy,  somewhat  viscid,  half  as  long  as  the  corolla,
and  divided  at  its  summit  into  five  acute  segments.  The  corolla  is
funnel-shaped,  monopetalous,  viscid,  of  a  pale-greenish  color  externally,
swelling  above  into  an  oblong  cup,  which  expands  into  five  pointed,
plaited,  rose-colored  segments.  The  stamens  are  as  long  as  the  corolla,
inclining  to  one  side,  and  supporting  oblong,  compressed  anthers.  The
ovary  is  ovate,  and  bears  a  long,  slender  style,  terminated  by  a  roundish,
bilobate  stigma.  The  fruit  is  an  ovate,  two-valved,  two-celled  capsule,
invested  with  the  calyx,  opening  crosswise  at  top,  loculicidal,  and  con-
taining numerous,  small,  reniform  seeds,  attached  to  a  fleshy  receptacle.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  warm  parts  of  America,  and
was  unknown  to  Europeans  before  the  discovery  of  this  country.  At
present  it  is  cultivated  in  most  parts  of  the  world,  and  especially  in  the
Middle  States  of  this  country.  Havanna  tobacco  is  most  esteemed  by
the  smoker,  but  the  Virginian  is  the  strongest,  and  in  most  common
use.  It  flowers  in  July.  In  cultivating  tobacco,  the  young  shoots,  pro-
duced from  seeds  thickly  sown  in  beds,  are  transplanted  into  the  fields
during  the  month  of  May,  and  set  in  rows  with  an  interval  of  three  or
four  feet  between  the  plants.  The  crop  requires  constant  attention
through  the  whole  period  of  its  growth.  The  development  of  the  leaves
is  promoted  by  removing  the  top  of  each  plant,  and  thus  preventing  it
from  running  into  flower  and  seed.  The  harvest  is  in  August.  The
ripe  plants  having  been  cut  off  above  their  roots,  are  dried  under  cover,
then  stripped  of  their  leaves,  which  are  tied  in  bundles,  and  packed  into
hogsheads.  There  are  several  varieties  of  this  species,  but  they  do  not
differ  materially  in  properties.  Soil  and  mode  of  cultivation,  affects  the
quality  of  tobacco.

As  found  in  commerce,  tobacco  is  of  various  shades  of  color,  most
commonly  dark  yellowish-brown,  of  a  strong,  peculiar,  heavy,  narcotic
odor,  and  a  strong,  bitter,  nauseous  taste,  followed  by  a  very  unpleasant,
acrid  sensation  in  the  throat.  The  darker  the  color  of  the  tobacco,  the
stronger  is  the  tobacco,  and  the  greater  its  action  on  the  system.  Its
properties  are  imparted  to  boiling  water  or  alcohol.  Long  boiling  ren-
ders it  feeble  or  inert.  Many  chemists  have  analyzed  it,  and  with  vari-
ous results.  Posselt  and  Reimann,  found  ten  thousand  parts  of  the  fresh
leaves  to  contain  1172  of  solid  matter;  of  which  287  are  bitter  extrac-
tive, 174  gum  mixed  with  a  little  malate  of  lime,  27  green-resin,  26
albumen,  105  amylaceous  gluten,  133  organic  and  inorganic  salts,  497


NlCOTIANA TABACUM.  QQ\

ligneous  fiber,  6  a  peculiar,  oily-like  alkaloid  called  Nkotina,  and  1  a
camphoraceous  volatile  oil  termed  Nicotianin.  According  to  M.  E.
Goupet,  tobacco  also  contains  a  little  citric  acid.

Nicotia  or  Nicolina  exists  in  tobacco  combined  witb  an  acid  in  excess,
and  in  this  state  is  not  volatile.  That  obtained  by  Vauquelin,  and  Pos-
selt  and  Reimann  was  not  in  a  state  of  purity ;  it  was  reserved  for  MM.
Henry  and  Boutron  to  prepare  the  pure  alkaloid  by  the  following  pro-
cess :  Five  hundred  parts  of  smoking  tobacco  were  exposed  to  distillation
in  connection  with  about  six  thousand  parts  of  water,  and  two  hundred
parts  of  caustic  soda ;  the  heat  applied  being  at  first  very  moderate,  and
afterward  increased  to  the  boiling  point.  The  product  of  the  distillation
was  received  in  a  vessel  containing  about  thirty  or  forty  parts  of  sulphuric
acid,  diluted  with  three  times  its  weight  of  water ;  and  the  process  was
continued  till  nearly  one-half  of  the  liquid  had  come  over.  The  pro-
duct, in  which  care  was  taken  to  preserve  a  slight  excess  of  acid,  was
evaporated  to  about  one  hundred  parts,  and  was  then  allowed  to  cool.
A  slight  deposit  which  had  formed  was  separated  by  filtration,  an  ex-
cess of  caustic  soda  was  added,  and  the  liquid  again  distilled.  A  color-
less, very  volatile  acrid  liquid  now  came  over,  which,  being  concentrated
under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  lost  the  ammonia  which  accompanied
it,  and  assumed  a  syrupy  consistence,  and  more  or  less  of  the  color  of
amber.  In  this  liquid,  after  a  few  days,  minute  crystalline  plates  of
pure  nicotia  formed,  but  in  consequence  of  their  great  affinity  for  mois-
ture, it  was  difficult  to  isolate  them.

As  usually  obtained  Nicotia  is  in  the  form  of  an  oleaginous,  transpa-
rent, colorless,  tolerably  fluid,  anhydrous  liquid,  of  the  density  of  1.048,
becoming  slightly  yellow  with  keeping,  and  tending  to  become  brown
and  thick  from  contact  with  the  air,  from  which  it  absorbs  oxygen ;  it
remains  liquid  at  22°  F.,  and  volatilizes  at  77°,  leaving  a  carbonaceous
residue.  When  cold  it  has  but  little  odor;  its  taste  is  exceedingly
acrid-burning,  even  when  largely  diluted.  The  vapor  which  rises  from
its  volatilization,  presents  such  a  powerful  smell  of  tobacco,  and  is  so
irritating,  that  it  is  difficult  to  breathe  in  a  room  in  which  one  drop  of  it
has  been  spilt;  if  this  vapor  be  approached  with  a  lighted  taper,  it  burns
with  a  white  smoky  flame,  and  leaves  a  carbonaceous  residue.  It  strongly
blues  reddened  litmus  paper;  and  is  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,  oil  of  tur-
pentine and  fat  oils,  also  in  ether,  which  easily  separates  it  from  an
aqueous  solution.  It  combines  directly  with  acids,  disengaging  heat,  and
forming  difficultly  crystallizable  salts,  of  a  deliquescent  character,  having
an  acrid-burning  taste,  and  losing  a  portion  of  their  base  by  heat ;  the
double  salts  which  it  yields  with  the  different  metallic  oxides  crystallize
better.  Heated  with  stearic  acid  it  dissolves  and  forms  a  soap,  which
congeals  on  cooling,  and  is  slightly  soluble  in  water,  and  very  soluble  in
heated  ether.  It  contains  a  larger  proportion  of  nitrogen  than  most
other  organic  alkalies;  its  formula  being  JST2  Cjo  Hu,  and  its  combining


662  Materia Medica.

number  162.  It  is  the  active  constituent  of  tobacco,  and  is  a  most  viru-
lent poison.  One  drop  of  its  concentrated  solution  is  sufficient  to  kill
a  dog  ;  and  small  birds  perished  at  the  approach  of  a  tube  containing  it.
It  exists  in  various  proportions  in  different  tobaccos,  varying  from  3.8  to
11.28  parts  in  1000.  Smokers  in  respiring  the  smoke  of  tobacco  intro-
duce into  their  bodies  a  certain  quantity  of  the  vapor  of  nicotia;  and
the  empyreumatic  oil  of  tobacco,  formed  in  the  pipe  of  the  smoker,  is
an  active  poison,  and  consists  of  nicotia  attached  to  a  true  volatile  oil.
Tannic  acid  forms  with  nicotia  a  compound  of  but  slight  solubility,  and
might  be  employed  as  an  antidote  to  it.

Nicotianin,  discovered  by  Hermstadt,  may  be  obtained  by  distilling
six  pounds  of  fresh  tobacco  leaves  with  twelve  pounds  of  water,  till  one-
half  of  the  liquid  passes  over,  then  add  six  pounds  more  of  water,  and
again  distil,  and  repeat  this  process  three  times.  The  nicotianin  will
float  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  amounting  to  about  eleven  grains.  It
is  a  white,  fatty,  crystalline  substance,  with  the  odor  of  tobacco,  and  its
bitterish,  warm  taste,  without  its  acridity.  It  is  volatilizable  by  heat,
insoluble  in  water,  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,  not  affected  by  the  dilute
acids,  but  dissolved  by  solution  of  potassa.  When  applied  to  the  nos-
trils it  occasions  sneezing,  and  a  grain  of  it  swallowed  produces  giddi-
ness and  nausea.  *

The  empyreumatic  oil  of  tobacco  is  also  a  virulent  poison,  it  is  of  a  dark-
brown  color,  with  a  peculiar  odor  and  an  acrid  taste,  and  may  be  ob-
tained from  the  pipe  of  a  smoker,  or  by  distillation  of  tobacco  by  a  heat
above  212°.  One  drop  killed  a  cat,  and  two  drops  a  dog,  in  about  five
minutes,  each,  being  injected  into  the  rectum.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tobacco  is  a  potent  acro-narcotic  poison.  The
infusion  is  more  apt  to  affect  the  heart,  and  its  smoke  to  act  on  the  brain —
the  former  being  followed  by  great  feebleness  of  the  pulse,  fluttering  of
the  heart,  faintness,  alarm,  etc.,  while  the  latter  occasions  nausea  and
vomiting  followed  by  drowsiness.  Medicinally  it  is  a  sedative,  emetic,
diuretic,  expectorant,  discutient,  antispasmodic,  errhine,  and  sialagogue.
Seldom  used  internally,  except  in  cases  where  from  extreme  insensibility
of  the  stomach,  ordinary  emetics  will  not  operate.  The  smoke  injected
into  the  rectum,  or  the  leaf  itself  in  the  shape  of  a  suppository,  and  in-
troduced into  the  rectum,  has  been  beneficial  in  strangulated  hernia,
obstinate  constipation  from  spasm  of  the  bowels,  in  retention  of  urine
from  spasmodic  urethral  stricture,  hysteric  convulsions,  worms,  and  in
spasms  caused  by  lead ;  likewise  in  croup,  asthma,  and  in  inflammation
of  peritoneum  to  produce  evacuations  of  the  bowels,  moderating  reaction,
and  dispelling  tympanitis.  To  use  the  infusion  of  smoke,  blow  the
smoke  into  milk  or  water  and  inject.

In  croup  and  spasm  of  the  rima  glottidis  a  plaster  made  of  Scotch
snuff  and  lard,  and  applied  to  the  throat  and  breast,  has  proved  very


Nymph^ea  Odorata.  663

effectual  ;  or  a  cataplasm  of  the  leaves  may  be  employed.  An  ointment
of  tobacco  has  been  found  valuable  in  several  forms  of  cutaneous  dis-
ease. The  leaves,  in  combination  with  belladonna  or  stramonium  leaves,
will  be  found  an  excellent  application  to  old,  obstinate  ulcers,  painful
tumors,  and  for  spasmodic  affections.  Almost  a  certain  cure  for  piles,  is
the  application  of  a  wet  leaf  to  the  parts,  and  maintained  there  for  three
or  four  hours.  The  inspissated  juice  has  cured  facial  neuralgia,  being
rubbed  along  the  track  of  the  affected  nerve.  In  using  tobacco  at  all,
great  caution  should  always  be  observed,  and  if  it  produce  great  depres-
sion, or  too  lasting  a  sedative  effect,  stimulants,  as  ammonia  or  brandy,
should  be  administered.  The  quantity  for  an  injection  ought  not  to
exceed  a  scruple  at  first ;  if  this  fails,  cautiously  increase  it,  for  even
half  a  drachm  has  often  proved  fatal ;  if  the  injection  do  not  come  away
in  five  minutes,  it  should  be  assisted  by  throwing  up  a  large  quantity  of
warm  water.  Tobacco  ought  never  to  be  used  internally,  as  we  have
other  agents,  much  safer  and  fully  as  effectual,  to  meet  every  indication
desired.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Tabaci ;  Oleum  Tabaci ;  Unguentum  Tabaci.


NYMPILEA ODORATA.

White  Pond Lily.
Nat.  Ord. — Nymphaeceas. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — White  Pond  Lily  has  a  blackish,  large,  fleshy,  peren-
nial root,  or  rhizoma,  growing  in  mud  where  the  water  is  from  three  to
ten  feet  in  depth,  and  is  often  as  thick  as  a  man's  arm,  sending  up  leaves
and  flowers  to  the  surface.  The  petioles  are  long,  somewhat  semicir-
cular, and  perforated  throughout  by  long  tubes  or  air-vessels  which
serve  to  float  them.  The  leaves  are  floating,  orbicular,  sometimes  almost
kidney-shaped,  peltate,  cordate-cleft  at  the  base  quite  to  the  insertion
of  the  petiole,  the  lobes  on  each  side  prolonged  into  an  acute  point,
entire,  reddish  with  prominent  veins  beneath,  dark  shining-green  above,
and  five  or  six  inches  in  diameter.  The  flowers  are  large,  white  or  rose-
colored,  and  fragrant.  The  sepals  are  four,  lanceolate,  green  without
and  white  within.  The  petals  are  numerous,  lanceolate,  from  an  inch
to  two  and  a  half  inches  long,  of  the  most  delicate  texture,  white,  some-
times tinged  with  purple  on  the  outside.  Stamens  numerous,  yellow,  in
several  rows  ;  filaments  dilated  gradually  from  the  inner  to  the  outer
series  so  as  to  pass  insensibly  into  petals.  Anthers  in  two  longitudinal
cells  growing  to  the  filaments,  and  opening  inwardly.  Stigma  with  from
twelve  to  twenty-four  rays,  very  much  resembling  abortive  anthers,  at
first  incurved,  afterward  spreading.  The  pericarp  is  berry-like,  many-
celled,  many-seeded.


664:  Materia  Medica.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  ponds,  marshes,  and  sluggish  streams
in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  flowering  from  June  to  Septemher ;
the  flowers  shut  at  night  and  open  about  sunrise  ;  and  the  seeds  ripen
under  water.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  and  becomes  light,  spongy
and  friable  on  drying.  It  has  an  astringent  and  bitter  taste,  and  readily
imparts  its  virtues  to  water.  It  is  said  to  contain  much  tannin  and
gallic  acid,  with  starch,  mucilage,  resin,  sugar,  ammonia,  ulmine,  tar-
taric acid,  fecula,  etc.  The  root  should  be  collected  in  the  fall,  freed
from  dirt,  cut  into  slices  and  carefully  dried.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  root  is  astringent,  demulcent,  anodyne  and
anti-scrofulous.  Used  in  dysentery,  diarrhea,  gonorrhea,  leucorrhea,
and  scrofula,  and  combined  with  wild  cherry  in  bronchial  affections.
Externally,  the  leaves  and  roots  have  been  used  in  form  of  poultice  to
boils,  tumors,  scrofulous  ulcers,  and  inflamed  skin.  In  infusion,  used
as  a  gargle  in  ulcers  of  mouth  and  throat,  and  as  an  injection  in  leucor-
rhea. I  recollect  a  lady,  who,  several  years  since,  was  pronounced  by
several  physicians  to  have  uterine  cancer,  and  which  resisted  all  their
treatment ;  she  was  permanently  cured  by  a  squaw  who  gave  her  to
drink  freely  of  the  decoction  of  a  root,  as  well  as  to  inject  it  in  the
vagina,  which  proved  to  be  that  of  the  White  Pond  Lily.  The  dose  of
the  powdered  root  is  half  a  drachm  in  milk  or  sweetened  water;  but  its
best  form  of  administration  is  the  infusion  made  by  macerating  for  thirty
minutes,  one  ounce  of  the  coarsely-powdered  root  in  a  pint  of  boiling
water,  of  which  from  two  to  four  fluidounces  may  be  given  three  or  four
times  a  day.

The  Yellow  Pond  Lily,  Nvphar  Advena,  called  also  Spatterdock,
Frog-lily,  etc.,  possesses  similar  properties,  and  may  be  used  as  a  sub-
stitute. It  has  a  large  and  extensively  creeping  rhizoma,  with  large
erect  leaves,  or  floating  on  half-cylindrical  petioles,  oval,  rounded  at
apex,  with  rounded,  diverging  lobes  at  base,  dark  shining-green  above,
and  when  floating,  pale  and  slimy  beneath.  Thejlowers  are  rather  large,
globular,  erect,  yellow,  on  a  thick,  rigid  stalk.  Sepals  six,  the  three
outer  yellow  inside,  the  three  inner  entirely  yellow.  Petals  numerous,
small,  yellow,  furrowed  externally,  and  inserted  with  the  stamens  on
the  torus.  Stamens  numerous,  truncated,  linear.  Stigma,  sessile,  dis-
coid, with  prominent  rays.  Fruit  an  ovoid,  naked  pericarp,  many-
celled,  and  many-seeded.  It  is  a  very  common  plant  in  ponds,  ditches,
muddy  lakes,  and  mostly  in  shallow  water.

Off. Prep. — Cataplasma  Nymphse  ;  Infusum  Nymphse.


(Enanthe  Phellandrium.  065

(ENANTHE  PHELLANDRIUM. (Phellandrium  ^gualicum.)
Water  Fennel.
Nat.  Orel. — Apiacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE SEEDS.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Water '-Dropwort,
Fine-leaved  Water-hemlock,  is  a  biennial  or  perennial,  umbelliferous  herb,
having  a  thick,  spindle-shaped  root,  with  many  whorled  fibers.  The
stem  is  hollow,  furrowed,  half  immersed  in  the  water,  very  bushy,  with
numerous  spreading,  leafy  branches,  and  from  two  to  four  feet  in  bight.
The  leaves  are  petioled,  spreading,  repeatedly  pinnate,  cut,  with  innume-
rable fine,  expanded,  dark-green,  shining,  acute  segments.  The  umbels
are  opposite  to  the  leaves,  on  shortish  stalks,  about  five-rayed,  without
any  general  bracts.  Partial  umbels  are  very  dense,  of  numerous  short
rays,  accompanied  by  many  narrow,  taper-pointed  bracts.  The  flowers
are  white,  numerous,  all  fertile,  the  outer  ones  largest  and  most  irregu-
lar ;  the  innermost  more  certainly  prolific.  Styles  long,  filiform,  spread-
ing, capitate.  Fruit  ovate,  rather  compressed,  purplish,  smooth,  oblong,
crowned  with  the  minute  spreading  calyx,  and  rather  short,  permanent,
slightly-spreading  styles  ;  the  dorsal  ridges  distinct,  but  little  elevated.
the  lateral  ones  much  broader  and  thicker ;  all  confluent  below  the
calyx. Pedicels  shorter  than  the  fruit.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  Europe,  growing  in  ditches  and  wet
places,  and  its  leaves  are  said  to  be  injurious  to  cattle,  producing  a  kind
of  paralysis  when  eaten.  It  is  poisonous  but  not  so  dangerously  as  the
CEnanthe  Crocata,  Dead-tongue,  or  Hemlock-dropwort,  which  is  consi-
dered the  most  energetic  poison  of  the  narcotico-acrid  Apiaceae.  By
drying,  they  lose  much  of  their  deleterious  properties.  The  CE.  Phel-
landrium is  occasionally  found  in  this  country.  The  seeds  are  the  parts
used  ;  they  are  from  a  line  to  a  line  and  a  half  in  length,  ovate-oblong,
or  elliptical,  yellowish-green,  slightly  curved,  flat  on  one  side  and  gib-
bous on  the  other,  marked  with  ten  delicate  ribs,  and  crowned  with  the
remains  of  the  calyx,  and  with  the  erect  or  reverted  styles.  They  have
a  peculiar,  strong  odor,  somewhat  resembling  angelica,  and  an  acrid,
aromatic  taste,  owing  to  a  volatile  oil,  which  they  contain  in  abundance.
The  poisonous  principle  of  this  plant  has  been  discovered  by  M.  Hulet,
an  apothecary  at  Lyons.  He  names  it  Phellandrine,  and  procures  it  from
the  seeds,  which  contain  an  average  of  two  or  three  per  cent,  of  it,
Seven  and  a  half  grains  of  it,  injected  into  the  veins  of  a  dog  produced,
in  a  few  moments,  a  difficulty  of  respiration,  nervous  tremblings,  and
anxiety,  lasting  some  hours  ;  he  recovered,  however.  Two  birds  into
whose  beaks  the  same  dose  was  introduced,  died  in  fifteen  or  twenty
minutes. We  are  not  informed  of  its  method  of  preparation.


666  Materia  Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Water  Fennel  is  a  mild  narcotic  stimulant,
expectorant,  alterative,  and  diuretic.  In  overdoses  it  produces  vertigo,
intoxication,  and  dull  pains  in  the  head.  The  seeds  have  been  most
successfully  used  in  chronic  bronchitis,  asthma,  chronic  catarrh,  hemop-
tysis, dyspepsia,  and  obstinate  ulcers.  They  are  given  in  powder,
commencing  with  five  or  six  grains,  and  so  repeated  as  to  amount  to  a
drachm  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  formula  recommended  by  Dr.  Lob-
stein,  who  had  considerable  success  with  the  remedy,  in  many  of  the
above  named  diseases,  is :  take  of  powdered  water  fennel  seed,  two
drachms,  lactin,  powdered  gum  arabic,  of  each,  four  drachms.  Mix,
and  divide  into  twenty-four  powders.  Dose,  one  powder  every  two  or
three  hours.


OENOTHERA  BIENNIS.
Tree  Primrose.

Nat.  Ord. — Onagraceae. Sex.  Syst. — Octandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK AND TWIGS.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous,  biennial  plant,  with  an  erect,
rough,  hairy,  and  branching  stem,  from  three  to  five  feet  high.  The
leaves  are  ovate-lanceolate,  alternate,  acute,  obscurely  toothed,  roughly
pubescent,  from  three  to  six  inches  long  by  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  and
a  half  broad,  those  on  the  stem  sessile,  and  the  radicals  tapering  into  a
petiole.  The  flowers  are  numerous,  pale-yellow,  sessile,  odorous,  and
are  disposed  in  a  terminal,  somewhat  leafy  spike  ;  they  are  nocturnal,
open  but  once  by  night,  and  continue  only  a  single  day.  The  calyx  tube
is  two  or  three  times  longer  than  the  ovary,  deciduous,  four  lobes,  retlexed.
The  petals  are  four,  equal,  obcordate,  or  obovate,  inserted  into  the  top
of  the  tube.  Stamens  eight,  obliquely  declined,  a  little  shorter  than  the
petals.  Anthers  mostly  linear.  Ovary  sessile,  four-grooved.  Capsule
oblong,  somewhat  tapering  above,  four-celled,  four-valved,  valves  one-
ribbed. Seeds  numerous,  naked,  arranged  in  two  rows  in  each  cell.

History. — Tree-Primrose  is  very  common  in  this  country,  growing  in
fields  and  waste  places,  and  along  fences,  from  Canada  to  Carolina ;  it
bears  fine  yellow  flowers  in  July  and  August.  It  is  exceedingly  vari-
able, and  has  been  divided  into  numerous  species.  When  it  grows  in
secluded  situations,  the  leaves  become  covered  with  a  white  mucor,
giving  them  a  highly  pubescent  appearance  ;  and  by  cultivation  the
flowers  become  of  a  much  deeper  color,  and  of  a  larger  size.  They
expand  in  the  evening,  just  as  twilight  begins,  and  continue  open  till  the
sun  begins  to  exert  some  power  on  the  succeeding  morning ;  the
same  flower  does  not  expand  a  second  time.  Pursh  states  that  he  has
"  frequently  observed  a  singularity  in  this  plant,  and  it  might  be  inter-
esting to  make  further  inquiry  into  its  cause ;  it  is  that  in  a  dark  night,
when  no  objects  can  be  distinguished  at  an  inconsiderable  distance,  this


Olea.  667

plant,  when  in  full  flower,  can  be  seen  at  a  great  distance,  having  a
bright  white  appearance,  which  probably  may  arise  from  some  phos-
phoric properties  of  the  flowers."  The  bark,  leaves,  and  twigs  are  the
parts  used  ;  when  recent  they  are  mucilaginous,  and  when  chewed,  are
followed  by  a  sensation  of  acridity,  which  is  partially  lost  by  drying.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  strong  decoction  has  been  very  beneficial  in
obstinate  infantile  eruptions,  tetter,  and  some  other  cutaneous  affections.
Probably  an  ointment  made  by  boiling  the  twigs,  leaves  and  bark,  in
lard  or  tallow,  would  answer  a  similar  purpose.  They  must  be  gathered
about  the  flowering  season.  In  fomentation,  or  when  recent,  bruised,
they  form  an  excellent  emollient  in  ulcers.


OLEA.

Oils.


Oils  may  be  liquid  or  solid ;  they  are  characterized  by  an  unctuous
feel,  by  their  inflammability,  and  insolubility  in  water,  and  by  their
property  of  leaving  a  greasy  stain  upon  paper.  They  are  divided  into
two  classes,  the  fixed  and  volatile  or  essential  oils.

Olea  Fixa,  fixed  or  expressed  oils,  are  usually  obtained  by  submitting
the  seeds  or  other  bodies  containing  them,  to  powerful  pressure,  after
having  bruised  and  gently  heated  them,  in  order  that  the  oil  may  flow
more  freely.  Sometimes  the  articles  are  boiled  in  water,  and  the  oil
removed  as  it  comes  to  the  surface.  Fixed  oils  vary  in  consistence
from  that  of  tallow  to  perfect  fluidity;  they  are  somewhat  viscid,  trans-
parent, and  mostly  of  a  yellowish  color,  which  may  be  removed  by
animal  charcoal;  they  are  most  commonly  fluid  at  ordinary  temperatures,
and  are  not  volatilizable  without  decomposition.  Their  density  is  less
than  that  of  water,  ranging  from  0.913  to  0.936,  and  their  point  of
concretion  varies  considerably.  Pure  fixed  oils  are  nearly  inodorous
and  tasteless.  Heated  to  600°,  ebullition  ensues,  and  a  vapor  is  given
off,  which  when  condensed  presents  oleic  and  margaric  acids  in  large
proportion,  beside  benzoic  acid,  another  volatile  acid,  and  an  empyreum-
atic  oil.  If  placed  in  close  vessels,  and  exposed  to  red  heat,  they  yield
among  other  products,  a  quantity  of  the  combustible  compounds  of  car-
bon and  hydrogen.  In  the  open  air,  exposed  to  heat,  they  burn  with  a
bright  flame,  producing  water  and  carbonic  acid.  They  absorb  oxygen
and  gradually  become  solid  on  exposure  to  the  air.  Those  which  are
thus  converted  into  a  transparent,  yellowish,  flexible  solid,  without  any
unctuous  feel,  are  called  Drying  oils.  Those  which  contain  mucilage  or
acid,  become  rancid,  with  an  unpleasant  smell  and  sharp  taste ;  in  those
where  there  is  a  tendency  to  the  formation  of  an  acid,  this  change  may
be  prevented  by  boiling  them  for  a  short  time  with  hydrate  of  magnesia
and  water.  The  fixed  oils  are  insoluble  in  water,  but  may  be  mixed
with  it  by  means  of  mucilage,  forming  emulsions ;  generally  sparingly


668  Materia Medica.

soluble  in  alcohol,  but  readily  so  by  ether,  which  may  be  used  to  sepa-
rate them  from  other  vegetable  proximate  principles. Aided  by  heat
they  dissolve sulphur and phosphorus. They convert chlorine  and
iodine  into  muriatic  and  hydriodic  acids,  which,  reacting  upon  them,
render  them  more  and  more  consistent,  until  they  acquire  the  firmness
of  wax. They  are  decomposed  by  the  stronger  acids,  furnishing,  among
other  products,  oleic  and  margaric  acids. When  boiled  with  nitric  acid,
they  furnish  malic  and oxalic acids. By  combination  with  salifiable
bases,  they  are  resolved  into  glycerin,  which  remains  free,  and  into  oleic
and  margaric  acids  which  combine  with the  base. The  compounds  of
these  acids  with  potassa  and  soda  are  called  soaps. Many  of  the  vege-
table alkalies,  resins,  volatile  oils,  and  other  proximate  principles  of  plants
are  dissolved  by  the  fixed  oils. They  consist  of  two  distinct  substances,
the one a fluid,  called  Olein,  and the  other a  solid,  called  Maryarin.
Boiling  alcohol  takes  up  fixed  oil,  and  on  cooling  deposits  the  concrete
principle,  and  the  olein  may  be  had  by  evaporation. Or  the  olein  may
be  had  from  congealed  oil  or  fat,  by  pressing  it  between  folds  of  bibulous
paper,  which  absorbs  the  olein,  and  leaves  the  solid  principle  untouched.
Margarin  differs  from  Stearin  by  yielding  margaric  acid,  while  the  latter
furnishes  stearic  acid. They  may  be  distinguished  from  each  other  by
the  greater  fusibility  of  margarin, and  by  its  solubility  in  cold  ether;
and  the  two  principles  may  be  separated  by  boiling  ether,  which  dis-
solves both,  but  deposits  the  stearin  on cooling,  and after  filtration,
yields  the  margarin  by  evaporation. Nitric  acid  converts  olein  into  a
deep-yellow  butyraceous  mass,  which  when  treated  with  warm  alcohol,
yields  to  it  in  solution a  deep  orange-red oil,  leaving  a  peculiar  fatty
matter  behind,  called  Elaidin. It  is  white,  fusible  at  97°,  insoluble  in
water,  sparingly  soluble  in  alcohol,  readily  soluble  in  ether,  and  con-
verted, in  the  process  of  saponification  by  alkalies,  into  a  peculiar  acid,
termed  Eldidic  acid,  and  into  glycerin. MM.  Pelouze  and  Boudet,  con-
sider margarin  and  stearin  to  be  always  identical  from  whatever  source
they  may  be  derived,  when  in  a  state  of  purity. The  variable  fusibility
of  these  principles  is  owing  to  the  existence  of  definite  combinations  of
them  respectively  with  olein. They  also  state  that  there  are  two  dis-
tinct kinds  of  olein,  one  existing  in  the  drying  oils,  and  the  other  in  oils
which  are  not  drying. One  remains  liquid  under  nitrous  acid,  while
the  other  forms  elaidin,  with  it ;  the  former  contains  much  less  hydro-
gen than  the  latter. The  oleic  acid  prepared  from  them,  likewise  dif-
fers as  with  the  one  nitrous  acid  converts  it  into  ela'idic  acid,  but  not
with the other. Olein,  margarin,  stearin,  elaidin,  etc.,  are  at  present
supposed  to  be  compounds  of  oleic,  margaric,  stearic,  elaidic,  etc.,  acids,
with  glycerin  ;  and  in  the  process  of  saponification,  the  alkali  takes  the
oily  acid,  and  sets  the  glycerin  free. The  ultimate  constituents  of  the
fixed  oils  are  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen; the  hydrogen  being  in
much  larger  proportion  than  is  necessary  to  form  water  with  the  oxygen.


Olea.  6G9

Those  which  contain  the  most  carbon  and  least  oxygen  are  least  fusible;
and  their  solubility  in  alcohol  is  said  to  depend  upon  their  amount  of
oxygen,  those  with  the  greatest  proportion  of  it,  being  the  most  soluble.
It  is  said  that  some  of  them  contain  a  very  minute  proportion  of  nitro-
gen, but  this  is,  probably,  an  error  in  analysis,  the  nitrogen  depending
upon  a  minute  quantity  of  albuminous  matter  in  the  oil,  or,  perhaps  the
absorption  of  a  minute  quantity  of  azote  from  the  atmosphere.

Olea  Volatiiia,  volatile  or  essential  oils,  are  found  in  all  odoriferous
plants,  in  one  or  several  parts  of  them,  or  in  the  whole  plant,  and  are
usually  obtained  by  distillation,  with  a  few  exceptions,  as  with  the  rind
of  the  lemon  or  orange,  where  the  oil  is  in  distinct  cellules,  and  is
obtained  by  expression.  Some  oils,  as  those  of  mustard,  or  bitter
almonds  do  not  exist  ready  formed  in  the  plant,  but  are  produced  during
distillation  by  chemical  reactions  and  influences.  Volatile  oils  are  of
various  colors,  red,  green,  blue,  or  brown,  sometimes  colorless,  but  more
commonly  yellowish.  Their  odor  is  similar  to  that  of  the  plants  furnish-
ing them,  but  stronger  and  less  agreeable;  and  their  taste  is  hot  and
pungent,  being  more  grateful  when  they  are  diluted.  They  vary  in
density  from  0.847  to  1.17.  At  ordinary  temperatures  they  partially
rise  in  vapor,  diffusing  their  peculiar  odor,  and  on  the  application  of
heat  they  become  entirely  volatilized.  Their  boiling  point  varies,  though
most  of  them  rise  readily  with  the  vapor  of  boiling  water;  when  dis-
tilled alone,  they  almost  alwaj^s  undergo  decomposition.  Their  point  of
concretion  also  varies,  some  becoming  solid  at  ordinary  temperatures,
several  at  32°  F.,  and  many  remain  liquid  even  below  this  degree  of
temperature.  They  burn  with  a  bright  flame  with  much  smoke  ;  and
exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  they  absorb  oxygen,  become  darker  colored,
thicker,  less  fragrant,  and  finally  become  converted  into  resin ;  under  the
influence  of  light  this  change  takes  place  rapidly.  Previous  to  a  com-
plete change,  the  remaining  oil  may  be  recovered  by  distillation.  Instead
of  resin,  some  of  them  form  acids  by  combination  with  oxygen.  Dr.  J.
L.  Plummer  has  found  many  of  the  essential  oils  to  possess  bleaching
or  decolorizing  properties  ;  whether  this  is  actually  the  case  is  not  yet
satisfactorily  ascertained,  as  it  is  probable  that  the  bleaching  power  was
due  to  some  principles  produced  by  the  influence  of  light  and  air.
Faraday  has  stated  that  "essential  oils  are  thickened  by  long  exposure
to  light  and  air;  they  become  ozonized,  and  their  properties  changed."
The  volatile  oils  are  slightly  soluble  in  water,  rendering  it  milky  upon
agitation,  but  separating  on  standing,  leaving  the  water  clear  and  im-
pregnated with  their  odor  and  taste ;  this  impregnation  is  more  complete
when  water  is  distilled  with  the  oils,  or  from  the  plants  containing  them.
When  trkurated  with  magnesia  or  its  carbonate,  they  are  more  readily
soluble  in  water;  sugar  also  increases  their  solubility.  Alcohol  readily
dissolves  the  greater  part  of  them,  as  well  as  ether  ;  the  more  oxygen
they  contain  the  more  easily  soluble  are  they. They  dissolve  sulphur


670  Materia Medica.

and  phosphorus  with  the  aid  of  heat,  but  deposit  them  on  cooling
Brown,  unctuous,  fetid  substances  called  Balsams  of  Sulphur,  are  made
by  boiling  them  for  a  long  time  with  sulphur.  Chlorine  or  iodine  con-
verts them  into  resin,  and  then  combines  with  the  resin.  They  unite
with  several  vegetable  acids,  but  are  decomposed  by  the  strong  mineral.
Caustic  alkali  converts  them  into  resin,  which  unites  with  the  alkali  and
forms  soap.  Several  metallic  oxides,  and  various  salts  which  easily
part  with  oxygen,  convert  them  into  resin.  They  dissolve  fixed  oils,
fats,  resins,  camphor,  and  several  of  the  vegetable  alkalies.

The  volatile  oils  consist  of  two  distinct  principles,  Stearoptene  or  a
solid  matter,  and  Elcoptcne  or  a  fluid.  These  principles  congeal  at  diffe-
rent temperatures,  and  may  be  separated  by  pressing  the  oil,  when
frozen,  between  folds  of  bibulous  paper,  the  stearoptene  remains
between  the  folds,  while  the  eleoptene  is  absorbed  by  the  paper,  and
may  be  obtained  from  it  by  distillation  with  water.  Stearoptene  is  often
deposited  by  volatile  oils  upon  standing,  in  a  solid  crystalline  form;
sometimes  these  deposits  are  oxides,  and  when  formed  under  the  influ-
ence of  water,  are  frequently  hydrates  of  the  respective  oils.  The
ultimate  constituents  of  the  volatile  oils  are  usually  carbon,  hydrogen,
and  oxygen  ;  some  of  them  contain  nitrogen,  and  the  oils  of  horseradish
and  mustard  contain  sulphur.  Volatile  oils  leave  a  greasy  stain  upon
paper,  which  disappears  by  heat ;  this  is  not  the  case  with  fixed  oils,
and  they  should  always  be  preserved  in  small,  well-stopped  bottles,  and
excluded  from  the  light.

Volatile  oils  are  frequently  adulterated  with  fixed  oils,  resinous  sub-
stances, and  alcohol.  Fixed  oils  may  be  known  by  their  leaving  a  per-
manent greasy  stain  upon  paper,  while  that  produced  by  the  volatile  oil
disappears  entirely  when  exposed  to  heat.  When  the  adulterated  oil  is
distilled  with  water,  both  resin  and  fixed  oil  remain  behind.  Alcohol
may  be  detected  by  the  milkiness  of  the  oil  when  agitated  with  water,
and,  after  the  liquids  have  separated,  the  water  occupies  more  space
and  the  oil  less  than  before.  Various  methods  have  been  recommended
to  detect  the  presence  of  alcohol  with  essential  oil.  M.  Beral  puts  twelve
drops  of  the  suspected  oil  in  a  perfectly  dry  watch-glass,  and  then  adds
a  piece  of  potassium  about  as  large  as  the  head  of  a  pin.  If  the  potas-
sium remain  for  twelve  or  fifteen  minutes  in  the  midst  of  the  liquid,
there  is  either  no  alcohol  present,  or  less  than  four  per  cent. ;  if  it  dis-
appear in  five  minutes,  the  oil  contains  more  than  four  per  cent,  of
alcohol;  if  in  less  than  a  minute,  twenty-five  per  cent,  or  more.  M.
Borsarelli  introduces  small  pieces  of  chloride  of  calcium,  well  dried  and
perfectly  free  from  powder,  into  a  small  cylindrical  tube,  closed  at  one
end,  and  about  two-thirds  filled  with  the  oil  to  be  examined,  and  heats
the  tube  to  212°,  occasionally  shaking  it.  If  there  be  a  considerable
proportion  of  alcohol,  the  chloride  is  entirely  dissolved,  forming  a  solu-
tion which  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  the  tube ;  if  only  a  very  small  quantity,


Olea.  671

the  pieces  lose  their  form,  and  collect  at  the  bottom  in  a  white  adhering
mass;  if  none  at  all,  they  remain  unchanged.  J.  J.  Bernoulli  adds  dry
acetate  of  potassa  to  the  oil;  if  alcohol  be  present  the  salt  is  dissolved,
forming  a  solution  from  which  the  volatile  oil  separates.  If  the  oil  be
free  from  alcohol,  the  salt  remains  dry  therein.  Wittstein,  who  speaks
highly  of  this  test,  has  suggested  the  following  mode  of  applying  it  as
the  best:  In  a  dry  test-tube,  about  half  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  five  or
six  inches  long,  put  not  more  than  eight  grains  of  powdered  dry  acetate
of  potassa;  then  fill  the  tube  two-thirds  full  with  the  volatile  oil  to  be
examined.  The  contents  of  the  tube  must  be  well  stirred  with  a  glass
rod,  taking  care  not  to  allow  the  salt  to  rise  above  the  oil ;  afterward  set
aside  for  a  short  time.  If  the  salt  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  the  tube
dry,  it  is  evident  that  the  oil  contains  no  spirit.  Oftentimes,  instead  of
the  dry  salt,  beneath  the  oil  is  found  a  clear  syrupy  fluid,  which  is  a
solution  of  the  salt  in  the  alcohol,  with  which  the  oil  was  mixed.  When
the  oil  contains  only  a  little  alcohol,  a  small  portion  of  the  solid  salt  will
be  found  under  the  syrupy  solution.  Many  oils  frequently  contain  a
trace  of  water,  which  does  not  materially  interfere  with  this  test,
because,  although  the  acetate  of  potassa  becomes  moist  thereby,  it  still
retains  its  pulverulent  form.  A.  Oberdofler  places  from  two  to  four
drachms  of  the  suspected  oil  in  a  flat  glass  plate,  in  the  middle  of  which
is  placed  a  small  glass  stand  (the  inverted  neck  of  a  six-ounce  bottle  is  very
suitable  for  this  purpose)  on  which  a  watch-glass,  with  five  to  ten  grains
of  platinum-black,  is  supported,  and  the  whole  covered  with  a  glass  bell
open  at  the  top.  After  a  strip  of  moistened  litmus  paper  has  been  laid
over  the  vessel  containing  the  platinum-black,  the  operator  observes
the  reaction.  In  the  course  of  a  few  minutes,  oil  containing  alcohol,
begins  to  redden  the  litmus  paper,  which,  in  the  space  of  a  quarter  or
half  an  hour,  is  completely  accomplished;  upon  which,  the  eliminated
vapor  of  acetic  acid  is  deposited  on  the  interior  of  the  glass  bell  if  the
alcohol  was  present  in  sufficient  quantity,  and  can  be  recognized  dis-
tinctly by  its  odor.  To  remove  all  doubt,  he  washes  the  platinum -black,
after  an  hour  has  elapsed,  with  a  little  water,  filters,  saturates  the  filtrate
carefully  with  potassa,  and  adds  neutral  chloride  of  iron,  by  which  the
characteristic  color  of  acetate  of  iron  is  obtained ;  and,  after  boiling,  the
fluid  becomes  decolorized,  and  the  hydrated  oxide  of  iron  is  precipitated.
From  a  series  of  experiments,  he  concludes  that  it  is  possible,  in  this
way,  to  detect  the  presence  of  one  to  two  per  cent,  of  alcohol,  and  that
with  five  per  cent,  the  odor  is  sufficient,  with  most  oils,  to  prove  the
admixture  of  alcohol.  How  far  this  method  may  be  interfered  with,  by
some  oils  which  have  very  acid  reactions,  or  particularly  pungent  odors,
experience  must  teach;  but  with  a  great  number  of  oils,  it  has  been
found  available,  even  with  oil  of  bitter  almonds.

It  is  frequently  the  case,  that  volatile  oils  of  small  value  are  mixed
with  the  more  costly ;  these  may  be  detected  by  their  taste,  smell,  and


672


Materia  Medica.


specific  gravity.  Oil  of  turpentine,  which  is  a  common  adulteration,
may  be  known  by  remaining  in  part  undissolved,  when  the  oil  is  treated
with  three  or  four  times  its  volume  of  alcohol  of  the  specific  gravity
(For  Volatile  Oils,  see  Part  111.)


0.84.


TABLE  OF  SPECIFIC  GRAVITIES  OF  FIXED  AND  VOLATILE  OILS.


Oils.


Amygdalae.  •  ■  ■
do Amarse..

Anethi

Anisi

Anthemidis. . .

Bevgamii

Cajuputi

Cari

Caryophylli..  .

Chenopodii. . .

Cinnamomi. . .

Copaiba?

Cubebae

Fceniculi

Gaultheriaa  . . .

Hedeomse .

Junipori

Lavandulae.c'm

do rectified

do from  the

whole  herb

Liiiionis,  com .

do rectified

!  Lini


Temporal.  Specific  Gravity.


68°  F


71°  F.


.976


.914

.931

1.034


.917  to  .920
1.043  "  1.084
.881
.990
.908
.885
.927
.946

1.061
.908

1.035
.91(1
.929
.997

1.173
.948
.911
.898
.877

.920
.851
.847
.932


Menthae  Piperitaa

Menthse  Viridis.

Monardae

Morrluiae,  pure. .

do  pale

do  light-brown
do  dark-brown

Myristicae

Olivae,  pure


Origani


Pimentae

Pulegii

Pacini

Rosae

Rosmarini,  com.
do rectified..

Rutse

Sabinae

Sassafras

Succini,  rectified
Terebinthinae  . .
Valerianae


l'emperat.  Specific  Gravity.


72°  F.
63°  F.


90°  F.


75°  F.

72°  F.


•902  to .920
•914  " .975

.917

.923

.924

.929

.920  to .948

.915

(Kane .867

{Lewis  .940

(Brande.909

1.021

.925  to .978

.964

.832

.911

.888

.837

.915

1.094

.758

.86

.934


The  above  specific  gravities  are  those  usually  given,  yet  they  probably
vary,  according  to  circumstances ;  and  unless  otherwise  named,  the  tem-
perature of  each  is  about  60°  F.


OLEUM  BUBULUM.
Neats-foot Oil.

THE OIL PREPARED FROM THE BONES OF THE BOS DOMESTICUS.

Preparation. — The  feet  of  the  ox,  having  been  deprived  of  the  skin
and  hoof,  are  subjected  to  a  long-continued  boiling  in  water  ;  the  oil  and
fat  existing  in  them  being  melted,  rise  to  the  surface,  from  which  they
are  removed,  and  again  placed  in  fresh  water,  which  is  heated  to  nearly
212°.  After  standing  for  some  time,  various  impurities  settle  at  the
bottom,  and  the  oil  is  taken  from  the  surface.  If  further  purification  is
desired,  it  is  to  be  again  placed  into  water,  and  kept  for  twenty-four
hours  at  such  a  temperature  as  will  permit  the  fat  that  remains  with  the
oil  to  separate  from  it.  After  the  liquid  has  cooled,  the  fat  concretes
into  a  mass,  and  the  oil  remains  in  the  state  of  a  thin  fluid,  which  is  to  be
filtered  through  small  pieces  of  charcoal,  free  from  powder.

History. — Neats-foot  Oil,  when  purified  properly,  is  a  yellowish,
inodorous,  and  bland  liquid  ;  but  in  general,  it  retains  both  a  disagreeable


Oleum  Morrhu^e.  073

odor  and  taste.  It  congeals  with  much  difficulty,  remaining  fluid  at  very-
low  temperatures,  and  is  used  for  greasing  machinery  in  order  to  lessen
friction,  likewise  by  saddlers  and  shoemakers,  to  soften  and  preserve
leather,  and  prevent  its  cracking.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  oil  is  emollient  and  relaxant,  and  may  be
applied  with  advantage  to  the  breast  and  throat,  in  croup  or  cough,  rub-
bing it  on  with  brisk  friction.  It  likewise  enters  into  various  extempora-
neous liniments  and  poultices.

OLEUM  MORRHlLdE.

Cod  Liver  Oil.

A FIXED OIL OBTAINED FROM THE LIVER OF GADUS MORRHUA.

Description. — The  Gadus  Morrhua  of  Linnaeus,  and  Morrhua  vulgaris
of  Storer  and  other  Naturalists,  or  the  common  Cod-fish,  belongs  to  the
Class  Pisces,  Order  Jugulares  (Linnceus) — Malacopterygii  Subbrachiati,
and  Family  Gadidae  ;  its  Generic  character  is  recognized  by  the  ventrals
attached  under  the  throat,  and  attenuated  to  a  point.  The  fish  is  usually
between  two  and  three  feet  long,  with  brown  or  yellowish  spots  on  its
back.  The  body  is  moderately  elongated  and  somewhat  compressed,
and  covered  with  soft,  rather  small  scales,  of  which  the  head  is  destitute  ;
of  the  fins,  which  are  soft,  there  are  three  on  the  back,  two  anal,  and  a
distinct  caudal ;  and  the  fin  under  the  throat  is  narrow  and  pointed.
The  jaws  are  furnished  with  pointed  irregular  teeth  in  several  ranks.
The  gills  are  large  with  seven  rays.  It  inhabits  the  Northern  Atlantic
Ocean,  and  is  found  in  abundance  on  the  banks  of  Newfoundland.

History. — Cod-liver  Oil,  as  it  is  generally  called  in  commerce,  is  obtained
from  several  of  the  species  of  the  Genus  Gadus  —  as  the  codfish,  coal-
fish,  and  burbot ;  and  sometimes  from  the  pollock,  hake,  and  haddock.
The  oil  is  obtained  by  several  processes  ;  one  of  which  is  to  heat  the
livers  with  water,  until  they  are  broken  up  into  a  pultaceous  mass,  and
then  throw  them  upon  a  strainer  placed  over  some  vessel  into  which  the
liquid  flows,  the  oil  rises  to  the  surface,  from  which  it  is  drawn  off,
strained,  and  prepared  for  market.  Another  and  improved  plan  is  to
heat  the  livers  in  a  large  vessel  by  steam  externally  applied,  and  then
drain  the  pultaceous  mass  as  in  the  other  process.  The  oil  is  said  to  be
sometimes  procured  by  expression.  Again,  it  is  obtained  by  the  putre-
factive decomposition  of  the  livers,  when  placed  in  quantities  in  barrels
or  other  vessels,  the  oil  rising  to  the  surface  as  it  escapes  from  the  dis-
integrating tissue.

There  are  three  varieties  of  Cod-liver  Oil  in  commerce  : 1st.  The

White  or  Pale-yellow,  which  is  prepared  from  fresh  sweet  livers,  and

varies  in  color  from  the  slightest  tint  of  transparent  yellow  to  a  fine

golden  yellow  ;  2d.  The  Brownish-yellow,  obtained  from  livers  running

43


67±  Materia  Mkdica.

gradually  to  putrefaction,  and  of  a  chestnut-brown  color;  and  3d.  The
Dark-brown,  prepared  from  livers  in  an  intermediate  state,  dark-brown,
and  somewhat  opake,  except  in  thin  layers.  They  are  generally  of  the
consistence  of  sperm  oil,  and  have  a  peculiar  odor  and  taste  unlike  all
other  oils,  and  which  properties,  in  a  great  measure,  are  the  best  tests
for  the  genuineness  of  the  oil.  The  smell  and  taste  is  similar  to  that  of
shoe-leather,  as  prepared  in  this  country,  and  when  a  decided  odor  of
ordinary  fish  oil  is  present,  we  may  suspect  its  purity.  All  the  varieties
have  an  acrid  taste,  together  with  a  somewhat  empyreumatic  bitterness
in  the  most  impure.  The  specific  gravity  at  72°  F.  varies  from  0.915  to
0.9195;  at  63°  F.,  the  specific  gravity  of  the  pale  variety  is  stated  as
0.923  ;  of  the  light-brown  0.924,  and  of  the  dark-brown  0.929.

According  to  analysis,  numerous  principles  have  been  found  in  Cod-
liver  Oil,  as  gaduin,  oleic  and  margaric  acids,  butyric  and  acetic  acids  ;
various  biliary  principles,  as  fellinic,  cholic,  and  bilifellinic  acids,  and
bilifulvin  ;  a  peculiar  substance  soluble  in  alcohol  ;  a  peculiar  substance
insoluble  in  water,  alcohol,  or  ether  ;  iodine,  chlorine,  and  traces  of  bro-
mine ;  phosphoric  and  sulphuric  acids,  phosphorus,  lime,  magnesia,
soda,  and  iron.  Dr.  Winckler  has  shown  that  a  distinguishing  feature
of  cod-liver  oil,  consists  in  its  having  no  glycerin,  but  in  its  place,  the
hydratcd  oxide  of  propyl.

Gaduin  may  be  obtained  by  saponifying  the  oil  with  soda,  decompos-
ing the  soap  by  acetate  of  lead,  and  treating  the  resulting  lead  soap  with
ether,  which  dissolves  the  oleate  of  lead  and  gaduin,  leaving  the  marga-
rate  of  lead  behind.  The  ethereal  solution,  which  is  dark-brown,  is
decomposed  by  sulphuric  acid,  which  liberates  the  brown  oleic  acid.
This  owes  its  color  to  gaduin,  to  separate  which  soda  is  added  in  excess;
the  resulting  oleate  of  soda,  which  is  insoluble  in  an  excess  of  the  alkali,
is  dissolved  in  alcohol  ;  and  the  alcoholic  solution  is  cooled  below  32°,
by  which  means  the  oleate  of  soda  is  separated,  the  gaduin  remaining  in
solution.  This  is  precipitated  from  its  solution  by  the  addition  of  sulphu-
ric acid.  Gaduin  is  a  dark-brown  substance,  brittle  and  pulverizablc
when  dry,  without  odor  or  taste,  insoluble  in  water,  and  soluble  to  some
extent  in  alcohol  or  ether.  It  is  insoluble  in  nitric  and  muriatic  acids,
but  is  dissolved  by  sulphuric  acid,  giving  a  blood-red  color  to  the  solu-
tion, from  which  it  is  precipitated  by  water  and  the  alkalies.  Alkaline
solutions  dissolve  it ;  chlorine  decolorizes  it.  It  is  gradually  changed
into  a  blackish-brown  insoluble  substance,  by  boiling  in  alcohol.  Its  for-
mula is  C25  H23  Oo.  It  is  not  supposed  to  be  connected  with  any  of  the
virtues  of  the  oil.  The  virtues  of  Cod-liver  Oil  have  been  supposed  by
many  to  be  owing  to  its  bromine  and  iodine,  but  these  exist  in  it  in  too
small  proportion  for  much  effect.  The  usual  tests  cannot  detect  the  pre-
sence of  the  iodine  ;  the  oil  must  be  first  saponified,  and  this  carbonized
before  the  iodine  can  be  detected. The  oil,  although  capable  of  dissolving


Oleum  Morrhu^e.  675

a  larger  proportion  of  iodine,  never  contains  over  one  part  of  it  in
2000  ;  and  if  any  specimen  contains  more,  it  is,  probably,  fraudulently
added.

Cod-liver  Oil  is  liable  to  adulteration  with  other  fixed  oils  ;  for  the
detection  of  this  there  are  no  perfectly  reliable  tests.  The  best,  are  thp
peculiar  shoe-leather  smell  and  taste  ;  and  if  a  strong  lamp-oil  odor  is
perceptible,  the  oil  is  impure.  The  color  of  the  oil  is  of  but  little  import-
ance, though  the  pale  or  light-brown  variety  is  generally  esteemed  the
most.  A  drop  of  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  added  to  a  small  portion
of  fresh  cod-liver  oil,  causes  a  fine  violet  color,  soon  passing  into  yellow-
ish or  brownish-red ;  sometimes  it  immediately  becomes  a  clear  red,  or
dark-brownish  red,  without  assuming  the  violet  hue,  and  which  is  said
to  occur  with  oil  prepared  by  boiling  the  livers  with  water.  Concen-
trated nitric  acid  agitated  with  the  oil,  produces  instantly  a  pinkish  color
which  soon  becomes  brown.

Dr.  Jongh  states  that  a  few  drops  of  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,
change  olive  oil  to  a  dirty  gray  color ;  oil  of  poppies  to  a  deep-yellow
inclining  to  brown  ;  and  ordinary  fish  oil  to  a  deep-brown  color ;  but
when  added,  drop  by  drop,  to  cod-liver  oil,  a  peculiar  centrifugal  move-
ment is  produced  from  the  spot  at  which  the  drops  fall,  and  at  the  same
time  a  beautiful  violet  tint,  which  is  instantly  changed  into  purple  by
agitating  the  oil.  This  change  of  color  is  not  owing  to  the  presence  of
iodine,  for  other  fish-oils  which  contain  iodine  do  not  manifest  a  similar
change,  but,  as  he  believes,  to  the  presence  of  a  biliary  principle  called
Cholink  Acid.  This  method,  however,  although  it  will  distinguish  the
cod-liver  from  every  other  oil,  will  not  answer  to  distinguish  its  various
adulterations  with  other  fish  or  vegetable  oils.  The  pure  cod-liver  oil
contains  in  100  parts  from  0.020  to  0.030  parts  of  iodine,  and  oils  con-
taining a  less  proportion  of  this  substance,  are  to  be  considered  as  adul-
terations or  mixtures  with  non-remedial  oils.  Other  oils,  when  mixed
with  iodine  or  various  iodurets,  maybe  readily  detected  by  their  yielding
these  articles  to  water  or  alcohol  when  agitated  with  them,  while  genuine
cod-liver  oil  never  gives  up  its  iodine  to  these  fluids.  The  genuine  oil,
when  carbonized,  without  being  first  saponified,  and  the  carbon  then
separated  by  means  of  alcohol,  does  not  betray  the  least  trace  of  iodine,
while  other  oils  treated  in  the  same  manner  are  invariably  detected  by
manifesting  the  presence  of  iodine  or  any  of  the  medicinal  iodurets.
Again,  the  genuine  oil,  when  saponified,  never  communicates  to  the
mother  water  the  slightest  trace  of  iodine,  while  the  contrary  is  the  case
when  other  oils  combined  with  iodine,  either  in  a  free  state  or  in  any  of
its  combinations,  are  subjected  to  saponification.

Exposure  to  the  air  effects  a  change  in  the  properties  of  the  cod-liver
oil,  consequently  it  should  always  be  kept  well  stopped  ;  and  the  best
mode  of  keeping  it,  is  to  fill  bottles  with  it,  which  are  of  sufficient  size
to  contain  the  quantity  generally  wanted  for  use  at  one  time,  and  have


676  Materia  Medica.

them  well  stopped. By  this  means  it  may  be  kept  for  some  time  without
any  sensible  change.

Properties  and  Uses. — Cod-liver  Oil  is  nutritive  and  alterative.  It
has  been  long  used  as  a  domestic  remedy  in  chronic  rheumatic  and
strumous  diseases,  especially  in  the  northern  parts  of  Europe,  and  has
been  in  general  medical  use,  only  since  the  treatise  upon  it  by  Professor
Bennett  of  Edinburgh,  in  1841,  although  employed  occasionally  in  the
profession  as  early  as  1766.  The  diseases  in  which  it  is  said  to  be  most
efficient  are  chronic  rheumatism,  strumous  diseases,  enlargements  of
the  glands,  strumous  ophthalmia,  pseudo-syphilis,  in  scrofulous  constitu-
tions, various  chronic  cutaneous  diseases,  and  even  phthisis.  Gout,
caries,  rachitis,  and  tabes  mesenterica,  have,  it  is  said,  yielded  to  its
influence.  It  is  also  asserted  to  have  been  found  useful  in  diseases  of
the  joints  and  spine,  lupus,  obstinate  constipation,  worms,  and  inconti-
nence of  urine  ;  and  may  be  advantageously  employed  in  all  chronic
cases,  in  which  the  disease  appears  to  consist  mainly  in  impaired  diges-
tion, assimilation  and  nutrition.  Externally,  used  in  opacities  of  the
cornea,  a  drop  or  two  placed  on  the  cornea  with  a  camel's  hair  pencil,
also  in  various  chronic  cutaneous  diseases,  rhagades,  chaps,  eczema,
excoriations  and  fissures.  Dose,  half  a  fluidounce,  twice  a  day,  or  more;
but  it  is  best  to  begin  with  small  doses  at  first,  say  one  drachm  only,  in
order  to  lessen  the  risk  of  nausea  and  vomiting.  Patients  soon  accustom
themselves  to  its  use,  without  repugnance.  It  is  best  given  alone,  fol-
lowed by  some  claret,  or  a  little  sugar  and  cinnamon  powder,  or  prepared
with  aromatic  oils,  the  same  as  castor  oil,  which  see.  Its  use  is  contra-
indicated  in  plethora,  or  where  there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  it.  When
long  used,  it  is  said  to  frequently  occasion  an  eruption  on  the  surface
of  an  eczematous  character.  But  little  advantage  will  be  apparent  from
the  administration  of  cod-liver  oil,  until  its  use  has  been  persevered  in
for  five  or  six  weeks,  though  it  often  commences  earlier.  Whether  it
deserves  all  the  encomiums  passed  upon  it,  or  is  as  efficient  an  agent  as
stated,  in  the  various  forms  of  disease  in  which  it  has  been  recommended,
is  yet  a  matter  of  some  uncertainty ;  time  is  required  to  fully  and  cor-
rectly ascertain  its  merits.  Dr.  Jongh  prefers  the  darker  colored  oils,
which  he  thinks  act  more  promptly  than  the  paler  kinds.  He  considers
this  to  be  owing  to  their  different  chemical  composition,  which  varies
according  to  the  mode  adopted  in  obtaining  them  ;  by  analysis  he  has
shown  that  the  lighter-colored  oils  are  the  richest  in  inorganic  principles,
while  the  darker-colored  contain  a  greater  abundance  of  the  bilious  prin-
ciples and  volatile  acids,  on  the  presence  of  which  last  constituents  he
believes  their  medical  virtues  chiefly  to  depend.


Oleum  Oliv^e.  677

OLEUM  OLIVJE.

Olive  Oil.

Nat.  Ord. — Oleacese. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

OIL FROM THE FRUIT OF OLEA EUROP^EA.

Description.  —  The  Olive  tree  is  an  evergreen,  with  hoary,  rigid
branches,  and  covered  with  a  grayish-bark.  It  is  usually  from  fifteen
to  twenty  feet  high,  though  frequently  attaining  a  much  greater  size.
The  wood  is  hard  and  compact,  of  a  dark-yellowish  color,  susceptible  of
a  high  polish.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  subsessile,  firm,  lanceolate,
entire,  mucronate,  two  or  three  inches  long,  smooth,  dull  green  above,
hoary  beneath,  and  with  their  edges  somewhat  reverted.  The  flowers
are  small,  whitish,  and  are  disposed  in  opposite  clusters  in  the  axilla  of
the  leaves,  which  are  on  short  peduncles,  erect,  about  half  as  long  as
the  leaves,  and  furnished  with  small,  obtuse,  hoary  bracts.  The  calyx  is
obtuse  and  four-cleft ;  the  corolla  is  white,  monopetalous,  spreading,
and  divided  into  four  ovate,  obtuse  segments.  The  stamens  are  two,
shorter  than  the  corolla,  supporting  large  elliptical  anthers,  and  a  single,
slender,  erect  style,  with  a  bipartite  stigma.  The  fruit  is  a  smooth,
oval  drupe,  of  a  violet  color  when  ripe,  of  an  unpleasant,  bitter  taste,  but
abounding  in  a  bland  oil,  and  inclosing  an  ovate,  oblong,  rugose  nut.

History. — The  native  country  of  the  Olive  tree  is  unknown,  though
supposed  to  be  originally  from  Asia  ;  at  present  it  is  extensively  culti-
vated in  the  South  of  Europe,  especially  in  Spain,  Southern  France,
Sicily,  and  Italy.  After  its  second  year,  it  commences  bearing  fruit,
and  is  in  full  bearing  at  six  years,  and  is  of  long  duration,  perhaps  cen-
turies. There  are  several  varieties  of  this  tree,  differing  in  the  size  and
form  of  the  leaves,  and  in  the  magnitude,  color,  and  taste  of  the  fruit.
The  bark  of  the  olive  tree  was  formerly  used  in  medicine;  it,  together
with  the  leaves,  have  an  acrid  and  bitterish  taste.  In  hot  countries  a
morbid  product  exudes  from  the  tree,  incorrectly  termed  Olive-gum  or
Lecca-gum  ;  it  consists  of  a  resin,  a  peculiar  crystalline  principle  called
Olivin  or  Olivilin,  and  benzoic  acid.  This  was  formerly  used  in  medi-
cine, but  is  not  employed  at  present.  The  fruit,  gathered  when  not
quite  ripe,  is  hard  and  excessively  acrid  ;  but  when  macerated  in  lime-
water  or  an  alkaline  ley,  and  then  pickled  in  brine,  it  constitutes  the
olive  of  commerce,  a  pleasant  and  highly  esteemed  article  of  diet.

The  only  product  of  the  plant  which  is  officinal  is  the  oil  obtained  from
the  fleshy  pericarp  of  the  fruit.  The  fruit  is  gathered  just  before  they
are  fully  ripe,  or  when  it  begins  to  redden,  because  if  delayed  until  they
are  thoroughly  matured,  the  tree  will  bear  only  in  alternate  years.  It
is  carefully  collected  by  hand,  and  the  harvest  completed,  if  possible,
in  one  day  ;  it  is  then  immediately  carried  to  the  mill,  in  which  it  is
bruised,  care  being  taken  that  the  millstones  are  set  far  enough  apart
from  each  other  as  not  to  crush  the  nut. The  pulp  is  put  in  bags  and


6^8  Materia  Medica.

moderately  pressed ;  the  product  obtained  is  of  the  first  quality,  and  is
called  Virgin  oil.  The  remaining  marc  is  broken  in  pieces,  moistened
with  hot  water,  and  again  pressed ;  the  oil  from  this  second  operation  is
of  an  inferior  quality,  but  sufficiently  good  for  table  use,  and  for  pre-
paring fine  soaps — it  constitutes  the  ordinary  olive  oil  of  commerce.
The  marc  is  again  broken  up,  well  soaked  in  water,  allowed  to  ferment,
and  again  submitted  to  pressure  ;  a  coarse,  inferior  oil  is  obtained  fit
only  for  burning,  plasters,  coarse  soaps,  etc.  Other  varieties  are  intro-
duced into  the  process  in  different  countries.  The  finest  oil  comes  from
Provence  and  Florence,  and  sometimes  from  Genoa  and  Lucca ;  the
commoner  sort,  termed  Gallipoli  oil,  comes  from  Naples.  The  best
quality  is  imported  in  glass  bottles,  or  in  flasks,  surrounded  by  a  net-
work made  of  grass,  and  known  as  Florence  flasks.

Pure  olive  oil  is  an  unctuous  liquid,  of  a  pale-greenish  yellow  tint,
almost  inodorous,  and  a  bland,  faintly  sweet,  oleaginous  taste ;  it  will
keep  for  a  long  time  without  becoming  rancid.  Its  specific  gravity  is
0.9153.  It  is  only  partially  dissolved  by  alcohol,  unless  this  be  in  large
proportion,  and  is  completely  soluble  in  twice  its  volume  of  ether.  At  a
temperature  of  38°,  a  portion  of  it  solidifies  in  white  crystalline  grains,
which  is  a  compound  of  margarin  and  olein ;  the  liquid  portion  is  uncom-
bined  olein.  Olive  oil  contains  in  100  parts,  72  of  olein,  and  28  of
margarin.  Margarin  may  be  obtained  by  squeezing  the  crystals  which
form  at  a  temperature  of  about  20p  in  bibulous  paper ;  the  paper  absorbs
the  olein,  and  leaves  the  concrete  margarin.  Few  vegetable  oils  contain
so  large  a  proportion  of  this  solid  principle.  Olive  oil  is  not  a  drying
oil ;  it  undergoes  saponification  when  heated  with  alkaline  solutions,
freeing  glycerin,  and  forming  soluble  salts  in  which  the  alkali  is  com-
bined with  several  fatty  acids.  Nitrous  acid,  or  nitrate  of  mercury
converts  it  into  a  fatty  principle,  called  Elaidin,  which  concretes  at  tem-
peratures below  97°,  and  is  converted  by  saponification  into  glycerin,
and  elaidic  acid.  When  exposed  to  the  air  or  heat,  olive  oil  is  apt  to
become  rancid,  acquiring  a  thicker  consistence,  a  sharp  taste,  a  disagree-
able smell,  and  a  darker  color.  It  is  often  adulterated  with  oils  of
poppy  seeds,  rape  seeds,  etc.,  which  may  be  detected  by  the  aid  of
hyponitrous  acid  and  heat,  which,  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  renders
the  whole  of  the  pure  article  a  firm  fatty  mass — even  if  so  little  as  five
per  cent.,  of  any  other  oil  be  present,  the  consolidation  is  much  less  firm
and  more  tardy.  M.  Diesel  states  that  nitric  acid  colors  pure  olive  oil
green,  but  if  it  be  mixed  with  rape  oil,  it  becomes  of  a  strong  yellowish-
gray  color.  Since  the  manufacture  of  lard  oil,  it  has  been  extensively
used  to  adulterate  olive  oil,  and  large  quantities  of  it  are  exported  annu-
ally from  this  country  to  France  for  this  purpose  ;  the  reaction  with
nitric  acid,  will,  probably,  detect  this  adulteration.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Olive,  or  Sweet  oil,  as  it  is  often  called,  is
nutrient,  emollient,  laxative,  and  anthelmintic. A  fluidounce  or  two


Oleum  Ricini.  679

purges,  but  is  uncertain  and  often  ineffective.  Used  as  a  demulcent  in
catarrh  and  other  pulmonary  affections,  as  a  laxative  in  irritation  of  the
intestinal  mucous  membrane,  as  an  emollient  and  antidote  in  poisoning
by  alkalies,  with  which  it  forms  soap,  but  not  as  an  antidote  to  opium,
arsenic,  copper,  etc.,  in  which  cases  its  administration  is  improper.  In
poisoning  by  cantharides,  on  account  of  its  being  an  excellent  solvent  of
the  active  principles,  it  augments  the  danger.  It  is  principally  employed
in  the  composition  of  liniments,  ointments,  cerates  and  plasters.  As  an
article  of  diet,  it  is  exceedingly  improper  for  dyspeptics.  Smeared  over
the  skin,  it  is  thought  to  be  beneficial  in  the  treatment  of  plague,  scar-
latina, and  some  other  exanthematous  affections.  According  to  Mr.
Sidney  H.  Maltass,  a  strong  decoction  of  the  leaves  of  the  olive  tree,
given  in  doses  of  a  wineglassful  every  three  hours,  has  cured  the  most
obstinate  and  severe  forms  of  intermittent  fever.  He  considers  it  more
effectual  than  quinia.

Off.  Prep.  —  Emplastrum  Plumbi ;  Emplastrum  Plumbi  Composi-
tum  ;  Emplastrum  Resinae  Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Ammoniae  ;  Lini-
mentum  Nigrum ;  Unguentum  Acidi  Nitrici ;  Unguentum  Cetacei ;
Unguentum  Ipecacuanhae ;  Unguentum  Myricae ;  Unguentum  Plumbi
Compositum.

OLEUM  RICINI.
Castor  Oil.

Nat.  Ord. — Euphorbiacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

THE OIL OF THE SEEDS OF RICINUS COMMUNIS.

Description. — Ricinus  Communis,  the  Castor  oil  busk,  in  the  United
States  is  a  herbaceous  annual,  with  a  white,  frosted  or  glaucous,
hollow,  smooth  stem,  somewhat  purplish  toward  the  top,  branching,  and
from  three  to  eight  feet  in  bight.  In  the  East  Indies  and  Africa,  it
becomes  a  tree  attaining  the  hight  of  thirty  or  forty  feet,  and  is  peren-
nial. The  root  is  long,  thick,  and  fibrous.  The  leaves  are  large,  alter-
nate, on  long  tapering  purplish  petioles,  peltate,  palmate,  with  seven  or
nine  pointed,  serrate  lobes,  smooth  on  both  sides,  of  a  bluish-green
color.  The  flowers  are  monoecious,  stand  upon  jointed  peduncles,  in
long,  green,  glaucous,  pyramidal  spikes  or  racemes  which  spring  from
the  divisions  of  the  branches.  The  male  flowers  from  the  lower  part  of
the  spike,  the  females  the  upper;  both  are  destitute  of  corolla.  The
calyx  of  the  male  flower  is  divided  into  five  oval,  concave,  pointed,
reflected,  purplish  segments,  and  incloses  numerous  stamens,  which  are
united  into  fasciculi  at  their  base.  That  of  the  female  has  three  or  five
narrow  lanceolate  segments  ;  and  the  ovary,  which  is  roundish  and  three-
sided,  supports  three  linear,  reddish  stigmas,  forked  at  their  apex.  The
fruit  is  a  roundish,  glaucous  capsule,  with  three  projecting  sides,
covered  with  tough  spines,  and  divided  into  three  cells,  each  containing


680  Materia Medica.

one  seed,  which  is  expelled  by  the  bursting  of  the  capsule.  Seeds,
about  as  large  as  a  bean,  ovate,  compressed,  obtuse  at  the  extremities,
smooth  and  shining,  of  a  gray  or  ash  color,  marbled  with  black  or  red-
dish-brown spots  and  veins.

History. — Ricinus  Communis,  or  Palma  Christi,  is  a  native  of  India,
and  has  become  naturalized  in  many  warm  climates ;  it  is  extensively
cultivated  in  many  parts  of  the  United  States,  where  it  flowers  in  July
and  August,  ripening  its  seeds  in  August  and  September.  The  officinal
part  is  the  fixed  oil  obtained  from  the  seeds.  The  seeds  have  a  small
yellowish  tubercle  at  one  end,  from  which  an  obscure  longitudinal  ridge
proceeds  to  the  opposite  extremity,  dividing  the  sides  upon  which  it  is
situated  into  two  fiattish  surfaces.  Its  variegated  color  depends  upon  a
very  thin  pellicle,  closely  investing  a  hard  brittle,  blackish,  tasteless,
easily  separable  shell,  within  which  is  a  thick,  fleshy,  oleaginous,  white
nucleus  or  kernel,  inclosing  a  large,  dicotyledonous,  leafy  embryo.
From  its  resemblance  to  the  dog-tick,  the  Latin  name,  Ricinus,  was
probably  derived.  The  husk  constitutes  twenty-four  per  cent,  of  the
seed,  and  consists  chiefly  of  ligneous  fiber,  with  a  little  gum,  resin,  and
extractive  matter.  The  nucleus  constitutes  sixty-nine  per  cent,  of  the
seed  when  dry,  and  contains  46.19  parts  of  fixed  oil,  2.40  of  gum,  20.00
of  starch  and  lignin,  and  0.50  of  soluble  albumen.  It  must  also  con-
tain a  peculiar  acrid  and  purgative  principle,  which  has  not  yet  been
obtained,  for  it  is  powerfully  active  after  the  oil  has  been  expressed.
The  seeds  easily  become  rancid,  and  are  then  unfit  for  the  extraction  of
the  oil,  which  is  acrid  and  irritating.  The  fixed  oil  is  the  officinal
Castor  oil.

Castor  oil  is  obtained  from  the  seeds  by  three  processes :  First,  by
decoction ;  the  seeds  are  deprived  of  their  husks,  steeped  for  a  night
in  cold  water,  and  then  boiled  for  two  hours  in  a  fresh  portion  of  water,
dried  in  the  sun  and  bruised,  and  lastly  boiled  in  fresh  water,  and  con-
stantly stirred,  till  all  the  oil  separates  and  rises  to  the  surface ;  this  is
skimmed  or  strained  off,  and  boiled  with  a  small  quantity  of  water  to
dissipate  the  acrid  principle.  The  above  process  is  the  one  said  to  be
pursued  in  the  East  Indies;  in  the  West  Indies  the  same  course  is  followed,
except  that  the  seeds  are  not  steeped  or  boiled  before  being  bruised.
This  mode  is  very  apt  to  furnish  an  acrid  and  irritating  product,  and  a
brownish-colored  oil.  The  second  method  is  by  alcohol,  which  process
has  been  practiced  in  France,  but  the  oil  obtained  is  said  to  become
speedily  rancid,  although  very  pure.  The  third  method  is  by  expres-
sion, which  is  the  one  practiced  in  this  country,  and  when  properly
conducted,  gives  a  bland  and  colorless  result.  The  seeds  after  having
been  thoroughly  cleansed  from  dust  and  fragments  of  capsules,  and
other  impurities  with  which  they  may  be  mixed,  are  placed  into  a  shal-
low iron-reservoir,  where  they  are  submitted  to  a  very  gentle  heat,  no
greater  than  can  be  borne  by  the  hand,  and  not  sufficient  to  scorch  or


Oleum  Ricini.  681

decompose  them ;  this  warmth  renders  the  oil  sufficiently  liquid  for  easy
expression.  They  are  then  placed  into  a  powerful  screw-press,  and
yield  a  whitish  oleaginous  liquid,  which  is  transferred  to  vessels  holding
large  quantities  of  water,  and  boiled  for  some  time.  As  impurities  rise
to  the  surface  they  are  skimmed  off,  until  at  last  the  clear  oil  only  is  left
floating  upon  the  surface,  the  albumen  having  been  coagulated  by  the
heat,  forms  a  whitish  layer  between  the  oil  and  the  water,  and  the  muci-
lage and  starch  are  dissolved  by  the  water.  The  oil  is  now  carefully
removed,  and  is  again  boiled  with  a  minute  proportion  of  water,  for  the
purpose  of  clarifying  it,  and  rendering  it  less  acrid  by  driving  off  the
acrid  volatile  matter ;  and  the  heat  is  continued  till  aqueous  vapors  cease
to  rise,  and  till  a  small  portion  of  the  oil,  taken  out  in  a  vial,  presents  a
perfect  transparency  when  cooled.  Care,  however,  must  be  taken  not
to  push  the  heat  too  far,  or  else  the  oil  will  become  brownish,  and
acquire  an  acrid  peppery  taste.  One  bushel  of  good  seeds  yields  five
or  six  quarts  of  oil.  Sometimes,  however,  after  expression,  the  oil  is
merely  allowed  to  stand  for  a  time,  until  all  precipitation  has  ceased,
and  then  the  supernatant  liquid  is  drawn  off.  When  not  carefully  pre-
pared, castor  oil  is  apt  to  deposit  a  sediment  upon  standing ;  and  the
apothecary  frequently  finds  it  necessary  to  filter  it  through  coarse  paper
before  dispensing  it.

When  pure,  castor  oil  is  a  thick,  viscid,  colorless  fluid,  slightly  odor-
ous, with  a  sweetish,  mildly  nauseous  taste,  followed  by  a  slight  sense
of  acrimony.  In  the  shops  it  is  often  found  tinged  with  yellow,  having
an  unpleasant  smell,  and  occasionally  brownish,  with  a  hot  acrid  taste.
The  most  esteemed  castor  oil  is  the  cold  drawn,  which  is  made  by
expression  without  heat.  It  is  one  of  the  heaviest  of  the  fixed  oils,
having  a  density  of  .964  at  60°.  When  exposed  to  cold  a  little  below
32°,  it  slowly  becomes  thick  and  turbid,  and  at  length  deposits  a  very
few  crystalline  grains  of  margarin,  though  it  is  stated  that  no  margarin
separates,  if  the  oil  has  been  previously  heated  to  212°  either  with  or
without  water.  At  a  temperature  above  212°  the  oil  itself  becomes
altered  and  acquires  acrid  properties.  Exposed  to  the  air  it  slowly
thickens  without  becoming  opake,  acquires  rancidity,  and  finally  dries
up ;  it  belongs  to  the  drying  oils.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  soluble  in  all
proportions  in  alcohol  or  ether,  and  alcohol  of  the  specific  gravity  of
0.842  takes  up  about  three-fifths  of  its  weight — a  property  not  possessed
by  any  other  common  fixed  oil  except  the  concrete  palm  oil.  It  readily
combines  with  other  fixed  as  well  as  volatile  oils;  the  alkaline  solutions
dissolve  and  saponify  it,  producing  acids  termed  the  ricinic,  ricinoleic,
and  ricino- stearic.  Hyponitrous  acid  will  convert  twenty  times  its  weight
of  castor  oil  in  seven  hours,  into  a  firm,  yellow,  solid  substance,  called
Palmin,  which  is  saponifiable  by  alkalies,  yielding  Palmic  acid  and
glycerin.  Castor  oil  when  added  to  other  fixed  oils,  renders  them  more
soluble  in  alcohol. It  may  be  distilled  at  a  temperature  of  about  510°,


G82  Materia Medica.

when  it  undergoes  important  alterations,  yielding  three  acids,  apparently
identical  with  those  above-named.  The  proximate  constitution  of  castor
oil,  is  imperfectly  understood  by  chemists.

It  is  stated  that  rancid  acrid  castor  oil  may  be  deprived  of  its  disa-
greeable odor  and  taste,  as  well  as  of  its  acrimony,  by  boiling  it  for
fifteen  minutes  with  water  and  a  little  calcined  magnesia.  If  it  be
turbid,  it  should  be  clarified  by  filtration  through  coarse  paper.  Castor
oil  is  much  employed  in  the  preparation  of  an  article  which  is  exten-
sively sold  throughout  the  country  for  bear's  oil;  it  is  composed  of  four
fluidounces  of  castor  oil,  mixed  with  two  fluidrachms  of  an  aqueous
solution  of  salts  of  tartar  (carbonate  of  potassa)  and  scented  with  ber-
gamot,  lavender,  or  other  aromatic  oil.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  castor  oil  seed  or  bean  is  a  powerful  drastic
cathartic  and  irritant,  and  has  proved  fatal  to  man  when  taken  to  the
extent  of  twenty  seeds  at  once.  Yet  the  oil  expressed  from  it  is  only  a
mild  cathartic,  operating  promptly,  producing  thin,  feculent,  but  not
watery  stools,  causing  but  little  griping  or  nausea.  From  its  mildness
of  action,  it  is  especially  adapted  to  young  children,  pregnant  or  puer-
peral females,  likewise  to  hemorrhoidal  affections,  colic,  diarrhea,
dysentery,  enteritis,  after  the  reduction  of  hernia,  obstinate  constipation,
collections  of  indurated  feces,  accumulation  of  acrid  secretions,  and  in
worms.  One  part  of  oil  of  turpentine  mixed  with  three  or  four  parts
of  castor  oil  increases  its  purgative  and  anthelmintic  effect.  The  great-
est objections  to  this  cathartic  are  its  nauseous  taste  and  its  tendency  to
cause  sickness  or  unconquerable  disgust.  This  may  be  overcome  by
adding  to  one  pint  of  the  oil  half  a  fluidounce  each  of  oils  of  origanum
and  wintergreen,  or  one  ounce  of  sassafras  oil ;  the  dose  of  this  may  be
given  in  sweetened  water.  Any  other  aromatic  oils  will  answer  equally
as  well.  When  not  contra-indicated  it  may  be  taken  in  wine,  spirituous
liquors,  or  the  froth  of  porter,  likewise  in  cinnamon  or  peppermint  water.
I  find  it  a  very  pleasant  mode  of  administration  to  boil  the  dose  of  oil
with  about  a  gill  of  good  sweet  milk  for  a  few  minutes,  sweeten  with
loaf-sugar,  and  flavor  with  essence  of  cinnamon  or  other  favorite  aroma-
tic ;  it  somewhat  resembles  custard  in  its  taste  and  appearance,  and  is
readily  taken  by  even  the  most  delicate  stomach.  Stuncke  states  that
castor  oil  saponifies  readily  with  alkalies,  and  gives  with  soda  a  white
solid  soap,  which,  in  the  form  of  pills,  is  a  certain  and  agreeable  purga-
tive. According  to  M.  Parola,  an  ethero-alcoholic  extract,  and  an
ethereal  or  alcoholic  tincture  of  the  seeds,  operate  in  much  smaller
doses  than  the  oil,  and  with  less  disposition  to  irritate  the  bowels  or  to
cause  vomiting.  As  an  enema,  castor  oil  may  be  used  in  the  quantity
of  two  or  three  fluidounces,  mixed  with  some  mucilaginous  liquid.
Externally,  it  has  been  recommended  in  itch,  ringworm,  and  other  cuta-
neous diseases.  Dose,  for  an  adult,  a  fluidounce  or  a  fluidounce  and  a
half;  for  an  infant,  one,  two,  or  three  fluidrachms,  according  to  its  age.


Oleum  Ricini.  683

Equal  parts  of  castor  oil  and  copal  varnish,  form  an  excellent  local
application  for  hemorrhoidal  affections.

We  are  informed  by  Dr.  J.  0.  McWilliam  that  the  natives  of  the
Cape  de  Verd  Islands,  have  common  recourse  to  a  remedy  called  "Bo-
fareira,"  for  the  purpose  of  accelerating  and  increasing  the  flow  of  milk,
not  only  from  the  breasts  of  childbearing  women,  where  that  secretion
was  tardy  in  appearing,  or  deficient  in  quantity  when  it  did  appear,  but,
on  occasions  of  emergency,  from  the  breasts  of  women  who  are  not
child  bearing,  or  who  have  not  given  birth  to,  or  suckled  a  child  for
many  years.  The  leaves  of  the  plant,  Bofareira,  are  used,  and  which
proved  to  be  on  investigation,  the  "  Ricinus  Communis,"  or  common
castor  oil  plant.  The  white  bofareira  is  used,  and  carefully  selected  from
the  red  bofareira,  which  appears  to  be  a  variety  of  the  same  species,  but
which  they  say  is  a  powerful  irritant,  producing  an  immediatcand  often
immoderate  menstrual  discharge,  as  has  resulted  in  cases  where  it  has
been  occasionally  used  in  mistake.  The  white,  or  that  which  possesses
galactagogue  qualities,  is  recognized  by  the  natives  by  the  light-green
color  of  the  stem  of  the  leaf,  while  the  leaf  stem  of  the  red  is  of  a
purplish-red  hue.

In  cases  of  childbirth,  when  the  appearance  of  the  milk  is  delayed
(a  circumstance  of  not  unfrequent  occurrence  in  those  islands),  a  decoc-
tion is  made  by  boiling  well  a  handful  of  the  white  bofareira  in  six  or
eight  pints  of  spring  water.  The  breasts  are  bathed  with  this  decoction
for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes.  Part  of  the  boiled  leaves,  are  then  thinly
spread  over  the  breasts,  and  allowed  to  remain  until  all  moisture  ha.s
been  removed  from  them  by  evaporation,  and  probably,  in  some  measure,
by  absorption.  This  operation  of  fomenting  with  the  decoction  and
applying  the  leaves,  is  repeated  at  short  intervals  until  the  milk  flows
upon  suction  by  the  child,  which  it  usually  does  in  the  course  of  a  few
hours.

On  occasions  where  milk  is  required  to  be  produced  in  the  breasts
of  women  who  have  not  given  birth  to,  or  suckled  a  child  for  years,  the
mode  of  treatment  adopted,  is  as  follows  :  two  or  three  handfuls  of  the
leaves  of  the  Ricinus  are  taken  and  treated  as  before.  The  decoction  is
poured,  while  yet  boiling,  into  a  large  vessel,  over  which  the  woman
sits  so  as  to  receive  the  vapor  over  her  thighs  and  generative  organs,
clothes  being  carefully  tucked  around  her  so  as  to  prevent  the  escape  of
the  steam.  In  this  position  she  remains  for  ten  or  twelve  minutes,  or
until  the  decoction  cooling  a  little,  she  is  enabled  to  bathe  the  parts  with
it,  which  she  does  for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  more.  The  breasts  are
then  similarly  bathed,  and  gently  rubbed  with  the  hands;  and  the  leaves
several  operations  are  repeated  three  times  during  the  first  day.  On
the  second  day,  the  woman  has  her  breasts  bathed,  the  leaves  applied,
and  the  rubbing  repeated  three  or  four  times. On  the  third  day,  the


684  Materia  Medica.

sitting  over  the  steam,  the  rubbing,  and  the  application  of  the  leaves  to,
with  the  fomentation  of,  the  breasts,  are  again  had  recourse  to.  A  child
is  now  put  to  the  nipple,  and,  in  a  majority  of  instances,  it  finds  an
abundant  supply  of  milk.  In  the  event  of  milk  not  being  secreted  on
the  third  day,  the  same  treatment  is  continued  for  another  day,  and  if
then  there  still  be  want  of  success,  the  case  is  abandoned,  as  the  person
is  supposed  not  to  be  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  the  Bofareira.

Women  with  well-developed  breasts  are  most  easily  affected  by  it,
while  those  with  small  and  shriveled  breasts  have  the  uterine  system
acted  upon,  bringing  on  the  menses,  if  their  period  be  distant,  or  causing
their  immoderate  flow  if  their  advent  be  near.  Exposure  to  cold  is
carefully  avoided  by  women  brought  under  its  influence  ;  they  scrupu-
lously abstain  from  wetting  the  hands  or  feet  with  cold  water.  It  is
said  to  affect  virgins  of  adult  age,  similar  to  child-bearing  women.  It
sometimes  produces  swelling  and  pain  in  the  breasts  and  axillary  glands,
pain  in  the  back,  and  an  increase  of  a  leucorrheal  discharge.

This  remedy,  and  the  red  Bofareira,  as  an  emmenagogue,  both  of
which  are  common  to  this  country,  have  been  already  tried  by  physi-
cians, and  the  results  have  been  sufficiently  favorable  to  render  further
investigation  very  desirable.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Chenopodii  Composita;  Mistura  Olei  Composita.


OLEUM  TEREBINTHINA.
Oil  or  Spirit  of  Turpentine.
Nat.  Orel. — Pinaceas.  Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.
History. — The  term  Turpentine  is  usually  given  to  vegetable  juices,
liquid  or  concrete,  and  which  consist  of  resin,  and  a  peculiar  volatile
oil,  separated  by  distillation,  and  called  Oil  of  Turpentine.  It  is  derived
from  the  juice  of  the  Yellow  or  Pitch  Pine,  Pinus  Palustris,  as  well  as
other  pines,  and  the  Abies  Balsam6a,  etc.  Beside  the  turpentines  from
these  trees,  there  are  others,  as  the  common  European  Turpentine,
Terebinthina  Vulgaris,  from  the  Pinus  Sylvestris ;  the  Larch  or  Venice
Turpentine,  Terebinthina  Veneta,  from  the  Larix  Europea  and  Abies
Larix ;  the  Chian  or  Cyprus  Turpentine,  Terebinthina  Chia,  or  Cypria,
from  the  Pistacia  Terebinthus;  the  Bordeaux  Turpentine,  from  the  Pinus
Maritima,  and  many  others.  All  the  turpentines  are  generally  thick,
of  the  consistence  of  honey,  and  of  a  light  yellow  or  brown  color;  some
are  turbid,  others  are  transparent,  of  a  strong  smell,  sui  generis,  and  of
an  acrid,  bitter,  and  nauseous  taste.  The  Venice  turpentine  is  usually
tolerably  liquid,  slightly  greenish,  of  a  strong,  not  unpleasant  smell,  and
of  a  warm  and  bitter  taste.  The  turpentines  are  readily  soluble  in
ether  or  alcohol,  and  unite  with  fixed  oils.  All  the  terebinthinate  pre-
parations owe  their  medical  properties  to  their  volatile  oil,  and  they  are
seldom  used  at  present,  except  in  salves,  plasters,  and  the  like.


Oleum  Terebinthin^e.  685

Oil  of  turpentine  is  obtained  by  distillation  of  the  turpentine  with  or
without  water;  but  in  the  latter  case  a  much  higher  temperature  is
required,  and  the  product  is  liable  to  be  empyreumatic.  The  residue
in  the  still,  after  the  distillation  of  the  oil,  is  resin.  When  it  is  necessary
to  obtain  absolutely  pure  oil  of  turpentine,  it  should  be  redistilled  from
a  solution  of  caustic  potassa.  Large  quantities  of  the  oil  are  distilled
in  North  Carolina  for  exportation.  The  oil,  or  Spirits  of  Turpentine  as
it  is  frequently  called,  is,  when  pure,  a  clear,  transparent,  colorless,  very
liquid  fluid,  having  the  specific  gravity  of  0.86  at  72°  F.  It  possesses
a  powerful,  penetrating,  balsamic,  peculiar  odor,  and  a  disagreeable,
aromatic,  bitter,  and  sometimes  acrid  taste.  It  is  lighter  than  water,  is
very  volatile  and  inflammable,  and  boils  at  312°,  the  temperature  rising
to  350°  as  the  ebullition  proceeds.  A  cold  of — 17°  causes  it  to  deposit
white  crystals,  which  are  a  hydrate  of  the  pure  oil.  It  burns  with  a
fierce,  dense,  red  flame  and  much  black  smoke.  Exposed  to  the  air  it
slowly  absorbs  oxygen  and  becomes  yellow  and  thick,  losing  much  of
its  activity.  It  is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  moderately  so  in
alcohol,  and  readily  in  sulphuric  ether.  It  dissolves  resins,  fixed  oils,
fats,  many  alkaloids  and  neutral  crystalline  principles  from  the  vegetable
kingdom,  and  caoutchouc.  When  immersed  in  chlorine  gas,  it  inflames ;
and  iodine  dropped  into  it  is  partly  dissolved,  and  partly  dispersed  with
an  explosion.  It  absorbs  muriatic  acid  gas  in  large  quantity,  forming
with  it  two  compounds,  one  a  dense  red  liquid,  the  other  a  white  crystal-
line compound  resembling  camphor,  and  hence  called  Artificial  camphor;
this  last  consists  of  an  equivalent  of  the  acid,  and  one  of  the  radical  oil
of  turpentine  or  camphene,  and  is  therefore  a  muriate  of  camphene.
Nitric  acid  changes  oil  of  turpentine  into  resin,  and  by  long  boiling,  into
turpentinic  acid.  Exposed  to  light  and  air  oil  of  turpentine  deposits  a
white  solid  matter  in  acicular  crystals,  which  are  inodorous  and  tasteless,
insoluble  in  cold  water,  but  soluble  in  ether  or  alcohol.  The  pure  or
radical  oil  is  denominated  Camphene,  and  consists  of  ten  equivalents  of
carbon,  and  eight  of  hydrogen ;  but  when  kept  for  some  time  it  always
contains  a  little  absorbed  oxygen.  Combined  with  one  equivalent  of
oxygen,  camphene  forms  camphor;  and  with  two  equivalents  it  forms
camphoric  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  actions  of  oil  of  turpentine  are  complex.
It  is  irritant,  stimulant,  cathartic,  diuretic  anthelmintic,  and  in  relation
to  chronic  mucous  discharges,  astringent.  Given  in  large  doses  it  occa-
sions slight  vertigo,  or  a  sense  of  fullness  in  the  head,  with  a  feeling
similar  to  that  of  intoxication,  or  a  state  resembling  trance,  attended
frequently  with  nausea,  and  frequently  followed  by  active  catharsis ;
sometimes  it  creates  pain  in  the  stomach,  sickness  and  vomiting;  more
frequently,  especially  when  absorbed,  it  gives  rise  to  violent  strangury
bloody  urine,  and  other  symptoms  of  irritation  of  the  bladder  and
kidneys,  at  the  same  time  imparting  the  odor  of  violets  to  the  urine.


686  Materia  Medica.

If  purgation  occurs,  the  other  effects  seldom  present  themselves.  In
medicinal  doses,  it  warms  the  stomach,  quickens  the  pulse,  increases  the
temperature  of  the  surface,  and  in  small  doses,  frequently  repeated,  it
stimulates  the  kidneys,  increasing  the  urinary  secretion.  In  some
persons,  its  internal  administi-ation  occasions  an  erythematic  eruption  on
the  skin.  As  a  stimulant  it  is  particularly  useful  in  the  typhoid  stage
of  various  febrile  diseases,  where  there  is  reason  to  suspect  ulceration
of  the  mucous  membranes ;  as  in  cases  where  the  tongue  becomes  dry
and  brown,  the  skin  dry,  and  tympanitis  present,  with  sometimes  a
slight  delirium,  the  frequently-repeated  use  of  small  doses  will  remove
all  these  symptoms,  and  the  patient  gradually  recover.  It  is  supposed,
in  these  instances,  to  effect  a  healthy  change  on  the  ulcerated  intestinal
surfaces.  It  is  likewise  recommended  in  neuralgia,  chronic  rheumatism,
dropsy,  suppression  of  urine,  worms,  especially  tenia — tympanitic  dis-
tension in  typhoid  fever,  peritonitis,  or  other  diseases — chorea,  hysteria,
croup,  colic,  jaundice,  and  in  cases  where  gravel  is  habitually  carried
off  by  copious  discharge  of  lithic  acid,  and  lithate  of  ammonia.  It  has  a
tendency  to  diminish  excessive  mucous  discharges,  and  has  been  employed
with  advantage  in  chronic  catarrh,  chronic  dysentery,  chronic  diarrhea,
chronic  inflammation  of  the  bladder,  gleet,  chronic  gonorrhea,  and  leucor-
rhea.  The  dose,  in  ordinary  cases,  is  from  five  drops  to  half  a  fluidrachm,
and  even  to  one  drachm,  repeated  every  hour  or  two  in  acute  disease,  and
every  three  or  four  hours  in  chronic.  In  the  course  of  its  action  it  is  ab-
sorbed, and  imparts  its  odor  to  the  breath  and  perspiration.  In  doses  vary-
ing from  twenty  minims  to  a  fluidrachm,  according  to  the  urgency  of  the
symptoms,  and  repeated  every  three  or  four  hours,  it  is  a  most  efficacious
astringent,  and  may  be  used  in  epistaxis,  hematemesis,  hemoptysis,  and
other  sanguineous  discharges.  It  may  be  administered  in  water,  flavored
with  some  agreeable  aromatic  syrup,  or  in  infusion  of  matico,  in  hemop-
tysis; in  the  decoctions  of  uva  ursi,  epigea,  or  eupatorium,  etc.,  in  hema-
turia ;  or  in  the  decoction  or  infusion  of  Peruvian  bark  in  purpura
hemorrhagica. Where  much  arterial  blood  has been lost, muriated

o

tincture  of  iron  will  form  a  valuable  adjunct.  Combined  with  castor
oil,  it  is  an  excellent  vermifuge.  Externally  it  is  a  rubefacient,  and  is
used  as  a  counter  irritant  in  the  form  of  liniment  in  rheumatic  and
paralytic  affections,  various  internal  inflammations,  in  the  neighborhood
of  indolent  tumors,  to  chilblains,  indolent  and  erysipelatous  ulcers,  caries,
sloughing,  especially  from  pressure  in  exhausting  diseases,  chronic  inflam-
mation of  the  edge  of  the  eyelids,  and  in  recent  burns  or  scalds  com-
bined with  linseed  oil.  Sometimes  used  in  deafness  arising  from  a  de-
ficient or  unhealthy  secretion  of  wax,  mixed  with  some  mild  oil  and
introduced  on  cotton  into  the  ear.  In  the  form  of  enema,  oil  of  turpen-
tine has  been  employed  in  cases  of  amenorrhea  arising  from  torpor  of
the  uterine  vessels,  likewise  in  obstinate  constipation,  ascarides,  and  in
tympanitis,  or  distension  of  the  bowels  from  accumulations  of  air,  in


i


Oleum  Teremnthin^e.  687

which  it  is  a  superior  remedy.  From  half  a  fiuidounce  to  two  fluid-
ounces  may  be  suspended  in  half  a  pint  of  water,  or  some  mucilaginous
liquid,  by  means  of  two  yelks  of  egg,  injected  into  the  rectum,  and
retained  there  for  some  time.

When  given  internally,  it  may  be  administered  on  sugar,  or  in  emul-
sion with  gum  Arabic,  loaf  sugar,  and  cinnamon  or  mint  water  ;  or  it
may  be  triturated  with  the  yelk  of  egg,  gradually  adding  syrup,  and
essence  of  cinnamon,  with  a  portion  of  water.  One  yelk  is  sufficient  for
trituration  with  every  two  fluidrachms  of  the  oil.  In  tapeworm  it  has
been  combined  with  gin,  and  given  in  doses  of  one  or  two  fiuidounces.
As  an  ordinary  vermifuge,  three  or  four  parts  of  castor  oil  may  be  added
to  one  part  of  the  oil  of  turpentine.

Dr.  Jas.  Warren  has  used  a  preparation  for  nearly  thirty  years  in  the
treatment  of  hemorrhages,  with  uniform  success.  It  acts  both  by  its
sedative  power,  in  diminishing  the  force  of  the  circulation,  and  by  its
astringent  qualities,  in  contact  with  the  bleeding  vessels.  He  is  satisfied
that  no  remedy  now  known  exerts  a  more  specific  power  and  more
speedy  relief,  especially  in  hemoptysis,  hematemesis,  epistaxis,  and
menorrhagia.  In  the  treatment  of  hemorrhage,  neither  bloodletting,
continement  to  the  room,  suppression  of  the  voice,  relaxation  from  busi-
ness, nor  other  precautions  are  necessary;  nor  is  any  auxiliary  treatment
required,  except,  perhaps,  a  purgative  dose  where  there  is  evidence  that
blood  has  been  swallowed.  Exercise  in  the  open  air  is  decidedly  prefer-
able to  inaction ;  and  wherever  there  are  premonitory  symptoms  of  a
return  of  hemorrhage,  it  has  always  exerted  a  prophylactic  power  when
promptly  used ;  and  by  this  early  resort  to  it,  many  radical  cures  have
been  effected.  He  terms  it  "Styptic  Balsam."  It  is  made  as  follows  :
Place  sulphuric  acid,  five  drachms  by  weight,  in  a  Wedgewood  mortar,
and  slowly  add  to  it,  oil  of  turpentine  two  fluidrachms,  stirring  it  con-
stantly with  the  pestle  ;  then  add  in  the  same  manner  Alcohol  two
fluidrachms,  and  continue  stirring  until  no  more  fumes  arise,  when  it
may  be  bottled,  and  should  be  stopped  with  a  ground  stopper.  It
should  be  prepared  from  the  purest  materials;  and  when  made  should
exhibit  a  dark  but  clear  red  color,  like  dark-blood  ;  but  if  it  be  a  pale,
dirty  red,  it  will  be  unfit  for  use.  The  dose  is  forty  drops,  to  be  used
as  follows ;  into  a  common  sized  teacup  put  a  teaspoonful  of  brown  sugar,
thoroughly  incorporate  the  forty  drops  by  rubbing  together,  and  then
slowly  stir  in  water  until  the  cup  is  nearly  full,  when  it  should  be  imme-
diately swallowed.  The  dose  may  be  repeated  every  hour,  for  three  or
four  hours,  and  its  use  should  be  discontinued  as  soon  as  fresh  blood
ceases  to  flow.  After  standing  a  few  days,  a  pellicle  forms  upon  the
surface  of  the  balsam,  which  should  be  broken,  and  the  liquid  below  it
used.  If  in  well-stopped  bottles,  age  does  not  deteriorate  it. — iV.  Y.
Jour.  Med.


688  Materia  Meoica.

Off.  Prep.  —  Emplastrum  Myricae  j  Emplastrum  Picis  Compositum ;
Enema  Terebinthinse  Composita  ;  Linimentum  Terebinthinae  ;  Linimen-
tum  Nigrum  ;  Mistura  Copaibae  Composita ;  Mistura  Olei  Composita ;
Pilulae  Ferri  Compositee;  Tinctura  Camphor33  Composita;  Unguentum
Myricae  ;  Unguentum  Plumbi  Compositum  ;  Vinum  Phytolaccae  Com-
positum.

OLEUM TIGLII.

Croton  Oil.

Nat.  Ord. — Euphorbiacese. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

THE EXPRESSED OIL OF THE SEEDS OF CROTON TIGLIUM.

Description.  —  Croton  Tiglium  is  a  middle  sized  tree,  the  young
branches  of  which  are  terete,  smooth,  shining,  and  somewhat  furrowed
toward  the  extremities.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  petiolate,  oval-oblong,
acute,  three  to  five-nerved  at  the  base,  acuminate  at  the  apex,  with
shallow  glandular  serratures  ;  thin,  membranous,  with  two  glands  at
their  base,  covered  when  young  with  very  minute  stellate  scattered  hairs,
dark-green  above,  and  paler  beneath.  The  petioles  are  about  one-third
the  length  of  the  leaf,  channeled,  having  stellate  hairs  when  quite  young,
but  soon  losing  them.  The  flowers  are  downy,  and  arranged  in  erect,  ter-
minal racemes,  the  male  flowers  being  at  the  apex,  and  the  female  below.
The  male  flowers  have  a  five-cleft  calyx,  five  lanceolate,  woolly,  straw-
colored  petals,  and  fifteen  distinct  stamens  ;  the  females  have  a  five-
cleft,  permanent  calyx,  with  long  and  bifid  styles.  The  fruit  is  a  smooth,
oblong,  obtusely  triangular  capsule,  about  the  size  of  a  hazel-nut,  closely
covered  with  minute  stellate  hairs,  three  cells,  each  of  which  is  com-
pletely filled  with  a  solitary  seed.  The  skin  of  the  seeds  is  of  a  pale
dull-brown  color,  and  overlays  a  harder  dark  integument.

History. — This  tree  is  a  native  of  the  East  Indies,  and  is  cultivated  in
some  parts  of  the  West  Indies.  Like  the  other  plants  of  the  family  Eu-
phorbiaceae,  it  is  pervaded  throughout  by  an  acrid  purgative  principle.
The  oil  obtained  from  the  seeds  is  the  officinal  portion.  The  seeds  are
of  an  ovoid  or  oblong  form,  rounded  at  the  extremities,  rather  larger
than  a  coffee  grain,  reddish-brown  when  recent,  grayish-brown  when
old,  sometimes  brownish  black.  They  consist  of  a  thin,  brittle,  ligneous
shell ;  a  delicate,  white,  membranous  integument  ;  and  an  oleaginous
kernel  composed  of  a  pale  yellowish-white  albumen,  and  a  beautiful
embryo,  with  large,  leafy  cotyledons.  The  oil  is  obtained  by  depriving
the  seeds  of  their  shells,  bruising  them  to  a  pulp,  and  subjecting  the
pulp  to  strong  pressure.  About  fifty  per  cent,  of  oil  is  thus  obtained,
and  ten  per  cent,  more  may  be  removed  by  digesting  the  residue  with
sulphuric  ether,  filtering,  and  expelling  the  ether  by  a  gentle  heat.  It
may  likewise  be  obtained  by  decoction  of  the  pulp  in  water. Guibourt


Oleum  Tich.ii.  689

recommends  after  the  first  expression,  to  digest  the  residue  with  alcohol
at  a  temperature  of  120°  to  140°  F.,  and  then  submit  it  to  a  new  expres-
sion. Distil  off  the  alcohol,  and  add  the  oil  to  the  first  product.  Croton
seeds  yield  upon  analysis,  a  fatty  acid  called  Crotonic  acid,  fixed  oil,
resin,  traces  of  a  volatile  oil,  stearin,  wax,  a  magnesian  soap  with  an  alka-
line reaction,  called  Crotonin,  extractive,  sugar,  gum,  starch,  albumen,
gluten,  lignin,  and  salts.

Crotonic  acid  is  the  supposed  active  constituent  of  the  seeds,  and
passes  out  with  the  oil  either  by  expression,  by  ether,  or  by  alcohol.  It
may  be  obtained  by  saponifying  the  oil  with  solution  of  potassa,  de-
composing the  resulting  soap  by  tartaric  acid,  filtering  and  distilling  the
solution,  neutralizing  the  acid  product  with  barytic  water,  evaporating
the  solution  to  dryness,  decomposing  the  barytic  salt  with  strong  phos-
phoric acid,  and  again  distilling.  The  acid  thus  obtained  is  crystalline
at  23°,  highly  volatile,  of  an  acrid  taste,  intensely  irritating  to  the
nostrils,,  and  forms  salts  with  alkaline  bases  called  Crotonates.

The  croton  oil  of  commerce  is  partly  imported  from  India,  and  partly
expressed  in  England  from  the  imported  seeds.  It  varies  in  color  from
a  pale  amber  color  to  that  of  deep-colored  sherry,  has  a  viscid  consistence,
like  castor  oil,  which  is  increased  by  age,  possesses  a  faint  odor,  a  pecu-
liar, hot,  acrid  taste,  which  is  very  persistent,  and  is  felt  most  strongly
in  the  back  of  the  palate  and  throat.  It  is  soluble  in  sulphuric  ether,
also  in  the  volatile  as  well  as  fixed  oils.  The  English  oil  is  wholly  and
readily  soluble  in  pure  alcohol,  forming  a  permanent  solution  at  ordinary
temperatures  ;  the  India  oil  forms  an  opake  mixture,  which  becomes
clear  and  uniform  upon  being  heated,  but  separates  on  standing  into  two
layers,  one  of  the  alcohol  somewhat  diminished  in  bulk,  the  other  of  the
oil,  somewhat  increased  by  a  retention  of  part  of  the  alcohol.  It  is
sometimes  adulterated  with  castor  oil,  which  is  difficult  to  detect  in  the
English  variety,  but  may  be  distinguished  in  the  India  oil  by  shaking
the  suspected  article  with  absolute  alcohol,  which  will  dissolve  the  castor
oil,  and  have  but  slight  influence  on  the  croton.  It  is  stated  that  an  oil
weaker  than  the  genuine  croton  is  obtained  from  the  Barbadoes'  nuts,  or
the  seeds  of  Jatropha  Curcas  ;  it  is  an  efficient  cathartic  in  a  dose  of  three
or  four  drops.  The  seeds  of  the  Croton  Pavana  are  likewise  supposed
to  furnish  some  of  the  croton  oil  of  commerce.

Properties  and  Uses. — Croton  oil  is  a  powerful  irritant,  and  hydra-
gogue  cathartic.  In  large  doses  it  is  a  dangerous  poison,  occasioning
vomiting,  severe  griping  pain,  hypercatharsis,  and  other  serious  symp-
toms. Its  action  is  prompt,  frequently  causing  catharsis  within  an  hour;
and  on  account  of  its  small  dose  it  is  especially  adapted  to  cases  where
medicines  requiring  large  doses  cannot  be  given,  as  in  mania,  coma,  and
with  children.  A  drop  placed  on  the  tongue  of  a  comatose  patient  will
generally  operate.  It  is  principally  employed  as  a  purgative  when  the
44


690  Materia  Medica.

bowels  are  very  torpid  ;  in  comatose diseases  as a  revellent ;  and in
dropsy  as  a  hydragogue. It  is  likewise  asserted  that,  independent  of  its
purgative  property,  it  possesses  efficacious  influences  in  epilepsy,  neural-
gia, and  spasm  of  the  glottis. It  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  prompt
and  active  purgation  is  indicated. It  is  distinguished  from  other  pow-
erful cathartics  by  occasioning  much  borborygmus  or  rumbling  of  wind,
by  its  action  commencing  speedily  and  ending  soon,  and  by  the  purgative
effect,  however  exhausting  at  the  time,  being  followed  by  little  debility.
Externally,  it  produces  erythematic redness,  intense  burning,  and  an
eruption  of  minute  vesicles. It  should  be  diluted  with  three  parts  of
olive  oil,  camphor  liniment,  oil  of  turpentine,  or  other  convenient  vehicle,
and  applied  to  the  skin  as  a  counter-irritant  two  or  three  times  a  day.
Used  thus  it  is  beneficial  in  rheumatism,  gout,  neuralgia,  indolent  swell-
ings, follicular  disease  of  the  throat,  and  pulmonary  affections. The
dose  of  croton  oil  is  from  one  to  six  drops,  which  is  best  given  on  sugar,
or  made  into  a  pill  with  crumb  of  bread,  in  order  to  avoid  the  disagree-
able acrid  sensation  it  occasions  in  the  throat,  with  a  constant  tendency
to  hawk,  as  well  as  to  prevent  nausea  or  vomiting. Four  drops  of  the
oil,  applied  externally  by  friction  around  the  umbilicus,  will,  it  is  said,
produce  catharsis.

Off.  Prep. — Ceratum  Crotonis ;  Pilulae  Gambogise  Compositae.


OLIBANUM.
The  Frankincense  of  the  Ancients.

Nat.  Orel. — Amyridacoa?,  Burseraceae,  (Lindley) ;  Terebinthacea?,  (De  Can-
dolle). Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

GUM-RESIN OF BOSWELLIA SERRATA.

Description. — This  is  the  Boswellia  Tkurifera  of  some  botanists;  it  is
a  leafy  forest  tree  growing  on  the  Coromandel  coasts  and  other  parts  of
India.  The  leaves  are-  at  the  extremity  of  the  branches,  pinnate,  consist-
ing of  about  ten  pairs  of  obliquely,  oblong,  obtuse,  serrated,  villous
leaflets,  with  a  terminal  one;  they  are  sometimes  opposite,  sometimes
alternate,  and  on  short,  round,  pubescent  petioles.  The  flowers  are  in
simple  axillary  racemes,  shorter  than  the  leaves,  numerous,  small,  of  a
pale  pink  color,  and  furnished  with  minute  bracts.  The  calyx  is  small,
downy,  and  five-cleft;  the  petals  are  oblong  and  spreading,  villous  exter-
nally, and  longer  than  the  stamens.  Stamens  are  ten,  inserted  on  the
outer  edge  of  a  cup-shaped  torus  or  nectary,  which  is  cremated  and
fleshy,  surrounding  the  ovary  ;  they  are  alternately  shorter,  and  support
oblong  anthers.  The  ovary  is  superior,  ovate,  and  bears  a  cylindrical
style,  with  three-lobed  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  a  three-angled,  smooth
capsule,  having  three  cells  opening  by  three  valves,  and  each  containing


Onosmodium  Virginianum.  691

a  single  seed,  which  is  broad,  cordate  at  base,  deeply  emarginate,  with
a  long,  slender  point.

History. — There  appear  to  be  two  varieties  of  frankincense,  one  from
the  above  tree  and  one  from  a  tree  growing  in  the  countries  around  the
Red  Sea,  and  which,  it  is  stated,  grows  upon  bare  marble  rocks,  without
any  soil  or  even  a  fissure  to  support  it,  adhering  by  means  of  a  substance
thrown  out  from  the  base  of  the  stem.  It  rises  about  forty  feet,  having
short  branches  near  the  top,  covered  with  a  bright-green,  singular  foli-
age. Olibanum  consists  chiefly  of  yellowish,  somewhat  translucent,
roundish  tears,  and  generally  covered  with  a  whitish  powder,  produced
by  friction.  It  has  a  balsamic,  resinous  smell,  and  an  acrid,  bitterish
and  somewhat  aromatic  taste.  When  triturated  with  water,  it  forms  an
imperfect  milky  solution.  Alcohol  dissolves  nearly  three-fourths  of  it,
forming  a  transparent  tincture.  One  hundred  parts  of  it  contain  8  of  a
volatile  oil  resembling  that  of  lemons  in  color  and  smell,  and  which  may
be  separated  by  distillation  ;  56  of  resin  ;  30  of  gum ;  5.2  of  a  glutin-
ous matter  insoluble  in  water  or  alcohol,  with  0.8  loss.

Properties  and  Uses. — Olibanum  is  stimulant,  like  other  gum-resins.
Principally  used  for  fumigations,  and  occasionally  enters  into  some
plasters.

ONOSMODIUM  VIRGINIANUM.

False  Gromwell.
Nat.  Ord. — Boraginacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT AND SEEDS.

Description. — This  plant  is  the  Onosmodium  Hispidum,  of  Michaux,
and  the  Lithospermum  Virginianum  of  Linnaeus ;  it  is  also  known  by  the
common  names  of  Gravel-weed,  and  Wild  Job's  Tears.  It  is  a  perennial
herb,  clothed  all  over  with  harsh  and  rigid  appressed  bristles  ;  the  stems
are  rather  slender,  and  grow  from  one  to  two  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves
are  oblong,  or  oblong-lanceolate,  often  oval,  and  even  ovate-lanceolate,
sessile,  minutely  strigose,  three  to  five-veined,  the  lower  ones  narrowed
at  base,  and  from  an  inch  to  two  and  a  half  inches  long,  by  half  an  inch
or  three  quarters  of  an  inch  broad.  The  flowers  are  yellowish-white,  in
terminal  leafy  racemes,  which  are  recurved  at  first  but  finally  become
erect  and  elongated.  Calyx  five-cleft,  the  lobes  lanceolate,  pilose  on
both  sides,  and  half  as  long  as  the  corolla.  Corolla  oblong-tubular,
with  a  ventricose,  half  five-cleft  limb,  with  lance-subulate  segments,
and  clothed  externally  with  long,  hispid  hairs.  Stamens  five,  with  very
short  flattened  filaments  supporting  included,  sagittate,  apiculate  anthers.
Style  much  exserted,  smooth.  Achenia  ovoid,  smooth  and  shining,  fixed
by  a  fiat  base.

History. — This  plant  is  found  growing  from  New  York  to  Florida,  in
dry,  hilly  grounds,  flowering  from  June  to  September. The  root  and


692  Materia  Medica.

seeds  are  the  parts  employed,  and  yield  their  virtues  to  water.  There
are  two  other  species  of  this  genus  which  possess  similar  properties.
These  are  the  Onosmodium  Carolinianum,  growing  in  rocky  hills  and  along
river  banks  from  New  York  to  Carolina  and  Tennessee ;  it  grows  from
one  to  four  feet  high,  has  a  stout,  upright,  soft,  white  pubescent  stem,
with  stouter  and  larger  leaves  than  the  preceding  variety ;  lubes  of  the
corolla  deltoid-ovate,  obtusish,  more  or  less  hairy  on  the  back;  anthers
oblong,  longer  than  the  narrow  filaments,  and  silky-pubescent. — The
other  is  the  Onosmodium  Strigosum,  growing  in  the  Western  States,  and
found  abundantly  in  Tennessee  and  Illinois  in  wet  prairies  and  woods,
on  hill  sides,  and  delighting,  as  it  is  said,  in  rich  limestone  soils.  The
stem  is  erect,  simple,  pilose-hispid,  very  leafy;  the  leaves  are  sessile,
lance-linear,  three  inches  long  and  one  inch  wide,  three-veined,  with
appressed  hairs,  nearly  smooth  beneath  the  veins ;  bracts  lance-linear,
silky ;  calyx  lobes  linear,  acute,  silky  with  appressed  hairs  on  both  sides,
very  long ;  corolla  cylindrical,  larger  than  in  the  last,  a  third  longer  than
the  calyx,  silky  pubescent  outside  ;  anthers  linear,  much  longer  than  the
vertically  dilated  filaments.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic  and  tonic.  Said  to  be  a  solvent  of
calculus.  A  strong  infusion  of  the  root  and  seeds,  taken  every  two
hours  for  twelve  or  twenty  hours,  or  until  it  operates  as  a  cathartic,  in
doses  of  four  fluidounces,  is  highly  extolled  as  a  cure  for  calculous  affec-
tions. Care  must  be  taken  that  it  be  not  continued  too  long,  for  fear
of  producing  too  great  a  flow  of  urine.  It  is  worthy  of  a  full  investi-
gation.

ORIGANUM  VULGARE.

Origanum.
Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceag. Sex.  Si/st. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Origanum  Vulgare  or  Wild  Marjoram  is  a  perennial
herb,  with  erect,  herbaceous,  hairy,  purplish,  quadrangular,  trichotomous
stems,  from  six  inches  to  two  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  opposite,
petiolate,  broad-ovate,  obtuse,  subserrate,  hirsute,  rounded  at  the  base,
green  on  both  sides,  sprinkled  with  resinous  dots,  and  paler  beneath.  The
petioles  are  hairy,  and  one-fourth  as  long  as  the  leaves.  The  jloivers  are
numerous,  of  a  pinkish  purple  or  rose-color,  and  are  disposed  in  smooth,
erect,  roundish,  panicled,  and  fasciculate  spikes,  and  accompanied  with
ovate,  reddish  bracts,  longer  than  the  calyx.  The  calyx  is  ovate,  tubu-
lar, striated,  with  nearly  equal  segments,  and  hairy  in  the  throat.  The
corolla  is  funnel-shaped,  about  the  length  of  the  calyx,  slightly  two-
lipped  ;  the  upper  lip  suberect,  bifid  and  obtuse,  the  lower  trifid,  blunt,
and  spreading. Stamens  four,  exserted,  somewhat  didynamous,  with


Ornus  EuropjEA.  693

double  anthers  ;  the  stigma  bifid  and  reflexed.  Achenia  dry,  somewhat
smooth.

History. — Wild  Marjoram  is  a  native  of  Europe  and  America.  It  is
found  "rowing  along  the  road-sides,  dry  banks,  and  in  dry  stony  fields
and  woods,  flowering  from  June  to  October.  The  whole  plant  is  offi-
cinal, but  is  principally  used  for  the  extraction  of  its  volatile  oil,  on
which  its  virtues  depend  and  which  may  be  separated  by  distillation  with
water.  The  plant  has  a  strong,  peculiar,  rather  agreeable  balsamic  odor,
and  a  warm,  bitterish,  aromatic  taste,  which  properties  are  imparted  to
alcohol,  or  boiling  water  by  infusion. —  The  Origanum  Majorana,  or
Sweet  Marjoram,  possesses  properties  similar  to  the  above  species.  It
is  a  native  of  Portugal,  but  cultivated  in  our  gardens,  and  much  used
in  cookery  as  a  seasoning.  Its  leaves  are  oval  or  obovate,  obtuse,  entire,
petiolate,  hairy  pubescent;  the  flowers  pink-colored,  in  compact,  round-
ish, pedunculate,  terminal  spikes,  with  roundish  bracts.  It  flowers  a
month  earlier  than  the  preceding  species ;  its  odor  is  stronger,  and  more
agreeable,  and  its  taste  more  camphoraceous.

Properties  and  Uses. — Origanum  is  gently  stimulant,  tonic,  and  em-
menagogue.  A  warm  infusion  produces  diaphoresis,  and  tends  to  pro-
mote menstruation,  when  recently  suppressed  from  cold.  It  is  some-
times employed  externally  in  fomentation.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Origani ;  Linimentum  Capsici  Compositum  ;
Linimentum  Olei  Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Saponis  Camphoratum  ;
Oleum  Origani ;  Tinctura  Camphorse  Composita.


ORNUS  EUROP^EA.

Manna  Tree.

Nat.  Ord. — Oleaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE. MANNA.

Description. — The  Manna  tree,  or  Flowering  Ash,  is  a  small  tree,
usually  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  feet  high,  much  branched,  and
covered  with  a  smooth  gray  bark.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  petiolate,
and  unequally  pinnate,  and  consist  of  three  or  four  pairs  of  leaflets,  with
a  terminal  one,  which  are  opposite,  oblong,  or  oval,  acuminate,  obtusely
serrate,  smooth,  hairy  at  the  base  of  the  midrib  on  the  under  side,  about
an  inch  and  a  half  in  length,  and  of  a  bright  green  color ;  the  petioles
are  channeled.  The  flowers  are  white,  and  usually  expand  with  the
leaves;  they  grow  in  dense  panicles  at  the  extremities  of  the  young
branches,  on  supra-decompound  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  very  short,
with  four  ovate  teeth  ;  the  corolla  consists  of  four  linear,  lanceolate
petals.  The  stamens  are  two,  supporting  long,  yellow,  incumbent  an-
thers. The  ovary  is  oval,  with  a  very  short  style,  and  a  notched  stigma.


694  Materia Medica.

The  fruit  is  a  pendulous, compressed samara, containing  a  single,
lanceolate,  cylindrical,  brown  seed.

History. — The  manna  tree  is  a  native  of  most  parts  of  Southern
Europe,  but  thrives  especially  in  Calabria  and  Sicily.  The  officinal  part
is  the  juice  of  the  tree,  known  in  commerce  as  manna.  In  Sicily  the
tree  yields  manna  after  its  eighth  year,  and  for  some  ten  or  twelve  sub-
sequent years,  when  it  is  cut  down,  and  young  sprouts  allowed  to  grow
up  from  the  root.  The  manna  exudes  spontaneously  from  the  bark,
during  the  hot  months,  and  concretes  ;  but  in  order  to  facilitate  the
process  deep  longitudinal  incisions  are  made  in  the  bark,  on  one  side  of
the  tree,  from  which  the  juice  runs  out,  and  speedily  thickens.  These
incisions  are  made  on  one  side  of  the  trunk  during  one  season;  on  the
other  side  the  next,  and  so  on  alternately  as  long  as  the  trees  yield
manna.  There  are  several  varieties  of  manna,  which  chiefly  differ  from
one  another  in  quality  according  to  the  season  and  mode  of  collection.
The  Sicily  manna  is  the  most  esteemed.

The  best  and  purest  is  the  Flake  Manna  or  Manna  Cannulata,  the
Manna  Gerace  of  the  Sicilians ;  it  exudes  spontaneously,  or  by  incisions
during  the  hottest  and  dryest  weather  in  July  and  August,  and  is  usually
collected  on  straw  or  clean  chips  which  are  stuck  into  the  bark  below  the
incisions,  so  that  the  juice  may  concrete  upon  them  in  easily  detached
stalactites.  It  is  in  irregular,  unequal  pieces,  light,  rough,  brittle,  dry,
white,  or  pale  yellowish-white,  resembling  stalactitic  masses,  about  six  or
seven  inches  long,  and  an  inch  broad,  hollowed  slightly  on  the  side  by
which  they  adhered  to  the  tree,  and  frequently  soiled  by  adhering  frag-
ments of  bark  or  other  impurities.  They  usually  vary  in  length  from
one  to  seven  inches,  and  have  a  crystalline  or  granular  fracture.  The
next  quality  is  Common  Manna,  or  Manna-in- sorts,  this  is  collected  late
in  the  season  when  the  heat  has  begun  to  moderate,  and  the  juice  does
not  so  readily  concrete,  but  requires  to  be  further  dried  in  the  sun.  It
is  in  whitish  or  yellowish  fragments,  similar  to  the  flake  manna  but  much
smaller,  mixed  with  a  soft,  viscid,  uncrystallized  brownish  matter,  and
has  a  nauseous  taste.  Fat  Manna  is  that  collected  in  the  latter  part  of
the  season,  during  cool  and  wet  weather,  in  which  the  juice  is  still  less
disposed  to  thicken.  It  is  soft,  adhesive,  not  brittle,  of  a  brown,  or
yellowish-brown  color,  and  full  of  impurities.

Manna  is  produced  from  several  other  trees  beside  the  Ornus  Eu-
ropbea,  belonging  to  the  genera  Ornus  and  Fraxinus.  Among  which
are  more  particularly  the  0.  Rotundifolia,  F.  Excelsior,  and  F.  Parvi-
flora.  The  Abies  or  Pinus  Larix,  yields  a  sweet  exudation  called
Briancon  manna,  but  which  contains  no  mannite;  the  Hcdysarum  Alhagi
of  Syria,  yields  the  Manna  Mereniabin,  an  inferior  manna ;  the  Larix
Cedrus  produces  the  Manna  of  Lebanon  ;  the  Tamarix  Gallica,  the  Manna
of  Mount  Sinai ;  and  the  Eucalyptus  Mannifera,  a  kind  of  manna  called
New  Holland  manna,  containing  a  saccharine  principle,  but  no  mannite.


Orobanche  Virginiana.  G95

Manna  has  a  faint,  peculiar  odor,  and  a  rather  pleasant,  sweet,  some-
what sharp,  peculiar  taste  ;  in  the  impure  or  inferior  kinds  the  taste
is  also  nauseous.  When  long  kept  it  loses  its  white  color,  and  gradually
changes  to  a  yellowish-red  or  brown.  It  softens  with  the  heat  of  the
hand,  melts  at  a  temperature  somewhat  higher,  and  is  inflammable,
burning  with  a  blue  flame.  When  pure  it  is  almost  wholly  soluble  in
three  parts  of  temperate,  and  in  its  own  weight  of  boiling  water.  A
saturated  boiling  aqueous  solution  on  cooling  deposits  the  manna  in  par-
tially crystalline  masses.  It  dissolves  in  eight  parts  of  alcohol,  and  if  a
saturated  solution  be  made  by  heat,  on  cooling,  a  deposit  of  beautiful
crystals  of  manna  will  ensue.  In  consequence  of  its  sugar,  it  is  capable
of  undergoing  fermentation.  Analysis  has  found  it  to  consist  of  mannite,
sugar,  a  yellow,  nauseous  matter,  mucilage,  etc.  Mannite  may  be  ob-
tained by  boiling  manna  in  alcohol,  allowing  the  solution  to  cool,  and
redissolving  the  crystalline  precipitate,  when  pure  mannite  is  deposited.
It  is  in  white,  acicular,  four-sided  prisms,  in  radiated  tufts.  It  is  sweet,
inodorous,  soluble  in  five  parts  of  cold  water,  less  so  in  alcohol,  and  not
fermentable  with  yeast.  Nitric  acid  converts  it  partly  into  oxalic,  and
partly  into  mucic  acid.  It  consists  of  six  equivalents  of  carbon,  seven
of  hydrogen,  and  six  of  oxygen.  One  or  two  ounces  will,  it  is  stated,
act  as  a  gentle  laxative.  Good  manna  is  seldom  counterfeited,  though
the  inferior  sorts  are,  occasionally.  A  spurious  article  is  said  to  be
made  of  sugar  and  honey  combined  with  some  mild  laxative.  The
inferior  manna  is  likewise  purified  so  as  to  resemble  the  flake  variety ;
but  all  these  frauds  are  easily  detected.

Properties  and  Uses. — Manna  is  a  gentle  laxative.  Used  for  children
and  pregnant  women,  also  in  piles  attended  with  constipation.  Usually
added  to  other  purgatives  to  conceal  their  taste.  Dose,  one  or  two
ounces,  for  an  adult;  from  one  to  four  drachms  for  children.  It  is
but  especially  with  senna.  In  large  doses  it  is  apt  to  cause  flatulence
and  griping.


OROBANCHE  VIRGINIANA.

Beech  Drops.
Nat.  Ord. — Orobancheaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Digynia.

THE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant  is  the  Epiphegus  Americanus  of  Nuttall,  the
E.  Virginiana  of  Barton,  and  is  also  known  by  the  name  of  Cancer-root.
It  is  a  parasitic  growth,  with  a  smooth,  fleshy,  leafless  stem,  about  a
foot,  or  a  foot  and  a  half  in  hight,  with  slender  and  irregular  branches
given  off  the  whole  length  of  it.  The  root  is  scaly,  and  tuberous,  covered
with  stiff,  short,  and  brittle  radicles.  Instead  of  leaves  it  has  only  a  few,
scattered,  inconspicuous,  ovate  scales,  one  at  the  base  of  each  branch,


696  Materia Medica.

of  a  yellowish  or  purplish  color.  The  flowers  are  alternate,  scattered
on  each  branch,  subsessile,  the  lower  perfect  and  fertile,  the  upper
usually  imperfect  and  abortive.  Calyx  short,  five-toothed.  Corolla  of
the  perfect  flowers,  two-lipped ;  the  upper  lip  emarginatc,  the  lower
three-toothed  ;  of  the  imperfect,  slender,  four-toothed,  deciduous,  six  to
eight  lines  long,  curved,  whitish  and  purple;  the  upper  tooth  or  lip
broadest,  notched  at  the  apex,  arched,  not  longer  than  the  others.  Sta-
mens as  long  as  the  corolla  ;  filaments  smooth ;  anthers  two-lobed,  acute
at  the  base,  valveless,  dehiscent  in  the  middle.  Stigma  capitate,  some-
what emarginate.  Capsule  gibbous,  truncate,  oblique,  one-celled,  com-
pressed, half  two-valved  at  the  apex,  with  two  approximate  placentae  on
each. Seeds  very  numerous,  straw-colored,  shining.

History. — This  plant  is  found  in  all  parts  of  North  America,  growing
upon  the  roots  of  beech  trees,  and  flowering  in  August  and  September.
The  whole  plant  is  of  a  dull-red  color,  without  any  verdure.  It  has  a
bitter,  nauseous,  astringent  taste,  which  is  diminished  by  drying.  It
yields  its  virtues  to  water.  There  are  several  other  species  of  this
genus,  which  are  parasitic,  and  which  possess  analogous  properties,  as
the  Orobanche  Uhiflora,  or  one-flowered  broomrape,  and  the  Orobanche
Americana,  or  American  broomrape.

Properties  and  Uses. — An  astringent.  Used  with  benefit  in  hemor-
rhages of  the  bowels  and  uterus,  and  in  diarrhea.  Said  to  cure  cancer,
but  it  possesses  no  property  of  the  kind.  In  erysipelas  a  decoction
drank  freely,  and  the  parts  bathed  with  it,  has  effected  many  cures.  As
a  local  application,  the  decoction  or  poultice  will  arrest  the  tendency  of
wounds  or  ulcers  to  gangrene;  a  poultice  of  equal  parts  of  poke,  white
oak,  and  beech-drops  is  very  useful  in  herpetic  affections.  Also  useful  as
a  topical  application  to  obstinate  ulcers,  aphthous  ulcerations,  leucorrhea,
gleet,  etc.  Dose,  of  the  powder,  from  ten  to  fifteen  grains.  This  plant
seems  to  exert  an  influence  upon  the  capillary  system,  somewhat  similar
to  that  produced  by  the  tincture  of  muriate  of  iron.

ORYZA  SATIVA
Rice.

Nat.  Ord. — Graminacea\ Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Digynia.

THE SEEDS DEPRIVED OF THEIR HUSKS.

Description.  —  Rice  is  an  annual  plant  with  a  jointed  culm  or  stem;
leaves  clasping ;  panicle  terminal ;  glumes  two,  one-flowered ;  paleoz  two,
adhering  to  the  ovary;  stamens  six;  styles  two.

History. — Rice  is  supposed  to  have  been  originally  a  native  of  the
East  Indies,  but  it  is  at  present  cultivated  in  nearly  all  parts  of  the
world,  where  the  soil  and  climate  are  favorable.  The  ordinary  commercial
rice  consists  of  the  seeds  of  the  plant  divested  of  their  husks. Carolina


OSMORRHIZA LONGISTVLIS.  697

rice,  on  analysis,  has  been  found  to  consist  of  85.07  per  cent,  of  starch,
3.60  of  gluten,  0.71  of  gum,  0.29  of  uncrystallizable  sugar,  0.13  of  a
fixed  oil,  4.80  of  vegetable  fiber,  5.00  of  water,  and  0.40  of  saline
substances.

Properties  and  Uses. — Rice  is  nutritious ;  and  boiled  in  water  till  per-
fectly soft,  is  very  useful  in  cases  of  debilitated  stomach  or  bowels,  and
diarrhea;  it  is  likewise  reputed  a  valuable  article  of  food  to  overcome
the  diarrhea  so  common  to  those  who  for  the  first  time  use  the  river
waters  of  the  Western  States.  It  is  by  some  considered  injurious  to  the
eyes  when  used  in  any  quantity,  but  this  is  an  erroneous  opinion,  as
many  nations  employ  it  almost  exclusively  as  a  diet,  without  any  such
effects.  A  decoction  of  rice  (rice-water)  is  an  excellent  soothing  and
nutritive  drink  in  fevers,  and  inflammatory  diseases  of  the  lungs,
stomach,  bowels,  and  kidneys.


OSMORRHIZA LONGISTYLIS.

Sweet  Cicely.

Nat. Ord. — Apiaceje. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  This  is  the  Uraspermum  Claytoni  of  Nuttall;  it  has  a
perennial,  thick,  fleshy,  branching  root,  of  an  agreeable,  aromatic  flavor,
and  an  erect,  nearly  smooth  stem,  branching  above,  and  growing  from
two  to  three  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  large,  decompound,  the  ultimate
divisions  often  pinnate ;  the  radical  leaves  on  long,  slender  petioles,  the
cauline  sessile.  The  leaflets  are  irregularly  divided  by  clefts  and  sinuses
into  lobes  and  teeth;  the  lobes  broadly  ovate,  and  slightly  pubescent.
The  flowers  are  white,  in  axillary  and  terminal  umbels,  about  five-rayed,
the  central  ones  barren,  and  the  outer  ones  fertile.  Calyx-margin  obso-
lete ;  petals  oblong,  nearly  entire,  with  a  short  indexed  point.  Involucres
of  linear  bracts  longer  than  the  rays.  Style  as  long  as  the  villose  germ,
filiform,  erect,  deflexed.  Fruit  linear-oblong,  about  an  inch  in  length,
angled,  tapering  downward  into  a  stalk-like  base,  contracted  at  the  sides,
blackish,  and  crowned  with  the  persistent  styles.  Carpels  with  five
equal,  acute,  upwardly  bristly  ribs;  commissure  with  a  deep,  bristly
channel ;  intervals  without  vittse.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  in
rich  moist  woods,  on  the  sides  of  low  meadows,  on  the  banks  of  running
streams,  and  on  the  borders  of  low  woodlands.  It  flowers  in  May  and
June.  The  root  is  the  part  employed,  it  has  a  sweet  smell  and  taste,
resembling  aniseed,  and  yields  its  sensible  properties  to  water  or  diluted
alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sweet  Cicely  is  aromatic,  stomachic,  carmina-
tive, and  expectorant. Useful  in  coughs,  flatulence,  and  as  a  gentle


698  Materia Medica.

stimulant  tonic  to  debilitated  stomachs  ;  the  fresh  root  may  be  eaten
freely,  or  it  may  be  used  in  infusion  with  brandy  or  water.


OSMUNDA REGALIS.

Buckhorn  Brake.

Nat.  Ord. — Filices  ( lAndley)  ;  Polypodiacese  (Brown).  Sex.  Syst. — Cryp-
togamia  Filices.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  This  is  the  Osmunda  Spectabilis  of  Willdenow,  often
termed  Royal  Flowering- Fern.  It  has  a  hard,  scaly,  tuberous  rhizoma,
beset  with  numerous  fibers,  and  having  a  whitish  core  in  the  center.
The  fronds  are  several,  erect,  three  or  four  feet  high,  doubly-pinnate,
smooth,  bright-green,  the  primary  divisions  or  pinnce  from  six  to  ten,
nearly  opposite,  remote,  hardly  a  span  long.  The  leaflets  are  more
numerous,  often  alternate,  sessile  or  nearly  so,  oblong,  bluntish,  entire
or  obscurely-crenate  with  one  rib,  and  numerous  transverse  veins;  the
base  dilated,  heart-shaped,  or  somewhat  lobed.  Some  of  the  upper
leaflets  are  cut,  and  as  it  were  partially  transmuted  into  dense  clusters
or  spikes  of  innumerable,  small,  light-brown,  veiny,  globular,  two-
valved  thecce  entirely  covering  the  segments ;  several  of  the  upper  divi-
sions of  the  leaf  consisting  entirely  of  such  thecse,  composing  a  compound
panicle. Spores  green.

History.  —  This  beautiful  fern  is  found  in  meadows  and  low,  moist
grounds  throughout  the  United  States,  flowering  in  June.  The  main
roots  or  caudex,  is  the  officinal  part,  it  is  about  two  inches  long,  and
somewhat  in  the  shape  of  a  horn.  It  consists  of  a  number  of  longitudi-
nal scales,  lying  over  each  other,  and  which  have  silky,  transparent
borders,  with  numerous  small  fibers  or  radicles,  firmly  matted  together.
It  contains  an  abundance  of  mucilage,  which  is  extracted  by  boiling
water.  The  root  should  be  collected  in  August,  or  about  the  latter  part
of  May,  and  dried  with  great  care,  as  they  are  apt  to  become  moldy.

The  Osmunda  Cinnamomea,  or  Cinnamon-colored  Fern,  is  sometimes
used  as  a  substitute  for  the  above,  but  it  is  inferior.  Its  root  is  similar
to  that  of  the  above,  in  shape,  but  it  is  considerably  larger.  When  its
stems  first  appear  in  the  spring,  they  are  hairy  and  of  a  whitish  color,
surmounted  by  the  young  leaves,  curiously  rolled  up  in  the  form  of  a
scroll,  and  covered  with  a  downy  or  wool-like  substance.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Mucilaginous,  tonic,  and  styptic.  Used  in
coughs,  diarrhea,  and  dysentery ;  also  used  as  a  tonic  during  conva-
lescence from  exhausting  diseases.  One  root,  infused  in  a  pint  of  hot
water  for  half  an  hour,  will  convert  the  whole  into  a  thick  jelly.  Very
valuable  in  leucorrhea,  and  other  female  weaknesses,  and  said  to  be  an
almost  certain  cure  for  rickets,  in  doses  of  three  drachms  of  the  root,


OSTKYA VlRGINICA.  699

three  times  a  day.  The  mucilage  mixed  with  brandy  is  a  popular
remedy  as  an  external  application  for  sprains,  and  weakness  of  the  back.
For  internal  use,  the  roots  may  be  infused  in  hot  water,  sweetened,  and
ginger,  cinnamon,  brandy  etc.,  added  if  not  contra-indicated.


OSTRYA VlRGINICA.

Iron  Wood.

Nat.  Ord. — Cupuliferas. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Polyandria.

THE INNER WOOD.

Description.  —  This  is  a  small  tree  from  twenty -five  to  thirty  feet  in
hight,  remarkable  for  its  fine,  narrow,  longitudinally  divided  and  brown-
ish bark.  The  wood  is  white,  hard,  and  strong.  The  leaves  are  oblong-
ovate,  subcordate,  acuminate,  unequally  serrate,  somewhat  downy ;  buds
acute.  Sterile  flowers  in  cylindrical  aments ;  scales  orbicular-ovate  acu-
minate, ciliate,  one-flowered ;  filaments  somewhat  united  irregularly;
anthers  bearded  at  the  summit.  Fertile  flowers  in  pairs,  numerous,  in  a
short,  oblong,  pendulous,  loosely  imbricated,  linear,  terminal  ament,
with  small  deciduous  bracts ;  scales  none,  but  each  flower  is  inclosed  in
a  membranous  sac-like  involucre,  bristly-hairy  at  the  base,  and  which
enlarges,  forming  a  bladdery  closed  bag  in  fruit,  these  being  imbricated
to  form  a  sort  of  strobile  appearing  like  that  of  the  Hop.  Ovary  two-
celled,  two-ovuled,  crowned  with  entire  and  bearded  border  of  the  peri-
anth, forming  a  small  and  seed-like  smooth  nut.  Styles  two,  united  at
the  base ;  nut  lance-oblong,  somewhat  compressed,  included  in  the
enlarged,  imbricated,  bladder-like  sac.

History.  —  This  plant,  sometimes  called  Hop-hornbeam,  Lever-wood,
etc.,  is  a  tree  common  to  the  United  States,  growing  in  rich  woods,  and
flowering  in  April  and  May.  The  flowers  are  green  and  appear  with  the
leaves,  and  the  large  and  handsome  oval-oblong  strobiles  are  matured  in
August.  The  inner  wood  and  bark,  are  the  parts  used  ;  they  are  bitter,
and  yield  their  virtues  to  water.  There  is  another  tree,  known  as  Iron-
wood  closely  resembling  the  above,  the  Carpinus  Americana ;  it  grows
from  ten  to  twenty  feet  high,  has  a  smooth  gray  bark,  with  an  irregularly
ridged  trunk,  and  very  fine-grained,  compact,  white  wood.  The  scales
of  the  fertile  aments  are  three-parted,  the  middle  segment  being  much
the  largest,  oblique,  with  a  lateral  tooth,  persistent,  and  becoming  folia-
ceous.  The  nut  small,  ovoid,  bony,  ribbed,  with  a  simple,  one-sided,
enlarged,  and  open  leaf-like  involucre.  This  tree  is  not  bitter,  and  must
not  be  confounded  with  the  Ostrya.

Properties  and  Uses. — Iron-wood  is  antiperiodic,  tonic,  and  alterative,
It  has  been  used  with  efficacy  in  intermittent  fevers,  neuralgic  affections,
dyspepsia,  scrofula,  and  all  diseases  where  an  antiperiodic-tonic  is  indi-
cated. Dose  of  the  decoction,  one  or  two  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times
a  day.


700  Materia Medica.

OVUM.
Egg-

THE  EGG  OE  PHASANIUS  GALLUS.

History. — The  Common  Hen,  Phasanius  Gallns,  supposed  to  have
been  originally  the  Jungle-fowl  of  India,  is  domesticated  in  nearly  all
parts  of  the  globe.  Its  egg  is  the  officinal  product.  It  consists  of  an
external  shell,  testa  ovi  or  putamen  ovi,  composed  chiefly  of  carbonate  of
lime,  from  which  nearly  pure  lime  is  had  by  calcination  ;  a  lining  mem-
brane of  an  albuminous  nature  ;  the  white,  and  the  yelk.

The  white,  albumen  ovi,  is  a  glairy,  colorless,  transparent  liquid
inclosed  in  delicate  membranous  cells,  inodorous,  tasteless,  and  composed
of  twelve  per  cent,  of  albumen,  2.7  of  mucus,  0.3  of  saline  substances
with  traces  of  sulphur,  and  eighty-five  of  water.  It  is  soluble  in  water,
coagulable  by  alcohol,  the  stronger  acids,  and  by  a  heat  of  160°  F.,  and
precipitated  by  corrosive  sublimate,  chloride  of  tin,  chloride  of  gold,
subacetate  of  lead,  sulphate  of  copper,  and  tannin.  Exposed  in  thin
layers  to  a  current  of  air,  it  becomes  solid,  retaining  its  transparency
and  solubility  in  water,  and  can  be  thus  preserved  a  long  time  without
change  ;  in  this  state,  it  may  be  applied  in  a  state  of  solution  to  the
same  purposes  as  in  its  original  condition.  It  soon  putrefies  when  kept
in  the  fluid  state.

The  yelk,  vitellus  ovi,  is  a  thick,  opake,  yellow  fluid,  inodorous,  of  a
bland,  oily  taste,  and  when  agitated  with  water  forms  an  opake  emulsion.
When  heated  it  is  converted  into  a  granular  solid,  from  which  a  fixed  oil
may  be  obtained  by  expression.  It  contains  51.846  per  cent,  of  water,
15.760  of  vitellin,  a  peculiar  albuminous  principle,  21.304  of  margarin
and  olein,  0.438  of  cholesterin,  7.226  of  oleic  and  margaric  acids,  1.200
of  phosphoglyceric  acid,  0.034  of  muriate  of  ammonia,  0.277  of  chlo-
rides of  sodium,  potassium,  and  sulphate  of  potassa,  1.022  of  phos-
phates of  lime  and  magnesia,  0.400  of  animal  extract,  and  0.553  of
coloring  matter,  traces  of  iron,  lactic  acid,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Eggs  are  much  employed  in  medicine  and  phar-
macy. The  shells,  powdered  and  levigated,  may  be  used  in  the  same
doses  as  prepared  chalk,  as  an  antacid  in  diarrhea.  The  white  of  egg  is
useful  as  a  demulcent  in  diseases  of  the  intestinal  mucous  membrane,
and  as  an  antidote  for  corrosive  sublimate  and  the  soluble  salts  of  cop-
per, with  which  it  forms  insoluble  and  comparatively  inert  compounds.
In  cases  of  redness  or  excoriation  from  pressure,  it  forms  a  good  local
application,  used  in  the  form  of  a  liniment,  made  by  agitating  it  briskly
with  its  own  volume  of  alcohol.  It  is  used  also  for  the  clarification  ot
liquids,  which  it  accomplishes  by  undergoing  coagulation,  and  envelop-
ing suspended  impurities  in  its  flakes;  for  the  suspension  of  insoluble
substances  in  water ;  and for  forming  an  astringent  poultice,  by  being


OXALIS ACETOSELLA.  701

agitated  with  a  lump  of  alum  ;  the  coagulura  thus  produced  is  applied,
between  folds  of  gauze,  over  the  eye  in  some  forms  of  ophthalmia.

The  yelk  when  raw  is  considered  laxative,  and  is  a  popular  remedy  in
jaundice,  and  dvspepsia  ;  probably,  its  effects  in  these  complaints  are
owing  to  its  easiness  of  digestion.  It  is  mildly  nutritious,  and  generally
acceptable  to  the  stomach,  and  may  be  used  in  dyspepsia,  beaten  up  with
water  and  a  little  ginger.  It  answers  a  better  purpose  than  the  white,
in  preparing  emulsions  and  mixtures,  being  highly  useful  as  an  inter-
medium between  water  and  balsams,  turpentines,  oils,  and  other  insol-
uble substances.  The  oil  expressed  from  the  coagulated  yelk  is  some-
times used  as  an  application  to  excoriated  nipples.  A  non-collegiate
practitioner  in  this  county,  has  acquired  some  celebrity  in  the  treatment
of  dyspepsia,  loss  of  appetite,  constipation,  hemorrhoids,  etc.  ;  the  agent
he  employs  is  a  powder  composed  of  equal  parts  of  the  inner  skin  of
chickens'  gizzards  (ingluvies  pulli,)  dried  and  pulverized,  sulphur,  and
resin,  of  which  from  five  to  ten  grains  are  to  be  taken  three  or  four  times
a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Linimentum  Terebinthinse.


OXALIS  ACETOSELLA.

Wood  Sorrel.

Nat.  Ord. — Oxalidaceaj. Sex. Si/st. — Decandria  Pentagynia.

THE WHOLE HERB.

Description. — Wood -Sorrel  is  a  small,  perennial,  herbaceous,  stemless
plant,  with  a  creeping  and  scaly-toothed  root-stock.  The  leaves  are
numerous,  radical,  palmately  three-foliate,  on  long,  weak,  hairy  stalks;
the  lea/lets  are  broadly  obcordate,  with  rounded  lobes,  entire,  pubescent,
of  a  yellowish-green  color,  but  frequently  purplish  beneath  ;  they  close
and  droop  at  nightfall.  Scape  longer  than  the  petioles,  one-flowered,
with  two  scaly  bracts  near  the  middle.  Flowers  white,  yellowish  at  the
base,  delicately  veined  with  purple,  scentless.  Stamens  ten,  monadel-
phous  at  the  base,  alternately  shorter ;  sepals  five,  persistent;  petals  five;
style  as  long  as  the  inner  stamens.  Capsule  five-lobed,  five-celled,
oblong  ;  seeds  several,  with  an  elastic  testa.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  Europe  and  North  America,  in  woods,
groves,  and  hedges,  but  principally  confined,  in  America,  to  the  boreal
and  mountainous  regions.  It  flowers  in  May,  and  is  the  Shamrock  of
the  Irish.  It  is  without  smell,  and  has  an  agreeable,  acid  taste.  It  owes
its  acidity  to  binoxalute  of  potassa,  which  is  sometimes  prepared  and  sold
under  the  name  of  Salt  of  Sorrel.  This  comes  from  Switzerland  and
Germany,  where  it  is  prepared  from  different  species  of  oxalis  and
rumex. The  following process  is employed : The plants previously


702  Materia  Mkdica.

bruised  are  macerated  for  some  days  in  water,  and  then  submitted  to
pressure.  The  liquid  thus  obtained  is  mixed  with  clay,  and  occasionally
agitated  for  two  days.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  the  clear  liquor  is
decanted,  and  evaporated  so  that  crystals  may  form  when  it  cools.
These  are  purified  by  solution  and  a  new  crystallization.  Five  hundred
parts  of  the  plant  afford  four  parts  of  the  acidulous  salt.  The  same  salt
may  be  prepared  by  cautiously  dropping  a  solution  of  potassa  into  a
saturated  solution  of  oxalic  acid.  The  binoxalate  crystallizes  when  a
sufficient  quantity  of  the  alkali  has  been  added.  It  is  in  rhomboidal
crystals,  of  a  sour,  pungent,  bitterish  taste,  soluble  in  ten  times  their
weight  of  boiling  water,  much  less  so  in  cold  water,  and  unalterable  in
the  air.  It  is  employed  for  removing  iron-mold  and  ink  stains  from
linen,  and  sometimes  as  a  test  for  lime.  It  contains  72.48  parts  or  two
equivalents  of  oxalic  acid,  47.5  parts  or  one  equivalent  of  potassa,  and
eighteen  parts  or  two  equivalents  of  water.

The  Quadroxalate  of  Potassa,  or  Essential  Salt  of  Lemons  is  often
substituted  for  the  binoxalate.  It  is  prepared  in  the  same  manner,
except  that,  instead  of  one  part,  three  parts  of  the  acid  are  added  to  the
original  portion  neutralized  by  the  potassa.  Used  for  the  same  purposes
as  the  binoxalate  ;  both  are  poisonous,  though  in  a  less  degree  than
uncombined  oxalic  acid. —  JJ.  S.  Dis.

There  are  other  varieties  of  this  plant,  possessing  analogous  proper-
ties, as  the  Oxalis  Stricta,  and  0.  Violacea.  They  all  have  tcrnate
leaves  with  obcordate  leaflets,  and  with  the  exception  of  0.  Violacea
bear  yellow  flowers.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  and  other  species  of  Sorrel  are  refrigerant
and  diuretic.  Useful  in  febrile  diseases,  hemorrhages,  gonorrhea,
chronic  catarrh,  urinary  affections,  and  in  scurvy.  An  infusion,  or  a
whey  made  by  boiling  them  in  milk,  may  be  used,  or  the  herb  may  be
eaten,  but  in  neither  case  to  excess,  on  account  of  the  oxalic  acid  they
contain.  Externally,  the  bruised  leaves,  or  inspissated  juice  have  been
found  useful  as  an  application  to  scrofulous,  malignant  and  indolent
ulcers.  The  Rumex  Acetosa,  or  Garden  Sorrel,  R.  Acetosella,  or  Sheep
Sorrel,  and  R. Vesicarius  possess  similar  properties,  which  see.


P^EONIA  OFFICINALIS.

Peony.

Nat.  Ord. — Eanunculacese. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Digynia.


THE ROOT.


Description. — Peony  has  many,  thick,  long,  spreading,  perennial  roots,
running  deep  into  the  ground,  with  an  erect,  herbaceous,  large,  green
and  branching  stem,  about  two  or  three  feet  high. The  leaves  are  large  ;


Panax Quinquefolium.  703

the  lower  leaves  bipinnately  divided ;  the  leaflets  are  ovate-lanceolate,
smooth,  variously  incised.  The floivers  are  large,  red,  terminal,  solitary;
sepals  five,  unequal ;  petals  red,  cordiform  ;  stamens  numerous,  mostly
changed  to  petals  by  cultivation.  Carpels  three ;  stigmas  double,  per-
sistent ;  follicles  fleshy,  many-seeded  ;  seeds  black,  numerous,  dry,
round.

History. — This  is  a  native  of  southern  Europe,  and  is  cultivated  in
gardens  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere,  on  account  of  the  beauty
of  its  flowers,  which  appear  from  May  to  August.  The  root  is  the  offi-
cinal part ;  it  consists  of  a  caudex  about  as  thick  as  the  thumb,  sending
off  spindle-shaped  tubers  in  all  directions,  which  gradually  taper  into
thread-like  fibers.  It,  together  with  the  seeds,  have  when  recent,  a
strong,  peculiar,  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  nauseous,  sweetish  taste,  suc-
ceeded by  bitterness,  acridity,  and  slight  astringency;  on  drying  it  nearly
loses  its  odor,  and  its  taste  is  lessened.  The  flowers  have  a  similar  odor,
and  an  astringent,  sweetish,  herbaceous  taste.  They  all  yield  their  vir-
tues to  diluted  spirits. No  analysis  has  been  made  of  this  plant.

Properties  and  Uses. — Peony  is  antispasmodic  and  tonic.  It  has  been
successfully  employed  in  chorea,  epilepsy,  spasms,  and  various  nervous
affections.  In  combination  with  white  snakeroot,  or  black  cohosh,  it  has
proved  valuable  in  pertussis.  An  infusion  may  be  made  by  adding  an
ounce  of  the  root  in  coarse  powder  to  a  pint  of  a  builing  liquid,  com-
posed of  one  part  of  good  gin,  and  two  parts  of  water,  which  may  be
sweetened  ;  dose  two  or  three  fiuidounces  three  or  four  times  a  day.
Dose  of  the  expressed  juice  of  the  recent  root,  one  or  two  drachms;  of
the  powdered  root,  a  drachm  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  of  the  powdered
seeds  from  thirty  to  forty  grains.  The  seeds  taken  night  and  morning,
have  been  successfully  used  in  removing  the  nightmare,  attendant  upon
dropsical  persons;  they  are  also  reputed  emetic,  cathartic,  and  anti-
spasmodic.


PANAX  QUINQUEFOLIUM.

Ginseng.

Nat. Ord.— Araliaceafi. Sex.  Syst.— Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  Ginseng  has  a  perennial,  fusiform,  whitish,  thick  and
fleshy  root  transversely  wrinkled,  and  terminating  in  fibers  ;  its  upper
portion  slender  and  marked  with  the  scars  of  former  shoots.  The  stem
is  round,  smooth,  green,  often  with  a  tinge  of  red,  about  a  foot  high,
regularly  divided  at  top  into  three  petioles,  with  a  flower-stalk  in  their
center.  Petioles  round,  smooth,  swelling  at  base.  The  leaves  are  three,
ternate,  quinate  or  septenate.  Leaflets  pedicellate,  obovate,  sharplv
serrate am mi not,


704:  Materia  Medica.

veins  above.  The  flowers  are  small,  greenish,  and  arranged  in  a  simple
umbel,  supported  by  a  round,  slender  peduncle,  which  rises  from  the
top  of  the  stem  in  the  center  of  the  petioles.  Involucre  of  a  multitude
of  short  subulate  bracts,  interspersed  among  the  flower-stalks,  which
are  so  short  as  to  give  the  appearance  of  a  head  rather  than  an  umbel.
Calyx  with  five  small  acute  teeth.  Petals  five,  oval,  reflexed  and  deci-
duous. Stamens  five,  with  oblong  anthers.  Styles  two,  reflexed,  per-
sistent. Ovary  large,  inferior,  ovate-cordate,  compressed.  Berries
kidney-shaped,  retuse  at  both  ends,  compressed,  of  a  bright  scarlet
color,  crowned  with  the  calyx  and  styles,  and  containing  two  and  some-
times three  semicircular  seeds.  The  outermost  florets  ripen  first,  and
their  berries  often  obtain  their  full  size  before  the  central  ones  are  ex-
panded, the  central  florets  are  frequently  abortive.

History. — Ginseng  is  a  native  of  most  of  the  Middle  and  Northern
States,  and  extends  on  the  mountains  far  south,  growing  in  rich  soil  and
in  shaded  situations,  and  flowering  in  May.  The  root  is  somewhat
spindle-shaped,  from  one  to  three  inches  long,  about  as  thick  as  the
little  finger,  and  terminated  by  several  slender  fibers.  "When  dried,
it  is  yellowish-white  and  wrinkled  externally,  internally  a  hard  central
portion,  surrounded  by  a  soft  whitish  bark  ;  it  has  a  feeble  odor,  and  a
sweet,  pleasant  bitter,  slightly  aromatic  taste,  and  yields  its  properties  to
water  or  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  mild  tonic  and  stimulant.  Useful  in  loss  of
appetite,  slight  nervous  debility,  and  weak  stomach.  By  some,  it  is  con-
sidered useful  in  asthma,  gravel,  convulsions,  paralysis,  to  invigorate
the  virile  powers,  etc.,  etc.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  ten  to  sixty
grains  ;  of  the  infusion,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.


PAP  AVER SOMNIFERUM.

Poppy.
Nat.  Ord. — Papaveracea?,. Sex. Syst. — Polyandria  Monogynia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE OF THE UNRirE CAPSULES. OPIUM.

Description. — The  Poppy  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  tapering  and  white
root;  the  stem  is  round,  erect,  smooth,  glaucous,  often  branched,  leafy,
and  from  two  to  four  feet  in  bight ;  sometimes  there  are  a  few  rigid
hairs  on  the  upper  part  of  the  stem.  The  leaves  are  large,  alternate,
ovatfe-oblong,  incised  and  dentate,  repand,  amplexicaul.  The  flowers  are
large,  terminal,  white  or  silvery-gray,  on  long  peduncles.  The  calyx  is
smooth,  and  consists  of  two  ovate,  concave,  obtuse,  sepals,  which  fall
off  on  the  expanding  of  the  flower  ;  the  corolla  consists  of  four,  roundish,
spreading,  undulated,  and  as  it  were,  plaited  petals,  white  with  a  violet
spot  at  base.  The  stamens  are  very  numerous,  much  shorter  than  the
corolla,  and  terminated  by  oblong,  compressed  anthers. The  ovary  is


Papaver  Somniferum.  705

nearly  globular,  smooth,  crowned  with  a  flat,  stellate  stigma.  The  cap-
sule is  large,  smooth,  one-celled,  but  with  partial  dissepiments.  The
seeds  are  very  numerous,  small,  of  a  whitish  or  gray  color,  somewhat
reniform,  escaping  at  maturity  by  openings  under  the  stigma  ;  they  are
oily  and  destitute  of  any  narcotic  power.

History. — There  are  several  varieties  of  this  species,  the  most  promi-
nent of  which  are  termed  the  White  and  the  Black  Poppy.  The  white,
Papaver  Somniferum,  has  white  flowers  and  seeds,  and  ovate  capsulea
with  no  seed  openings;  the  black,  P.  Officinale  has  colored  flowers,  dark
seeds,  and  large  globular  capsules,  with  openings  for  the  discharge  of
the  seeds  under  the  stigma.  However  distinct  these  may  be  naturally,
by  cultivation  they  run  into  each  other,  and  seeds  from  the  same  capsule
will  furnish  plants  bearing  flowers  of  different  colors.  The  white  poppy
supposed  to  be  a  native  of  Persia,  though  found  growing  wild  in  the
South  of  Europe.  At  present  it  is  extensively  cultivated  in  India,
Egypt,  Turkey,  and  several  parts  of  Europe,  on  account  of  its  seed,
capsules,  and  opium.  In  this  country  it  is  found  only  as  a  garden  plant,
although  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  would  prove  a  very
lucrative  branch  of  industry,  not  only  from  the  opium  it  yields,  but  also
from  the  oil  to  be  had  from  its  seeds,  which  is  an  excellent  substitute
for  olive  oil.  In  India  the  flowers  appear  in  February  ;  in  Europe  and
the  United  States  from  May  to  September.  The  officinal  parts  of  the
plant  are  the  capsules,  and  opium,  or  the  concrete  juice  from  the  cap-
sules ;  the  seeds  are  employed  for  obtaining  their  oil.

The  capsules  of  the  poppy,  or  poppy-heads,  should  always  be  gathered
before  they  have  ripened  ;  at  this  time  they  abound  in  the  juice  from
which  opium  is  formed,  which  in  a  great  measure  disappears  on  the
ripening  of  the  capsule.  When  dried,  the  unripe  capsules  possess  the
peculiar  bitterness  and  narcotic  qualities  of  opium,  which  is  scarcely  per-
ceptible in  those  that  have  been  suffered  to  come  to  maturity.  The  dried
capsules  are  of  various  sizes,  from  that  of  a  small  egg  to  that  of  a  large
orange,  they  are  of  an  ovate  or  globular  form,  flattened  below,  and  sur-
mounted by  the  persistent  stigma.  The  capsules  of  the  white  poppy  are
larger  than  those  of  the  black.  They  owe  their  virtues  entirely  to  the
opium  contained  in  them.  Poppy  seeds  are  very  numerous,  a  single
capsule  containing  from  10,000  to  30,000.  They  are  oleaginous  and
emulsive,  and  yield  by  expression  a  large  quantity  of  a  yellowish  fixed
oil,  which,  on  being  exposed  for  some  time  to  the  air,  dries  up  into  a
varnish.  The  oil  obtained  is  from  one  quarter  to  one  half  the  weight  of
the  seeds.  It,  together  with  the  seeds,  is  inodorous,  and  has  a  bland
and  pleasant  taste,  without  any  narcotic  properties.  The  oil  is  light,
and  transparent,  and  is  used  as  food,  likewise  for  painting,  for  burning,
and  for  the  manufacture  of  soap.
45


706  Materia  Medica.

Opium  is procured from the  unripe  capsules. The  whole  plant  is
said  to  contain  a  white,  opake,  narcotic  juice,  but  in  less  quantity  than
the  capsules. The  mode  of  procuring  it  is  as  follows  :  A  few  (lavs  after
the  flowers  have  fallen,  horizontal  incisions  are  made  in  the  capsule,
care  being  taken  not  to  penetrate  its  cavity;  a  white,  milky  fluid  exudes,
which  is  left  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  then  scraped  off  with  large  dull
knives  ;  each  capsule  furnishes  but  a  few  grains  of  opium. The  epider-
mis of  the  capsule  is  likewise  removed  by  the  process  of  scraping  and
constitutes  about  one-twelfth  of  the  whole  product. The  opium  is  now
in  the  form  of  a  glutinous,  granular  jelly,  and  is  transferred  into  small
earthen  vessels,  where  it  is  beaten,  and  at  the same time,  moistened
occasionally  with  saliva. It  is  then  wrapped  in  dry  leaves  for  sale. The
extraction  of  the  opium  from  the  capsules  does  not  injure  the  seeds. In
different  countries,  the  mode  of  collecting  the  opium  varies,  in  some,  the
incisions  are  made  transversely,  but  in  all,  the  essential  steps  are  nearly
similar. An  inspection  of  the  various  kinds  of  opium,  would  indicate  a
difference  in  the  mode  of  extraction,  as  well  as  in  its  subsequent  manipu-
lations. Sometimes  it  consists  of  small  tears  or  drops,  which  appear  to
have  undergone  no  other  process after  collection  than  agglutination ;
again,  it  is  found  composed  of  thin  layers,  partially  inspissated  on  poppy
leaves,  and  afterward  united  along  with  the  leaves  into  roundish  masses;
and  that  of  Egypt,  Hindostan,  and  Europe  is  quite  homogeneous.

The  supply  of  opium,  in  commerce,  is  chiefly  obtained  from  Persia,
Hindostan,  Egypt,  and  Asiatic  Turkey.  That  from  Turkey  is  the  most
esteemed,  and  is  the  kind  principally  used  in  the  United  States.  It  is
imported  direct  from  Smyrna,  or  indirectly  through  various  European
ports.  Turkey  opium  is  prepared  in  Anatolia  ;  it  usually  comes  to  us
in  more  or  less  flattened  masses,  of  irregular  size  and  shape,  covered
with  leaves,  or  the  remains  of  leaves  and  with  the  reddish  capsules  of
some  species  of  Rumex,  which  are  said  to  be  absent  in  the  inferior
kinds.  There  are  several  varieties  of  it,  among  which  we  may  refer  to
the  Smyrna  and  Constantinople  opium.  The  Smyrna  opium  is  imported
in  lumps  weighing  from  half  a  pound  to  a  pound,  and  occasionally  two
or  three  pounds,  and  is  of  various  shapes,  owing  probably  to  the  pres-
sure they  receive,  while  yet  soft,  in  the  cases  which  contain  them  ;  some-
times they  are  found  in  flat  cakes.  Internally,  they  are  still  soft  when
found  in  the  market;  externally  they  are  hard,  and  covered  with  the  red-
dish capsules  of  a  species  of  Rumex  to  prevent  their  surfaces  from  adhering,
and  sometimes  with  the  remains  of  leaves.  Their  substance  is  rather  pale-
brown,  and  consists  of  minute  agglutinated  scales  or  tears,  and  are  un-
doubtedly formed  from  the  juice  which  escapes  in  drops  from  the  incisions
in  the  capsules,  and  is  allowed  to  concrete  before  collecting  them.  In  the
finer  kinds,  the  only  impurities  present,  are  fragments  of  the  capsules.
This  variety  of  opium  is  the  most  abundant  in  our  markets,  and  is  the  best
opium  met  with;  it  is  more  productive  in  morphia  than  any  other,  yielding


Papaver  Somnifekum.  707

from  9  to  1 1  per  cent.  There  is  an  inferior  article,  or  Common  Smyrna
Opium,  of  the  form  and  size  of  the  previous  kind ;  it  is  commonly-
covered  with  poppy  leaves,  and  often  with  rumex  capsules ;  it  is  harder
because  older ;  it  has  a  darker  color,  sometimes  brownish-black  inter-
nally, at  times  a  musty  smell,  with  more  or  less  moldiness.  It  is  some-
times homogeneous,  and  again  appears  to  be  composed  of  thin  layers
with  interposed  poppy  leaves.  This  variety  is  less  productive  of  mor-
phia than  the  preceding,  and  is  likewise  more  liable  to  adulteration.

Constantinople  Opium  is  met  with  in  flat,  roundish  masses,  from  half
a  pound  to  two  and  a  half  pounds  in  weight,  and  in  its  exterior  appear-
ance very  much  resembles  the  superior  Smyrna  variety.  It  differs,
however,  in  its  interior  constitution,  being  for  ihe  most  part,  dry,  hard,
pale-brown,  and  homogeneous  in  texture,  or  rather  composed,  as  it  were,
of  agglutinated  scales,  owing,  probably,  to  its  being  removed  from  the
capsules  before  concretion,  or  to  its  being  subsequently  subjected  to
pressure.  In  point  of  purity,  it  is  about  equal  to  the  Smyrna  drug.  It
is  only  occasionally  met  with  in  commerce.

Other  varieties,  as  Egyptian,  India,  and  Persian  Opium  are  occasion-
ally met  with.  The  Egyptian  variety  has  been  largely  imported,  but  of
late  is  gradually  disappearing  from  our  markets.  It  is  in  round  flat-
tened cakes,  of  various  dimensions,  weighing  from  four  to  eight  ounces,
and  sometimes  a  pound.  It  is  wrapped  up  in  a  poppy  leaf,  is  dry,  hard,
and  brittle,  has  a  pale-brown  color  and  conchoidal,  waxy  fracture,  with
an  odor  weaker  than  the  Smyrna  opium.  It  is  always  destitute  of  the
Rumex  capsules.  It  is  inferior  to  the  Turkey  opium,  though  occasion-
ally parcels  are  met  with  as  rich  in  morphia,  but  the  quality  is  by  no
means  uniform.  It  is  probably  adulterated  in  its  preparation,  and
should  never  be  employed  in  the  preparation  of  tinctures,  or  for  filling
the  prescriptions  of  physicians.  The  India  or  East  India  Opium,  very
seldom  reaches  our  markets ;  a  greater  abundance  of  it  is  made  than  of
any  other  kind  of  opium,  and  in  the  East  it  commands  high  prices,
though  inferior  to  Turkey  opium.  There  are  two  chief  varieties  of
it,  the  Bengal,  and  the  Malwah  opium.  The  Bengal  Opium  is  produced
in  Bahar  and  Benares  ;  it  is  in  round  balls,  weighing  three  pounds  and
a  half,  invested  by  a  coating  or  case  about  half  an  inch  thick,  and  half  a
pound  in  weight,  formed  of  tobacco-leaves  and  agglutinated  poppy
capsules.  Its  interior  is  brownish-black,  of  the  consistence  of  stiff
paste,  and  has  the  characteristic  odor  and  taste  of  opium.  This  is  an
inferior  opium,  yielding  about  4  or  5  per  cent,  of  morphia,  and  is  not
only  subject  to  adulteration,  but  is  injured,  in  consequence  of  the  juice
being  kept  until  fermentation  takes  place,  before  it  is  made  up.  Another
variety  of  Bengal  Opium,  is  called  Garden  Patna  Opium;  it  is  pre-
pared in  Bahar  with  much  care,  from  juice  which  has  not  been  allowed
to  ferment.  It  is  in  cakes  about  three  or  four  inches  square,  and  about
half  an  inch  thick,  weighing  four  ounces,  and  is  neatly  packed  in  cases


708  Materia  Medica.

with  a  partition  of  mica  between  each  cake.  The  cakes  are  without
covering,  hard,  dry,  brittle,  of  a  uniform  fracture,  light-brown,  and
sometimes  almost  black,  very  much  resembling  the  Egyptian  Opium.
They  are  superior  to  the  preceding  Bengal  Opium,  and  some  specimens
are  little  inferior  to  average  Turkey  Opium  in  their  proportion  of  mor-
phia. This  opium  is  never  imported  as  an  article  of  trade.  Malwah
Opium  is  in  flat,  roundish  cakes,  five  or  six  inches  in  diameter,  and
from  four  to  eight  ounces  in  weight.  They  are  commonly  quite  hard,
dry,  brittle,  almost  pulverizable,  of  a  light-brown  color,  a  shining  frac-
ture, a  compact  homogeneous  texture,  free  from  mechanical  impurities,
and  frequently  presenting  cracks  near  their  circumference.  It  is  superior
to  the  common  Bengal  Opium,  and  is  not  met  with  in  this  country.

Persian  Opium  has  occasionally  found  its  way  into  our  markets,  but
it  is  very  rare.  It  is  in  cylindrical  sticks  five  or  six  inches  long,  and
about  half  an  inch  thick,  wrapped  in  glossy  paper,  and  tied  with  a
cotton  thread.  It  is  soft  and  flexible,  of  uniform  consistence,  does  not
harden  when  kept  for  years,  is  of  a  paler-brown  color  than  any  other
kind,  and  its  texture,  under  the  microscope,  is  distinctly  granular,  as  if
it  were  composed  of  agglutinated  tears.  It  is  of  inferior  quality.  But  it
is  not  in  Asia  alone  that  Opium  has  been  collected;  many  successful
attempts  have  been  made  in  England  and  other  parts  of  Europe;  and
although  the  culture  of  the  poppy  has  been  limited  in  these  places,  yet
opium  has  been  prepared  fully  equal  to  the  Turkey  drug,  and  at  a  much
cheaper  rate.

Opium,  when  of  good  quality,  has  a  strong,  very  peculiar,  narcotic
odor,  with  a  most  intense  and  persistent  bitter  taste,  somewhat  aromatic
and  acrid.  Its  color  is  deep  reddish-brown  or  deep  fawn,  its  texture
compact,  and  its  specific  gravity  1.336.  The  only  change  that  good
opium  undergoes  by  keeping,  is  that  of  gradually  becoming  hard;  the
inferior  varieties,  are  very  apt  to  become  moldy  after  a  time.  Persons
unaccustomed  to  its  use  will  often  have  their  mouths  blistered  by  chew-
ing it,  and  it  is  very  apt  to  excite  more  or  less  irritation  in  the  lips  and
tongue.  When  soft,  as  it  is  usually  in  the  center  of  the  mass,  it  is  tena-
cious, and  on  exposure  to  the  air  gradually  hardens,  and  ultimately
becomes  brittle,  breaking  with  a  shining  fracture,  and  giving  a  yellowish-
brown  powder,  when  pulverized,  which  is  very  apt  to  cohere.  Upon
the  application  of  a  gentle  heat  it  softens  and  becomes  adhesive,  and
at  a  higher  temperature  it  burns,  evolving  peculiar  odorous  fumes.
Water,  cold  or  warm,  dissolves  about  two-thirds  of  it,  including  a  great
part  of  its  active  ingredients,  and  forms  a  deep  reddish-brown  infusion ;
the  residuum  consists  chiefly  of  a  substance  analogous  to  caoutchouc,  with
a  considerable  portion  of  narcotin.  Alcohol  dissolves  nearly  four-fifths
of  its  weight,  and  the  whole  of  its  active  parts.  Sulphuric  ether  chiefly
dissolves  narcotin,  which  may  be  obtained  in  fine  crystals  on  evapora-
tion. The concentrated mineral acids disorganize opium ; but the


Papaver  Somniferum.  709

diluted  acids,  ooth  mineral  and vegetable,  are  powerful  solvents,  and
exhaust  it  entirely  of  its  active  principles.

Probably,  no  drug  lias  more  engaged  the  attention  of  chemists  than
this;  but  notwithstanding  the  many  investigations  of  it,  nothing  of
importance  was  developed  until  1803  when  Derosne  made  known  the
existence  of  a  crystallizable  substance  which  he  had  discovered  in  opium;
and  which  was  subsequently  termed  narcotin;  in  the  year  following,
Seguin  discovered  another  crystallizable  body,  but  did  not  fully  investi-
gate its  nature.  In  1817  Sertuerner  announced  the  discovery  of  mor-
phia and  meconic  acid,  since  which  later  experimenters  have  demonstrated
that  this  drug  is  complex  in  its  composition,  containining  no  less  than
seventeen  or  eighteen  constituents.  It  contains  morphia,  which  is  its
most  important  principle,  narcotin,  codeia,  paramorphia,  narcein,  meco-
nin,  porphyroxin,  meconic  and  sulphuric  acids,  a  peculiar  acid  not  yet
fully  investigated,  extractive  matter,  gum,  bassorin,  a  peculiar  resinous
body  insoluble  in  ether  and  containing  nitrogen,  fixed  oil,  a  substance
resembling  caoutchouc,  an  odorous  volatile  principle,  lignin,  a  small
proportion  of  acetic  acid,  sulphate  of  lime,  sulphate  of  potassa,  alumina,
and  iron,  and  also  what  appears  to  be  only  an  occasional  constituent,
termed  by  Pelletier,  pseudomorphia,  beside  papaverina  discovered  by
Dr.  G.  Merck.

Inferior  opium  has  a  blackish  color,  a  weak  or  empyreumatic  smell,  a
sweet  or  slightly  nauseous  and  bitter  taste;  a  soft,  viscid,  or  greasy  con-
sistence, and  a  dull  fracture;  or  it  may  possess  an  irregular,  heterogeneous
texture,  arising  from  foreign  impurities.  It  should  not  color  the  saliva
deep  brown,  nor  leave  a  dark  uniform  trace  when  drawn  over  paper,  nor
form  with  water  a  thick  viscid  solution.  When  drawn  over  paper,  good
opium  usually  leaves  an  interrupted  trace  of  a  light-brown  color.

All  the  substances  which  cause  precipitates  with  opium  do  not  neces-
sarily affect  its  medical  virtues ;  but  those  agents  which  are  strictly
incompatible,  are  all  vegetable  infusions  containing  tannic  or  gallic  acids,
which  separate  and  precipitate  its  active  principle,  and  also  the  alkalies
or  their  solutions.

Opium  is  very  subject  to  adulterations,  which  are  practiced  before  it
is  imported  into  this  country.  Sand,  dust,  stones,  oil,  extract  of  poppy,
and  various  other  substances  are  employed  for  the  purpose.  Some  of
these  impurities  can  be  detected  by  ocular  inspection,  but  others  are
more  difficult  to  distinguish.  Many  purchasers  rely  almost  entirely  on
external  characters,  as  color,  odor,  taste,  texture,  moisture,  and  freedom
from  mechanical  admixtures;  but  these  constitute  fallacious  criterions.
Meconic  acid  and  morphia,  have,  thus  far,  been  found  only  in  the  pro-
ducts of  the  poppy — hence,  the  presence  of  these  agents  will  prove  the
existence  of  opium  in  any  suspected  mass,  although  it  will  not  determine
its  quality.  Meconic  acid  may  be  ascertained  by  forming  an  aqueous
infusion  of  the  substance  to  be  examined,  and  adding  to  it  the  tincture


710  Materia Medica.

of  chloride  of  iron,  if  the  solution  become  changed  to  a  red  color,  this
acid  is  probably  present. The  matter  may  be  rendered  more  certain  by
the  following  process  :  Add  to  the  filtered  infusion  an  excess  of  a  solu-
tion of  acetate  of  lead ;  if  opium  be  present,  there  will  be  a  precipitate
of  meconate  of  lead,  and  the  acetates  of  morphia  and  lead  will  remain
in  solution. Suspend  the  precipitate  in  water,  and  decompose  it,  either
by  adding  a  little  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  which  forms  the  sulphate  of
lead,  and  leaves  the  meconic  acid  in  solution ;  or,  by  passing  through  it
a  stream  of  sulphureted  hydrogen,  removing  the  precipitated  sulphuret
of  lead  by  filtration,  and  heating  the  clear  liquor  so  as  to  drive  off  the
sulphureted  hydrogen. If  meconic  acid  be  present,  the  clear  liquor
thus  obtained,  will  yield  a  red  color  with  tincture  of  muriate  of  iron,  a
green  precipitate  with the ammoniated  sulphate  of  copper,  and  white
precipitates  soluble  in  nitric  acid,  with  acetate  of  lead,  nitrate  of  silver,
and  chloride  of  barium. To  ascertain  the  presence  of  morphia,  take  the
above  liquid  after  the sulphureted  hydrogen  has  been  driven  off  by
heat,  and  apply  the  following  reagents  :  Nitric  acid,  colors  it  red  if  mor-
phia be  present ;  iodic  acid,  which  is  decomposed  by  the  morphia  with
the  extrication  of  iodine,  colors  the  liquid  reddish-brown,  and,  if  starch
be  present,  unites  with  it  to  form  a  blue  compound  ;  tannic  acid,  precipi-
tates an  insoluble  tannate  of  morphia;  solution  of  ammonia,  carefully
added  so  as  not  to  be  in  excess,  throws  down  a  precipitate  of  morphia,
soluble  in  a  great  excess  of  that  alkali,  or  of  potassa ;  and  if  the  pre-
cipitate afford  a  deep-red  color  becoming  yellow,  with  nitric  acid,  and  a
blue  color  with  the  sesquichloride  of  iron,  the  proof  is  complete. Having
now  ascertained  that  opium  is  present  in  the  mass  under  examination,
the  next  thing  is  to  ascertain  its  quality,  and  this  can  only  be  done  by
extracting  its  morphia  ;  the  proportion  of  morphia  obtained  is  the  best
test  of  its  purity. Good  opium  should  yield  at  least  ten  per  cent,  of
morphia,  according  to  the  processes  named  under  the  head  of  Morphia,
which  see. The  Edinburgh  College  gives  the  following  test:  "A  solu-
tion from  100  grains  of  fine  opium  macerated  twenty-four  hours  in  two
fluidounces  of  water,  filtered  and  strongly  squeezed  in  a  cloth,  if  treated
with  a  cold  solution  of  half  an  ounce  of  carbonate  of  soda  in  two  waters,
yields  a  precipitate  which  weighs  when  dry,  at  least  ten  grains,  and  dis-
solves entirely  in  solution  of  oxalic  acid."

The  following  is  Guilliermond's  test  of  the  quality  of  opium,  as  ascer-
tained by  its  amount  of  morphia:  "Take  15  parts  of  opium,  cut  in
pieces,  rub  it  up  with  GO  parts  of  alcohol  at  160°,  drain  the  mixture  on
linen  and  express,  treat  the  residue  with  40  parts  of  alcohol  at  the  same
temperature,  unite  the  tinctures  in  a  vessel  with  a  large  mouth  into
which  4  parts  of  solution  of  ammonia  (22°  Cartier),  have  been  intro-
duced, and  allow  the  mixture  to  stand  12  hours.  The  crystals  which
form  are  to  be  put  upon  linen,  washed  repeatedly  with  water  to  separate
the  meconate  of  ammonia,  and  then  introduced  into  a  small  vessel  of


Papaver Somniferum.  711

water.  The  crystals  of  narcotina  being  very  light,  remain  suspended  in
the  water,  and  may  be  decanted  along  with  it,  while  those  of  morphia
remaining  at  the  bottom,  may  be  collected  and  weighed.  Good  opium
treated  in  this  way  will  yield  for  the  15  parts  employed  from  1.25  to
1.75  parts  of  the  crystals  of  morphia."  As  these  crystals  are  not  quite
free  from  narcotina,  M.  de  Vry  proposes  the  following  modification :
"The  mixture  of  morphia  and  narcotina,  precipitated  from  the  alcoholic
solution  by  ammonia,  after  being  washed,  is  to  be  heated  with  a  slight
excess  of  sulphate  of  copper  dissolved  in  pure  water.  The  narcotina
has  no  action  on  the  sulphate  of  copper,  which  is  decomposed  by  the
morphia,  producing  sulphate  of  morphia  and  tribasic  sulphate  of  copper.
The  latter  and  the  narcotina  remain  undissolved,  and  a  solution  is  ob-
tained containing  sulphate  of  morphia  with  a  little  sulphate  of  copper.
This  being  filtered  is  treated  first  with  sulphureted  hydrogen,  which
precipitates  the  copper,  and  afterwai'd  with  ammonia,  which  throws  down
the  morphia.

Morphia  and  some  of  its  salts  are  treated  of  under  another  head, — see
part  III,  Morphia.  Narcotin  or  Narcotina,  is  considered  alkaline  by  some
who  bestow  upon  it  the  latter  name,  and  others  who  view  it  as  a  neutral
principle,  give  it  the  former  term.  It  may  be  obtained  from  opium
exhausted  in  water,  by  macerating  it  with  diluted  acetic  or  pyroligneous
acid,  filtering  the  solution  and  decomposing  it  with  potassa,  washing  the
precipitate  with  water,  and  purifying  it  by  solution  in  boiling  alcohol,
from  which  it  crystallizes  as  the  liquid  cools.  Should  it  still  be  impure,
the  solution  in  alcohol  and  crystallization  may  be  repeated  several  times
if  necessary.  Narcotina  may  likewise  be  obtained  by  digesting  opium
in  sulphuric  ether,  and  as  the  ethereal  solution  is  slowly  evaporated,
crystals  of  narcotina  are  deposited.  It  is  white,  tasteless,  and  inodorous;
it  crystallizes  from  alcohol  in  thin,  unequally-beveled  pearly  tables,  but
in  regular  rhombic  prisms  from  ether;  is  insoluble  in  cold  water,  soluble
in  400  parts  of  boiling  water,  in  100  parts  of  cold  and  24  of  boiling
alcohol  which  deposits  it  upon  cooling,  soluble  in  ether,  diluted  acids,
fixed  and  volatile  oils,  and  insoluble  in  solution  of  potassa.  At  a  mode-
rate temperature  it  is  fusible,  being  converted  into  a  resinous-like  sub-
stance, and  when  pure  it  is  incapable  of  forming  a  yellow  solution  with
nitric  acid,  or  a  blue  one  with  sesquichloride  of  iron.  It  unites  with  acids
forming  definite  compounds,  some  of  which  are  crystallizable,  but  does
not  prevent  them  from  reddening  litmus  paper.  Its  salts  are  very  bitter,
and  their  solution  reddens  litmus  paper.  Narcotina  consists  of  nitrogen,
carbon,  hydrogen  and  oxygen ;  its  received  formula  is  NCUs  H24  O15.
Its  effects  upon  the  system  are  but  very  imperfectly  known.  One  grain
dissolved  in  oil  threw  a  dog  into  a  state  of  stupor  terminating  in  death
in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours.  Acetic  acid  is  said  to  modify  its
action,  also  nitric  and  muriatic  acids.  Twenty-four  grains  dissolved  in
vinegar  will  not  destroy  a  dog;  thirty  grains  similarly  dissolved  exerted


712  Materia Medica.

no  influence  upon  several  patients  to  whom  this  dose  was  given.  Thirty
or  forty  grains  dissolved  in  acetic  or  sulphuric  acid,  or  in  olive  oil,  proves
fatal  to  dogs,  but  not  when  put  in  nitric  or  muriatic  acid.  It  has  been
highly  recommended  as  an  antiperiodic ;  three  grains  to  be  given  as  a
dose,  in  a  solution  of  muriatic  acid,  and  repeated  three  times  a  day ;  it
is  said  to  prove  sudorific,  and  never  to  occasion  distressing  headache
and  restlessness,  as  is  sometimes  the  case  with  quinia.

Codeia  was  discovered  by  Robiquet,  in  1832.  It  exists  in  opium  com-
bined with  meconic  acid,  and  is  extracted  with  the  morphia  in  the
preparation  of  the  muriate.  When  the  liquor  containing  the  mixed
muriates  of  morphia  and  codeia  is  treated  with  ammonia,  the  morphia
is  precipitated,  and  the  codeia  remains  in  the  liquid,  from  which  it  may
be  obtained  by  evaporation  and  crystallization.  It  may  then  be  purified
by  dissolving  the  crystals  in  hot  ether,  and  evaporating.  It  may  like-
wise be  separated  from  morphia  by  a  solution  of  soda  or  potassa,  which
dissolves  the  morphia  and  leaves  the  codeia.  Codeia  forms  in  colorless
octahedral  crystals.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether  and  in  water,  which
takes  up  1.26  per  cent,  at  60°,  3.7  at  110°,  and  5.9  at  212°.  When
added  to  boiling  water  in  excess,  the  undissolved  portion  melts  and  sinks
to  the  bottom,  looking  like  oil.  It  melts  at  300°  without  decomposition.
It  has  an  alkaline  reaction  on  test-paper,  forms  salts  with  the  acids,
some  of  which  are  crystallizable,  and  does  not  become  changed  to  a  red
color  with  nitric  acid,  nor  to  a  blue  with  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron.
Tannic  acid  precipitates  it  from  its  solutions,  forming  a  tannate  of  codeia.
It  consists  of  nitrogen,  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen,  its  received
formula  being  NCjs  H20  Oj.  In  doses  of  one  or  two  grains,  it  acts  on
the  nervous  system,  directing  its  influence  apparently  to  the  great  sym-
pathetic, relieving  painful  disorders  which  seem  to  have  originated  from
this  nerve,  but  producing  no  effect  upon  pains  of  parts  receiving  a  supply
of  nerves  from  the  spinal  marrow.  It  does  not  affect  the  circulation,
disturb  digestion,  nor  cause  constipation.  The  nitrate  of  codeia  in  doses
of  four  or  six  grains  acts  as  an  excitant,  accelerating  the  pulse,  increas-
ing the  temperature  of  the  head  and  face,  with  itching  of  the  skin,  and
a  species  of  intoxication,  followed  after  a  lapse  of  several  hours,  with
an  unpleasant  depression,  nausea,  and  sometimes  vomiting.  Like  nar-
cotina  its  influence  upon  the  system  is  imperfectly  known.

Paramorphia  was  discovered  by  Pelletier.  It  is  prepared  by  treating
an  infusion  of  opium  with  milk  of  lime ;  the  resulting  precipitate  must
be  washed  with  water  till  the  liquid  comes  away  colorless.  Then  treat
with  alcohol,  which,  instead  of  taking  up  morphia,  yields  a  new  alkaline
principle,  which  may  be  obtained  by  evaporating  the  alcohol,  dissolving
the  residue  with  ether,  and  allowing  the  ethereal  solution  to  evaporate
spontaneously.  The  resulting  crystalline  mass  must,  in  order  to  purify
it,  be  dissolved  in  an  acid,  precipitated  by  ammonia,  and  rccrystallized
by  means  of  alcohol  or  ether. Paramorphia  is  white,  crystallizes  in


Papaveb  Somniferum.  713

grains  from  alcohol,  and  in  very  oblique  prisms  from  ether,  has  an  acrid,
styptic  taste,  is  hardly  soluble  in  water,  very  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,
fuses  at  266°,  and  combines  with  acids  forming  uncrystallizable  salts.
Alkaline  solutions  do  not  dissolve  it,  but  precipitate  it  from  its  acid  solu-
tions. Nitric  acid  does  not  redden  it,  nor  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron
change  it  to  a  blue  color.  It  may  be  distinguished  from  codeia,  by
never  being  in  large  crystals,  by  its  not  forming  crystallizable  salts  with
acids,  being  always  precipitated  from  its  acid  solutions  by  ammonia,  and
by  not  melting  in  oily  drops.  It  differs  from  narcotina,  in  having  shorter
crystals  which  lack  the  pearl-like  appearance  of  those  of  that  alkali,  in
tasting  differently,  in  being  much  more  soluble  in  cold  alcohol,  and  in  the
action  of  nitric  acid  upon  it,  which  converts  it  into  a  resinous-like  matter
before  dissolving  it,  while  the  same  acid  instantly  dissolves  narcotina.
The  same  elements  are  found  in  its  composition  as  in  the  two  previous
principles;  its  formula  is  NC25  Hi4  0-3.  The  term  Thebain  has  been
proposed  for  it.  One  grain  of  it  has  produced  tetanic  spasms,  and  it
appears  to  produce  effects  analogous  to  those  of  strychnia  and  brucia.

Narcein  was  discovered  by  Pelletier  in  1832.  He  obtained  it  by
treating  an  aqueous  extract  of  opium  with  distilled  water,  precipitating
the  morphia  by  ammonia,  concentrating  the  solution  and  filtering  it,
precipitating  the  meconic  acid  by  baryta  water,  separating  the  excess  of
baryta  by  carbonate  of  ammonia,  driving  off  the  excess  of  the  ammo-
niacal  salt  by  heat,  evaporating  the  liquor  to  the  consistence  of  syrup,
and  setting  it  aside  till  a  pulpy  matter  formed  containing  crystals.  This
pulpy  matter  he  separated  and  expressed,  treated  it  with  alcohol,  and
concentrated  the  alcoholic  solution.  Upon  cooling,  delicate  silky  needles
of  narcein  were  deposited,  which  were  readily  purified  by  repeated
solution  and  crystallization.  Meconin,  which  often  crystallizes  with  it,
may  be  separated  by  the  agency  of  ether.  Its  effects  upon  the  system
are  not  known.  Narcein  is  white,  neutral,  inodorous,  slightly  bitter,
fusible  at  197°  F.,  soluble  in  375  parts  of  cold  and  220  of  boiling  water,
soluble  in  alcohol,  and  insoluble  in  ether.  Weak  acids  render  it  blue,
but  nitric  acid  does  not  redden  it,  nor  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron
turn  it  blue.  It  is  dissolved  by  acids,  but  does  not  combine  with  nor
neutralize  them. Its  formula  is  NCw  H20  O12.

Meconin,  first  observed  by  M.  Dublanc,  junior,  is  obtained  by  precipi-
tating the  aqueous  infusion  of  opium  with  ammonia,  washing  the  preci-
pitate with  water  until  the  latter  passes  colorless,  mixing  the  watery
fluids,  evaporating  them  to  the  consistence  of  molasses,  setting  them
aside  for  two  or  three  weeks,  during  which  a  mass  of  granular  crystals
is  formed,  then  decanting  the  liquid,  expressing  the  mass,  and  drying  it
with  a  gentle  heat.  The  meconin  may  be  separated  from  the  mass  by
treating  it  with  boiling  alcohol  of  36°  Baume,  evaporating  so  as  to
obtain  crystals,  dissolving  these  in  boiling  water  with  animal  charcoal,
filtering  the  liquid  while  hot,  and  subjecting  the  crystals  which  form


714  Materia Medica.

upon  the  cooling  of  the  solution  to  the  action  of  ether,  which  dissolves
the  meconin,  and  yields  it  in  a  state  of  purity  by  spontaneous  evapora-
tion. Meconin  is  white,  crystallizes  in  hexangular  prisms,  is  neutral  in
respect  to  acids,  soluble  in  265  parts  of  cold  and  18  of  boiling  water,
very  soluble  in  ether,  alcohol,  and  the  essential  oils,  has  an  acrid  taste
without  bitterness,  fuses  at  194°,  and  in  this  state  forms,  with  chlorine
gas,  a  blood-red  fluid,  which  crystallizes  on  cooling.  It  contains  no
nitrogen,  and  is  volatilizable  without  change.  Gregory  gives  its  formula
as  Cio  Hs  Oi.

Meconic  acid  is  obtained  by  macerating  opium  in  water,  filtering  the
infusion,  and  adding  a  solution  of  chloride  of  calcium,  which  causes  a
precipitate  of  meconate  and  sulphate  of  lime.  This  precipitate  having
been  washed  with  hot  water  and  with  alcohol,  is  treated  with  dilute
muriatic  acid  at  180°.  The  meconate  of  lime  is  taken  up,  and  as  the
liquid  cools,  bimcconate  of  lime  is  deposited.  This  is  dissolved  in  warm
concentrated  muriatic  acid,  which  deposits  pure  meconic  acid  when  it
cools.  It  may  be  freed  from  coloring  matter  by  neutralizing  it  with
potassa,  decomposing  the  crystallized  meconate  thus  obtained  by  muri-
atic acid,  and  again  crystallizing.  It  forms  in  white,  brilliant  scaly
crystals,  of  an  acid  taste  followed  by  bitterness,  fusible  and  volatilizable
by  heat,  soluble  in  four  parts  of  boiling  water,  also  in  cold  water  or
alcohol,  reddens  vegetable  blues,  and  forms  salts.  Its  compounds  with
the  earths  and  heavy  metallic  oxides  are  generally  insoluble  in  water.
With  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron  it  produces  a  blood-red  color;  with
a  weak  solution  of  ammoniated  sulphate  of  copper  it  causes  a  green
precipitate ;  with  acetate  of  lead,  nitrate  of  silver,  and  chloride  of  barium,
it  produces  white  precipitates,  soluble  in  nitric  acid.  It  has  but  little
action  on  the  system.  Its  formula  is,  according  to  Gregory,  Cu  HOn,
3HO  =  ifc,  3  HO.

Porphyroxin  is  neutral,  crystallizes  in  shining  needles,  is  insoluble  in
water,  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  and  weak  acids,  and  is  convertible  into
a  beautiful  purple-red  or  rose-colored  solution  when  heated  in  diluted
muriatic  acid.  It  may  be  obtained  by  treating  powdered  opium  (pre-
viously exhausted  by  boiling  ether,  and  then  made  into  a  pulp  by  means
of  water)  with  carbonate  of  potassa,  agitating  it  with  ether,  evaporating
the  ethereal  solution,  dissolving  the  residue  in  dilute  muriatic  acid,  and
precipitating  with  ammonia.  Paramorphia  and  porphyroxin  are  thus
obtained  together.  These  are  to  be  dissolved  in  ether,  which  by  spon-
taneous evaporation  deposits  the  paramorphia  in  crystals,  and  the  por-
phyroxin in  the  form  of  resin.  By  the  cautious  use  of  alcohol,  the
porphyroxin  is  separated,  and  obtained  by  evaporating  the  alcoholic
solution.

Papaverina  is  prepared  by  precipitating  the  aqueous  infusion  of  opium
with  soda,  exhausting  the  precipitate  with  alcohol,  evaporating  the
tincture  to  dryness,  treating  the  residue  with  a  dilute  acid,  filtering,


Papaver  Somniferum.  715

precipitating  by  ammonia,  dissolving  the  precipitate  in  muriatic  acid,
mixing  with  the  solution  the  acetate  of  soda,  and  treating  the  resulting
precipitate  with  boiling  ether;  on  cooling  the  papaverina  is  deposited.
It  crystallizes  in  needles,  is  insoluble  in  water,  very  sparingly  soluble  in
cold  alcohol  or  ether,  more  soluble  in  these  liquids  when  boiling  hot,  but
deposited  as  they  cool.  It  forms  salts  with  acids  which  are  nearly  inso-
luble in  water.  When  moistened  with  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  its
crystals  acquire  a  dark  blue  color. Its  formula  is  NCw  H21  Os.

Pseudomorphia  is  reddened  by  nitric  acid,  and  strikes  a  blue  color  with
the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron,  the  same  as  morphia,  but  it  differs  from
this  in  not  forming  salts  with  the  acids,  in  not  decomposing  iodic  acid,
and  in  not  having  any  poisonous  influence  upon  the  system.  It  forms
shining  scales,  is  sparingly  soluble  in  water  and  weak  alcohol,  insoluble
in  absolute  alcohol  and  ether,  and  is  readily  dissolved  by  caustic  potassa
or  soda. Its  supposed  formula  is  C27  His  NOn.

Properties  and  Uses . —  Opium  is  a  stimulant-narcotic,  acting  under
various  circumstances  as  a  sedative,  antispasmodic,  febrifuge,  diapho-
retic, and  an  inspissant  of  the  mucous  secretions.  Topically,  it  is  a
direct  stimulant  and  indirect  sedative  of  the  nervous,  muscular  and
vascular  systems.  A  medium  dose  taken  while  in  health,  augments  the
force,  fullness,  and  frequency  of  the  pulse,  increases  the  heat  of  the
skin,  gives  energy  to  the  muscles,  renders  the  senses  more  acute,  and
produces  a  general  excitement  of  the  whole  system — the  brain  is  espe-
cially acted  upon,  the  faculties  becoming  more  clear,  the  ideas  brilliant,
precise,  and  under  control,  the  power  of  application  more  intense,  the
conversational  energies  augmented,  and  frequently  a  state  of  delirium  or
intoxication  is  induced.  After  a  time  this  excitement  subsides,  leaving
a  calm,  careless,  indifferent,  pleasurable  sensation,  with  a  series  of  vague,
fleeting  ideas,  which  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour  or  an  hour  is  succeeded
by  sleep,  which  continues  for  six,  eight,  or  ten  hours,  and  is  followed  by
giddiness,  languor  of  the  pulse,  nausea,  headache,  tremors,  want  of
appetite,  and  other  symptoms  of  deranged  nervous  action.  Other  effects
likewise  occur  during  the  period  of  its  influence  upon  the  system,  thus —
the  mucous  secretions  become  suspended,  constipation  is  induced,  the
cutaneous  secretion  is  increased,  the  urinary  and  biliary  secretions  may
be  unaffected,  or  merely  inspissated,  in  consequence  of  their  discharges
being  impeded.  The  retention  of  urine,  and  constipation,  sometimes
exist  for  several  days.  No  injurious  consequences  will  ultimately  result
from  these  effects,  unless  the  dose  be  frequently  repeated,  so  that  the
natural  powers  be  destroyed  by  continuous  over-excitement.  The  un-
pleasant symptoms  following  the  sleep  caused  by  opium  may  be  removed
by  lemon-juice,  strong  coffee,  or  a  cathartic.

The  effects  of  opium  vary  in  different  persons,  and  not  unfrequently
in  the  same  individual  under  dissimilar  circumstances.  In  some  persons
the  smallest  dose  will  cause  nausea,  vomiting,  and  spasm  of  the  stomach ;


716  Materia Medica.

in  others  it  will  occasion  feverishness,  headache,  watchfulness,  restless-
ness, startling,  disagreeable  visions,  delirium,  anxiety,  and  afterward  an
aggravated  degree  of  the  more  familiar  subsequent  effects  of  this  drug;
these  phenomena  constitute  what  is  called  the  idiosyncratic  action  of
opium.  Though  commonly  the  result  of  idiosyncracy,  yet  these  symp-
toms are  often  induced  in  persons  with  whom  opium  in  general  agrees.
Dissolved  in  vinegar  or  lemon  juice,  opium  acts  more  pleasantly,  and  is
less  liable  to  produce  the  above  disagreeable  consequences.  A  disagree-
able itching  or  pricking  of  the  skin,  occasionally  attended  with  a  slight
eruption,  will  be  frequently  produced  by  opium,  as  well  as  its  various
preparations.  The  narcotic  power  of  opium  is  lessened  by  certain  states
of  disease,  as  in  the  advanced  stage  of  pneumonia,  or  peritonitis,  by
profuse  hemorrhage,  especially  uterine,  by  severe  dysentery,  delirium-
tremens,  some  varieties  of  mania,  tetanus,  and  severe  pain  or  spasm  of
any  kind.  It  is  also  modified  by  the  conjunction  of  other  remedies;
camphor  is  thought  to  diminish  the  chance  of  its  subsequent  or  idiosyn-
cratic effects ;  and  given  with  ipecacuanha,  three  or  four  times  the  ordi-
nary hypnotic  dose  may  be  administered  without  inducing  sleep,  but
with  the  effect  of  bringing  on  sweating  with  much  greater  certainty.
Through  whatever  channel  opium  is  introduced  into  the  body — the
stomach,  rectum,  a  wound,  vein,  excoriation,  blistered  surface,  etc., — its
remote  action  is  exerted  on  the  brain.  It  acts  most  energetically  when  it
is  promptly  absorbed  ;  yet  it  has  not  been  detected  in  the  blood.  When
opium,  or  any  of  its  preparations,  is  applied  freely  to  a  blistered,  exco-
riated, or  inflamed  surface,  its  effects  should  be  attentively  watched,  for
dangerous  accidents  have  occasionally  happened  in  this  way.

In  large  doses,  opium  is  a  poison,  producing  death  if  the  proper
remedies  are  not  promptly  and  unremittingly  resorted  to.  The  state  of
excitement  and  exhilaration,  if  caused  at  all,  is  of  short  duration,  being
speedily  followed  by  depression  of  the  circulation,  and  of  the  functions
of  the  brain,  as  manifested  by  diminution  of  the  frequency  of  the  pulse,
loss  of  muscular  strength,  slow,  soft  respiration,  flaccidity  of  the  extremi-
ties, languor,  drowsiness,  torpor  or  coma,  pale  features,  excessively  con-
tracted pupils,  coldness  of  the  limbs,  generally  retention  of  urine,  and
frequently  profuse  perspiration,  together  with  an  almost  total  insensibility
to  external  impressions.  This  state  ends  in  death,  unless  speedily
relieved.  The  remedies  are,  emetics  of  mustard  and  lobelia  seed,  with
strong  coffee,  stomach  pump,  external  counter-irritation,  cold  applica-
tions to  the  head  and  spine,  forced  exercise,  galvanism,  and  artificial
respiration.  As  soon  as  the  stomach  has  been  properly  evacuated  by
emesis,  internal  stimulants  must  be  administered,  the  best  of  which  are
brandy  and  carbonate  of  ammonia.  As  soon  as  consciousness  is  once
fairly  restored,  an  active  cathartic,  with  the  continuation  of  the  forced
exercise,  generally  completes  the  cure.  The  same  toxicological  treat-
ment should  be  pursued in case  of  poisoning  by  any  of  its  salts  of


Papaver  Somnifeetjm.  717

morphia.  Opium  is  employed  internally  in  form  of  pill,  powder,  tincture,
or  solution.  In  addition  to  the  laudanum,  and  paregoric  elixir  of  the
pharmacy,  other  valuable  forms  of  preparation  are  used,  which  it  may
be  proper  to  notice  here.

Rousseau's  Laudanum,  is  in  fact  a  tincture  of  the  acetate  of  morphia,
and  is  three  times  as  active  as  Sydenham's  laudanum,  though  liable  to
uncertainty;  it  is  made  by  placing  a  vessel  containing  twelve  ounces  of
pure  honey,  and  three  pounds  of  warm  water,  in  a  warm  place  ;  and  so
soon  as  fermentation  commences,  add  four  ounces  of  good  opium  pre-
viously diffused  in  twelve  ounces  of  water,  and  let  the  whole  ferment  for
one  month.  Pour  off  the  liquor,  and  evaporate  to  ten  ounces  ;  filter,
and  add  four  and  a  half  ounces  of  alcohol.  Sydenham' 's  Laudanum  is
prepared  by  adding  to  a  pint  of  Spanish  wine,  a  mixture  composed  of
opium  two  ounces,  saffron  one  ounce,  powdered  cloves  and  cinnamon,
of  each,  one  drachm.  Expose  the  whole  to  a  sand  bath  heat  for  two  or
three  days,  and  strain.  It  is  double  the  strength  of  ordinary  laudanum,
a  fluidrachm  being  equal  to  seven  and  a  half  grains  of  opium.  The
Black,  or  Quaker's  Drop,  is  an  acetic  tincture  of  opium.  It  is  prepared
thus :  Take  half  a  pound  of  good  opium  in  slices,  an  ounce  and  a  half
of  bruised  nutmegs,  and  half  an  ounce  of  saffron,  and  boil  them  in  four
pounds  of  verjuice,  (or  good  vinegar),  and  then  add  a  quarter  of  a
pound  of  sugar,  and  two  tablespoon fuls  of  yeast.  Place  the  mixture  in
a  warm  place  to  ferment  for  the  space  of  six  weeks.  Then  decant,  filter,
and  bottle,  adding  a  little  sugar  to  each  bottle.  It  is  about  three  times
stronger  than  ordinary  laudanum,  and  is  preferred  by  many  practitioners,
on  account  of  its  more  uniform  agreement  with  the  digestive  organs.
However,  the  acetate,  or  citrate  of  morphia,  are  much  preferable  to
these  tinctures.

The  special  uses  of  opium  are  so  numerous,  that  it  is  impossible  to  do
more  here  than  mention  the  most  important  of  them.  In  all  febrile  and
inflammatory  diseases,  it  is  given  either  alone,  or  in  combination  with
ipecacuanha  to  produce  diaphoresis.  As  an  anodyne-diaphoretic  this
combination  is  likewise  beneficial  in  rheumatic,  neuralgic,  and  gouty
diseases,  in  nervous  irritability,  morbid  vigilance,  restlessness,  diarrhea,
and  dysentery.  As  an  antispasmodic  in  asthma,  colic,  cholera,  hysteria,
tetanus,  spasm  of  the  stomach  attending  gout,  spasm  of  the  ureters  in
nephritis,  and  of  the  biliary  ducts  during  the  passage  of  calculi,  in
convulsive  affections,  and  dyspepsia.  Also  to  relieve  cough,  nausea,
tenesmus,  and  strangury.  In  the  suppression  of  morbid  discharges  it
frequently  answers  an  important  indication,  and  proves  very  advantage-
ous in  diarrhea,  chronic  catarrh,  humoral  asthma,  diabetes,  hemor-
rhages, especially  uterine  hemorrhage,  etc.  Indeed  it  will  be  found
valuable  in  all  symptoms  or  forms  of  disease  characterized  by  pain,
wakefulness, inflammation, increased nervous excitability, increased


718  Materia.  Medica.

mucous  secretions,  or  spasmodic  action.  Its  use  is  contra-indicated
where  there  is  a  great  amount  of  inflammatory  excitement,  which  should
be  reduced  before  venturing  its  internal  administration,  or  the  drurr
should  be  modified  in  its  action  by  combination  with  ipecacuanha,  in
cases  where  there  is  any  doubt  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  reduction.  In
inflammation  of  the  brain,  strong  determination  of  blood  to  the  head,
deficient  secretion  from  inflamed  mucous  membranes,  and  generally  in
constipation,  it  is  also  contra-indicated.  If  the  constipation  depends
upon  spasmodic  action,  it  may  then  be  given  as  an  antispasmodic  in
combination  with  a  laxative.  Opium  is  often  eaten  by  persons  until  it
becomes  a  habit  exceedingly  difficult  to  overcome  ;  when  taken  to  ex-
cess in  this  manner  it  may  be  known  by  the  deadly  pale  or  sallow  aspect,
with  tokens  of  emaciation,  and  a  gradual  loss  of  the  energies  and  acti-
vity of  the  whole  system.  The  author  of  a  work  entitled,  "Confessions
of  an  Opium  Eater,"  tells  us  that  he  was  cured  of  this  soul-destroyimr
vice  by  using  the  Ammoniated  tincture  of  Valerian  as  a  substitute  for
his  opiate  stimulant.  Probably  any  other  stimulant  would  have  answered
the  same  purpose.

Externally,  opium  is  employed  chiefly  to  subdue  pain,  and  arrest  local
inflammatory  action  ;  it  is  applied  in  the  form  of  lotion,  liniment,  or  plas-
ter, and  is  of  service  in  neuralgia,  rheumatism,  some  forms  of  cutaneous
disease,  irritable  blistered  surfaces,  diseased  mucous  surfaces,  and  in
erysipelatous  inflammations.  It  is  likewise  added  to  collyria  in  ophthal-
mic affections,  and  to  injections  in  gonorrhea.  There  is  much  variety
of  opinion  among  Eclectics  as  to  the  use  of  this  drug  as  a  medicine,  some
contending  against  its  use,  and  others  in  its  favor.  That  it  is  a  useful
agent  in  many  diseases,  and  exerts  an  influence  not  possessed  by  any
other  one,  no  person  will  attempt  to  deny;  neither  does  it,  when  given
in  the  proper  medicinal  doses,  leave  the  seeds  of  after  disease  in  the  sys-
tem, as  is  the  case  with  arsenical,  mercurial,  and  other  preparations,
which  in  small  doses  decompose  the  constituents  of  the  body;  there-
fore, although  its  present  results  may  be  disagreeable,  yet,  as  they  are
not  permanent,  there  is  no  good  reason  why  we  should  dispense  with  an
agent  so  well  calculated  to  lessen  the  effects  of  disease  upon  the  human
system.  When  we  administer  the  almost  death-like  prostrating  emetic,
lobelia,  the  energetic,  prostrating,  and  nauseating  hydragogue,  podo-
phyllin,  etc.,  etc.,  it  is  too  much  like  prejudice  without  reason  to  oppose
opium  because  its  effects  continue  for  a  few  days,  or  improper  doses  and
carelessness  in  its  use  have  resulted  in  death,  and  which  may,  in  a
degree,  be  said  of  every  active  remedy  in  the  Materia  Medica.

The  dried  ripe  capsules  of  poppy  have  properties  analogous  to  opium,
but  very  feeble,  and  are  sometimes  used  in  decoction,  emulsion,  syrup,
or  extract,  to  calm  irritation,  lessen  pain,  promote  rest,  and  produce  the
general  effects  of  opium  ;  and  externally,  as  an  emollient  and  anodyne
application.


Parthenium  Integrifolium.  719

Dose  of  opium  in  pill  or  powder  from  one-fourth  of  a  grain  to  three
grains,  according  to  its  influence  upon  the  patient,  the  nature  of  the
complaint,  and  the  purpose  to  be  effected.  Sometimes  larger  quantities
are  given,  as  in  severe  tetanic,  or  other  nervous  affections,  and  in  cases
of  severe  pain.  The  medium  dose  to  ease  pain  and  produce  sleep  is,  one
grain.  The  dose  of  the  tincture  is  from  ten  to  fifty  drops.  When  it
cannot  be  taken  by  mouth,  as  in  cases  of  obstinate  vomiting,  and  in
painful  nephritic  or  uterine  affections,  strangury  from  blisters,  and  in
dysenteric  tenesmus,  it  may  be  injected  into  the  rectum  with  great  ad-
vantage, being  added  to  a  small  quantity  of  water,  flaxseed  or  elm  infu-
sion, starch  water,  mucilage  of  gum  Arabic,  etc.  When  thus  given  the
quantity  may  be  twice  that  administered  by  the  mouth — yet  the  prac-
titioner should  be  cautious,  as  some  patients  are  more  powerfully  influ-
enced by  it  than  others.

Off.  Prep. — Enema  Opii;  Linimentum  Capsici  Compositum ;  Linimen-
tum  Opii ;  Mistura  Camphorae  Composita;  Pilulae  Camphorae  Compositae;
Pulvis  Ipecacuanha  et  Opii  ;  Tinctura  Opii  ;  Tinctura  Opii  Acetata ;
Tinctura  Opii  Camphorata ;  Tinctura  Serpentaria  Compositae.


PARTHENIUM INTEGRIFOLIUM.

Cutting  Almond.
Nat. Ord. — Asteracete. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Necessaria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  name  of  JVejihritic  Plant,
is  indigenous  and  perennial,  with  an  erect,  striate,  pubescent  stem,  from
three  to  six  feet  in  night.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  lance-ovate,  hispid-
scabrous,  coarsely  dentate-crenate,  coriaceous,  lower  ones  petiolate,  upper
sessile,  sometimes  clasping;  they  are  from  four  to  twelve  inches  long,
and  about  half  as  wide.  Radical  petioles  a  foot  long.  Heads  many-
flowered,  tomentose,  corymbed  ;  ray-flowers  five,  somewhat  ligulate,
fertile  ;  disk-flowers  tubular,  sterile.  Involucre  hemispherical,  five-
leaved ;  scales  in  two  series,  outer  ovate,  dilated,  inner  orbicular;  recep-
tacle, minute,  conical,  chaffy;  achenia  five,  obovate,  compressed,  cohering
with  two  contiguous  paleae.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  the  Middle  and  Western  States,  in  dry
soils,  flowering  from  July  to  September.  The  root  is  the  part  used.
Its  growth  is  singular  ;  it  issues  from  a  head  or  caudcx,  at  first  small,
but  gradually  increases  in  size,  and  terminates  very  abruptly,  giving
off  other  roots  of  a  similar  form,  each  being  a  distinct  root  about  the  size
and  shape  of  a  radish,  but  growing  horizontally,  and  sending  up  stems
from  near  the  large  ends  of  the  principal  roots,  which  are  blackish  out-
side, and  bluish-gray  within.  Cold  water  extracts  its  medicinal  virtues.
It  has  not  been  analyzed.


720  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Diuretic.  The  root  sliced  and  infused  in  cold
water,  and  drank  in  moderate  quantities,  is  useful  in  suppression  of  the
urine,  scalding  of  the  urine,  gonorrhea,  gravel,  and  diseases  of  the  kid-
neys and  bladder  generally.  It  is  highly  recommended  by  some  prac-
titioners in  these  diseases.  Likewise  said  to  be  an  aromatic-bitter,  and
stimulant.


PETROLEUM.

Petroleum.

A BITUMINOUS FLUID,  ISSUING FROM THE EARTH.

History. — Liquids,  or  readily  fusible  solids  of  native  inflammable
character,  are  found  in  various  parts  of  the  globe,  -which  evolve,  when
heated,  a  peculiar  odor,  which  burn  readily  leaving  a  very  small  carbo-
naceous residue,  and  which  are  called  Bitumens ;  to  this  class  of  sub-
stances Petroleum  belongs.  They  are  of  two  kinds,  one  liquid,  called
Naphtha,  the  other  solid,  termed  Asphaltum.

Naphtha  is  a  transparent,  yellowish-white,  ethereal,  very  mobile,
inflammatory,  and  very  light  liquid,  and  is  found  in  abundance  in  Persia.
It  consists  exclusively  of  hydrogen  and  carbon  ;  and  on  account  of  the
absence  of  oxygen  in  its  composition,  it  may  be  used  for  preserving
potassium.  Dr.  Andrcosky,  of  the  Russian  army,  has,  it  is  stated,  used  it
with  benefit  in  Asiatic  Cholera,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  twenty  drops,
given  in  half  a  glass  of  white  wine,  or  in  mint  water.  The  artificial
naphtha  obtained  during  the  formation  of  coal  gas,  when  rectified  becomes
as  light  and  limpid  as  the  natural  fluid;  and  in  this  state  is  said  to  dis-
solve caoutchouc,  the  solution  having  been  usefully  applied  to  the
purpose  of  forming  several  surgical  instruments  of  that  material ;  it  has
also  been  employed  for  giving  a  thin  coating  of  caoutchouc  to  cloth  or
other  fabrics,  to  render  them  water-proof.  They  are  varnished  with
the  solution  on  one  side,  and  the  varnished  surfaces  are  applied  to  each
other,  and  made  to  adhere  by  powerful  pressure.

Asphaltum  is  a  solid,  black,  dry,  friable  substance,  insoluble  in
alcohol,  but  soluble  in  oil  of  turpentine  by  the  aid  of  heat,  forming  an
ink  or  paint.  Naphtha  and  Asphaltum  often  exist,  naturally  combined
together;  when  the  asphaltum  predominates,  the  viscid  substance  formed
is  called  Maltha  or  Mineral  Tar;  when  the  naphtha  is  in  the  larger  pro-
portion, the  thick  fluid  produced  is  termed  Petroleum.

Petroleum  is  found  principally  at  Amiano  in  the  Duchy  of  Parma,  at
Gabian  in  France,  upon  the  borders  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  in  the  kingdom
of  Ava,  and  in  Barbadoes,  Trinidad,  and  other  West  India  islands.
The  wells  of  petroleum  in  Ava  are  said  to  produce  four  hundred  thou-
sand hogsheads  annually.  The  petroleum  from  Barbadoes  is  indicated
as  the  officinal  variety  by  the  London  and  Dublin  Colleges.  In  the
United  States  petroleum  is  found  in  various  localities,  the  principal  of


Petroleum.  721

which  are  on  the  Kanawha,  in  Virginia ;  near  Scottsville,  in  Kentucky ;
in  Western  Pennsylvania;  on  Duck  Creek  in  Ohio;  and  on  the  shores
of  Seneca  Lake  in  New  York.  That  found  in  the  latter  locality  is  usu-
ally called  in  this  country  Seneca  oil,  and  similar  varieties  of  petroleum
from  other  native  sources  are  known  by  the  same  name.

Barbadoes  Petroleum,  sometimes  called  Barbadoes  Tar,  as  well  as  that
from  Trinidad,  is  of  a  dusky-greenish  brown,  or  black  color,  nearly
opake,  inflammable,  of  a  strong,  peculiar,  not  agreeable,  bituminous
taste  and  odor,  unctuous  to  the  touch,  and  having  the  consistence  of
very  thick  cream  or  molasses.  When  exposed  to  the  air  it  gradually
hardens  to  the  consistence  of  pitch.  Heat  increases  its  liquidity,  but
not  its  thorough  mobility ;  and  a  higher  heat,  by  distillation,  expels
naphtha,  leaving  a  solid  residue  of  asphaltum.  Alcohol,  acids,  and
alkalies  have  but  little  effect  upon  it;  ether  dissolves  it,  the  solution
becoming  green  ;  and  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils  likewise  dissolve  it.  It
consists  chiefly  of  carbon  and  hydrogen,  with  a  little  oxygen  and  nitro-
gen. The  Rangoon  Petroleum,  has  also  a  dark  greenish-brown  color,  a
strong  rather  fragrant  odor,  and  the  consistence  of  lard  in  warm  weather;
when  heated  to  90°  it  becomes  a  very  mobile  liquid.  By  distillation  it
yields  a  large  quantity  of  naphtha,  and  afterward  a  crystalline  principle,
identical  with  paraffin.  In  the  naphtha  Dr.  Gregory  subsequently  dis-
covered eupione.  It  is,  probably,  more  active  than  the  Barbadoes
Petroleum.

Properties  and  Uses. — Petroleum  is  considered  a  stimulating  antispas-
modic and  sudorific,  and  has  been  recommended  as  a  remedy  in  various
diseases.  In  diseases  of  the  chest  not  attended  with  inflammation  it  has
been  reputed  beneficial,  and  is  extolled  as  a  vermifuge,  especially  for
tapeworm.  For  this  purpose  it  may  be  taken  inwardly  in  the  form
of  emulsion,  and  applied  externally  by  friction  over  the  abdomen.
Schwartz's  formula  in  such  cases,  was  a  mixture  of  one  part  of  petro-
leum with  one  and  a  half  parts  of  tincture  of  assafcetida,  of  which  forty
drops  were  given  three  times  a  day.  Externally,  it  is  employed  as  a
stimulating  embrocation  in  chilblains,  chronic  rheumatism,  affections  of
the  joints,  and  paralysis.  It  is  likewise  beneficial  in  cutaneous  diseases,
especially  lepra,  psoriasis,  and  other  scaly  diseases.  The  dose  of  Petro-
leum is  from  ten  to  thirty  minims,  given  in  any  convenient  vehicle.

British  Oil  is  composed  of  eight  fluidounces  each  of  Oil  of  Turpentine,
and  Oil  of  Linseed ;  four  fluidounces  each  of  Oil  of  Amber,  Oil  of
Juniper;  three  fluidounces  of  Barbadoes  Petroleum,  and  one  fluidounce
of  American  Petroleum  or  Seneca  Oil.

Seneca  or  Pock  Oil  is  lighter  colored,  of  thinner  consistence,  and  less
sapid and  odorous  than  the Barbadoes,  and  probably  contains  more
naphtha ;  it  is  considerably  used  in  domestic  practice  as  an  external
application.
46


722  Materia  Medica.

PHOSPHORUS.

Phosphorus.

Preparation. — Phosphorus  is  made  by  adding  to  bone  ashes,  which
consist  principally  of  phosphate  of  lime,  two-thirds  their  weight  of  strong
sulphuric  acid  previously  diluted  with  twelve  times  its  weight  of  water;
allow  them  to  digest  for  twenty-four  hours.  The  sulphuric  acid  com-
bines with  the  lime,  and  precipitates  as  sulphate  of  lime,  while  a  super-
phosphate of  lime  remains  in  solution.  The  whole  is  strained  through
a  linen  cloth  to  separate  the  sulphate  of  lime,  and  afterward  submitted
to  evaporation,  which  causes  a  fresh  precipitation  of  sulphate,  requiring
to  be  separated  by  a  new  filtration.  The  filtered  solution  of  superphos-
phate is  evaporated  to  a  syrupy  consistence,  and  then  thoroughly  mixed
with  half  its  weight  of  powdered  charcoal,  so  as  to  form  a  soft  mass,
which  is  dried  by  being  heated  to  dull  redness  in  an  iron  pot.  The
mass,  when  cool,  is  quickly  transferred  to  a  coated  earthenware  retort,
furnished  with  an  adopter  of  copper,  bent  downward  at  right  angles  so
as  to  enter  a  bottle  with  a  large  neck  containing  water  which  should  rise
about  two  lines  above  the  orifice  of  the  adopter.  The  bottle  is  closed
round  the  adopter  by  a  cork,  which  is  traversed  by  a  small  glass  tube,
to  give  exit  to  the  gaseous  products.  The  retort  is  heated  in  a  furnace,
furnished  with  a  dome,  in  the  most  gradual  manner,  so  as  to  occupy
about  four  hours  in  bringing  it  to  a  red  heat.  Afterward,  the  heat  is
pushed  vigorously,  so  long  as  any  phosphorus  drops  into  the  water;  and
this  takes  place  generally  for  from  twenty- four  to  thirty  hours.  During
this  part  of  the  process,  the  excess  of  acid  in  the  superphosphate  is
decomposed ;  its  oxygen  combining  with  the  charcoal,  and  the  liberated
phosphorus  distilling  over.  A  quantity  of  the  materials  sufficient  to  fill
a  quart  retort  will  yield  about  a  pound  of  phosphorus.  The  calcined
bones  of  sheep  are  generally  preferred,  as  they  contain  mosi  phosphate
of  lime,  and  are  more  readily  acted  on  by  the  acid. —  U.  S.  Disp.

M.  Donovan  has  offered  a  process  which  facilitates  the  preparation  of
phosphorus.  It  is  as  follows :  Take  beef  or  sheep  bones  as  they  are
found  in  commerce,  with  their  natural  quantity  of  fatty  matter  and
moisture.  Digest  them  for  four  hours  in  a  mixture  of  one  part  of  nitric
acid  of  commerce,  and  ten  parts  of  water.  This  dissolves  the  calcare-
ous salts,  leaving  the  soft  gelatinous  tissues  which  retain  the  form  of
the  bones,  and  which  may  be  washed  and  employed  in  the  manufacture
of  glue.  The  acidulated  liquid  containing  the  phosphate  and  nitrate  of
lime,  is  to  be  treated  with  an  excess  of  neutral  acetate  of  lead,  and  the
precipitated  phosphate  of  lead  washed  and  dried.  It  is  then  put  in  a
covered  crucible  and  heated  to  redness  to  condense  its  volume,  which
operation  requires  great  care,  else  the  phosphate  will  lose  its  pulveru-
lent form  and  fuse,  requiring  a  difficult  pulverization.  The  dense
pulverulent  phosphate  of  lead  is  then  intimately  mixed  with  one-sixth


Phosphorus.  723

of  its  weight  of  charcoal,  previously  calcined, and  afterward  distilled
in  the  ordinary  manner  in  large  earthen  retorts,  properly  heated.

History. — Phosphorus  was  discovered  in  1669  by  Brandt,  and  was
at  first  obtained  from  putrid  urine;  in  1769  it  was  found  in  bones  by
Gahn  who  published  a  process  for  obtaining  it.  It  is  a  semitransparent
solid,  without  taste,  but  possessing  an  alliaceous  smell.  When  perfectly
pure,  it  is  colorless ;  but  as  usually  prepared,  it  is  yellowish  or  reddish-
yellow.  It  is  flexible,  sectile,  and  when  cut,  exhibits  a  waxy  luster.  It
is  insoluble  in  water,  but  dissolves  sparingly  in  alcohol  and  the  oils,  and
more  freely  in  ether.  Its  sp.  gr.  is  1.84  and  its  equivalent  number  32.
It  takes  fire  at  100°,  melts  at  108°,  and  boils  at  550°,  air  being  exclud-
ed. During  its  combustion,  it  combines  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  and
forms  phosphoric  acid.  On  account  of  its  great  inflammability,  it  requires
to  be  kept  under  water.  When  exposed  to  the  air,  it  undergoes  a  slow
combustion,  emitting  white  vapors,  which  are  luminous  in  the  dark.  It
forms  with  oxygen,  hypophosphorus,  phosphorus,  and  phosphoric  acids,
and  the  two  isomeric  varieties  of  phosphoric  acid,  called  pyrophosphoric,
and  metaphosphoric.  With  hydrogen,  it  forms  phosphureted  hydrogen
and  subphosphureted  hydrogen.  The  only  medicinal  combinations  con-
taining phosphorus  are  phosphoric  acid  and  the  phosphates  of  mercury,
iron,  lime,  and  soda.  Phosphoric  acid  in  a  diluted  state,  and  the  three
latter  phosphates  are  officinal.  In  contact  with  chlorine,  bromine,  or
iodine,  without  the  aid  of  heat,  combustion  takes  place  spontaneously,
while  the  phosphorus  combines  with  these  metalloids.  It  occasionally
contains  arsenic,  antimony  or  sulphur,  from  which  it  should  be  freed.
Those  who  work  in  phosphorus,  as  manufacturers  of  lucifer  matches,
are  liable  to  necrosis  of  the  jaw-bone,  the  consequence  of  periostitis.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  small  doses,  and  properly  diluted,  phosphorus
acts  as  a  powerful  diffusible  stimulant ;  in  large  doses,  or  when  given  in
substance,  it  acts  as  a  violent  irritant  poison.  Its  action  is  especially
directed  to  the  kidneys  and  genital  organs,  producing  diuresis,  and  a  sex-
ual excitement.  It  is,  undoubtedly,  an  aphrodisiac,  and  is  of  much  service
in  the  impotence  of  old  and  debilitated  subjects.  It  has  been  recommend-
ed in  extreme  prostration  of  the  vital  powers,  dropsy,  typhus  fever,  phthi-
sis, marasmus,  chlorosis,  paralysis,  amaurosis,  mania,  etc.  It  should  never
be  used  in  substance,  but  in  solution  with  ether  and  oil.  The  following  is
a  good  formula  :  Take  of  phosphorus,  cut  in  pieces,  four  parts ;  sulphuric
ether,  two  hundred  parts ;  mix,  and  macerate  in  a  darkened  bottle,  or  in
a  dark  place  for  one  month  ;  then  add  one  hundred  parts  of  oil  of
cinnamon,  or  any  other  oil,  and  mix  thoroughly  together.  Decant  this
into  blackened  ounce  vials,  and  have  them  well  stopped.  Dose,  is  from
ten  to  fifteen  drops,  every  three  hours,  in  some  mucilaginous  liquid.  In
the  exhibition  of  phosphorus,  great  caution  is  necessary,  and  its  effects
must  be  closely  watched.  It  should  never  be  given  in  substance  as
it  is  apt  to  cause  violent  irritation  of  the  stomach. When  taken  in  a


724  Materia  Medica.

poisonous  dose,  give  an  emetic  followed  by  copious  draughts  of  water
and  magnesia,  which  arrest  its  combustion,  and  neutralize  any  phosphoric
acid  which  may  form.  The  following,  administered  in  copious  draughts,
has  been  recommended  as  an  antidote  to  phosphorus :  Calcined  mag-
nesia 4  grains;  chlorine  water  16  grains;  distilled  water  224  grains;
mix.  Phosphorus  is  seldom  employed  in  Eclectic  practice.
Off.  Prep. — Acidum  Phosphoricum  Dilutum.


PHYSALIS  VISCOSA.

Ground  Cherry.

Nat. Orel. — Solanaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE BERRIES.

Description.  —  This  plant,  also  called  Yellow-henbane,  is  indigenous,
perennial  and  pubescent,  having  a  herbaceous,  decumbent  stem,  about
a  foot  high,  and  which  is  often  viscid  as  well  as  the  whole  plant.  The
branches  are  somewhat  dichotomous  and  angular.  The  leaves  are  very
variable,  even  in  the  same  plant,  solitary  or  in  pairs,  ovate,  or  lanceolate-
ovate,  cordate  or  acute  at  base,  often  obtuse  at  the  apex,  repand-toothed
or  entire,  petiolate,  from  one  to  four  inches  in  length,  and  one-half,  or
two-thirds  as  broad,  or  even  of  equal  breadth  ;  when  they  occur  in  pairs,
one  of  them  is  much  smaller.  The  flowers  are  solitary,  axillary,  pendu-
lous ;  the  corolla  is  campanulate-rotate,  twice  as  long  as  the  calyx,  tube
very  short,  limb  obscurely  five-lobed,  greenish-yellow,  with  five  brownish
spots  at  base  inside.  The  calyx  is  five-cleft,  persistent,  enlarged,  inflated,
angular ;  stamens  five,  connivent ;  anthers  opening  lengthwise.  Fruit  a  yel-
low or  orange-colored  berry,  inclosed  in  the  calyx.  There  are  many  vari-
eties of  this  plant,  some  of  which  have  been  unnecessarily  divided  into  spe-
cies, as  P.  Obscura,  P.  Pubescens,  P.  Pennsylvanica,  and  P.  Philadelphia.
History. — This  plant  is  common  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  and  is
found  growing  in  dry  fields,  hill-sides,  and  road-sides,  flowering  in  July
and  August.  Its  root  is  fusiform,  white,  and  bitter,  and  will  probably
act  as  a  bitter-tonic ;  the  fruit  or  berries  are  slightly  acid  and  edible,
with  a  faint  bitterness. Water  or  proof  spirit  extracts  their  properties.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  laxative,  and  diuretic,  said  also  to  be
sedative.  The  juice  of  the  berries,  or  a  strong  infusion  is  reputed  very
beneficial  in  suppression  of  the  urine,  gravel,  and  other  urinary  disorders.
Dose  of  the  juice  of  the  berries,  one  or  two  ounces.

The  Physalis  Alkekengi,  or  Winter  Cherry,  of  Europe,  with  the  stem
somewhat  branching  below,  the  leaves  in  pairs,  entire,  acute ;  flowers
white  ;  calyx  of  the  fruit  red  or  reddish,  with  acid  and  somewhat  bitter
berries,  and  growing  about  a  foot  high,  possesses  similar  properties,  and
is  likewise  recommended  as  a  febrifuge.

Dessaignes  and  Chautard  have  obtained  the  bitter  principle  of  the
Physalis  Alkekengi,  which  they  call  Physaline,  and  which  has  been


Phytolacca  Decandea.  725

employed  with  success  in  intermittent  fever.  An  alcoholic  extract  of  the
plant  was  prepared,  which  yielded  a  bitter  dark-colored  mass  ;  the  bitter
principle  was  taken  up  by  cold  water,  and  was  separated  either  by  means
of  charcoal,  from  which  it  was  afterward  dissolved  by  alcohol,  or  by
shaking  the  aqueous  solution  with  chloroform.  The  bitter  principle  thus
obtained  was  pulverulent,  slightly  colored,  and  very  bitter.  When  pure,
physuline  is  a  white  powder,  with  a  faint  tinge  of  yellow ;  its  taste  is  at
first  faintly,  afterward  permanently  bitter;  it  is  noncrystalline,  softens  at
356°  or  374°,  and  then  soon  decomposes,  burning  with  a  smoky  flame.
It  is  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water,  to  which  it  communicates  a  bitter
taste  ;  more  soluble  in  hot  water,  chloroform  and  alcohol ;  and  sparingly
soluble  in  ether  and  acids.  It  is  dissolved  by  ammonia,  and  remains
unaltered  after  its  volatilization ;  is  not  precipitated  by  nitrate  of  silver
and  ammonia  from  the  alcoholic  solution,  but  is  precipitated  by  an  am-
moniacal  solution  of  acetate  of  lead.  They  give  its  formula  as  C25  H32
O10. The  fruit  of  the  physalis  contains  citric  acid.


PHYTOLACCA  DECANDRA.

Poke.

Nat.  Ord. — Phytolaccaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Decagynia.

THE  ROOT,  LEAVES  AND  BERRIES.

Description. — This  plant  is  known  by  various  other  names,  as  Pigeon-
berry,  Garget,  Scoke,  Coakum,  etc.  It  is  indigenous,  with  a  perennial
root  of  large  size,  frequently  exceeding  a  man's  leg  in  diameter,  usually
branched,  fleshy,  fibrous,  whitish  within,  easily  cut  or  broken,  and
covered  with  a  very  thin  brownish  bark  or  cuticle.  The  stems  are
annual,  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  from  five  to  eight  feet  in  hight,
round,  smooth,  and  very  much  branched  ;  when  young  they  are  green,
and  become  of  a  fine  deep  purple  when  matured.  The  leaves  are  scat-
tered, petiolate,  ovate-oblong,  smooth  on  both  sides,  ribbed  underneath,
entire,  acute,  and  five  inches  long  by  two  or  three  in  breadth.  The
flowers  are  numerous,  small,  greenish-white,  on  long  pedunculated
racemes  opposite  to  the  leaves,  sometimes  erect,  and  sometimes  droop-
ing. Peduncles  nearly  smooth,  angular,  ascending ;  pedicels  divaricate,
sometimes  branched,  green,  white,  or  purple,  having  a  small  linear
bract  at  base,  and  two  others  in  the  middle.  Calyx  whitish,  consisting
of  five  round- ovate,  concave,  incurved  sepals.  Stam,ens  ten,  somewhat
shorter  than  the  sepals,  with  white,  roundish,  two-lobed  anthers.  Ovary
green,  round,  depressed,  ten-furrowed.  Styles  ten,  short,  recurved.
Berries  in  long  clusters,  dark-purple,  almost  black,  round,  depressed  or
flattened,  marked  with  ten  furrows  on  the  sides.  Cells  ten;  seeds  ten,
solitary ;  embryo  curved  in  a  ring  around  the  albumen.

History. — Poke  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,  growing  in  nearly  all
parts,  along  fences,  in  newly  cleared  spots,  uncultivated  fields,  road-sides,


726  Materia  Medica.

moist  grounds,  etc.,  and  flowering  from  July  to  September.  It  is
likewise  found  naturalized  in  some  parts  of  Northern  Africa  and  Southern
Europe.  The  young  shoots  are  often  used  for  greens,  but  become
cathartic  when  they  have  attained  any  size.  The  ashes  of  the  stem  and
leaves  contain  a  large  proportion  of  potassa,  at  least  forty-two  per  cent.,
which,  in  the  plant,  is  in  union  with  an  acid  resembling  the  malic;
some  persons  have  successfully  employed  the  ashes  as  a  local  application
to  cancer. The  officinal  parts  are  the  root,  leaves,  and  berries.

The  root  should  be  gathered  late  in  November,  cut  into  thin  trans-
verse slices,  and  dried  with  a  moderate  heat;  it  loses  its  virtues  by
keeping,  and  should,  consequently,  be  replaced  by  a  fresh  supply  every
year.  When  properly  dried,  it  is  in  transverse  slices,  of  a  light  yellow-
ish-brown color  externally,  wrinkled,  and  presenting  on  the  internal  cut
surface,  numerous  concentric  rings,  formed  by  the  projecting  ends  of
fibers,  between  which  the  intervening  matter  has  shrunk  in  the  drying
process.  In  the  older  roots  the  structure  is  firm  and  almost  ligneous,
having  a  yellowish- white  color,  alternating  with  darker  circular  layers.
It  has  no  smell,  but  the  taste  is  mild,  and  slightly  sweetish,  followed  by
a  sense  of  acrimony.  Boiling  water,  or  alcohol  extracts  its  active  prin-
ciples. Analysis  has  detected  in  it  tannic  acid,  gum,  starch,  sugar,
resin,  fixed  oil,  lignin,  and  various  inorganic  principles.  The  leaves
should  be  gathered  a  short  time  previous  to  the  ripening  of  the  berries.
The  berries  must  be  collected  when  they  are  fully  ripened ;  they  contain
a  succulent  pulp,  and  yield  upon  pressure  a  large  quantity  of  a  purplish-
red  juice.  They  have  but  little  odor,  and  a  nauseous  sweetish  taste.
The  coloring  principle  of  the  juice  is  evanescent,  and  cannot,  conse-
quently, be  applied  to  the  purposes  of  dyeing.  Alkalies  turn  it  yellow,
but  acids  restore  it  to  its  original  color.  The  juice  contains  saccharine
matter,  and  after  fermenting,  yields  alcohol  by  distillation.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Poke  is  emetic,  cathartic,  alterative,  anti-
herpetic,  and  somewhat  narcotic.  In  doses  of  from  ten  to  thirty  grains
it  acts  both  as  an  emetic  and  cathartic,  but  is  seldom  used  for  these
purposes  on  account  of  the  slowness  of  its  action,  which,  when  estab-
lished, continues  for  a  long  time.  Narcotic  effects  as  drowsiness,  dim-
ness of  vision,  vertigo,  etc.,  frequently  attend  its  action,  but  very  rarely
any  pain  or  spasm.  Overdoses  cause  excessive  vomiting  or  purging,
great  nervous  prostration,  occasionally  convulsions,  and  sometimes  a
tingling  or  prickling  sensation  over  the  whole  surface.  In  doses  of  from
one  to  five  grains  it  acts  as  an  alterative.  The  root  excites  the  whole
glandular  system,  and  has  been  highly  extolled  in  syphilitic,  scrofulous,
rheumatic,  and  cutaneous  diseases.  The  extract  of  the  root  is  an  excel-
lent remedy  for  the  removal  of  those  severe  pains  attending  mercurio-
syphilitic  affections  (osteocopus),  in  which  it  is  more  beneficial  than
opium.  The  root  roasted  in  hot  ashes  until  soft,  and  then  mashed  and
applied as  a  poultice,  is unrivaled in  felons and  tumors  of  various


PlCR^ENA EXCELSA.  727

kinds.  It  discusses  them  rapidly,  or,  if  too  far  advanced,  hastens  their
suppuration.  Care  must  be  had  in  powdering  the  root,  as  it  sometimes
occasions  headache,  purging,  prostration  of  strength,  and  all  the  symp-
toms of  a  severe  coryza.  A  drachm  of  the  pulverized  root  or  leaves,
mixed  with  an  ounce  of  lard  has  proved  beneficial  in  psora,,  tinea-capitis,
and  some  other  forms  of  cutaneous  disease ;  when  first  applied  it  occa-
sions a  sense  of  heat  and  smarting.

The  leaves  are  somewhat  purgative,  and  are  used,  in  some  parts  of
the  country,  as  a  dressing  to  ulcers.  A  strong  decoction  of  the  leaves
is  of  much  benefit  in  hemorrhoids ;  injected  into  the  rectum  two  or  three
times  a  day,  and  a  fomentation  of  the  leaves  applied  to  the  part,  will
almost  always  give  relief,  and  eventually  effect  a  cure.  A  fluidrachm
or  two  may  be  taken  internally  at  the  same  time,  and  repeated  two  or
three  times  a  day ;  should  any  narcotic  effects  be  produced,  its  use  may
be  omitted  for  a  day  or  two,  and  then  commenced  in  smaller  doses.
The  inspissated  juice  of  the  leaves  has  been  recommended  in  indolent
ulcers,  and  as  a  remedy  in  cancer;  in  this  last  disease,  Dr.  Bone  com-
bined it  with  gunpowder.

A  saturated  tincture  of  the  berries  has  been  successfully  employed  in
chronic  rheumatism.  It  is  also  recommended  in  the  same  diseases  as
the  root.  Dose  of  the  powdered  root,  as  an  alterative,  from  one  to  five
grains ;  of  the  tincture,  one  fluidrachm,  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  as
an  emetic,  twenty  to  thirty  grains  of  the  powder.

The  Franklin  Institute  of  the  city  of  New  York  advertise  the  active
principle  of  poke  root  under  the  name  of  Phytolaccin ;  said  to  be  a  light-
brown  powder,  with  a  pleasant,  mucilaginous  taste,  soluble  in  water,
and  insoluble  in  alcohol  or  ether.  I  am  not  advised  of  its  mode  of
preparation.  Said  likewise  to  be  a  most  powerful  alterative,  aperient,
and  slightly  narcotic.  Dose  from  one-fourth  of  a  grain  to  a  grain,  three
times  a  day.

Off.  Prep.  —  Cataplasma  Phytolaccae;  Decoctum  Phytolaccae;  Ex-
tractum  Phytolaccae;  Pilulae  Phytolacca  Compositse;  Syrupus  Phyto-
laccae Compositus ;  Tinctura  Phytolaccae ;  Tinctura  Cimicifugae  Com-
posita;  Unguentum  Phytolaccae;  Vinum  Phytolaccae  Compositum.


PICRJSNA EXCELSA.

Quassia.

Nat.  Ord. — Simarubacete. Sex.  Syst. — Deeandria  Monogynia.

THE WOOD.

Description. — This  is  the  Quassia  Excelsa  of  Linnaeus,  and  the  Sima-
ruba  Excelsa  of  Decandolle,  and  is  known  by  the  various  names  of  Lofty
Quassia,  Bitter-wood,  Bitter-ash,  etc.  It  is  a  tall  tree,  frequently  attain-
ing a  bight  of  one  hundred  fleet,  with  a  straight,  tapering  stem,  often  ten


728  Materia  Medica.

feet  in  circumference.  The  branches  are  given  off  near  the  top,  and
with  the  trunk,  are  covered  with  a  smooth  gray,  or  ash-colored  bark;
that  of  the  roots  is  of  a  yellowish  color.  The  wood  is  of  a  pale-yellow
hue,  tough,  but  not  very  hard,  though  susceptible  of  a  good  polish.  The
leaves  are  pinnate,  with  a  naked  petiole,  and  are  composed  of  from
four  to  eight  pairs  of  nearly  opposite,  elliptical,  pointed,  entire,  smooth
leaflets  upon  short  footstalks,  with  a  terminal  leaflet.  The  flowers  are  in
corymbose  clusters,  numerous,  small,  of  a  yellowish-green,  some  male,
and  the  rest  hermaphrodite  in  the  same  cluster.  The  calyx  is  very
small,  with  five  equal,  ovate,  pointed  sepals.  The  corolla  consists  of  five
equal,  lanceolate  petals,  longer  than  the  sepals.  The  stamens  are  five,
somewhat  longer  than  the  petals,  pubescent,  and  supporting  roundish
anthers.  The  ovary  is  ovate,  and  surmounted  by  a  slender,  grooved
style,  which  is  trifid  at  the  apex.  The  fruit  is  a  small  black  drupe,
usually  three,  sometimes  only  one  or  two,  attached  to  the  side  of  a
fleshy  receptacle.

Quassia  Amara,  or  Bitter  Quassia,  is  a  small  tree  or  shrub,  much
branched,  and  covered  with  an  ash-colored  bark.  The  leaves  are  alter-
nate, and  consist  of  two  pairs  of  leaflets,  and  a  terminal  one ;  they  are
elliptic-lanceolate,  entire,  very  smooth,  two  or  three  inches  in  length,
and  of  a  deep-green  color.  The  common  footstalk  is  narrow,  but
winged  on  each  side  with  a  leafy  membrane,  which  expands  toward  the
base  of  each  pair  of  leaflets,  where  it  is  also  jointed  or  articulated.
The  flowers  are  hermaphrodite  and  decandrous,  have  a  brilliant  scarlet
color,  and  terminate  the  branches  in  long  spikes,  which  are  secund  and
bracteate.  The  bracts  are  lanceolate,  reflexed,  and  of  a  pink  color.
The  calyx  consists  of  five  small,  persistent  sepals.  The  corolla  is  formed
of  five  lanceolate  petals,  which  are  never  fully  expanded,  being  twisted
in  a  spiral  manner,  and  opening  irregularly ;  at  the  base  of  the  corolla  is
placed  the  nectary,  consisting  of  five  roundish,  colored  scales.  The
stamens  are  ten,  slender,  longer  than  the  corolla,  and  bearing  simple
anthers,  attached  by  their  middle  so  as  to  be  transverse.  The  ovary  is
ovate,  five-parted,  and  supports  a  slender  style,  longer  than  the  stamens,
and  terminated  by  a  subulate  stigma.  The  fruit  consists  of  five  black
drupes,  containing  a  small  unilocular  nut,  and  all  attached  to  a  fleshy
receptacle.

History. — The  Quassia  Amara  is  a  native  of  Surinam,  flowering  in
November  and  December,  and  is  cultivated  in  some  of  the  West  India
Islands.  It  was  discovered  by  a  negro,  named  Quassi,  who  had  become
celebrated  for  his  success  in  curing  the  malignant  fevers  of  that  country;
he  kept  his  remedy  a  secret,  until  a  Swede,  Mr.  Rolander,  obtained  the
knowledge  of  it,  by  giving  him  a  valuable  consideration  for  it.  The
bark,  wood,  and  root  of  this  tree,  were  formerly  officinal,  but  it  is  very
doubtful  whether,  at  this  time,  any  of  these  reach  our  markets. They


PlCR^ENA ExCELSA.  729

are  ajl  excessively  bitter,  and  the  root  especially,  has  proved  very
efficacious  in  malignant  fevers.  The  quassia  amara,  has  now  become
superseded  by  the  following  article.

Picrama  Excelsa  is  a  native  of  Jamaica,  and  some  of  the  other  West
India  Islands,  flowering  in  October  and  November,  and  ripening  its  fruit
in  December  and  January.  The  wood  of  this  tree  furnishes  the  quassia
of  commerce,  and  is  used  as  a  substitute  for  the  genuine  quassia  of
Surinam.  It  is  imported  in  large  cylindrical  billets,  several  feet  in
length,  of  various  diameters,  occasionally  larger  than  a  man's  body,  and
split  into  quarters,  and  frequently  retaining  a  slightly  adherent,  smooth,
and  brittle  bark,  of  equal  virtue  with  the  wood.  These  are  undoubtedly
derived  from  the  trunk  or  branches,  and  not  from  the  root.  The  wood
is  very  tough,  close  in  texture,  at  first  whitish,  but  by  exposure  becomes
yellower  than  Surinam  quassia ;  it  is  inodorous,  of  a  pure,  intensely
bitter  taste,  and  imparts  all  its  active  properties  to  water  and  alcohol.
The  bark  is  thin,  dark-brown,  or  thick,  grayish-brown,  wrinkled,  and
traversed  by  reticulating  lines.  Its  virtues  are  owing  to  a  bitter  princi-
ple discovered  by  Winckler,  called  Quassin.

Quassin  may  be  obtained  by  concentrating  a  decoction  of  the  wood  to
three-quarters  of  the  weight  of  the  wood  employed,  agitating  it  when
cold  with  slaked  lime  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  filtering,  which  sepa-
rates the  pectin  and  other  substances.  The  filtered  liquor  is  then  to  be
evaporated  nearly  to  dryness,  and  the  residuum  to  be  acted  on  by  boiling
alcohol  of  specific  gravity  0.835,  which  dissolves  the  quassin,  and  leaves
behind  gum,  salt,  nitre,  etc.  The  alcoholic  solution  must  then  be  eva-
porated to  dryness,  when  impure  crystals  will  be  obtained.  To  purify
them,  dissolve  them  in  the  least  possible  quantity  of  absolute  alcohol,
and  then  add  a  large  proportion  of  ether,  which  throws  down  a  brown
mass ;  filter  the  liquor  and  evaporate  to  dryness.  This  solution  in  abso-
lute alcohol,  the  addition  of  ether,  etc.,  must  be  repeated  until  the  quassin
is  obtained  colorless.  As  it  is  not  disposed  to  assume  a  crystalline  form
by  this  process,  it  may  be  effected  by  pouring  the  alcoholic  solution
mixed  with  ether  upon  a  small  quantity  of  distilled  water,  and  allowing
it  to  evaporate  spontaneously.  Quassin  is  white,  opake,  unalterable  in
the  air,  inodorous,  and  intensely  bitter ;  it  is  freely  soluble  in  alcohol,
sparingly  so  in  ether,  soluble  in  two  hundred  parts  of  water,  but  the
solubility  of  which  is  increased  by  the  addition  of  acids  or  alkalies,  and  is
perfectly  neuter.  When  heated,  it  melts  like  a  resin.  Its  aqueous  solu-
tion is  not  disturbed  by  iodine,  chlorine,  corrosive  sublimate,  solutions
of  iron,  nor  acetate  of  lead,  but  is  precipitated  by  tannic  acid.  It  con-
sists of  carbon,  hydrogen  and  oxygen.

Properties  and  Uses. — Quassia  is  tonic,  febrifuge,  and  anthelmintic.
It  is  used  sometimes  in  remittent  and  intermittent  fevers  ;  likewise  in
dyspepsia,  debility  during  convalescence  from  exhausting  diseases,  and


730  Materia Medica.

for  worms.  It  preserves  animal  matters  from  decay,  which  is  a  property
possessed  more  or  less  by  all  simple  bitters.  The  decoction  administered
by  way  of  injection,  will  remove  ascarides.  An  infusion  may  be  made
by  macerating  for  twelve  hours,  an  ounce  of  the  rasped  or  ground  quas-
sia in  a  pint  of  cold  water  ;  the  cold  water  does  not  dissolve  the  extrac-
tive matter.  Of  this  a  wineglass  half  full  may  be  taken  three  times  a
day,  either  alone,  or  with  some  ginger  tea,  and  will  be  found  useful  for
feeble,  emaciated  persons,  with  impaired  digestive  organs.  Or  an
extract  made  by  evaporating  the  decoction  to  a  pilular  consistence,  may
be  given  in  doses  of  one  grain,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  which  will
be  found  less  offensive  to  the  stomach  than  the  infusion  or  decoction.
Quassia,  in  connection  with  sulphuric  acid,  enters  largely  into  the  com-
position of  an  Antibacchanalian  Elixir,  for  the  cure  of  drunkenness,  and
which  does  certainly  destroy  all  appetite  for  alcoholic  drinks.  On  flies
and  other  insects  quassia  acts  as  a  powerful  narcotic  poison,  and  the  alco-
holic extract  kills  small  animals,  when  introduced  into  the  cellular  tissue.
Mr.  Brande,  in  his  work  on  chemistry,  recommends  a  strong  decoction
of  quassia,  well  sweetened  with  brown  sugar  or  molasses,  as  an  effectual
poison  for  flies,  and  far  preferable  to  the  poisonous  articles  generally
used  to  destroy  them.  It  is  certainly  worth  a  trial.  Dose  of  the  pow-
der, thirty  grains ;  of  the  infusion,  from  one  to  three  fluidounces  ;  of  the
tincture,  one  or  two  fluidrachms  ;  and  of  the  extract,  from  two  to  ten
grains.

Off.  Prep.  —  Infusum Quassiae.


PIMPINELLA  ANISUM.

Anise.

Nat.  Ord. — Apiacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE FRUIT. ANISEED.

Description. — Anise  has  a  perennial  fusiform  woody  root,  and  an  erect,
branched,  solid,  round,  jointed,  striated  stem,  somewhat  rough  or  downy,
and  growing  about  a  foot  high.  The  leaves  are  petiolate  ;  the  lower  or
radical  ones  are  roundish,  cordate,  three  to  five-lobed,  unequally  toothed,
and  supported  on  furrowed,  sheath-like  petioles  ;  the  middle  cauline
ones  are  pinnate-lobed,  with  cuneate  or  lanceolate  lobes ;  the  upper
cauline  ones  are  trifid,  undivided,  linear.  The  flowers  are  small,  white,
and  disposed  in  flat,  terminal  umbels,  without  any  involucre.  The  calyx
is  very  minute  or  wanting.  The  corolla  consists  of  five  nearly  equal,
obcordate  petals,  incurved  at  tip.  The  stamens  are  five,  filiform,  longer
than  the  petals,  with  roundish  anthers.  The  ovary  is  ovate,  downy,
with  long  spreading,  subulate,  capitate  styles  bearing  obtuse  stigmas.
The  fruit  is  ovate,  a  line  and  a  half  long,  dull  brown,  slightly  downy,
and  not  at  all  shining  ;  the  mericarps  with  five  rather  prominent  ribs,
the  intervals  being  rugose.


Pinus  Palustris.  731

History. — Anise  is  a  native  of  Egypt,  but  is  extensively  cultivated  in
many  parts  of  Southern  Europe.  That  produced  in  Spain  is  smaller
than  the  French  or  German,  and  is  usually  preferred.  The  fruit,  popu-
larly called  Aniseed  is  the  officinal  portion.  Aniseed  is  about  a  line  or  a
line  and  a  half  in  length,  oval,  striated,  somewhat  downy,  attached  to
their  footstalks,  of  a  light  greenish-brown  color,  with  a  shade  of  yellow.
They  have  a  powerful,  penetrating,  fragrant  odor,  and  a  warm,  sweet,
aromatic  taste.  Their  virtues  depend  upon  a  volatile  oil,  and  are
imparted  sparingly  to  water,  but  freely  to  alcohol.  The  volatile  oil  is
officinal ;  it  resides  in  the  envelope  of  the  seeds,  and  may  be  readily
obtained  by  distillation  with  water  or  spirit.  The  internal  substance  of
the  seeds  contains  a  bland  fixed  oil,  and  when  they  are  expressed,  a
greenish  oil  is  obtained,  which  consists  of  a  mixture  of  the  fixed  and
volatile  oils.  When  the  seeds  are  collected  before  maturity,  they  are
apt  to  become  impaired  in  quality,  by  a  slight  fermentation  in  the  mass.

Star-aniseed,  which  is  much  used  to  flavor  liquors,  being  called  by
the  French  Badiane,  in  its  sensible  properties  is  similar  to  the  common
aniseed  ;  and  the  volatile  oil  upon  which  its  virtues  depend,  is  sold  as  oil
of  common  anise,  and  is  regarded  by  some  to  be  much  superior.  It  is
derived  from  an  evergreen  tree  growing  in  Eastern  Asia,  called  lllicium
Anisatum  ;  the  fruit  or  seeds  consist  of  five  or  ten  brownish  ligneous
capsules  four  or  five  lines  in  length,  united  together  in  the  form  of  a  star,
each  containing  a  brown  shining  seed.

Properties  and  Uses. — An  aromatic  carminative  ;  used  in  cases  of  flatu-
lency, flatulent  colic  of  infants,  and  to  remove  nausea.  Sometimes  added
to  other  medicines  to  improve  their  flavor,  correct  griping  and  other  dis-
agreeable effects.  The  dose  of  aniseed,  bruised  or  powdered,  is  from
twenty  to  forty  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Oleum  Anisi.


PINUS PALUSTRIS.

Long-leaved  Pine.

Nat.  Orel. — Pinacese. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Monadelphia.

the  concrete  juice. ( See Oil  of  Turpentine.)

Description. — This  tree  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Broom  Pine,
Yellow  Pitch-pine,  etc.,  and  is  the  Pinus  Australis  of  Michaux.  Its
trunk  rises  to  the  Light  of  from  sixty  to  eighty  feet,  of  which  distance
about  forty  or  fifty  feet  below  the  branches  has  a  diameter  varying
from  twelve  to  twenty  inches ;  the  bark  of  the  tree  is  slightly  fur-
rowed. The  leaves  are  in  threes,  of  a  brilliant  green  color,  about  a  foot
lono-,  and  united  in  bunches  at  the  ends  of  the  branches;  the  sheaths
or  stipules  are  pinnatifid,  scaly,  persistent;  buds  very  long,  whitish.
Sterile  aments violet colored, two inches long. Strobiles or cones


732  Materia  Medica.

sub-cylindrical,  muricate,  with  small  recurved  spines,  and  from  eight  to
ten  inches  long. Seeds  with  a  thin,  white  testa.

History. — This  is  a  very  large  indigenous  tree,  found  in  the  Middle,
Southern,  and  Western  States,  growing  in  dry  sandy  soils.  Its  timber
is  strong,  compact  and  durable,  and  is  much  used  by  carpenters  and
others.  From  this  tree  is  obtained  the  greater  part  of  the  tar,  turpen-
tine, resin,  etc.,  used  in  the  United  States.  The  concrete  juice  is  the
white  turpentine  of  commerce  ;  it  is  obtained  by  making  excavations  in
the  trunk  during  the  winter  months,  about  three  or  four  inches  from  the
ground,  and  of  sufficient  size  to  contain  three  or  four  pints.  About  the
middle  of  March  the  juice  begins  to  flow  into  these,  and  continues  to
flow  throughout  the  warm  season,  being  removed  as  the  excavations
become  filled  ;  this  is  placed  in  casks,  where  it  slowly  thickens,  acquir-
ing a  soft  solid  consistence.  It  is  yellowish-white,  of  a  peculiar,  some-
what aromatic  odor,  and  a  warm,  pungent,  bitterish  taste.  It  is  some-
what translucent,  and  of  a  consistence  which  varies  with  the  temper-
ature;  when  exposed  to  the  air  it  ultimately  becomes  hard  and  dry.
When  recent  it  affords  about  seventeen  per  cent,  of  essential  oil.  It  is
almost  wholly  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,  and  readily  unites  with  the
fixed  oils.

Venice  Turpentine  is  procured  from  the  Larix  Europaea,  or  Abies
Larix  ;  it  is  a  viscid  liquid  of  the  consistence  of  honey,  imperfectly  trans-
parent, yellowish,  or  slightly  greenish  in  color,  having  a  strong  not  disa-
greeable odor,  and  a  warm,  bitterish,  and  very  acrid  taste.  It  is  soluble
in  alcohol,  does  not  readily  concrete  upon  exposure,  and  is  not  solidified
by  one-sixteenth  of  magnesia.  The  brown  venice  turpentine  of  the
shops,  is  a  factitious  article  said  to  be  made  by  dissolving  resin  in  oil  of
turpentine. See  Abies  Larix.

Chian  Turpentine  is  obtained  from  the  Pistachia  Terebinthus ;  it  is  a
thick,  tenacious  liquid,  of  a  greenish-yellow  color,  a  peculiar  penetrating,
rather  agreeable  odor,  and  a  mild  taste  without  bitterness  or  acrimony.
Exposure  to  the  air  gradually  hardens  it.

Bordeaux  Turpentine  is  the  product  of  several  species  of  pine,  but
chiefly  the  Pinus  Sylvestris,  and  Pinus  Maritima.  It  is  whitish,  turbid,
and  thickish,  and  on  standing  separates  into  a  transparent  liquid  fluid,
and  a  fluid  of  the  color  and  consistence  of  thickened  honey.  There  are
various  other  turpentines  noticed  in  foreign  Materia  Medicas,  but  not
the  turpentines  have  a  similarity  in  taste  and  odor,  yet  differing  suffi-
ciently to  characterize  each  kind.  They  become  thick  and  eventually
solid  by  exposure,  are  softened  or  rendered  more  liquid  by  heat,  and
burn  with  a  white  flame  and  much  smoke.  Some  of  them  are  solidified
by  the  addition  of  magnesia;  alcohol  or  ether  almost  completely  dissolves
them,  and  they  readily  unite  with  the  fixed  oils  by  heat.


Piper  Angustifolium.  733

An  adhesive  and  strengthening  plaster  may  be  made  as  follows:
Take  of  Caoutchouc,  reduced  to  fine  shreds,  five  pounds,  steep  it  in  hot
water  to  soften ;  then  remove  from  the  water,  dry  as  quickly  as  possible,
place  in  a  vessel,  and  cover  with  oil  of  turpentine,  which  must  be  in-
creased in  quantity  as  the  caoutchouc  absorbs  it.  When  the  gum  is  suf-
ficiently dissolved,  press  it  through  a  fine  sieve,  and  add  to  it  the  follow-
ing mixtures  :  1st.  White  turpentine,  melted  and  dissolved  in  a  sufficient
quantity  of  oil  of  turpentine  to  make  it  thin  enough  to  strain  ;  2d.
Capsicum,  four  ounces,  heated  in  a  quart  of  oil  of  turpentine,  which
must  be  filtered  and  gradually  added  and  ground  with  a  pound  of
litharge,  and  to  which  Balsam  of  Peru  six  ounces,  is  to  be  added.  This
plaster  may  be  spread  on  paper,  linen,  or  leather. — The  phosgene  which
is  used  in  lamps  as  a  substitute  for  oil,  is  said  to  be  composed  of,  alcohol
of  100  per  cent.,  four  gallons  and  a  half,  oil  of  turpentine  one  gallon,
camphor  two  ounces.  Burning  fluid  may  be  made  in  two  different  ways:
1st.  Add  together  alcohol  of  90  per  cent,  ten  gallons,  oil  of  pine,  one
gallon,  camphor,  four  ounces  ;  or  2d.  Alcohol  90  p.  c.  six  gallons,  phos-
gene, one  gallon,  oil  of  turpentine,  one  pint ;  mix.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  turpentines  owe  their  influence  upon  the
system  to  their  essential  oil.  The  urine  is  changed  to  a  violet  color  by
their  use,  and  if  used  too  freely,  they  are  apt  to  occasion  strangury,
especially  when  they  do  not  act  upon  the  bowels.  White  turpentine
possesses  stimulant,  diuretic,  and  anthelmintic  properties,  and  in  large
doses  it  is  laxative.  Used  in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  leucorrhea,  chronic
diseases  of  the  urinary  passages,  in  chronic  catarrhal  affections,  chronic
rheumatism,  piles,  chronic  inflammation  or  ulceration  of  the  bowels  and
in  chlorosis  and  amenorrhea.  Externally,  it  is  rubefacient  and  stimu-
lant, and  enters  into  various  plasters  and  ointments.  Dose,  is  from  a
scruple  to  a  drachm,  in  pill  form,  or  in  emulsion  with  gum  arabic,  or
yelk  of  egg,  loaf  sugar,  and  water.  Venice  Turpentine,  Chian  Turpen-
tine and  Bordeaux  Turpentine,  possess  similar  properties,  but  are  seldom
used  in  this  country.

Off.  Prep. — Emplastrum  Myricee ;  Pilulae  Ferri  Compositae;  Ungu-
entum  Myricae ;  Unguentum  Plumbi  Compositum ;  Vinum  Phytolaccse
Compositum.

PIPER  ANGUSTIFOLIUM.

Matico.

Nat.  Ord- — Piperacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Trigynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant  is  the  Artanthe  Elongata  of  Miguel,  and  the
stem,  growing  to  the  hight  of  about  twelve  feet. The  leaves  are  sessile


734  Materia  Medica.

or  petiolated  very  shortly,  oval-lanceolate,  acuminate,  two  or  three
inches  long  by  about  one  in  breadth,  bright  green  on  the  upper  surface,
paler  and  downy  beneath,  crenate,  minutely  and  strongly  reticulated,  of
an  agreeable  aromatic  odor,  and  a  strong  spicy  taste.  The  spikes  are
solitary,  opposite  the  leaves,  and  cylindrical.  The  brads  are  pellate  or
cucullate  ;  the  flowers  hermaphrodite.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Peru,  and  was  introduced  to  the
profession  by  Dr.  Ruschenberger,  of  the  U.  S.  Navy.  In  the  imported
drug,  the  leaves  spikes  and  stalks  are  mixed  together,  and  more  or  less
compressed  in  packages.  They  are  easily  pulverized,  forming  a  light,
greenish,  absorbent  powder.  Water  takes  up  their  aroma  and  a  slight
pungency,  but  no  astringency.  Infusion  of  galls  produces  a  gray  pre-
cipitate with  infusion  of  matico  ;  the  sesquichloride  of  iron  causes  a  deep
green  one ;  tartar-emetic,  corrosive  sublimate,  and  gelatin  scarcely  affect
it.  They  are  said  to  contain  chlorophylle,  a  soft  dark-green  resin,  brown
and  yellow  coloring  matters,  gum,  salts,  lignin,  a  light-green,  thickish
volatile  oil,  and  a  peculiar  bitter  principle,  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,
but  not  in  ether,  named  Maticin;  to  this  and  the  volatile  oil,  matico  prob-
ably owes  its  activity.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aromatic,  tonic,  and  stimulant,  and  exerts  an
influence  on  the  urinary  passages.  Highly  recommended  in  hemoptysis,
hematemesis,  dysentery,  and  hematuria,  in  doses  of  one  drachm  of  the
powdered  leaves,  or  one  or  two  fluidounces  of  the  infusion,  four  times  a
day.  The  leaves  and  flowering  tops  have  been  used  with  advantage  in
diseases  of  the  mucous  membrane,  as  gonorrhea,  leucorrhea,  menor-
rhagia,  catarrh  of  the  bladder,  hemorrhoids,  and  epistaxis.  Externally,
the  leaves  are  used  for  arresting  hemorrhage  from  wounds,  leech-bites,
etc.;  the  downy  part  of  the  leaf  is  said  to  be  the  most  active  part.  Also
applied  to  ulcers.  A  tincture  is  also  used,  made  with  two  ounces  and  a
half  of  the  leaves  to  a  pint  of  diluted  alcohol,  of  which  the  dose  is  from
one  to  three  fluidrachms.

Off. Prep.  — Infusum Matico.


PIPER  CUBEBA.

Cubebs.

Nat.  Orel — Piperacese. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Trigynia.

THE BERRIES.

Description. — This  is  a  climbing  perennial  plant,  with  a  smooth,  flex-
uous,  jointed  stem ;  the  branches  round,  about  as  thick  as  a  goosequill,
ash-colored,  smooth,  rooting  at  the  joints  ;  when  very  young  minutely
downy,  as  well  as  the  petioles.  The  leaves  are  petiolate,  oblong  or
ovate-oblong,  entire,  acuminate,  rounded  or  obliquely  cordate  at  base,
strongly  nerved,  netted,  coriaceous,  very  smooth,  and  from  four  to  six


Piper  Cubeba.  735

and  a  half  inches  long  by  one  or  two  inches  broad.  The  flowers  are
dioecious  and  in  spikes  at  the  end  of  the  branches,  opposite  the  leaves,
on  peduncles  the  length  of  the  petioles.  Fruit  globose,  rather  longer
than  black  pepper,  on  pedicels  from  four  to  six  lines  in  length.

History. — Piper  Cubeba  is  a  native  of  Java,  Prince  of  Wales,  and
other  East  India  Islands,  where  it  grows  wild  in  the  woods.  The  dried
unripe  fruit  is  the  officinal  portion  ;  it  is  generally  imported  with  the
peduncles  attached.  The  fruit  or  berries  are  nearly  globular,  about  the
size  of  a  small  pea,  rough,  blackish  or  grayish-brown,  of  a  rather  agree-
able aromatic  odor,  and  of  a  hot,  bitterish,  somewhat  camphoraceous
taste,  leaving  a  peculiar  sensation  of  coolness  in  the  mouth,  similar  to
that  caused  by  the  oil  of  peppermint.  The  peduncles  or  stalks  are  con-
tinuous with  raised  veins  that  run  over  the  surface  of  the  berry,  and
embrace  it  like  a  network.  The  sarcocarp  is  thin ;  the  shell  is  hard,
almost  ligneous,  containing  within  it  one  loose  spherical  seed,  covered
with  a  blackish  coat,  but  white  and  oleaginous  internally.  The  powder
of  cubebs  is  dark-colored,  and  of  an  oily  aspect.  Cubebs  contain  a
green  volatile  oil,  a  ceruminous  substance,  a  yellow  volatile  oil,  a  balsa-
mic resin,  cubebin,  chloride  of  sodium,  extractive,  and  lignin.  The
volatile  oil  is  officinal.  Age  deteriorates  the  properties  of  cubebs  in
consequence  of  the  evaporation  of  their  volatile  oil  ;  hence,  it  is  better  to
keep  them  whole,  pulverizing  them  when  dispensed.

Cubebin,  was  first  obtained  by  Casola  ;  it  is  a  neutral  substance,  and
may  be  obtained  by  expressing  cubebs  from  which  the  oil  has  been
distilled,  preparing  with  them  an  alcoholic  extract,  treating  this  with  a
solution  of  potassa,  washing  the  residue  with  water,  and  purifying  it  by
repeated  crystallizations  in  alcohol.  Thus  prepared,  it  is  white,  inodo-
rous and  insipid,  not  volatilizable  by  heat,  almost  insoluble  in  water,
slightly  soluble  in  cold  alcohol,  freely  so  in  that  liquid  when  hot,  and
soluble  also  in  acetic  acid,  ether,  and  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils ;
although  bearing  a  close  resemblance  to  piperin,  it  differs  from  it  in
containing  no  nitrogen.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Cubebs  are  mildly  stimulant,  expectorant,
stomachic,  and  carminative.  They  act  more  particularly  upon  mucous
tissues,  arresting  excessive  discharges,  especially  from  the  urethra.  In
large  doses  they  accelerate  the  circulation,  increase  the  temperature  of
the  system,  and  occasionally  produce  headache  and  giddiness  ;  with
these  effects  they  likewise  in  most  instances,  cause  an  increased  flow  of
urine,  to  which  they  impart  a  peculiar  odor.  They  have  been  employed
successfully  in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  and  sometimes  in  leucorrhea,  and
catarrh  of  the  urinary  bladder  ;  if  not  speedily  useful,  their  use  should
be  discontinued.  They  are  contra-indicated  during  a  high  inflammatory
condition,  and  are  advised  to  be  used  in  gonorrhea  only  when  the
inflammation  is  confined  to  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  urethra. They


736  Materia  Medica.

have  also  been  recommended  in  piles,  abscess  of  the  prostate  gland,
and  chronic  bronchial  inflammation.  Their  use  sometimes  occasions
nausea  or  vomiting,  and  is  frequently  attended,  like  copaiba,  with  an
ephemeral  synocha,  followed  by  a  prompt  cessation  of  the  gonorrheal
discharge  ;  in  which  disease  they  may  be  given  in  powder  along  with
water  or  milk,  or  made  into  a  paste  with  copaiba.  The  following  pre-
parations have  been  successfully  used  in  gonorrhea  and  gleet ; — 1.  Take
of  Ethereal  extract  of  Cubebs,  Solidified  Balsam  of  Copaiba,  and
Carbonate  of  iron,  of  each,  two  drachms,  Podophyllin  half  a  scruple.
Mix,  and  divide  with  pills  of  four  grains  each,  of  which  one  or  two  mav
be  given  three  times  a  day.  2.  Take  of  pulverized  Cubebs,  Podophyl-
lum, white  Pond  Lily,  of  each,  half  an  ounce,  Holland  gin  one  pint.
Macerate  for  several  days,  and  give  sufficient  doses  three  times  a  day  to
act  slightly  on  the  bowels.  3.  Take  of  Solidified  Copaiba  two  ounces,
Ethereal  extract  of  Cubebs  one  ounce,  Oil  of  Juniper,  a  sufficient  quan-
tity. Mix,  and  divide  into  pills  of  four  grains  each,  of  which  one  or
two  may  be  taken  three  times  a  day.  Dose  of  Cubebs  in  powder,  from
half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm,  three  times  a  day;  of  the  tincture  two
fiuidrachms ;  of  the  oil  from  ten  to  thirty  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Cubebae  Fluidum  ;  Oleum  Cubebae.


PIPER  LONGUM.

Long  Pepper.

DRIED SPIKES.

PIPER  NIGRUM.

Black  Pepper.

Nat.  Ord. — Piperacese. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Trigynia.

DRIED UNRIPE BERRIES.

Description. — Piper  Longum  has  a  woody,  perennial  root,  with  many,
creeping,  jointed,  round  stems,  downy  when  young.  Branchlets  bearing
the  fruit  erect,  with  the  leaves  sessile,  or  nearly  so.  Leaves  on  the
creeping  branches  largest,  stalked,  broad-cordate,  seven-nerved;  on  the
erect  fruit-bearing  branchlets  amplexicaul,  oblong-cordate,  five-nerved ;
all  smooth,  somewhat  wrinkled,  pale-green  below.  Stipules  of  the
petioled  leaves  two,  adhering  to  the  petiole,  and  lanceolate ;  of  the  ses-
sile leaves  intrapetiolar,  single,  spathiform.  Fertile  flowers  or  catkins  in
sessile  spikes,  opposite  a  leaf,  stalked,  erect,  cylindrical,  imbricated  with
five  or  more  spiral  rows  of  small,  orbicular  scales.  Ovaries  sessile,
sub-orbicular.  Stigma  three  or  four-lobed.  Spike  of  ripe  fruit,  sub-
cylindrical,  composed  of  firmly  united  one-seeded  drupes.

Piper  Nigrum  is  a  perennial  vine  with  a  trailing  or  climbing  stem,
round, smooth, shrubby,  flexuose, dichotomously  branched,  jointed,


Piper  Longum.  737

swelling  at  the  joints,  and  often  throwing  out  radicles  there  which
adhere  to  bodies  like  the  roots  of  ivy,  or  become  roots  striking  into  the
ground.  The  leaves  are  from  four  to  six  inches  long,  alternate,  disti-
chous, broad-ovate,  acuminate,  of  a  dark-green  color,  shining  above,
paler  beneath,  five  to  seven-nerved,  the  nerves  connected  by  lesser
transverse  ones  or  veins,  and  prominent  beneath ;  petioles  round,  from
half  an  inch  to  an  inch  long.  The  flowers  are  small,  whitish,  sessile,  in
spikes  opposite  the  leaves,  mostly  toward  the  extremities  of  the
branches,  pedunculate,  from  three  to  six  inches  long,  slender,  droop-
ing, apparently  some  male,  others  female,  while  sometimes  the  flowers
are  furnished  with  both  stamens  and  pistils ;  stamens  three.  Fruit
ripening  irregularly  all  the  year  round,  sessile,  the  size  of  a  pea,  at  first
green,  then  red,  and  afterward  black,  covered  by  pulp.

History. — Piper  Longum  is  a  native  of  South-eastern  Asia,  and  is
cultivated  in  Bengal,  and  many  parts  of  Hindostan.  The  female  spikes,
dried  in  the  sun,  form  the  long  pepper  of  the  shops.  Miguel  has
separated  this  plant  from  the  genus  Piper  and  placed  it  in  a  new  one,
Chavica  ;  he  states  that  the  Long  Pepper  is  obtained  from  three  species,
viz  :  Chavica  Pepvloides,  Chavica  Roxburghii,  both  of  which  are  found
in  a  wild  state  in  India,  are  cultivated  in  Bengal,  and  furnish  the  Long
Pepper  of  India;  and  the  Chavica  Ojficinarum,  a  native  of  the  Philip-
pine and  Sunda  Islands,  and  which  yields  the  Long  Pepper  of  Sumatra
and  Java.

The  India  Long  Pepper  is  cylindrical,  an  inch  or  more  in  length,
indented  on  its  surface,  of  a  dark-gray  color,  a  weak  aromatic  odor,  and
a  pungent  fiery  taste,  but  inferior  to  black  pepper.  The  Java  Long  Pep-
per is  very  aromatic,  having  a  pungent  aromatic  taste  stronger  than
that  of  black  pepper;  they  are  of  a  grayish-brown,  or  grayish-cinnamon
color,  thick,  cylindrical,  somewhat  narrowed  toward  the  apex,  thick  at
base,  and  faceted  with  a  sort  of  network,  of  the  projecting  apices  of  the
berries  ;  their  stalk  is  roundish,  compressed,  somewhat  woody,  curved,
and  almost  smooth.  Long-pepper  contains  a  pungent  concrete  oil  or
soft  resin,  aromatic  volatile  oil,  and  piperin.  Its  medical  virtues  are  the
same  as  Black  pepper,  but  it  is  very  little  employed  in  this  country,
either  as  a  condiment  or  in  medicine.

Piper  Nigrum  is  a  native  of  various  parts  of  the  East  Indies,  and  is
extensively  cultivated  in  Sumatra,  Java,  Malabar,  etc.  The  plant  is
propagated  by  cuttings,  and  begins  to  bear  fruit  in  three  or  four  years
from  the  time  of  planting.  The  berries  are  gathered  before  they  are
quite  ripe,  and  dried  in  the  sun,  when  they  become  black  and  wrinkled,
in  consequence  of  the  drying  of  the  pulp  over  the  seed.  If  permitted
to  ripen,  and  macerated  in  water,  so  as  to  permit  the  removal  of  the
outer  coat,  they  form  white  pepper,  which  is  less  pungent  and  aromatic
than  the  black  pepper.  Black  pepper  is  principally  imported  from
Sumatra  and  Java.  The  dried  berries  are  about  the  size  of  a  small  pea,
47


738  Materia Medica.

roundish,  somewhat  wrinkled,  dark  brownish -black  externally,  whitish
internally,  with  a  peculiar,  aromatic  odor,  and  a  hot,  spicy,  pungent,
bitterish  taste.  Alcohol  or  ether  extracts  their  virtues,  and  water  only
partially.  They  contain  an  acrid  concrete  oil,  or  soft  resin  of  a  green
color,  a  balsamic  volatile  oil,  a  colored  gummy  substance,  an  extractive
matter  precipitated  by  infusion  of  galls,  bassorin,  uric  and  malic  acids,
lignin,  various  salts,  and  piperin.  The  activity  of  black  pepper  probably
depends  upon  its  acrid,  green  concrete  oil,  and  its  volatile  oil,  which  is
limpid,  colorless,  becoming  yellow  by  age,  of  a  strong  odor,  and  an
acrid  taste,  less  so,  however,  than  that  of  the  pepper,  and  consists  of
ten  equivalents  of  carbon,  and  eight  of  hydrogen;  with  muriatic  acid
it  forms  a  liquid  compound.  The  concrete  oil  is  soluble  in  alcohol  or
ether.

Piperin  was  discovered  by  Professor  (Ersted  of  Copenhagen,  Den-
mark. It  may  be  obtained  by  treating  pepper  with  alcohol,  filterino-
and  evaporating  the  tincture  to  the  consistence  of  an  extract,  submittinG-
this  extract  to  the  action  of  an  alkaline  solution  by  which  the  oleagi-
nous matter  is  converted  into  soap,  washing  the  undissolved  portion
with  cold  water,  filtering,  and  treating  the  matter  left  on  the  filter  with
alcohol,  and  allowing  the  solution  thus  obtained  to  evaporate  spontane-
ously, or  by  a  gentle  heat.  Crystals  of  piperin  are  deposited  and  may
be  purified  by  alternate  solution  in  alcohol  or  ether,  and  crystallization.
As  ordinarily  procured,  the  crystals  of  piperin  are  yellow ;  when  per-
fectly pure  they  are  colorless,  transparent,  inodorous,  and  nearly  taste-
less, fusible  at  212°,  insoluble  in  cold  water,  slightly  soluble  in  boiling
water,  which  deposits  it  on  cooling,  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether  or  acetic
acid,  decomposed  by  the  concentrated  mineral  acids,  becoming  of  a
blood-red  color  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  with  the  nitric  becoming  first
greenish-yellow,  then  orange,  and  finally  red.  It  consists  of  nitrogen,
carbon,  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  and  its  formula,  according  to  Wertheim,
is  N2  Cro  H37  O10. It  is  supposed  to  be  a  neutral  substance.

Properties  and  Uses. — Black  pepper  is  a  warm  carminative  stimulant,
capable  of  producing  general  arterial  excitement.  Its  chief  medicinal
use  is  to  excite  the  languid  stomach,  and  correct  flatulence,  and  is  some-
times added  to  quinia  in  cases  where  the  stomach  is  not  susceptible  to
quinia  alone.  It  has  been  recommended  as  a  remedy  in  intermittents,
but  very  often  fails.  Piperin  is  occasionally  employed  in  intermittent
fever,  but  will  be  found  less  efficient  than  the  alcoholic  extract  of  black
pepper.  Its  use  has  also  been  advised  in  colic,  diarrhea,  cholera,  scarla-
tina, chronic  gonorrhea,  and  in  solution  as  a  wash  for  tinea  capitis.
Piperin  should  not  be  administered  with  astringents,  as  it  is  thereby
rendered  nearly  inert.  Dose  of  Black  pepper  from  five  to  twenty  grains;
of  piperin,  from  one  to  eight  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Unguentum  Piperis  Nigri.


Pistacia  Lentiscus.  739

PISTACIA  LENTISCUS.

Lentisk.
Nat.  Ord. — Anacardiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Pentandria.

THE CONCRETE RESINOUS EXUDATION. MASTICH.

Description. — The  Lentisk  or  mastich  tree,  is  a  small  shrub,  seldom
more  than  twelve  feet  in  hight,  and  eight  or  ten  inches  in  diameter;  it
is  covered  with  a  smooth,  brown  bark,  and  toward  the  top  sends  off
numerous  branches.  The  leaves  are  evergreen,  petiolate,  and  abruptly-
pinnate  ;  the  leaflets  are  from  eight  to  twelve  in  number,  usually  alter-
nate, with  the  exception  of  the  two  upper  which  are  opposite,  oval,
lanceolate,  entire,  obtuse,  often  mucronate,  dark-green  above,  paler
beneath,  and  sessile  upon  the  common  petiole  which  is  winged  on  each
side.  The  flowers  are  very  small,  dioecious,  and  in  single  axillary  ra-
cemes. In  the  males,  the  calyx  is  divided  into  five  minute,  ovate  seg-
ments ;  stamens  five,  very  short,  with  large,  brown,  and  quadrangular
anthers.  The  females  are  placed  alternately  on  the  peduncle,  and  their
calyx  consists  of  three  small,  scale-like  segments.  The  ovary  is  ovate,
and  supports  three  styles,  with  reflexed,  clavate  stigmas.  The  fruit  is
a  smooth,  reddish,  obovate  drupe,  about  the  size  of  a  small  pea,  con-
taining a  smooth  nut.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  South  of  Europe  and  the
Levant ;  it  flowers  in  April  and  May.  Its  wood  is  hard  and  yellowish,
and  is  sometimes  used  in  the  arts ;  the  kernels  of  the  nut  are  edible,  and
furnish  an  oil  which  is  used  in  Spain  and  other  places  for  burning.  It
is  principally  cultivated  for  its  resinous  juice,  known  as  Mastich,  the
greater  part  of  which  is  obtained  from  the  island  of  Scio.  It  is
obtained  by  making  transverse  incisions  in  the  trunk  and  principal
branches,  during  the  month  of  August;  from  these  the  juice  slowly
exudes,  and  hardens  in  tears  upon  the  bark,  or  drops  upon  the  ground
where  it  is  received  upon  cloths,  or  upon  the  bare  ground,  and  concretes
in  irregular  masses.  There  are  two  kinds  of  it  in  commerce,  the  Picked
Mastich,  and  Mastich  in  Sorts.  The  former  is  the  finest  variety;  it  is  in
tears  of  various  sizes,  oval,  roundish,  or  elongated,  frequently  flattened,
smooth,  pale-yellow,  translucent,  usually  covered  with  a  whitish  dust
from  attrition,  brittle  and  easily  pulverized,  and  of  a  shining  fracture.
The  Mastich  in  Sorts  is  a  coarser  kind,  and  is  composed  of  many  tears
agglutinated  together,  varying  in  color  from  pale-yellow,  to  grayish-
brown,  and  black,  together  with  fragments  of  wood,  bark,  and  earthy
matter  intermingled.

Mastich  has  a  faint,  agreeable,  balsamic  odor,  which  is  increased  by
heat  or  friction ;  its  taste  is  weak,  agreeable,  and  somewhat  terebinthi-
nate ;  when  chewed  it  becomes  soft,  ductile,  whitish-gray,  and  opake,
and  after  a  time  slightly  acrid.  At  a  moderate  heat  it  melts,  and  at  a
higher  temperature  it  burns  with  a  clear  flame  and  balsamic  fumes. Its


740  Materia Medica.

specific  gravity  is  1.074.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  but  is  wholly  soluble
in  ether,  chloroform,  and  oil  of  turpentine,  and  scarcely  soluble  in  the
fixed  oils.  Boiling  alcohol  dissolves  from  it  a  resinous  acid,  to  the
amount  of  nine-tenths  of  its  weight,  and  leaves  a  white,  ductile  sub-
stance, somewhat  resembling  caoutchouc  in  its  properties,  and  which  is
soluble  in  ether,  or  boiling  absolute  alcohol.  This  substance  softens  and
swells  up  in  alcohol,  as  gluten  does  in  water,  and  becomes  brittle  on
drying;  it  is  termed  Masticin.  Mastich  consists  chiefly  of  resin,  with
masticin,  and  a  minute  proportion  of  volatile  oil.  It  is  occasionally
adulterated  with  sandarach,  olibanum,  and  other  resinous  bodies ;  and
in  seasons  of  scarcity  with  sea-salt.

Properties  and  Uses. — Mastich  is  seldom  employed  in  medicine.  The
Turks  use  it  as  a  masticatory  to  sweeten  the  breath  and  strengthen  the
gums.  It  is  sometimes  employed  by  dentists  to  fill  the  cavities  of  decayed
teeth.  The  following  preparation  is  recommended  for  this  purpose:
Take  of  pulverized  mastich  nine  parts,  sulphuric  ether  four  parts,  mix,
and  digest  for  several  days,  strain  it  through  a  cloth,  and  add  native  alum,
in  fine  powder,  a  sufficient  quantity  to  form  a  plastic  mass,  with  which
vials  holding  about  two  drachms  are  to  be  filled,  having  first  poured
into  each  about  thirty  grains  of  camphorated  alcohol,  and  fifteen  of
essence  of  cloves.  This  stopping  introduced  in  the  cavity  of  a  carious
tooth,  first  well  cleansed  and  dried,  is  extremely  useful  on  account  of  the
great  degree  of  hardness  it  acquires.  Dissolved  in  alcohol  or  oil  of  tur-
pentine mastich  forms  a  brilliant  varnish.  An  ounce  of  mastich  and
half  a  drachm  of  caoutchouc  macerated  in  four  fluidounces  of  chloroform,
and  when  dissolved,  filtered  in  close  vessels,  forms  a  varnish  much
esteemed  by  microscopists.


PIX  LIQUIDA.
Tar.
History. — The  impure  turpentine  procured  by  burning  from  the  wood
of  Pinus  Palustris  and  other  species  of  pinus.  It  has  a  peculiar  empy-
reumatic  odor,  a  bitterish,  resinous,  somewhat  acid  taste,  a  color  almost
black,  and  a  tenacious  consistence  between  that  of  a  liquid  and  solid.
It  is  dissolved  by  alcohol,  ether,  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  and  yields  a
small  proportion  of  its  medicinal  virtues  to  water.  It  consists  of  resinous
matter  united  with  acetic  acid,  oil  of  turpentine,  and  various  volatile
empyreumatic  products,  and  colored  with  charcoal.  By  distillation  it
yields  pyroligneous  acid,  and  an  empyreumatic  oil  called  Oil  of  Tar,  which
contains  oil  of  turpentine,  parajffine,  eupione,  creosote,  upon  which  probably
its  medicinal  virtues  depend,  picamar,  the  principle  to  which  its  bitter-
ness is  owing,  capnomor,  and  pitlacal.  The  solid  black  mass  left  after
the  liquid  parts  have  been  evaporated,  is  called  Fix  Nigra,  or  Black
Pitch;  it  has  a  shining  fracture,  softens,  and  becomes  adhesive  with  a


Plantago  Cordata.  741

moderate  heat,  melts  in  boiling  water,  and  consists  of  the  unaltered
pine-resin,  and  various  empyreumatic  resinous  products  which  have
received  the  name  of  pyretin. —  U.  S.  Disp.

Tar  is  prepared  in  large  quantities  in  North  Carolina  and  Virginia ;
and  in  smaller  quantities  in  New  Jersey,  New  England,  and  West
Pennsylvania,  from  the  Pinus  Rigida,  or  pitch  pine.  For  Burgundy
Pitch,  Pix  Burgundica,  see  Abies  Excelsa;  and  for  Canada  Pitch,  or
gum  hemlock,  Fix  Canadensis,  see  Abies  Canadensis.

Properties  and  Uses. — Similar  to  those  of  the  turpentines.  Used  in
chronic  coughs,  chronic  bronchial  inflammation,  ichthyosis,  and  the  vapor
has  been  serviceable  in  cases  of  bronchial  disease,  by  being  inhaled  into
the  lungs.  Externally,  in  the  form  of  an  ointment,  it  has  proved  an
efficient  remedy  in  tinea  capitis,  and  some  cases  of  psoriasis ;  also  in
foul  and  indolent  ulcers.  A  tar  water  has  been  recommended  in  cough
and  bronchial  affections,  prepared  as  follows :  To  half  a  gallon  of  boil-
ing water,  add  one  pint  of  tar  and  one  pint  of  honey ;  stir  the  mixture,
and  when  cold,  strain  off  the  liquid.  It  is  stimulant  and  diuretic,  and
may  be  taken  three  or  four  times  a  day,  in  doses  of  a  wineglassful.  It
will  also  be  found  beneficial  as  a  wash  in  some  forms  of  cutaneous  disease.

Fix  Nigra  has  been  used  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  sixty  drachms  in
ichthyosis  and  other  cutaneous  affections — it  may  be  given  in  pill  form.
In  piles  it  has  been  used  with  great  advantage  in  the  form  of  the  follow-
ing ointment:  take  of  pitch,  wax,  resin,  each,  ten  ounces,  olive  oil,  one
pint.  Melt  them  together,  and  express  through  linen,  and  when  nearly
cool,  stir  in  four  ounces  of  Scotch  snuff.

Off.  Prep. — Emplastrum  Picis  Composite ;  Unguentum  Piperis  Nigri.


PLANTAGO CORDATA.

Water  Plantain.

Nat. Ord. — Plantaginaceae. Sex.  Si/st. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  perennial  plant,  known  likewise  as
the  Heart-leaved  Plantain.  It  is  an  acaulescent  herb,  with  stout,  naked
scapes,  growing  from  one  to  two  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  radical,
cordate -ovate,  broad,  smooth,  somewhat  toothed,  thickish,  about  six
inches  long,  six  or  eight-ribbed  below  with  a  thick  midrib,  and  on  long
stout  petioles.  The  flowers  are  small,  whitish,  somewhat  imbricate,  the
lower  ones  scattered,  and  on  elongated  spikes  which  are  from  six  to
eight  inches  long;  bracts  ovate,  obtuse.  Calyx  and  corolla  lobes,  very
obtuse.  Pyxis  a  third  longer  than  the  calyx,  two-celled,  with  two  seeds
in  each  cell.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  moist  places,  and  along  the  banks  of
rivers,  from  New  York  and  New  Jersey  to  Tennessee ;  also  from  Ohio  to


742  Materia  Medica.

Wisconsin,  and  flowers  from  April  to  August. The  root  is  the  part
used,  and  yields  its  properties  to  water ;  it  has  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  The  root  of  Plantago  Cordata  is  astringent,
anodyne,  antispasmodic,  and  anti- emetic.  The  decoction  and  extract
have  been  successfully  used  in  Asiatic  cholera,  checking  the  disease  in
a  short  time ;  they  have  likewise  proved  beneficial  in  dysentery.  The
plant  is  certainly  deserving  more  extended  investigation.  A  poultice  of
the  roots  is  recommended  as  an  application  to  old,  indolent  ulcers,  bruises,
wounds,  etc.;  it  allays  inflammation,  and  reduces  swelling.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Plantaginis  Cordatee  Hydro-alcoholicum.


PLANTAGO MAJOR.

Plantain
Nat.  Ord. — Plantaginacese. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

ROOT AND TOPS.

Description. — This  is  a  perennial  acaulescent  plant  with  a  round  scape
from  one  to  three  feet  in  hight,  arising  from  a  fibrous  root.  The  leaves
are  ovate,  smoothish,  somewhat  toothed,  five  to  seven-nerved,  each  of
which  contains  a  strong  fiber,  which  may  be  pulled  out,  and  abruptly
narrowed  into  a  long,  channeled  petiole.  The  flowers  are  white,  very
small,  imbricated,  numerous,  and  are  densely  disposed  on  a  cylindrical
spike  from  five  to  twenty  inches  long.  Small  plants  are  frequently
found  with  the  spikes  only  half  an  inch  to  two  inches  long,  and  the
leaves  and  stalks  proportionally  small.  Stamens  and  styles  long;  seeds
numerous.

History. — Plantain  is  a  well  known  herb,  growing  in  rich  moist  places,
in  fields,  by  the  roadsides,  and  in  grass-plats,  and  common  in  Europe
and  America.  It  flowers  from  May  to  October.  The  root  has  a  sweet-
ish, saline  taste,  and  the  leaves  are  saline,  bitterish,  and  austere.  Water
or  alcohol  extracts  the  virtues  of  the  plant ;  it  has  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Plantain  is  refrigerant,  diuretic,  astringent,
alterative,  and  antiseptic.  The  tops  and  roots  in  strong  decoction,  have
been  highly  recommended  in  syphilitic,  mercurial,  and  scrofulous  dis-
eases, in  the  dose  of  from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a
day.  It  is  likewise  reputed  beneficial  in  menorrhagia,  leucorrhea,
hematuria,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  hemorrhoids.  The  juice  taken
internally,  in  doses  of  one  fluidounce  every  hour,  and  also  applied  to
the  wound,  is  in  high  repute  as  an  antidote  to  the  bites  of  venomous
serpents,  spiders,  and  insects.  Externally,  the  bruised  leaves,  or  an
ointment  made  with  them,  is  useful  in  wounds,  ulcers,  ophthalmia,  salt-
rheum,  erysipelas,  and  some  other  cutaneous  affections.  The  best  form
of  administration  is  the  juice  dissolved  in  diluted  alcohol,  and  evaporated
by  gentle  heat  to  the  consistence  of  an  extract.


Plumbi  Acetas.  743

PLUMBI  ACETAS.
Acetate  of  Lead.

Preparation. — Acetate  of  Lead  is  likewise  known  by  the  several  names
of  Sugar  of  Lead,  Superacetate  of  Lead,  Sacckarum  Saturni.  It  is  pre-
pared by  placing  thin  lead  plates  in  shallow  vessels  containing  distilled
vinegar,  or  diluted  pyroligneous  acid,  and  turning  them  occasionally  so
as  to  bring  different  portions  of  the  metallic  surface  in  contact  with  the
air.  In  this  way  the  metal  protoxidizes,  and  a  saturated  solution  of  the
protoxide  is  formed,  which,  by  evaporation  and  crystallization,  yields
the  acetate.  This  process  furnishes  a  perfectly  neutral  salt.  Another
mode  consists  in  dissolving,  by  the  aid  of  heat,  litharge,  or  the  protox-
ide of  lead  obtained  by  calcination,  in  an  excess  of  distilled  vinegar  or
of  purified  pyroligneous  acid,  contained  in  leaden  boilers.  The  oxide  is
rapidly  dissolved,  and  when  the  acid  has  become  saturated,  the  solution
is  transferred  to  other  vessels  to  cool  and  crystallize.  After  the  forma-
tion of  the  crystals,  the  mother-waters  are  decanted,  and  by  a  new
evaporation  made  to  yield  another  crop,  which  are  usually  yellow,  but
may  be  whitened  by  repeated  solutions  and  crystallizations.

History. — Acetate  of  lead  is  extensively  manufactured  in  Germany,
Holland,  France,  England,  and  in  the  United  States.  It  is  a  white  salt,
crystallizing  in  transparent,  brilliant  needles,  which  have  the  shape  of
long  prisms,  terminated  by  dihedral  summits.  It  has  an  acetous  odor,
and  a  sweet  taste  followed  by  strong  asti'ingency.  It  slowly  effloresces
when  exposed  to  the  air,  at  the  same  time  parting  with  a  little  of  its
acid.  It  is  soluble  both  in  water  and  alcohol  ;  cold  water  dissolving
from  one-fourth  to  three-fifths  of  its  weight.  Carbonic  acid  water,  as
well  as  common  water,  which  uniformly  contains  this  acid,  produces  a
slight  precipitate  of  carbonate  of  lead  with  the  acetate,  which  interferes
with  the  clearness  of  the  solution;  this  maybe  removed  or  prevented  by
the  addition  of  a  small  portion  of  vinegar,  or  of  acetic  acid.  Acetate  of
lead  ought  to  dissolve  entirely,  and  form  a  clear  solution,  in  pure  dis-
tilled water,  free  from  carbonic  acid.  Sulphuric  acid,  or  a  soluble  sul-
phate, when  added  to  a  solution  of  the  acetate  of  lead,  produces  instantly
a  precipitate  of  sulphate  of  lead,  the  acid  disengaging,  at  the  same  time,
acetic  vapors.  When  heated,  the  salt  fuses  in  its  water  of  crystalliza-
tion ;  at  a  heat  of  320°  its  whole  water,  with  a  small  proportion  of  its
acid,  is  speedily  discharged,  and  a  heavy  white  opake  mass  remains  ;  a
higher  heat  fuses  it  again,  decomposing  it,  and  disengaging  acetic  acid,
and  pyro-acetic  spirit  or  acetone  ;  a  still  higher  temperature  leaves  a
residue  of  charcoal  and  reduced  lead.  In  the  air-pump  vacuum,  and
with  the  aid  of  sulphuric  acid  or  quicklime  to  absorb  water  as  it  escapes,
the  acetate  of  lead  falls  into  a  white  powder,  which  is  completely  anhy-
drous. Acetate  of  lead  possesses  the  important  property  of  dissolving


744  Materia  Medica.

a  large  quantity  of  the  protoxide  of  lead.  It  consists  of  one  equi
valent  of  acetic  acid  51,  one  of  protoxide  of  lead,  111.6,  and  three
of  water  27=189.6  ;  its  formula  is  (Ci  Hs  03+PbO+3HO,  or  A+
PbO+3Aq.)

Acetate  of  lead  is  incompatible  with  all  acids,  and  with  those  soluble  salts
formed  from  them,  which  produce,  with  protoxide  of  lead,  insoluble,  or
sparingly  soluble  compounds.  Acids  of  this  character  are  the  sulphuric,
muriatic,  citric  and  tartaric.  It  is  also  decomposed  by  lime-water,  and
by  ammonia,  potassa,  and  soda  ;  the  two  last,  if  added  to  excess,  dis-
solving the  precipitate  at  first  formed.  It  is  decomposed  by  hard  water,
in  consequence  of  the  sulphate  of  lime  and  common  salt  which  such
water  usually  contains.  With  sulphureted  hydrogen,  it  gives  a  black
precipitate  of  sulphuret  of  lead  ;  with  iodide  of  potassium,  a  yellow  ore
of  iodide  of  lead  ;  and  with  carbonate  of  soda,  a  white  one  of  carbonate
of  lead.

Properties  and  Uses. — Acetate  of  lead  in  doses  of  from  one  to  three
grains,  repeated  every  two  or  three  hours,  is  a  powerful  astringent  and
sedative  ;  it  is  usually  given  in  pill  form.  In  large  doses  it  is  an  irritant
poison  ;  and  in  long  continued  small  doses  it  may  induce  the  peculiar
constitutional  action  of  the  preparations  of  lead.  Its  best  antidote  is  sul-
phate of  soda,  sulphate  of  magnesia,  or  phosphate  of  soda,  which  should
be  followed  by  emetics  if  necessary,  and  then  by  alternate  purgatives
and  opium.  Generally  an  overdose  is  followed  by  vomiting,  which  pre-
vents any  serious  injury,  and  as  long  as  the  bowels  are  kept  regular,  its
remote  constitutional  effects  are  less  apt  to  occur.  Large  doses,  even
two  hundred  and  forty  grains,  have  been  swallowed,  without  proving
fatal.  It  is  much  employed  internally  among  Allopathic  practitioners,
in  hemorrhages  from  the  lungs,  intestines,  and  uterus, — in  some  forms
of  diarrhea,  and  dysentery,  —  in  cholera  infantum  —  in  the  colliquative
diarrhea  of  phthisis  combined  with  opium  —  in  severe  mercurial  saliva-
tion, and  in  irritability  of  the  stomach  attending  certain  fevers.

It  is  never  used  internally  by  Eclectics,  but  is  occasionally  employed
externally,  in  solution,  in  cases  of  superficial  inflammations,  as  in  ery-
thema, erysipelas,  spreading  inflammation  of  the  subcutaneous  cellular
tissue,  and  in  many  cutaneous  diseases.  The  solution  may  be  made  by
dissolving  a  drachm  of  the  salt  in  five  or  eight  fluidounces  of  distilled
water,  to  which  a  fluidrachm  of  distilled  vinegar  may  be  added  to  prevent
the  oxide  from  being  thrown  down.  As  a  collyrium  the  usual  strength
is  one  or  two  grains  to  the  ounce  of  water.  In  inflammations  opium  is
often  conjoined  with  it,  four  grains  of  each  being  added  to  every  fluid-
ounce  of  water.  So  much  improvement  has  been  recently  made  in
Eclectic  practice,  that  we  believe  even  the  external  use  of  this  agent  can
be,  in  a  great  measure,  dispensed  with.

Off. Prep. — Lotio  Myrrhse  Composita.


Plumbi  Oxidum  Rubrum.  745

PLUMBI  OXIDUM  RUBRUM.
Red  Oxide  of  Lead.

Preparation. — Red  Oxide  of  Lead,  also  known  by  the  name  of  Red-
lead,  Minium,  etc.,  is  prepared  on  a  large  scale  by  tlie  manufacturing
chemists.  It  is  obtained  from  the  protoxide  of  lead,  [yellow  massicot,)
by  exposing  it,  under  the  access  of  air,  to  a  temperature  just  short  of
what  is  required  to  cause  fusion,  stirring  it  occasionally  for  a  day  and  a
half  or  upward,  and  allowing  the  product  to  cool  slowly.  The  French
prepare  it  in  tin  boxes,  closed  from  the  air,  and  heated  nearly  to  red-
ness, and  then  gradually  allowed  to  cool.  Red-lead,  to  be  of  good  qual-
ity, should  be  made  in  large  quantities  at  a  time,  and  should  be  allowed
to  cool  slowly;  this  is  important,  for,  as  the  absorption  of  oxygen,  by
which  it  is  formed,  takes  place  during  a  particular  interval  of  temperature
only,  it  is  necessary  that  the  heat  within  that  interval  should  be  main-
tained sufficiently  long  to  allow  all  the  protoxide  to  absorb  its  appro-
priate amount  of  oxygen.

History. — Read-lead  is  a  heavy,  scaly,  tasteless  powder,  of  a  bright
scarlet  color,  with  a  slight  tinge  of  orange.  Heat  renders  it  darker,  and
when  raised,  fuses  it,  with  the  disengagement  of  oxygen,  and  its  re-con-
version into  protoxide.  Its  specific  gravity  is  about  9.  It  is  insoluble
in  water.  Mitrous  acid  dissolves  it  entirely,  forming  nitrate  of  protoxide
of  lead  ;  because  the  excess  of  oxygen  in  red-lead  converts  the  nitrous
into  nitric  acid.  Diluted  nitric  acid  instantly  renders  it  dark-brown,
resolving  it  into  two  oxides,  one  of  them  the  protoxide,  which  is  dis-
solved, and  the  other  the  peroxide  or  binoxidc,  which  remains.  It  is
sometimes  adulterated  with  red  oxide  of  iron,  or  red-bole,  substances
which  may  be  detected  by  dissolving  the  suspected  red-lead  in  nitric
acid,  and  testing  with  tincture  of  galls.  This  reagent  will  produce  a
black  precipitate,  in  consequence  of  the  iron  present  in  the  substances
mentioned.  If  powdered  brick  be  present,  it  will  be  left  undissolved,
upon  treating  the  suspected  specimen  with  nitrous  acid,  which  dissolves
the  lead  and  leaves  the  impurity  ;  or  if  boiled  in  water  with  sugar,  and
a  small  quantity  of  nitric  acid,  a  similar  result  will  take  place.  When
free  from  impurities,  it  is  completely  reduced  on  charcoal,  by  means  of
the  blowpipe,  into  a  globule  of  metallic  lead.  When  treated  by  nitric
acid,  it  is  resolved  into  protoxide  which  dissolves,  and  peroxide  which
remains  insoluble.  Chemists  differ  as  to  the  constitution  of  red-lead  ;  it
is  generally  considered  to  consist  of  three  equivalents  of  lead  and  four
of  oxygen,  so  united  as  to  constitute  it  a  compound  of  two  equivalents
of  protoxide,  and  one  of  peroxide  or  plumbic  acid  (2PbO+PbO->)  that
is,  223.2  parts  of  the  former  oxide,  and  1 19.6  of  the  latter.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  only  purpose  for  which  this  article  is  used,
is  in  the  formation  of  plasters,  as  for  instance,  the  Black  Plaster,  or  Black


746  Materia  Medica.

Salve,  a  beautiful  and  efficacious  agent  in  cuts,  wounds,  ulcers,  some
cutaneous  affections,  etc.

Off.  Prep. — Emplastrum  Plumbi  Compositum ; Unguentum  Plumbi
Compositum.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

Mandrake.

Nat.  Ord. —  Berberidaceaj,  Brown;  Podophyllete,  Lindley.  Sex.  Syst. —
Polyandria  Monogynia.

THE RHIZOMA, OR ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  several  names  of  May-
apple,  Wild-lemon,  Raccoon-berry ,  Wild  Mandrake,  etc.  It  is  indigenous
and  herbaceous,  with  a  perennial,  smooth,  creeping,  jointed  root,  several
feet  in  length,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  brown  externally,
yellowish  within,  and  furnished  with  radicles  at  the  joints.  The  stem  is
simple,  erect,  round,  smooth,  about  a  foot  in  hight,  invested  at  its  base
by  the  sheaths  which  covered  it  when  in  bud,  and  divided  at  top  into
two  round  petioles  from  three  to  six  inches  long ;  each  petiole  supports
a  large,  peltate  palmate  leaf,  smooth  above,  slightly  pubescent  beneath,
deeply  divided  into  five,  six,  or  seven  lobes,  which  are  wedge-shaped,
two-parted,  yellowish-green  above,  paler  below,  and  irregularly  incised
at  their  extremities.  In  barren  stems  which  support  but  one  leaf,  the
peltate  character  is  the  most  perfect.  The  flower  is  solitary  in  the  fork
of  the  stem,  on  a  round  nodding  peduncle  one  or  two  inches  long,  white,
large,  about  two  inches  in  diameter,  and  somewhat  fragrant.  The  calyx
consists  of  three  oval,  obtuse,  concave,  deciduous  sepals,  which  cohere
in  the  bud  by  their  scarious  margins.  The  corolla  is  composed  of  from
six  to  nine  white,  obovate,  obtuse,  smooth,  concave  petals t  curiously
netted  with  delicate,  transparent  veins.  Stamens  from  nine  to  twenty,
shorter  than  the  petals,  curving  upward,  with  yellow,  oblong  anthers  of
twice  the  length  of  the  filaments,  and  not  opening  by  perfect  uplifted
valves.  Ovary  oval,  compressed,  obscurely  angular.  Stigma  subses-
sile,  convex,  its  surface  rendered  irregular  by  numerous  folds  and  con-
volutions. The  fruit  is  fleshy,  ovoid-oblong,  one-celled,  one  or  two
inches  in  length,  and  crowned  with  the  persistent  stigma ;  its  fleshy,
mucilaginous  pulp,  has  somewhat  the  flavor  of  a  strawberry,  and
contains  imbedded  in  it  about  twelve  ovate  seeds,  all  connected  to  the
lateral  receptacle  by  fibers.  When  ripe  the  fruit  is  of  a  lemon-yellow
color,  with  round,  brownish  spots.

History. — Mandrake  is  found  in  abundance  in  almost  all  parts  of  the
United  States,  in  damp  and  shady  woods,  and  sometimes  in  dry  and
exposed  situations.  It  flowers  in  May  and  June,  and  ripens  its  fruit  in
September,  at  which  time  the  leaves  wither  and  fall  off.  The  leaves  are
said  to  be  poisonous. The  fruit  has  a  subacid,  sweetish,  peculiar  taste,


Podophyllum  Peltatum.  747

is  edible,  and  slightly  aperient,  and  is  very  much  liked  by  some  persons,
but  extremely  disagreeable  to  others.  The  root,  which  is  the  officinal
part,  was  well  known  to  the  Indians  before  the  whites  settled  the  country,
and  was  one  of  their  most  active  purgatives ;  it  should  be  collected  for
medicinal  use  soon  after  the  ripening  of  the  fruit.  The  dried  root,  as
found  in  the  shops,  is  in  pieces  of  various  lengths,  about  two  or  three
lines  thick,  with  broad,  swelling,  flattened  joints  at  short  intervals,  longi-
tudinally corrugated,  blackish-brown,  or  reddish-brown  externally,  dirty
white  internally,  and  furnished  with  fibers  of  a  similar  color  to  that  of
the  rhizoma.  Its  fracture  is  short  and  irregular,  its  odor  faint  and
unpleasant,  very  similar  to  ipecacuanha,  and  its  taste  is  sweetish,  bitter,
and  slightly  acrid.  Its  active  principles  are  readily  taken  up  by  alcohol,
or  ether ;  water  takes  up  a  portion  of  its  activity.  Analysis  has  detected
in  this  root  gum,  albumen,  starch,  extractive,  lignin,  gallic  acid,  fixed
oil,  traces  of  volatile  oil,  salts  of  potassa  and  lime,  and  two  resinous
principles,  one  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,  and  the  other  soluble  in
alcohol  only.  Both  resins  are  purgative,  and  probably  compose  our
medicinal  podophyllin.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  entire  plant  in  its  recent  state  is  an  irritant
poison,  producing  vomiting,  hypercatharsis,  tormina,  stupor,  and  bloating
of  the  body ;  the  root,  recently  dried,  operates  as  a  drastic  cathartic  and
emetic,  when  given  in  large  doses  ;  but  the  violence  of  its  action  is
materially  modified  by  age,  or  roasting.  Mandrake  is  cathartic,  emetic,
alterative,  anthelmintic,  hydragogue,  and  sialagogue.  It  is  an  active
and  certain  cathartic,  being  equal,  if  not  superior  to  jalap,  though
operating  more  slowly.  When  given  in  combination  with  bitartrate  of
potassa,  it  induces  watery  stools,  on  which  account  it  has  been  found
serviceable  in  dropsical  affections.  As  a  deobstruent,  it  is  one  of  the
most  valuable  in  our  Materia  Medica,  acting  through  and  upon  all  the
tissues  of  the  system — and  its  action  continues  for  a  long  time.  Small
doses,  repeated  at  short  intervals,  to  fall  short  of  catharsis,  will  induce
ptyalism  with  many  persons.  In  bilious  and  typhoid  febrile  diseases,  it
is  very  valuable  as  a  cathartic,  or  emeto-cathartic,  often  breaking  up  the
disease  at  once.  Its  cathartic  operation  is  apt  to  be  slow,  sometimes
remaining  twenty-four  hours,  and  producing  considerable  distress,  which
is,  however,  more  than  compensated  for,  by  the  thorough  and  cleansing
manner  in  which  it  acts.  In  chronic  hepatitis,  there  is  not  its  superior
in  the  whole  range  of  medicines,  being  vastly  more  useful  than  mercurial
agents,  arousing  the  liver  to  a  healthy  action,  increasing  the  flow  of  bile,
and  keeping  up  these  actions  longer  than  any  other  agent  with  which
we  are  acquainted.  In  alterative  doses,  it  has  been  found  exceedingly
valuable  in  scrofula,  syphilitic  diseases,  rheumatism,  and  many  other
forms  of  chronic  disease.  In  constipation,  it  acts  upon  the  bowels,
without  disposing  them  to  subsequent  costiveness. It  has  likewise  been


748  Materia  Medica.

found  very  beneficial  in  dysmenorrhea,  amenorrhea,  incontinence  of
urine,  worms,  and  some  affections  of  the  bladder.  Dose  of  the  powdered
root,  as  a  cathartic,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains ;  of  the  tincture,  from  ten
to  sixty  drops  ;  as  a  sialagogue  and  alterative,  from  three  to  ten  grains
of  the  powder,  or  from  five  to  twenty  drops  of  the  tincture.  Since  the
preparation  of  the  podophyllin  by  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell,  the  crude  drug  is
seldom  employed.  The  Podophyllum  Montanum  of  Rafinesque,  having
a  slender,  deeply  furrowed  stem,  the  leaves  with  sharp,  bifid  segments,
palmate,  not  peltate,  with  narrow  sinuses,  and  many  unequal  teeth  ;  the
petals  six  to  seven,  oblong,  obtuse  ;  stamens  seven  to  nine,  and  berry
yellowish  oblong,  is  possessed  of  similar  medical  properties.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Podophylli ;  Emplastrum  Picis  Compositum;
Pilulae  Aloes  Compositee  ;  Tinctura  Podophylli.


PODOPHYLLIN.
The  Resinoid  or  Active  Principle  of  Mandrake.

Preparation. — This  is,  undoubtedly,  as  with  the  major  part  of  our
concentrated  preparations,  an  impure  resin.  It  may  be  prepared  by
adding  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  root  to  an  equal  quantity  of  water,
and  distilling  off  the  alcohol ;  the  resin  falls  to  the  bottom.  The  water
contains  the  gum,  mucilage,  extractive,  etc.  It  may  likewise  be  pre-
cipitated without  heat  by  adding  a  solution  of  alum  to  a  saturated
tincture  of  the  root,  but  by  this  process  all  the  resin  is  not  obtained.

I  am  indebted  to  the  Messrs.  F.  D.  Hill  &  Co.,  of  this  city,  for  the
following  process  of  manufacturing  podophyllin,  as  pursued  by  them ;
these  gentlemen,  in  common  with  all  true  Eclectics,  are  very  desirous
of  elevating  our  school  of  medicine  by  all  honorable  means,  and  one
among  these  means  is  opposition  to  all  secret  remedies  or  preparations;
and  for  the  prompt  and  cheerful  manner  in  which  they  have  furnished
any  information  requested  of  them,  they  deserve  the  thanks  of  the  pro-
fession. "  Exhaust  coarsely  powdered  mandrake  root  with  alcohol,  by
percolation.  Place  the  saturated  tincture  in  a  still,  and  distil  off  the
alcohol,  the  residue  will  be  a  dark  fluid  of  the  consistence  of  molasses ;
sometimes  it  is  thicker,  and  when  this  is  the  case  add  a  small  portion  of
it  to  some  water,  and  if  it  does  not  form  a  whitish  yellow  precipitate,  a
small  quantity  of  alcohol  must  be  added  to  it,  or  enough  to  cause  the
light  precipitate.  Then  warm  the  thick  residual  fluid,  and  slowly  pour
it  into  three  times  its  volume  of  cold  water,  which  must  be  constantly
agitated  during  the  process.  If  poured  in  too  fast,  or  without  agitation
the  fluid  will  fall  to  the  bottom  unchanged.  Allow  it  to  stand  for  twenty-
four  hours  ;  at  which  time  nearly  all  the  podophyllin  will  be  precipitated,
the  addition  of  a  sufficient  quantity  of  muriatic  acid  will  precipitate  the
remainder. The  precipitated  podophyllin,  of  a  whitish  yellow  color,  is


PODOPHTLLIN.  749

now  to  be  removed  and  placed  on  a  linen  filter,  and  washed  several
times  with  water,  to  remove  any  remaining  acid,  gum,  etc.;  after  which
it  is  to  be  placed  in  thin  layers  on  paper,  and  dried  in  a  room  of  a  tem-
perature between  65°  and  90°  F.,  or  if  in  summer  at  the  natural  atmos-
pheric temperature — it  becomes  a  shade  or  two  darker  by  drying  in  this
manner,  but  if  artificial  heat  be  employed  to  hasten  the  process,  or  of  a
higher  temperature,  the  resin  becomes  quite  dark."

This  valuable  agent  I  had  the  honor  of  introducing  to  the  profession
several  years  since.  In  1835  I  was  first  led  to  an  examination  of  the
resinous  principle  of  this  plant,  as  well  as  of  the  Iris,  Cimicifuga,  Ale-
tris,  and  several  other  plants,  in  consequence  of  some  information  given
to  me  by  Professor  Tully,  of  Yale  College,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  relative
to  the  resinous  constituent  of  the  Cimicifuga  Racemosa.  And  since
August,  1835,  I  have  prepared,  and  used,  more  or  less  in  my  practice,
in  the  treatment  of  various  forms  of  disease,  the  resins  of  Podophyllum,
Iris,  Cimicifuga,  Aletris,  and  several  other  medicinal  plants.  In  July,
1844,  I  first  called  public  attention  to  the  resins  of  Podophyllum  and
Iris,  in  the  New  York  Philosophical  Medical  Journal,  vol.  i,  No.  7,
pages  157-161,  in  which  I  recommended  the  mandrake  resin  in  combi-
nation with  an  alkali,  for  hepatic  diseases,  scrofula,  dropsy,  leucorrhea,
syphilis,  gonorrhea,  gleet,  obstructed  menstruation,  etc.,  but  of  which
it  appears  but  little  notice  was  taken  by  the  profession.  In  April,  1846,
I  again  called  the  attention  of  the  profession  to  this,  as  well  as  many
other  concentrated  preparations,  in  the  Western  Medical  Reformer,  vol.
v,  No.  12,  pages  175-178.  Now,  as  dates  are  the  only  reliable  source
of  correct  information  in  such  matters,  unless  some  one  can  show  an
earlier  notice  of  these  articles,  and  of  their  practical  utility,  than  the
above,  their  claims  will  naturally  be  considered  doubtful.  The  credit
of  first  preparing  podophyllin,  and  other  concentrated  preparations,  for
the  use  of  the  profession  generally,  it  being  part  of  his  avocation,
belongs  to  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell,  druggist  and  chemist,  of  Cincinnati,  who,
first  manufactured  it  in  June,  1847;  since  which  it  has  become  an  indis-
pensable and  highly  important  Eclectic  remedy ;  and  is  likewise  used  by
many  Allopathies  and  Homoeopathies,  and  by  the  former,  in  all  instances
where  they  have  employed  it,  is  preferred  to  mercurials.

Podophyllin  varies  in  color  according  to  its  mode  of  precipitation,
being  when  precipitated  by  heat,  dark-brown;  and  when  by  acid,  a  light
brownish-yellow,  or  greenish- olive  if  by  alum.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,
oil  of  turpentine,  dilute  nitric  acid,  and  dilute  alkalies.  It  appears  to
be  composed  of  two  resins,  both  of  which  are  purgative,  one  is  soluble
in  alcohol  only,  the  other  in  alcohol,  or  ether.  From  the  presence  of
gum,  or  perhaps  from  an  oxidation  of  the  resin  (an  example  of  which
may  be  witnessed  in  the  pine-gum),  soon  after  its  preparation,  a  portion
of  podophyllin  ceases  to  be  dissolved  by  alcohol.  It  has  no  alkaline  nor
acid  reaction,  but  forms  a  saponaceous  compound  with  the  alkalies.


750  Materia  Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — It  possesses  the  properties  of  the  root  in  a
superior  degree ;  from  four  to  eight  grains  operate  as  an  active  emeto-
cathartic,  with  griping,  nausea,  prostration,  and  watery  stools;  from
two  to  four  grains,  as  a  drastic  cathartic,  with  nausea  and  griping;  from
one  half  a  grain  to  two  grains,  generally  operates  as  an  active  cathartic,
leaving  the  bowels  in  a  soluble  condition ;  in  very  small  doses,  it  is
gently  aperient  and  alterative.  We  make  use  of  this  agent  in  those
cases  where  mercurials  are  used  by  a  certain  class  of  practitioners,  and
find  the  result  to  be  vastly  in  our  favor;  it  fulfills  all  the  indications  for
which  mercurials  are  recommended  and  used.  The  action  of  podo-
phyllin  is  very  much  increased  by  long  trituration,  with  four  or  five
times  its  weight  of  loaf  sugar,  or  sugar  of  milk  (lactin).  In  doses  of
half  a  grain,  or  a  grain,  it  is  one  of  our  most  valuable  cholagogue
cathartics,  operating  mildly  yet  effectually,  arousing  the  whole  biliary
and  digestive  apparatus  to  a  normal  action,  and  which  is  very  persistent
in  its  character.  It  likewise  exerts  a  favorable  influence  on  the  cuta-
neous functions,  producing  and  maintaining  a  constant  moisture  on  the
skin.  In  doses  of  from  one-eighth  to  one  half  of  a  grain,  or  rather  in
sufficient  doses  not  to  purge,  it  acts  as  a  powerful  alterative,  and  will
induce  ptyalism  in  some  persons,  and  is  very  useful  in  scrofulous  and
syphilitic  diseases,  hepatic  affections,  dysmenorrhea,  rheumatism,  gonor-
rhea, and  recent  disease  of  the  prostate.  It  produces  a  powerful  and
lasting  impression  upon  the  glandular  system  and  secretory  organs,
unequaled  by  any  other  article.  It  has  likewise  been  found  to  act  as  an
emmenagogue,  and  may  also  be  safely  and  beneficially  administered  in
jaundice,  dropsies,  dysentery,  diarrhea,  bilious  remittent  and  intermit-
tent fevers,  puerperal  fever,  typhoid  fever,  phrenitis,  and  all  glandular
enlargements;  and  in  congestive  fever  it  will  produce  evacuations  from
the  bowels,  when  mercurials  and  all  other  agents  fail.  There  is  not  a
better  cholagogue  preparation  known  in  medicine,  than  the  combination
of  podophyllin  and  leptandrin.  It  is  superior  to  mercurials  or  any  other
preparation  of  the  kind,  has  an  extensive  range  of  application,  combines
certainty  and  permanency  of  action,  and  is  less  liable  to  effect  harm,
even  in  the  hands  of  ignorant  or  injudicious  practitioners,  than  any  other
known  remedy  of  equal  power  and  energy.  In  urethral  stricture,  and
recent  disease  of  the  prostate,  the  following  pill  has  cured  several
cases :  Take  of  podophyllin  and  iridin  of  each  four  grains,  alcoholic
extract  of  belladona,  five  grains,  strychnia,  a  grain  or  a  grain  and  a
half,  conserve  of  roses  a  sufficient  quantity  to  make  a  pill  mass.  Divide
into  twenty  pills,  of  which,  one  may  be  given  for  a  dose,  and  repeated
three  times  a  day,  using  in  combination  with  it,  active  diuretic  infusions.
Podophyllin  should  never  be  given,  except  in  very  fine  powder,  or
which  is  still  better,  thoroughly  triturated  with  loaf  sugar,  sugar  of
milk,  ginger,  or  some  soluble  extract.  Five  grains  well  triturated  with
sugar  of  milk,  will  make  ten  or  fifteen  active  cathartic  doses. When


PODOPHYLLIN.  751

used  alone  it  is  very  apt  to  produce  irritation  and  pain  of  the  stomach,
but  castile  soap,  alkalies,  or  ginger  added  to  it  deprives  it  of  most  of
its  irritating  and  nauseating  tendency  and  disposition  to  gripe.  Caulo-
phyllin  combined  with  it,  materially  lessens  its  painful  and  disagreeable
effects.  Care  should  always  be  taken  to  proportion  the  dose  of  podo-
phyllin  to  the  susceptibilities  and  condition  of  the  patient,  as  in  some
cases  half  a  grain  will  prove  a  vigorous  emeto-cathartic,  while  in  others
it  would  require  twice  that  amount.  When  it  operates  too  actively,  the
administration  of  alkaline  solutions  with  aromatics  internally,  and  in
severe  cases  by  enema,  will  check  it.

Professor  R.  S.  Newton  observes,  that,  "administered  in  one-fourth
or  half  grain  doses,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  and  continued  for  several
days,  it  produces  an  entire  change  of  the  secretions  throughout  the
system,  especially  that  of  the  liver,  producing  free  and  copious  bilious
discharges."  He  has  used  it  extensively,  alone  and  in  combination
with  leptandrin  and  cimicifugin.

An  Eclectic  physician  says  of  this  resinoid : — "As  a  cholagogue
cathartic,  it  probably  has  no  equal  in  the  Materia  Medica.  Its  operation
is  slow,  mild  and  certain.  It  produces  a  specific  action  on  the  liver,
arousing  it  to  action,  and  producing  free  'bilious  evacuations,'  rather  of
a  hydragogue  character,  but  is  not  liable  to  produce  intestinal  irritation,
unless  given  in  unnecessarily  large  doses.  It  usually  takes  from  six  to
eight  hours  for  it  to  operate  as  a  cathartic,  unless  combined  with  cream
of  tartar,  or  some  other  article  by  which  its  action  will  be  hastened.
As  a  cathartic  in  all  biliary  derangements  not  attended  by  intestinal
irritation,  it  is  a  superior  remedy.  In  bilious  fevers,  either  remittent  or
intermittent,  as  well  as  in  acute  hepatitis  or  bilious-pneumonia,  it  not
unfrequently  arrests  the  disease  at  the  first  prescription  if  given  in  a
proper  manner,  or  it  so  far  modifies  the  attack  that  the  case  becomes
mild  and  manageable.  In  chronic  hepatic  derangements,  with  dyspepsia,
it  is  a  most  valuable  remedy.  Its  range  of  application  is  perhaps  more
extensive  than  any  other  cathartic  medicine,  except  what  is  claimed  by
the  old  school  for  mercury.  The  Podophyllin  is  a  regulator  of  all  the
secretions  as  far  as  any  one  remedy  can  be.  It  is  indicated  in  all  cases
where  according  to  'the  books,'  mercury  is  indicated,  and  while  in  any
and  every  case  it  will  do  all  the  good  that  mercury  can  be  presumed  to
do,  it  is  entirely  free  from  any  of  the  objections  to  that  article.  The  dose
varies  from  one-fourth  to  one-half  a  grain,  repeated  once  in  two  or  three
hours.  The  best  mode  of  using  it  is,  to  triturate  it  thoroughly  with  ten
times  its  weight  of  pure  white  sugar,  or  sugar  of  milk,  and  give  from
one  to  five  grains  of  the  trituration  at  a  dose  once  in  two  or  three  hours,'
until  the  proper  effect  is  produced.  It  will  usually  operate  in  about  six
hours,  sometimes  in  less.  If  it  is  desirable  to  have  an  operation  sooner,
add  twenty  or  thirty  grains  of  cream  of  tartar  and  one-fourth  of  a  grain
of  capsicum  to  each  dose. This  is  not  apt  to  nauseate  when  first  given,


752  Materia Medica.

but  if  the  stomach  be  much  deranged  or  'bilious,'  it  will  be  pretty  sure
to  vomit,  though  not  excessively,  about  the  time  its  cathartic  effect  com-
mences. If  given  alone,  however,  it  is  quite  sure  to  operate  as  an
emeto-cathartic,  unless  the  doses  be  very  small,  and  the  intervals
between  them  longer  than  three  hours.  As  an  aperient  or  alterative,
from  one-sixth  to  one-fourth  of  a  grain  given  evening  and  morning,  or
three  times  a  day  will  generally  be  sufficient.  It  is  better,  however,  in
all  cases  to  triturate  it  as  before  directed,  and  give  the  dose  accordingly.
A  combination  of  one  part  Podophyllin  and  ten  parts  Leptandrin  tritu-
rated with  ten  parts  of  sugar,  is  an  excellent  alterative  in  dyspepsia,
hepatitis,  etc.  As  a  remedy  in  puerperal  fever,  I  consider  the  Podo-
doses  with  half  a  drachm  of  cream  of  tartar,  to  be  repeated  every  two
hours  until  it  produces  free  purging,  and  in  no  instance  have  I  had  any
trouble  with  the  case  after  its  operation."

The  late  Prof.  T.  V.  Morrow  makes  the  following  remarks: — "Per-
haps no  medicine  has  been  introduced  to  the  notice  of  the  medical
profession,  for  the  last  one  hundred  years,  which  promises  to  be  of  so
much  value  as  the  Podophyllin.  An  experience  somewhat  extensive
in  the  use  of  this  agent  in  the  treatment  of  a  great  variety  of  cases  of
disease,  during  the  last  six  months,  has  fully  convinced  the  writer  of
its  immense  value  as  a  remedial  agent,  more  especially  as  a  purgative
and  alterative.  To  prepare  it  properly  for  use,  it  should  be  finely  pulver-
ized, and  given  in  doses  of  from  one  and  a  half  to  three  grains,  to  an
adult,  mixed  in  a  little  simple  syrup  or  sweetened  water — say  in  one-half
a  tablespoonful  or  about  two  teaspoonfuls.  In  doses  of  this  size  it  will
operate  with  great  efficiency  and  certainty  as  a  purgative,  in  from  four
to  eight  hours,  producing  several  pretty  copious  and  moderately  consis-
tent discharges,  which  are  very  frequently  charged  to  a  considerable
extent  with  bile.  In  some  instances  a  longer  period  will  elapse  before  its
operation  will  commence,  and  in  nearly  every  case  it  leaves  the  bowels
in  a  gently  lax  condition,  perhaps  for  two  or  three  days  after  its  opera-
tion is  over.  It  operates  with  much  energy  and  efficiency,  without
harshness,  seldom  producing  griping;  but  it  occasionally  produces
nausea,  and,  in  full  doses,  may  cause  vomiting,  but  in  small  doses,
seldom  produces  these  effects.  Some  practitioners,  who  have  used  the
Podophyllin,  say  it  will  operate  quite  satisfactorily  as  a  purgative,  in
doses  of  one  grain.  This  is  one  of  the  cathartics  which,  during  its  ope-
ration, seems  to  exercise  a  powerfully  controlling  influence  over  the
condition  of  the  cutaneous  tissue,  as  well  as  the  action  of  the  heart  and
arteries,  producing,  in  many  instances,  a  moderately  copious  perspira-
tion, which  often  continues,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  during  the  whole
period  of  its  operation.  This  is  more  especially  true  when  it  causes
nausea  and  vomiting.  But  when  these  effects  do  take  place  the  patients
never  experience  that  death-like  and  powerful  depressing  sickness,  which


PODOPHYLLIN.  753

not  unfrequently  results  from  the  operation  of  the  powdered  root  of  the
Podophyllum  Peltatum,  when  given  in  full  doses.  I  have  found  the
Podophyllin  quite  a  popular  and  convenient  purgative,  the  dose  being
so  remarkably  small  that  no  one  objects  to  taking  it  on  account  of  its
unpleasant  and  inconvenient  size.

In  the  treatment  of  the  various  kinds  of  intermittent,  remittent,  and
continued  forms  of  fever,  I  have  had  frequent  opportunities  to  test  its
value,  during  the  past  summer  and  fall.  With  one  single  dose,  of  from
two  to  three  grains,  of  this  medicine,  I  have  frequently  arrested  the
progress  of  a  severe  attack  of  bilious  remittent  fever,  requiring  nothing
further  to  complete  the  cure,  except  some  gentle  tonic  and  restorative
medicine,  and  a  proper  avoidance  of  the  exciting  causes.  The  same
remarks  apply  with  equal  truth  to  the  intermitting  forms  of  fever,  as
well  as  to  some  of  the  continued.  In  every  variety  of  case,  which  is
characterized  by  much  hepatic  torpor  and  congestion  of  the  portal  circle,
it  has  manifested  a  superior  controlling  power,  appearing  to  arouse  the
torpid  energies  of  the  liver,  and  restoring  very  promptly  its  lost  functions.

But  in  no  class  of  cases  has  this  medicine  manifested  a  higher  degree
of  value,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  observe  its  effects,  than  in  those
cases  marked  by  strong  determination  of  blood  to  the  brain,  producing
either  congestion  or  incipient  inflammation  of  that  organ.  In  several
cases  of  this  description,  in  the  treatment  of  which  I  have  witnessed  its
effects,  I  was  agreeably  surprised  to  find  every  trace  of  congestion  eradi-
cated by  one  or  two  thorough  operations  of  this  article.  It  seemed  to
exercise  a  more  completely  controlling  influence  over  this  pathological
condition  than  any  medicine  I  have  ever  known  used  for  the  same  pur-
pose. Of  course,  in  these  cases  it  was  used  in  moderately  full  doses,
and  its  operations  continued  for  a  considerable  length  of  time.  In  cases
of  puerperal  fever,  in  their  incipient  stage,  it  has  manifested  itself  as  a
medicine  of  superior  value,  arresting  them  at  once,  when  administered
in  full  doses,  and  even  as  a  common  purgative  dose  after  confinement,
no  medicine  has  exercised  a  happier  influence.  I  have  availed  myself
of  its  use  under  these  circumstances,  in  numerous  instances,  with  the
most  beneficial  and  satisfactory  results.  In  a  case  of  dropsy  of  the
serous  cavities,  as  well  as  cellular  texture  of  the  whole  body,  the  Podo-
phyllin was  administered  in  doses  of  one-half  a  grain,  in  conjunction
with  half  a  teaspoonful  of  Cremor  Tartar,  every  two  hours,  until  it
produced  a  half  dozen  or  more  copious  watery  discharges  from  the
bowels,  and  repeated  in  two  or  three  days  afterward,  till  the  same
effects  took  place,  it  soon  relieved  the  patient  completely  of  the  dropsi-
cal effusion ! !  From  its  effects  in  this  case  I  should  be  led  to  entertain
a  favorable  opinion  of  its  powers  in  all  cases  of  dropsy.

I  have  used  the  Podophyllin  in  numerous  cases  of  cholera  infantum,
and  other  attacks  of  summer-complaint  in  children,  with  very  satisfac-
tory results.  In  these  cases,  however,  it  was  given  in  very  small  doses.
48


754  Materia  Medica.

To  a  child  three  years  old,  it  was  given  in  doses  of  from  one-fourth  to  a
half  of  a  grain,  once  in  six  or  eight  hours  for  thirty-six  to  forty-eight
hours,  and  it  scarcely  ever  failed  to  afford  decided  advantage,  more
especially  in  those  cases  in  which  there  was  frequent  hepatic  torpor,  in
connection  with  a  determination  of  blood  to  the  head.  The  results  of
my  experience  in  the  use  of  this  article  as  a  remedial  agent,  on  the
whole,  are  such  as  to  leave  no  doubt  on  my  mind  that  it  is  destined  soon
to  occupy  a  conspicuous  place  among  the  most  valuable  remedies  of  the
Materia  Medica,  with  a  very  extended  range  of  application  in  the  treat-
ment of  disease.  As  an  alterative,  it  has  demonstrated  its  value  beyond
all  doubt,  in  numerous  cases  in  which  it  has  been  used  during  the  past
summer  and  fall,  especially  in  that  class  of  cases  in  the  treatment  of
which  the  routine  practitioners  of  the  orthodox  school  regard  the  mer-
curial preparations  as  of  indispensable  importance.  Indeed,  it  promises
to  be  more  than  a  substitute  for  the  mercurials,  in  all  those  cases  in
which  these  medicines  have  proved  of  any  substantial  value,  without
their  liability  to  produce  injurious  effects  on  the  constitution  of  patients."
Off.  Prep. — Pilulae  Baptisise  Compositse;  Pilulae  Copaibaa  Compositse;
Pilulae  Ferri  Compositse ;  Pilulae  Leptandrini  Compositae ;  Pilulse  Podo-
phyllum Compositee;  Pulvis  Leptandrini  Compositus;  Pulvis  Podophyl-
lini  Compositus.

POLEMONIUM REPTANS.

American  Greek- Valerian.

Nat. Ord. — Polemoniacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  perennial  plant,  sometimes  known
as  Blue  Bells,  Jacob's  Ladder,  etc.  It  has  a  creeping  root,  and  a  smooth,
erect,  weak,  fleshy,  diffusely-branched  stem  from  twelve  to  twenty  inches
high.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  and  pinnately  divided ;  the  leaflets  from
seven  to  eleven,  ovate-lanceolate,  acute,  subopposite,  smooth,  entire,
sessile,  an  inch  long  and  half  as  wide ;  the  upper  leaflets  are  sometimes
confluent.  The  flowers  are  numerous,  terminal,  rather  large,  nodding,
on  short  petioles,  blue,  and  nearly  bractless.  The  calyx  is  campanulate,
five-cleft;  the  segments  lanceolate-acute,  persistent,  much  shorter  than
the  tube  of  the  corolla.  The  corolla,  is  rotate-campanulate,  limb  five-
lobed,  erect,  tube  short,  closed  at  the  base  by  five  stamcniferous  valves.
Stamens  five,  equally  inserted  at  the  summit  of  the  corolla-tube ;  fila-
m,ents  slender,  declined,  hairy-appendaged  at  the  base ;  anthers  introrse.
Capsules  three-celled,  three-valved ;  cells  two  to  three-seeded.

History. — This  is  a  handsome  plant,  growing  in  woods,  damp  grounds,
and  along  shady  river  banks,  from  New  York  to  Wisconsin,  bearing  blue
flowers  in  May. The  root  is  the  part  used,  and  yields  its  virtues  to


Polygala  Rubella.  755

water ;  it  has  not  been  analyzed.  The  Polemonium  Coeruleum,  or  Greek-
Valerian,  is  a  native  of  England.  It  is  larger  and  more  numerously-
flowered  than  the  above,  and  is  often  found  cultivated  in  gardens.  The
stems  are  about  two  feet  high,  stout,  hollow,  several  from  the  same  root,
each  dividing  at  top  into  a  corymbose  panicle.  The  leaves  are  mostly
radical,  on  long,  grooved  petioles,  pinnately  eleven  to  seventeen  foliate ;
segments  sessile,  ovate-lanceolate,  subopposite,  acuminate,  oblique,  odd
one  lanceolate.  Flowers  blue,  terminal,  suberect.  This  plant,  probably,
possesses  medicinal  virtues  similar  to  the  one  above.

Properties  and  Uses. — Alterative,  diaphoretic,  and  astringent.  A
warm  infusion  of  the  root  will,  it  is  said,  produce  copious  perspiration,
and  has  been  found  serviceable  in  pleurisy,  febrile  and  inflammatory
diseases.  The  tincture,  made  of  whisky,  in  doses  of  from  one  to  two
fiuidounces,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  has  been  found  valuable  in  all
scrofulous  diseases,  and  other  chronic  diseases  where  an  alterative  is
indicated.  The  infusion  is  recommended  in  bites  of  venomous  snakes
and  insects,  and  in  bowel  complaints  requiring  the  use  of  astringents.
Reported  to  have  cured  consumption.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Polemonii.


POLYGALA RUBELLA.

Bitter  Polygala.
Nat.  Ord. — Polygalaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Octandria.

THE ROOT AND HERB.

Description.  —  This  is  the  Polygala  Polygama  of  Walter.  It  is  an
indigenous  herb,  with  a  perennial,  branched,  and  somewhat  fusiform
root.  The  stems  are  simple,  crowded,  many  from  the  same  root,  angular,
smooth,  and  erect,  growing  from  six  to  twelve  feet  high.  The  leaves'
are  linear,  oblong,  mucronate,  smooth,  alternate  below;  linear-lanceo-
late, obtuse,  sessile  above.  The  flowers  are  crested,  purple,  and  in
terminal  or  lateral  racemes;  the  former  are  spike-form,  loose,  with  the
flowers  perfect  and  winged ;  the  latter  are  leafless,  prostrate  or  subterra-
neous, wingless,  and  nearly  apetalous.  Wing  of  the  calyx  broadly
obovate,  and  longer  than  the  crested  corolla.  Anthers  eight,  in  two
equal  parcels.  Brads  small,  subulate,  caducous.  Lobes  of  the  caruncle
two,  scale-like,  shorter  than  the  seed.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  many  parts  of  the  United  States,
usually  growing  in  arid,  sandy  or  gravelly  soils,  and  flowering  in  July
and  August.  The  whole  plant  is  officinal ;  it  is  inodorous,  with  a  per-
sistent and  powerfully  bitter  taste,  which  is  imparted  to  water  or  alcohol.
It  has  not  been  analyzed.  The  Polygala  Amara  and  the  Polygala
Pavcifolia,  or  Fringed  Polygala,  possess  similar  properties,  and  may  be
employed  as  substitutes ;  the  root  of  the  latter  has  a  sweet,  pungent,
aromatic  taste,  resembling  somewhat  that  of  Gaultheria.


756  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  In  small  doses  a  bitter  tonic ;  in  large  ones
laxative  and  diaphoretic.  An  infusion  has  been  found  beneficial  as  a
tonic  in  debility  of  the  digestive  organs.  It  may  be  used  in  all  cases
where  a  bitter  tonic  is  indicated.


POLYGALA SENEGA.

Seneka.

Nat.  Qrd. — Polygalacese. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Octandria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Seneka  is  an  indigenous  plant,  with  a  ligneous,  contorted,
branching  and  perennial  root,  which  sends  up  annually  several  erect,
simple,  round,  somewhat  terete,  leafy  stems,  from  eight  to  fourteen
inches  in  hight,  brownish-red  below,  and  green  above.  The  leaves  are
alternate  or  scattered,  nearly  or  quite  sessile,  lanceolate,  acuminate,
bright-green  above,  paler  beneath,  with  scabrous  margins,  from  one  to
three  inches  long,  and  about  one-third  as  wide.  The  flowers  are  small,
white,  slightly  crested,  on  very  small  pedicels,  and  arranged  in  a  some-
what dense,  terminal,  spike-form,  filiform  raceme,  from  one  to  three
inches  in  length.  The  calyx  is  five-leaved,  with  two  leaflets  wing-
shaped,  larger  than  the  petals,  round-obovate,  concave,  white,  and
slightly  veined.  The  corolla  is  small,  closed,  having  two  obtuse  lateral
segments,  and  a  short-crested  extremity.  The  style  is  short,  somewhat
rostrate.  The  capsules  are  small,  obcordate,  invested  by  the  persistent
calyx,  compressed,  two-celled,  two-valved.  Seeds  two,  oblong-ovate,
acute  at  one  end,  slightly  hairy,  curved,  blackish,  with  a  longitudinal,
bifid,  white  strophiola  on  the  concave  side.  The  spike  opens  slowly,  so
that  the  lower  flowers  are  in  fruit  while  the  upper  ones  are  in  blossom.

History. — Seneka,  or  Seneca  Snake-root,  as  it  is  usually  called,  is  found
in  various  parts  of  the  United  States  in  woods,  and  on  hill-sides,  flower-
ing from  June  to  August.  It  is  found  in  the  greatest  abundance  in  the
Southern  and  Western  States,  and  is  rare  in  the  Eastern.  The  dried
root,  which  is  the  officinal  part,  is  of  various  sizes,  being  from  two  to  five
or  six  lines  in  diameter ;  it  presents  a  tuberous  head,  with  the  remains
of  the  stems,  below  which  is  the  tapering,  branched,  twisted  root,  often
surrounded  by  ringed  protuberances,  and  carinated  along  its  whole  length.
The  epidermis  is  corrugated,  transversely  cracked,  of  a  yellowish-brown
color  in  the  young  roots,  and  brownish-gray  in  the  old ;  the  cortical
portion  is  thick,  hard,  and  resinous,  and  contains  the  active  principles  of
the  root;  the  central  part  is  ligneous,  white,  inert,  and  should  be  rejected
in  the  preparation  of  the  powder.  When  fresh,  it  has  a  strong,  peculiar,
nauseous  odor,  which  is  scarcely  perceptible  in  the  dried  root ;  its  taste
is  at  first  mucilaginous  and  somewhat  sweetish,  followed  by  pungency,
acridity,  irritation  of  the  fauces,  and  a  flow  of  saliva. It  imparts  its


Polygala  Senega.  757

virtues  to  water  or  alcohol ;  diluted  alcohol  is  its  best  solvent.  The
infusion  is  stronger  than  the  decoction,  and  should  be  prepared  by  dis-
placement in  water  not  exceeding  104°  F.  in  temperature.  Too  high  a
temperature  renders  a  portion  of  the  acrid  principle  insoluble  in  water,
by  causing  it  to  unite  with  the  coloring  matter  and  coagulated  albumen
of  the  root.  It  has  been  analyzed  by  several  chemists,  and  with  vari-
able results  ;  according  to  the  most  recent  investigations  by  M.  Quevenne,
it  contains  a  peculiar  acrid  principle,  named  Polygalic  Acid ;  a  bitter,
yellow  coloring  matter,  nearly  insoluble  in  water,  but  soluble  in  ether  or
alcohol;  a  volatile  principle,  named  Virgineic  Acid;  pectic  acid  or  pectin;
tannic  acid  of  that  variety  which  precipitates  iron  green  ;  gum ;  albu-
men ;  cerin  ;  fixed  oil ;  woody  fiber ;  and  various  saline  and  earthy
substances.  The  polygalic  acid  has  been  variously  called  Polygalin  and
Senegin ;  it  contains  no  azote ;  is  closely  analogous  to  saponin,  and  is
probably  the  active  principle  of  the  root.  It  may  be  obtained  by  the
following  process  of  Quevenne :  Exhaust  powdered  seneka  by  alcohol
of  33°,  and  distil  off  sufficient  alcohol  from  the  tincture  to  reduce  it  to
the  consistence  of  syrup ;  treat  this  with  ether  to  remove  the  fatty  mat-
ter, and  allow  the  liquid  to  stand.  It  deposits  a  precipitate  which  is
separated  by  filtration,  and  is  then  mixed  with  water.  To  the  turbid
solution  thus  formed  alcohol  is  added,  which  facilitates  the  production
of  a  white  precipitate,  consisting  chiefly  of  polygalic  acid.  The  liquid
is  allowed  to  stand  for  several  days  that  the  precipitate  may  be  fully
formed.  The  supernatant  liquid  being  decanted,  the  precipitate  is
drained  upon  a  filter,  and  being  removed  while  yet  moist,  is  dissolved
by  the  aid  of  heat  in  alcohol  of  36°.  The  solution  is  boiled  with  puri-
fied animal  charcoal,  and  filtered  while  hot.  Upon  cooling  it  deposits
pure  polygalic  acid.  It  is  a  white  inodorous  powder,  of  a  slight  taste  at
first,  but  soon  followed  by  pungency,  acridity,  and  pain  in  the  fauces.
It  is  permanent,  unalterable  in  the  air,  inflammable,  slowly  soluble  in
cold,  but  rapidly  so  in  hot  water,  soluble  in  boiling  absolute  alcohol,
which  deposits  it  on  cooling,  insoluble  in  ether,  the  fixed  and  volatile
oils,  neutralizes  the  alkalies,  and  reddens  litmus  paper.  It  consists  of
carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen.

The  Polygala  Sanguinea,  or  Caducous  Polygala,  and  the  Polygala
Chamozbuxus,  possess  similar  properties  with  the  Seneka,  and  may  be
used  as  a  substitute.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  seneka  is  emetic  and  cathartic ;
in  ordinary  doses  it  stimulates  most  of  the  secretions,  acting  especially
as  a  sialagogue,  expectorant,  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  and  emmenagogue.
It  is  chiefly  employed  on  account  of  its  expectorant  virtues,  and  is  much
used  in  chronic  catarrh,  and  protracted  pneumonia,  also  in  humoral
asthma,  and  in  the  secondary  stages  of  croup.  In  active  inflammation
its  use  is  contra-indicated. In  relaxed  sore-throat  it  is  recommended  as


758  Materia Medica.

a  local  stimulant ;  also  as  a  diaphoretico-diuretic  in  rheumatism,  and  as
an  emmenagogue  in  amenorrhea.  Dose  of  the  powdered  root,  from  ten
to  twenty  grains  ;  of  the  infusion  or  syrup,  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  two
fluidounces.  The  extract  prepared  from  an  infusion  of  the  root,  obtained
by  percolation,  and  evaporated  to  the  proper  consistence  by  means  of  a
water-bath,  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  one  to  three  grains.  Poly-
galic  acid  may  be  given  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  root,  in  doses  of
from  one-fourth  to  one-half  of  a  grain,  dissolved  in  hot  water,  with  the
addition  of  gum  and  sugar.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Senegae ;  Tinctura  Laricis  Composita.


POLYGONUM  PUNCTATUM.

Water Pepper.

Nat.  Ord.— Polygonaceae. Sex.  Syst.— Octandria  Trigynia.

THE WHOLE HERB.

Description.  — This  plant,  sometimes  called  Smart-weed,  is  the  Poly-
gonum Hydropiper  of  Michaux.  It  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  smooth
stem,  branched,  often  decumbent  at  base,  slender,  jointed,  swelling  above
the  joints,  of  a  reddish  or  greenish-brown  color,  sprinkled  with  glandu-
lar dots,  and  from  one  to  two  feet  in  hight.  The  root  is  white,  whorled,
and  fibrous.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  lanceolate,  petiolate,  punctate
with  pellucid  dots,  wavy  and  scabrous  on  the  margin,  two  or  three
inches  long,  and  not  more  than  one-fifth  as  wide  ;  the  petioles  are  sheath-
ing, inflated,  fringed.  The  flowers  are  small,  greenish-white  or  purple,
and  are  disposed  in  slender,  loose,  interrupted,  drooping,  but  finally
erect  spikes  or  racemes ;  bracts  remotely  alternate.  The  calyx  is  four  or
five  cleft,  and  covered  with  glandular  dots.  Stamens  six  to  eight;  styles
two  to  three,  united  at  the  base  and  half  way  up.  Fruit  either  lenticular
or  three-sided,  opake,  roughish. Seed  one.

History. — Polygonum  Punctatum,  is  a  well  known,  intensely  acrid
plant,  found  growing  in  nearly  all  parts  of  the  United  States  in  ditches,
low  grounds,  among  rubbish,  and  about  brooks  and  water-courses,  flow-
ering in  August  and  September.  There  are  many  species  of  Polygonum,
but  which,  although  possessing  similar  virtues,  yet  differ  materially  in
their  medical  potency.  The  whole  plant  is  officinal,  and  has  a  biting,
pungent,  acrid  taste,  and  imparts  its  virtues  to  alcohol  or  water.  Age
renders  it  inert,  and  heat  impairs  its  medical  qualities.  It  should  be
collected  and  made  into  a  tincture  while  fresh.  The  plant  has  not  been
analyzed.

The  Polygonum  Persicaria,  called  Ladies'  Thumb,  or  Spotted  Knot-
weed,  possesses  similar  but  inferior  medicinal  properties,  and  may  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  above  by  the  deeper  green  or  purplish  color  of  the


Polygonum  Punctatum.  759

whole  plant,  a  brownish,  heart-shaped  spot  near  the  center  of  the  leaf,
and  its  rose-colored  flowers,  in  short,  dense,  terminal  spikes.  It  has  a
feebly  astringent  saline  taste,  and  at  one  time  was  considered  antiseptic.

Properties  and  Uses. — Water-pepper  is  stimulant,  diuretic,  emmena-
gogue,  antiseptic,  diaphoretic  and  vesicant.  Highly  recommended  in
amenorrhea,  in  doses  of  one  fluidrachm  of  the  saturated  tincture,  two
or  three  times  a  day,  or  from  four  to  six  grains  of  the  extract.  The  infu-
sion in  cold  water  has  been  found  serviceable  in  gravel,  colds  and  coughs,
and  mixed  with  wheat-bran  in  bowel  complaints.  In  Asiatic  cholera,
the  patients  wrapped  in  a  sheet  moistened  with  a  hot  decoction,  are  said
to  have  been  much  benefited,  and  recovered.  In  combination  with  sul-
phate of  iron  and  gum  myrrh,  it  is  said  to  have  cured  epilepsy — proba-
bly dependent  on  some  uterine  derangement.  Externally,  used  as  fomen-
tation, in  gangrene,  simmered  in  water  and  vinegar ;  the  infusion  or  a
fomentation  of  the  leaves  has  been  beneficially  applied  in  chronic  ulcers,
and  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  also  as  a  wash  in  chronic  erysipelatous  inflam-
mations, as  a  fomentation  in  tympanitis  and  flatulent  colic.  The  fresh
leaves  bruised  with  the  leaves  of  Mayweed,  and  moistened,  with  oil  of
turpentine,  and  applied  to  the  skin,  will  speedily  vesicate.  The  ashes
of  the  plant  combined  with  the  ashes  of  the  garden  Thyme,  Thymus  Vul-
garis, are,  it  is  said,  used  by  many  empirics  as  a  solvent  for  gravel  and
stone,  injected,  in  solution,  into  the  bladder :  hazardous  and  doubtful
treatment.  The  infusion  in  cold  water,  forms  an  excellent  local  application
in  the  sore-mouth  of  nursing  women,  and  in  mercurial  salivation.  The
decoction,  or  infusion  in  hot  water,  is  not  so  active  as  when  prepared  in
cold  or  warm  water.  Dose  of  the  infusion,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces ;
of  the  saturated  tincture,  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms  three  or  four  times
a  day  —  it  is  said  to  cause  a  warmth  and  peculiar  tingling  sensation
throughout  the  system,  with  slight  aching  pains  in  the  hips  and  loins,
and  a  sense  of  weight  and  tension  within  the  pelvis.

The  Polygonum  Arifolium,  Sickle-  Grass,  Halbert-lea,ved  Tear-thumb,
or  Hastate  Knot  Grass,  has  a  grooved,  angled,  prostrate,  aculeate  stem,
with  reversed  prickles,  and  growing  from  two  to  four  feet  in  length.
The  leaves  are  halbert-shaped,  taper-pointed,  long-petioled,  from  two  to
four  inches  long,  and  about  one-half  as  wide  ;  the  petioles  are  from  half
an  inch  to  an  inch  long.  The  flowers  are  few,  distinct,  reddish-white,
and  are  disposed  in  loose,  slender,  terminal,  racemose  clusters  ;  peduncles
glandular-bristly ;  calyx  often  four-parted,  closed ;  stamens  six  ;  styles
two,  very  short ;  fruit  lenticular,  large.  It  grows  in  low  and  wet
grounds  throughout  the  United  States,  flowering  from  June  to  September.
An  infusion  of  this  plant  in  cold  water  is  a  powerful  diuretic,  useful  in
gravel,  strangury,  gonorrhea,  and  all  urinary  affections  ;  it  must  be
drank  freely.

Polygonum  Fagopyrum,  or  common  Buckwheat,  may  be  used  as  fol-
lows to  recall  the  flow  of  milk  in  the  breasts of  nurses,  where  it  has


760  Materia Medica.

disappeared  for  several  days  :  Stir  in  any  quantity  of  buckwheat  flower,
a  sufficient  quantity  of  buttermilk  to  form  a  poultice  ;  warm  it,  but  be
careful  not  to  boil  or  make  it  hot.  Apply  it  thus  warm,  over  tbe  whole
breast  and  renew  it  every  four  or  six  hours.  Sometimes  it  requires  to
be  thus  used  for  three  or  four  days  before  its  effects  are  produced ;
usually,  however,  twenty-four  hours  are  sufficient.

Off.  Prep.  —  Infusum  Polygoni  ;  Extractum  Polygoni ;  Extractum
Polygoni  Fluidum ;  Pilulae  Polygoni  Compositae  ;  Tinctura  Caulophylli
Composita ;  Tinctura  Polygoni.

t

POLYPODIUM  VULGATE.

Common  Polypody.

Nat.  Ord. —  Filices,  Jussieu;  Pilicales,  Lindley  ;  Polypodiaceas,  Brown.
Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Filices.

THE ROOT AND TOPS.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Rock-Polypod,
Fern-root,  Rock-Brake,  Brake-root,  Female-Fern,  etc.  It  has  a  peren-
nial, creeping,  irregular,  brown  root,  with  membranous  scales  extending
to  the  caudex  or  base  of  the  stipe.  The  fronds  are  from  six  to  twelve
inches  high,  distiched,  green,  smooth,  deeply  pinnatifid,  being  divided
into  alternate  segments  nearly  to  the  midvein,  which  are  linear-oblong,
obtuse,  crenulate,  the  upper  ones  gradually  smaller,  parallel,  a  little
curved,  and  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  wide.  Stipe  naked  and  smooth.
The  fruit  on  the  lower  surface  of  the  frond,  in  large,  distinct,  golden
dots,  sori,  or  capsules,  without  any  indusium,  round,  in  a  double  row,
and  becoming  finally  brownish.

History. — Polypody  is  common  on  shady  rocks,  in  woods,  and  moun-
tains, throughout  the  United  States.  The  root  and  tops  are  used  in
medicine  ;  the  root  is  rather  long,  about  as  thick  as  a  goosequill,  some-
what contorted,  covered  with  brown,  easily  separable  scales,  furnished
with  slender  radicles,  and  marked  by  numerous  small  tubercles  ;  its  color
is  reddish-brown  with  a  tinge  of  yellow,  its  odor  disagreeably  oleagi-
nous, and  its  taste  peculiar,  sweetish,  mucilaginous,  somewhat  bitter  and
nauseous. Water  extracts  its  properties.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plant  is  pectoral,  demulcent,  purgative,
and  anthelmintic.  A  decoction  or  syrup  has  been  found  very  valuable
in  pulmonary  and  hepatic  diseases ;  and  a  strong  decoction  is  recom-
mended as  a  purgative,  and  for  the  expulsion  of  taenia,  and  other  worms.
Dose  of  the  powdered  plant  from  one  to  four  drachms  ;  of  the  decoction
or  syrup,  from  one  to  four  fiuidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Polypodii.


POLYTRICHUM JuNIPERUM —  PoPULUS BaLSAMIFEEA.  761

POLYTRICHUM JUNIPERUM.

Hair-cap  Moss.

Nat.  Ord. — Musci, — Polytrichacefe. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Musci.

THE WHOLE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant,  sometimes  known  as  Bear's  Bed,  Ground
Muss,  Robin's-Rye,  etc.,  is  indigenous,  and  perennial,  with  a  simple  or
divided  stem,  more  generally  simple,  slender,  of  a  reddish  color,  and
from  four  to  seven  inches  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  linear-lanceolate,  awn-
pointed,  entire,  flattish,  appressed,  somewhat  spreading,  the  margins
inflexed.  The  capsule  is  oblong  four-sided,  the  angles  acute  ;  the  calyp-
tra  is  densely  hairy  and  white  ;  the  lid  or  operculum  short-beaked  from  a
convex  base ;  apophysis  depressed,  and  discoidal.  Peristome  single,  of
sixty-four  teeth,  adherent  by  their  summits  to  the  membranous-dilated
apex  of  the  columella.  Inflorescence  dioecious  ;  sterile  Jlowers  terminal,
cup-shaped.

History. — This  is  an  evergreen  plant,  found  on  high,  dry  places,  along
the  margins  of  dry  woods,  and  exposed  places,  mostly  on  a  poor,  sandy
soil,  and  is  of  a  darker  green  color  than  the  mosses  in  general.  The
leaves  are  closely  set  on  the  stem  about  one  half  its  length,  above  which
the  stem  is  naked,  terminating  in  a  capsule,  covered  with  a  white,  hairy
hood  or  calyptre.  The  whole  plant  is  officinal.  It  yields  its  properties
to  boiling  water  by  infusion.  It  has  not  been  analyzed,  but  is  deserving
the  especial  attention  of  medical  men.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  valuable  and  important  Eclectic
agent,  which  has  been  in  use  for  a  number  of  years,  and  is,  I  believe,
unknown  to  any  other  class  of  practitioners.  It  is  a  powerful  diuretic  in
strong  infusion^  In  doses  of  two  fiuidounces  of  the  infusion,  every  half
hour,  it  has  been  known  to  remove  from  a  dropsical  patient  from  twenty
to  forty  pounds  of  water  in  the  space  of  twenty-four  hours.  It  possesses
but  very  little  smell  or  taste,  and  never  produces  any  nausea  or  disa-
greeable sensation  in  the  stomach.  It  may  be  used  in  connection  with
hydragogue  cathartics,  or  even  alone,  in  dropsies,  with  the  most  decided
advantage  ;  and  is  a  very  useful  article  in  gravel,  and  all  urinary  obstruc-
tions. Professor  Jones  considers  it  worthy  to  be  ranked  among  the  first,
if  not  at  the  head,  of  the  class  of  diuretics.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Polytrichi.


POPULUS  BALSAMIFERA.

Balsam  Poplar.

Nat.  Ord. — Salicaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Dicecia  Octandria.

THE BUDS.

Description. — This  tree,  also  called  Tacamahac,  or  Tacamahac  Poplar,
attains  the  hight  of  from  fifty  to  seventy  feet,  with  a  trunk  about  eighteen


762  Materia  Medica.

inches  in  diameter.  The  branches  are  smooth,  round,  deep-brown ;
the  buds  acuminate,  smooth,  and  covered  in  the  spring  with  an  abund-
ance of  fragrant,  viscid,  balsamic  juice.  The  leaves  are  ovate,  gradually
tapering  and  pointed,  smooth  on  both  sides,  with  fine  glandular  serra-
tures,  deep-green  above,  whitish  and  reticulate-veined  beneath,  and  on
long  petioles  ;  sometimes  two  glands  at  the  apex  of  the  petiole.  Scales
dilated,  slightly  hairy.

History. —  This  tree  is  found  in  Canada,  the  northern  parts  of  the
United  States,  and  in  Siberia.  In  this  country  it  is  in  blossom  in  April.
The  leaf-buds  are  the  officinal  part,  and  should  be  collected  in  the  spring;
they  have  a  peculiar,  agreeable,  balsamic  odor,  and  a, bitterish,  balsamic,
somewhat  pungent  taste.  The  balsamic  juice  is  collected  in  Canada  in
shells,  and  sent  to  Europe,  under  the  name  of  Tacamahaca.  Alcohol  or
spirits  is  the  proper  solvent. They  have  not  been  analyzed.

The  buds  of  the  Populus  Candicans,  or  Bulm  of  Gilead,  possess
similar  virtues  with  the  above.  The  tree  is  of  less  stature  than  the  P.
Balsamifera,  the  leaves  are  broader,  and  heart-shaped,  with  a  distinct
sinus  at  the  base — the  petioles  are  hairy  and  the  branches  terete.

Properties  and  Uses. — Poplar  buds  are  reputed  stimulant,  tonic,  diu-
retic, and  antiscorbutic.  A  tincture  of  them  has  been  beneficially
employed  in  pectoral,  rheumatic,  scorbutic,  and  nephritic  affections.
Externally,  macerated  in  oil  or  lard,  they  form  an  excellent  liniment  or
ointment  in  the  treatment  of  wounds,  bruises,  tumors,  some  cutaneous
diseases,  and  in  local  rheumatism.  The  bark  is  said  to  be  tonic  and
cathartic,  and  to  have  proved  of  service  in  gout  and  rheumatism.  Dose
of  a  tincture  of  the  buds,  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms  ;  and  is  excellent
for  colds,  and  pain  in  the  breast.


POPULUS  TREMULOIDES.

American  Poplar.

Nat.  Ord. — Salicaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Octandria.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  tree,  also  known  by  the  names  of  White-Poplar,
and  Aspen,  attains  the  bight  of  from  twenty  to  fifty  feet,  with  a  diame-
ter of  from  eight  to  twelve  inches.  It  is  covered  with  a  smooth,  green-
ish-white bark,  except  on  the  trunks  of  very  old  trees.  The  leaves  are
orbicular-cordate,  abruptly  acuminate,  dentate-serrate,  smooth  on  both
sides,  pubescent  at  the  margins,  dark-green,  three-nerved,  from  two  to
two  and  a  half  inches  loner,  and  one  and  a  fourth  as  wide,  and  are  on
long,  slender,  and  laterally  compressed  petioles,  which  accounts  for  the
continual  agitation  of  the  leaves  by  the  slightest  breeze.  Aments  plumed
with  silken  hairs,  about  two  inches  long,  pendulous,  appearing  in  April,


Potassium.  763

long  before  the  leaves. Scales  cut  into  three  or  four  deep  linear  divi-
sions, and  fringed  with  long  hairs.

History. — This  tree  is  common  in  Lower  Canada,  and  in  the  Northern
and  Middle  States.  The  bark  is  the  officinal  part,  and  should  be  col-
lected in  the  spring,  just  as  the  sap  begins  to  rise.  Its  virtues  are
imparted  to  alcohol,  water,  or  acetic  acid.  There  are  several  varieties
of  this  tree,  all  of  which  possess  similar  properties,  as  the  Populus
Grandidentata ,  P.  Candicans,  etc.

These  trees  owe  their  virtues  to  two  alkaloids,  Popidin  and  Salkin.
Populin  may  be  obtained  from  the  solution,  after  the  salicin  has  been
procured,  by  saturating  the  excess  of  sulphuric  acid,  when  the  salicin
has  ceased  to  crystallize,  with  a  concentrated  solution  of  carbonate  of
potassa.  This  precipitates  the  populin,  which  should  be  pressed  between
folds  of  blotting  paper,  and  re-dissolved  in  boiling  water ;  when,  upon
the  cooling  of  the  liquid,  the  populin  will  be  deposited  in  the  crystalline
state.  It  is  very  light,  purely  white,  and  of  a  bitter-sweetish  taste.
When  heated,  it  melts  into  a  colorless  and  transparent  liquid.  It  is
soluble  in  two  thousand  parts  of  cold,  and  about  seventy  of  boiling
water,  and  in  boiling  alcohol,  acetic  acid,  or  the  dilute  mineral  acids  from
which  alkalies  precipitate  it  unchanged.

Properties  and  Uses. — Poplar  bark  is  tonic  and  febrifuge,  and  has  been
used  in  intermittent  fever  with  advantage.  An  infusion  of  it  is  reputed
a  valuable  remedy  in  debility,  emaciation,  want  of  appetite,  feeble  diges-
tion, faintness  at  the  stomach,  chronic  diarrhea,  and  worms.  It  is  said
to  possess  active  diuretic  properties,  and  has  been  beneficially  employed
in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  strangury,  and  other  diseases  of  the  urinary  organs.
The  large  aspen,  P.  Grandidentata,  is  said  to  be  the  most  active  and
bitter. Dose  of  the  powdered  bark,  one  drachm,  two  or  three  times  a  day.


POTASSIUM.
Potassium.
Preparation. — A  mixture  of  carbonate  of  potassa  with  finely  divided
charcoal  is  first  prepared  by  igniting  cream  of  tartar  in  a  covered  cruci-
ble, which  leaves  a  mixture,  well  known  as  the  Black  Flux.  This,
while  still  warm,  is  mixed  with  a  considerable  proportion  of  charcoal
in  coarse  powder  and  small  fragments  recently  ignited,  and  allowed  to
cool  in  a  covered  crucible.  The  whole  is  now  introduced  into  one  of  the
hammered  iron  bottles  used  for  holding  mercury,  coated  outside  with  a
mixture  of  sand  and  clay.  The  bottle  is  placed  horizontally  in  a  wind
furnace,  and  a  short  wide  tube  of  iron  is  fitted  to  it,  to  which  tube  is
attached  a  copper  receiver,  partly  filled  with  good  naphtha,  and  having
a  diaphragm  of  copper,  and  on  the  further  side  of  the  receiver  an
aperture  for  the  escape  of  gas,  opposite  the  tube  of  the  bottle ;  so  that,  if


764  Materia  Medica.

necessary,  a  strong  steel  rod  may  be  introduced  through  this  aperture,
and  another  in  the  upper  part  of  the  diaphragm  into  the  tube,  for  the
purpose  of  cleaning  it  out  as  it  is  apt  to  become  choked.  The  receiver
with  the  naphtha  being  surrounded  with  ice,  a  steady  and  uniform  strong
red  or  white  heat  (by  means  of  dry  wood,  the  flame  of  which  plays  all
round  the  bottle,)  is  applied  to  the  bottle,  and  after  a  time  potassium,
which  is  known  by  the  appearance  of  its  pink  flame  at  the  mouth  of  the
tube,  distils  over,  accompanied  with  carbonic  oxide  gas,  and  with  a  gray
powder,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  occasional  choking  of  the  tube.  The
potassium  drops  into  the  naphtha,  which  protects  it  from  the  action  of
the  air ;  to  purify  it  entirely,  it  is  re-distilled  in  a  small  iron  retort  along
with  a  little  naphtha  into  a  receiver  containing  that  liquid.

History. — Potassium  was  discovered  in  1807  by  Sir  H.  Davy,  who
obtained  it  by  decomposing  the  hydrate  of  potassa  by  means  of  galvan-
ism. It  was  subsequently  obtained  in  larger  quantity  by  Gay-Lussac
and  Thenard,  who  placed  the  fused  alkali  in  contact  with  iron  heated  to
whiteness,  which  attracted  the  oxygen  and  set  free  the  metal.  The
common  mode  of  preparing  it  is  given  above.

Potassium  is  a  solid,  soft,  bluish-white  metal,  having  a  high  degree
of  metallic  luster,  but  becoming  quickly  tarnished  and  oxydized  when
exposed  to  the  air,  from  which  it  absorbs  oxygen,  and  should  therefore
be  kept  in  naphtha,  a  liquid  which  contains  no  oxygen.  It  is  more
ductile  than  wax,  and  is  easily  cut  with  a  knife.  Its  specific  gravity  is
0.865,  so  that  it  floats  on  the  surface  of  water;  it  melts  at  136°,  its  equi-
valent number  is  39.2,  and  symbol  K.  When  thrown  upon  water,  it
swims,  takes  fire,  and  burns  with  a  beautiful  pink  flame,  combining  with
oxygen,  and  generating  potassa  which  dissolves  in  the  water.  It  unites
with  most  of  the  non-metallic  elements,  and  with  several  of  the  metals.
Metals  and  metalloids  whose  attraction  for  oxygen  is  too  strong  to  be
overcome  by  the  usual  means,  are  isolated  by  potassium.  Thus,  it  decom-
poses the  oxides  or  chlorides  of  aluminum,  glucinum,  yttrium,  thorium,
and  zirconium,  and  the  boracic  and  silicic  acids.  It  is  found  chiefly  in
the  ashes  of  land-plants,  as  oxide  of  potassa  united  to  carbonic  acid,  and
is  also  obtained  as  chloride  in  the  ashes  of  sea-plants.  Many  rocks,  min-
erals, and  soils  contain  it;  indeed,  it  is  necessary  to  the  growth  of  plants.

Potassium  forms  two  compounds  with  oxygen,  a  protoxide,  KO,  con-
taining one  equivalent  of  oxygen,  (a  dry  potassa)  of  a  gray  color ;  and
a  peroxide  K03,  containing  three  equivalents  of  oxygen,  and  of  a  yel-
lowish-brown color.  Its  protoxide  forms  the  following  medicinal  salts,
acetate,  bichromate,  carbonate,  bicarbonate,  chlorate,  citrate,  hydrate,
nitrate,  sulphate,  sulphureted  sulphate,  bisulphate,  tartrate  and  bitar-
trate  of  potassa.  Potassium  also  forms  officinal  compounds  with  various
agents,  under  the  names  of  iodide,  bromide,  sulphuret,  cyanuret,  and
appropriate  head,  throughout  this  work.


Potasses  Bitartras.  7(55

POTASSA  BITARTRAS.

Bitartrate  of  Potassa.

History. — This  salt,  commonly  called  Cream  of  Tartar,  in  its  pure
state  was  unknown  until  the  investigations  of  Scheele  in  1769.  It  is
obtained  from  the  crude  tartar,  argol,  or  winestone  of  commerce,  a  gray-
ish or  brownish  obscurely  crystalline  substance,  which  becomes  deposited
on  the  bottom  and  sides  of  casks  in  which  new  wine  has  been  kept.  The
tart  wines  deposit  it  in  the  largest  quantity;  it  is  composed  of  bitartrate
of  potassa,  tartrate  of  lime,  coloring  matter,  and  other  accidental  impu-
rities. That  called  Red  Tartar,  is  of  a  reddish  color,  and  is  the  deposit
of  red  wines  ;  while  that  named  White  Tartar,  is  of  a  dirty-white  color,
and  obtained  from  white  wines.  The  juice  of  the  grape  contains  bitar-
trate of  potassa  in  solution  with  saccharine  matter,  and  during  its  fer-
mentation the  sugar  disappearing  and  becoming  replaced  by  alcohol,
which  does  not  hold  the  bitartrate  in  solution,  this  consequently  precipi-
tates as  a  crystalline  crust.  To  purify  this  substance,  it  is  pulverized,  and
then  boiled  with  water,  and  as  soon  as  the  solution  is  saturated,  it  is  allowed
to  cool,  when  a  nearly  colorless  crystalline  layer  is  deposited  ;  this  is
again  dissolved  in  boiling  water,  four  or  five  per  cent,  of  pipeclay  added
to  it,  and  the  solution  then  evaporated  to  a  pellicle.  As  it  cools,  the
clay  and  coloring  matter  subside,  and  white  crystals  in  crusts  are
deposited,  which  become  still  whiter  when  placed  on  linen  and  exposed
to  the  air.  In  pharmacy,  these  are  the  crystals  of  tartar;  and  when
powdered  form  the  medicinal  cream  of  tartar.

Bitartrate  of  potassa  when  first  prepared  is  in  the  form  of  white  cakes,
with  obscure  crystallization  on  one  of  the  surfaces  ;  the  crystals  being  of
small  size,  and  in  oblique  rhombic  prisms.  But  as  more  generally  met
with  it  is  in  the  form  of  a  fine  white  powder.  The  crystals  are  hard
and  gritty  between  the  teeth,  and  do  not  quickly  dissolve  in  the  mouth.
In  either  form,  it  has  a  sharp,  agreeable,  acid  taste,  an  acid  reaction,  is
permanent,  soluble  in  184  parts  of  cold  water,  18  of  boiling,  and  is
insoluble  in  alcohol.  A  red  heat  chars  and  decomposes  it,  disengaging
empyreumatic  oil,  pyrotartaric  acid,  and  various  gases,  and  leaving  car-
bonate of  potassa  with  charcoal.  The  black  flux  of  chemists  is  composed
of  one  part  bitartrate  of  potassa,  and  half  a  part  of  nitrate  of  potassa,
mixed  and  heated  together ;  a  residuum  is  left  of  carbon  and  carbonate
of  potassa.  If  the  nitre  be  doubled  the  carbonate  will  remain  without
the  carbon,  forming  white  flux.  Cream  of  tartar  is  abundantly  soluble  in
water  to  which  borax  or  boracic  acid  has  been  added,  forming  a  solution,
termed  Soluble  cream  of  tartar.  It  is  incompatible  with  baryta,  strontia,
lime,  and  acetate  of  lead,  which  precipitate  insoluble  tartrates,  and  tar-
trate of  lead.  It  forms  soluble  tartrates  with  salifiable  bases,  giving  rise
to  double  salts.  It  is  composed  of  two  equivalents  of  acid  132,  one  of
potassa  47.2  and  one  of  water  9=188.2,  (2T+KO+Aq).


766  Materia  Medica.

Commercial  cream  of  tartar  usually  contains  from  two  to  five  per  cent,
of  tartrate  of  lime  not  intended  as  an  adulteration.  But  it  is  sometimes
adulterated  with  sand,  clay,  gypsum,  flour,  chalk,  nitre,  alum,  sulphate
of  potassa,  chloride  of  potassium,  etc.  Sand,  clay,  and  gypsum  may  be
known  by  their  insolubility  ;  flour,  by  giving  a  blue  color  with  iodine  ;
chalk,  by  effervescing  with  dilute  acids;  alum,  by  its  astringencv ;  and
any  soluble  sulphate,  by  the  addition  of  chloride  of  barium,  which
occasions  a  precipitate  not  entirely  soluble  in  nitric  acid.  Chloride  of
potassium  may  be  detected  by  nitrate  of  silver,  which  produces  a  white
fiocculent  precipitate  insoluble  in  nitric  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bitartrate  of  potassa  is  refrigerant,  diuretic,  and
cathartic.  In  large  doses  it  is  apt  to  give  rise  to  severe  and  lonf-con-
tinued  purging  of  watery  stools,  —  yet  it  does  not  cause  griping  at  the
time,  nor  debility  afterward  ;  from  this  property,  as  well  as  its  diuretic
action,  it  is  very  much  used  in  dropsical  affections.  It  is  frequently
combined  with  Jalap,  the  Compound  Powder  of  Jalap,  Podophyllin,
Sulphur,  etc.  In  solution,  sweetened  with  sugar,  it  forms  an  agreeable,
refrigerant  drink,  very  useful  in  many  febrile  affections.  Combined  with
sulphur,  it  is  used  as  a  laxative,  and  is  often  given  for  some  forms  of
cutaneous  disease.  Dose,  as  a  cathartic,  from  four  to  six  drachms  ;  as
an  aperient,  one  or  two  drachms  ;  and  in  dropsy,  it  may  be  given  in
doses  of  from  one  to  three  drachms,  in  water,  several  times  a  day.
Equal  parts  of  Bitartrate  of  Potassa,  Powdered  Rhatany  Root,  and
Myrrh,  form  a  good  dentifrice.  Two  drachms  of  cream  of  tartar  added
to  a  pint  of  milk,  form  a  cream  of  tartar  whey,  which  when  diluted  with
water  is  sometimes  given  in  dropsical  complaints.

Off.  Prep.  —  Potassee  Carbonas  Purus  ;  Potassa?  Tartras  ;  Pulvis
Ipecacuanha?  Compositus ;  Pulvis  Podophyllini  Compositus  ;  Sodae  et
Potassae  Tartras.


POTASSA  NITRAS.
Nitrate  of  Potassa.
History. — Nitrate  of  Potassa  (Saltpetre,  Nitre,  Sal-prunelle)  is  a  salt
which  was  known  to  the  ancients,  though,  probably,  not  with  sufficient
accuracy  to  enable  them  to  determine  it  from  other  salts  formed  on  the
surface  of  the  soil  by  efflorescence.  It  may  be  artificially  manufactured,
although  it  exists  naturally  in  some  soils.  In  many  countries  it  exists
already  formed ;  thus,  it  is  found  in  this  country  in  Ohio,  Kentucky,
Tennessee,  Virginia,  and  Maryland,  generally  in  caverns  situated  in
limestone  rock,  and  intermixed  with  nitrate  of  lime.  It  is  also  found  in
various  sections  of  Europe,  in  Egypt,  in  Peru,  and  other  countries;  but
by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  commercial  article  is  obtained  from  India,
where  it  exists  in  great  abundance.  The  vegetable  kingdom  contains  a
considerable  portion  of  it,  having  been  found  in  the  crawley,  sunflower,
borage,  hemlock,  parietaria,  bugloss,  tobacco,  etc.


PoTASS^E NlTRAS.  767

In  India,  where  it  is  manufactured,  the  soil  contains  about  six  or
seven  parts  of  nitre  in  a  thousand ;  this  is  lixiviated  in  an  apparatus
made  for  the  purpose,  and  containing  wood  ashes,  which  has  the  effect
of  converting  any  nitrate  of  lime  that  may  be  present,  into  nitrate  of
potassa.  The  liquid  obtained  is  then  evaporated,  filtered,  and  set  aside
to  crystallize,  and  furnishes  a  substance  containing  from  45  to  70  per
cent,  of  the  pure  salt.  This,  when  redissolved  and  again  crystallized,
is  the  crude  nitre,  or  crude  saltpetre  of  commerce ;  it  has  a  dirty  yellow-
ish hue,  and  contains  much  foreign  matter.  An.  essential  part  of  these
soils  is,  that  they  shall  contain  decomposing  felspar,  mica,  or  other
destructible  minerals  which  consist  partly  of  potassa.  The  production
of  nitre  from  them  is  promoted  by  the  presence  of  animal  matter,  but
may  also  go  on  without  it;  so  that  the  nitric  acid  must  be  formed
through  the  intervention  of  atmospheric  air.  The  soluble  salts  of  the
nitrate  soils  consist  of  sulphates,  muriates,  and  nitrates  of  potassa,  lime,
and  soda.  The  nitrates  are  converted  into  nitrate  of  potassa  by  lixivi-
ating the  soil  over  a  filter  of  wood  ashes,  containing  carbonate  of  potassa,
and  then  duly  evaporating  the  filtered  liquor.  Nitre  is  also  prepared  in
many  parts  of  Europe  from  soils  artificially  impregnated  with  animal
matter — from  the  mortar  of  old  buildings — or  from  artificial  composts
consisting  of  animal  substances,  decaying  vegetables,  ashes,  and  chalk,
marl,  or  lime.  The  nitrate  thus  in  the  first  place  produced  is  the
nitrate  of  lime,  which  is  converted  into  the  nitrate  of  potassa  by  double
decomposition  with  carbonate  of  potassa ;  and  the  salt  is  then  obtained
by  lixiviation,  and  purified  by  repeated  crystallization.

On  account  of  the  low  price  of  India  nitre,  but  little  of  the  salt  is
prepared  from  the  native  sources  of  this  country  ;  it  is  chiefly  imported
from  Calcutta,  in  grass-cloth  bags  holding  from  150  to  175  pounds  each.
In  this  country  it  is  refined  by  our  chemists,  of  which  refined  saltpetre  a
great  portion  is  exported.  The  South  American  saltpetre,  incorrectly  so
called,  which  has  been  received  from  Peru  within  a  few  years,  is  a
nitrate  of  soda,  and  is  found  to  be  preferable  to  nitre  in  the  preparation
of  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids,  in  consequence  of  its  containing  a  greater
proportion  of  acid.  As  it  absorbs  moisture,  it  is  not  adapted  to  the
manufacturing  of  gunpowder.

Nitrate  of  potassa  forms  white,  long,  striated,  translucent  crystals,
which  are  six-sided  prisms,  terminated  by  one,  two,  or  six  converging
planes.  Its  taste  is  peculiar,  cooling,  and  slightly  bitterish.  It  is  per-
manent in  the  air,  soluble  in  about  two-fifths  of  its  weight  of  boiling  water,
soluble  in  four  or  five  times  its  weight  of  water  at  60°,  sparingly  soluble
in  ordinary  alcohol,  but  insoluble  in  absolute  alcohol.  In  the  act  of  dis-
solving it  occasions  considerable  cold.  Heat  fuses  it,  and  when  raised
to  redness  drives  off  oxygen  and  converts  it  into  the  hyponitrite  of
potassa.  In  consequence  of  this  evolution  of  oxygen,  it  greatly  enlivens
combustion  when  thrown  on  burning  fuel. Chloride  of  platinum  added


768  Materia  Medica.

to  its  solution,  occasions  a  yellow  precipitate.  On  account  of  its  liability
to  hold  mechanically  a  portion  of  water,  within  the  large  crystals,  it  is
advised  by  Berzelius  to  stir  the  mixture  during  crystallization,  so  as  to
make  it  shoot  into  small  crystals.  When  allowed  to  cool  from  a  state  of
fusion,  either  in  molds  or  flat  circular  cakes,  it  concretes  into  a  hard,
fibrous,  opake,  white  mass,  known  in  commerce  by  the  name  of  Sal  Pru-
nelle,  or  Crystal  Mineral.  Nitrate  of  Potassa  consists  of  one  equivalent
of  nitric  acid  54,  and  one  of  potassa  47.2  =  101.2. (NO  5  -f  KO.)

Its  most  common  impurity  is  salt,  which  renders  it  inapplicable  to  the
purpose  of  making  gunpowder.  The  presence  of  salt,  or  of  chloride  of
potassium,  may  be  known  by  the  addition  of  nitrate  of  silver  to  the
solution,  which  will  occasion  a  white  precipitate  of  chloride  of  silver.
If  the  chloride  of  barium  produces  a  precipitate,  the  impurity  is  a  sul-
phate. If  lime  be  present,  the  addition  of  a  solution  of  oxalate  of
ammonia  precipitates  the  white  oxalate  of  lime.  The  fracture  of  pure
nitrate  of  potassa  is  radiated,  the  radii  being  usually  large;  if  l-80th
of  common  salt  be  present,  it  renders  the  radii  smaller;  and  l-40th,
or  more,  gives  rise  to  a  zone  in  the  body  of  the  mass  without  any  radi-
ated structure,  or  occasions  the  entire  disappearance  of  this  structure.
One  hundred  grains  of  dry,  pure  nitre,  treated  with  sixty  grains  of  sul-
phuric acid,  in  a  deep  platina  or  porcelain  crucible  covered  to  prevent
loss  during  the  desiccation  of  the  salt,  and  the  whole  kept  at  a  red-heat
until  it  ceases  to  lose  weight,  should  yield  a  residue  of  eighty-six  grains
of  sulphate  of  potassa ;  if  less  than  this,  and  chlorides  and  sulphates
are  absent,  the  nitre  probably  contains  nitrate  of  soda.

Properties  and  Uses. — Nitrate  of  potassa  is  irritant,  cathartic,  refrige-
rant, and  diuretic.  In  doses  of  from  half  an  ounce  to  two  ounces,  in
solution,  it  occasions  heat  and  pain  in  the  stomach,  vomiting,  excessive
nervous  depression,  and  sinking  of  the  pulse ;  and  has  proved  fatal  in  a
few  hours.  On  account  of  the  uncertainty  of  its  cathartic  effects,  it  is
seldom  used  for  that  purpose.  Its  most  common  actions  are  to  increase
the  cutaneous  and  renal  secretions,  to  diminish  the  temperature  of  the
system  and  the  frequency  of  the  pulse,  to  keep  the  bowels  in  a  soluble
condition,  and,  in  consequence  of  these  influences,  to  lessen  febrile  and
inflammatory  action.  An  experiment,  in  which  from  one  to  five  drachms
of  nitre  were  given  daily,  in  a  state  of  health,  and  continued  for  eight  or
twelve  days,  resulted  in  general  debility,  lowness  of  spirits,  constant
drowsiness,  and  slow  and  weak  pulse,  falling,  toward  the  termination  of
the  experiment,  at  several  various  times,  to  twenty  beats  in  the  minute.
All  this  time  the  appetite  and  digestion  continued  unimpaired,  with  occa-
sional pains  in  the  abdomen  followed  by  purging.  Nitre  is  extensively
employed  as  a  diuretic,  and  especially  in  dropsical  affections.  It  has
also  been  found  useful  in  acute  rheumatism,  and  active  hemorrhages;
and  in  such  cases  the  salt  may  be  given  in  divided  doses,  to  the  extent
of  one  or  two  ounces  in  twenty-four  hours,  care  being  taken  to  have  it


Potassii  Ferroctanuretum.  769

largely  diluted  with  water.  In  spasmodic  asthma  it  has  been  adminis-
tered internally  with  efficacy ;  nitrous  fumigation  has  also  been  found
useful  in  this  affection;  it  is  employed  as  follows :  blotting-paper  is  dipped
in  a  saturated  solution  of  nitre  and  dried,  fire  is  then  applied  to  it,  and
the  nitrous  fumes  that  are  evolved  are  to  be  inhaled,  continuing  the  in-
halation each  time  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Nitre  is  sometimes  added
to  gargles  in  certain  stages  of  inflammatory  sore-throat.  It  is  fre-
quently substituted  for  the  bitartrate  of  potassa  in  our  Powder  of  Ipe-
cacuanha and  Opium.  Sal  prunelle  has  been  found  useful  as  an  appli-
cation to  chapped  lips.  The  dose  of  nitre,  as  a  sedative  refrigerant,  is
from  ten  to  twenty  grains,  well  diluted ;  and  as  a  diuretic,  from  twenty
to  sixty  grains.  Too  freely  given,  or  its  use  too  long  continued  occa-
sions pain  in  the  stomach.  No  antidote  is  known  to  its  more  serious
actions ;  the  treatment  consists  in  speedily  evacuating  it  from  the  sto-
mach, administering  mucilaginous  draughts  in  large  quantities,  anodynes
to  relieve  pain  and  irritation,  and  stimulants  to  overcome  any  tendency
to  prostration.

Off.  Prep.  —  Acidum  Nitricum  Purum ;  Collodium  ;  Potassae  Sul-
phas cum  Sulphure  j  Pulvis  Asclepidis  Compositus ;  Spiritus  vEtheris
Nitrici ;  Unguentum  Sulphuris  Compositum.


POTASSII  FERROCYANURETUM.
Ferrocyanuret  of  Potassium.

History. — On  the  large  scale,  this  salt  is  prepared  by  placing  a  mix-
ture of  two  parts  of  pearlash,  with  five  parts  of  animal  matter,  such  as
hoofs,  dried  blood,  old  leather,  chips  of  horn,  woolen  rags,  and  other
substances  abounding  in  nitrogen,  into  an  egg-shaped  iron  pot,  calcining
the  mixture  at  a  red-heat,  and  constantly  stirring  the  mass  until  it  ceases
to  give  out  fetid  vapors.  The  calcined  mass  is  then  cooled,  dissolved
in  water,  and  concentrated  by  evaporation  so  that  crystals  may  form.
These  are  purified  by  repeated  crystallization.  It  may  also  be  obtained
by  boiling  purified  Prussian  blue  in  a  solution  of  potassa,  until  the  blue
color  disappears,  filtering  the  liquor,  evaporating,  and  crystallizing
several  times  to  render  it  pure.

Ferrocyanuret  of  Potassium  occurs  in  broken  or  entire  crystals  of  large
size,  whose  form  is  usually  a  rectangular  prism,  truncated  on  the  ends
and  edges,  or  a  foursided  table  derived  from  the  rhombic  octaedre  by
excossive  truncation  of  the  apices.  They  are  transparent,  of  a  lemon-
yellow  color,  permanent  in  the  air,  somewhat  flexible,  inodorous,  and
possessed  of  a  sweetish-bitter,  saline  taste.  It  is  soluble  in  three  or  four
times  its  weight  of  Qold  water,  and  about  its  own  weight  of  boiling  water,
but  is  insoluble  in  alcohol.  At  a  temperature  of  140°  it  loses  its  water
of  crystallization,  leaving  a  white  anhydrous  salt.  A  low  red-heat,
decomposes  it,  converting  it  into  cyanuret  of  potassium,  carburet  of  iron,
49


770  Materia Medica.

and  other  compounds.  The  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron  are  precipitated
of  a  deep-blue  color  by  it ;  those  of  protoxide  of  iron  white,  quickly
passing  to  blue  ;  those  of  zinc  and  lead  white,  and  of  copper  chestnut-
brown.  The  precipitates  are  ferrocyanurets  of  the  respective  metals.  It
emits  a  hydrocyanic  acid  vapor  when  boiled  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid.
It  consists  of  two  equivalents  of  cyanuret  of  potassium  130.4,  one  of
cyanuret  of  iron  54,  and  three  of  water  27  —  211.4,  (2  K  Cy,  Fe  Cy-f
3  HO).  In  the  anhydrous  state,  it  is  stated  to  consist  of  a  compound
radicle  called  Ferrocyanogen,  which  is  composed  of  three  equivalents  of
cyanogen,  and  one  of  iron  (tercyanuret  of  iron)  combined  with  two
equivalents  of  potassium,  (2  K  Cy,  Fe  Cy),  or  (Fe  Cy3_]_2  K.)

Properties  and  Uses. — Ferrocyanuret  of  potassium  is  not  poisonous,
being  absorbed  and  carried  off  quickly  with  the  urine.  "  Dr.  Burleigh
Smart,  of  Kennebec,  Maine,  has  attributed  to  this  salt  valuable  medicinal
powers.  Its  primary  effect,  according  to  him,  is  that  of  a  sedative,
diminishing  the  fullness  and  frequency  of  the  pulse,  and  allaying  pain
and  irritation.  It  also  acts,  under  favorable  circumstances,  as  a  diapho-
retic and  astringent.  Dr.  Smart  used  it  with  success  in  a  case  of  chronic
bronchitis  in  a  child,  with  the  effect,  in  a  few  days,  of  diminishing  the
frequency  of  the  pulse,  and  of  lessening  the  sweating,  cough,  and  dys-
pnoea. It  sometimes  acts  as  a  diaphoretic,  but  only  in  cases  attended
with  excessive  vascular  action,  and  increased  heat  of  skin.  As  an
astringent,  its  power  is  most  conspicuous  in  the  colliquative  sweats  of
chronic  bronchitis  and  phthisis.  The  same  power  was  evinced  in  several
cases  of  leucorrhea,  cured  by  its  use.  It  sometimes  produces  ptyalism,
unattended,  however,  by  swelling  of  the  salivary  glands,  or  fetor  of  the
breath.  Its  properties  as  an  anodyne  and  sedative,  render  it  applicable
to  cases  of  neuralgic  pains  and  hooping-cough,  in  which  diseases,
especially  the  latter,  Dr.  Smart  found  it  useful.  When  given  in  an  over-
dose, he  states  that  it  occasions  vertigo,  coldness  and  numbness,  with  a
sense  of  gastric  sinking.

"  The  form  of  administration  which  Dr.  Smart  prefers,  is  that  of  solution
in  the  proportion  of  two  drachms  to  the  fiuidounce  of  water.  Of  this,
the  dose  for  an  adult  is  from  thirty  to  forty-five  drops,  equivalent  to
from  ten  to  fifteen  grains  of  the  salt,  repeated  every  four  or  six  hours.
Should  the  results  of  Dr.  Smart  be  confirmed  by  the  profession,  the
ferrocyanide  of  potassium  will  form  an  important  acquisition  to  the
Materia  Medica." — U.  S.  Disp.

Off.  Prep. — Acidum  Hydrocyanicum  Dilutum  ;  Ferri  Ferrocyanure-
tum  ;  Potassii  Cyanuretum.


POTENTILLA CANADENSIS POTENTILLA ToRMENTILLA.  771

POTENTILLA  CANADENSIS.
Fivefinger.
Nat.  Ord.— Rosacea?. Sex.  Syst.— Icosandria  Polygyria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  perennial,  villose-pubescent  plant,  frequently
known  by  the  name  of  Cinque-foil.  It  has  a  sarmentose,  procumbent
and  ascending  stem  from  two  to  eighteen  inches  in  length.  The  leaves
are  palmately  five-foliate,  the  leaflets  obovate,  silky  beneath,  cut-dentate
toward  the  apex,  entire  and  alternate  toward  the  base.  Stipules  ovate,
hairy,  deeply  two  or  three-cleft,  or  entire.  The  flowers  are  yellow,  on
long,  axillary,  solitary  pedicels.  The  calyx-segments  are  lanceolate  or
linear ;  bracetoles  of  the  calyx  longer  than  the  segments,  and  nearly  as
long  as  the  petals ;  petals  obcordate,  and  longer  than  the  calyx.  There
are  two  varieties  of  this  plant,  the  Potentilla  Pumila,  which  is  very
small  and  delicate,  flowering  in  April  and  May,  and  growing  in  dry,
sandy  soils,  the  stem  rising  about  three  or  four  inches.  The  other  is
the  Potentilla  Simplex,  which  is  less  hirsute,  with  a  simple  stem,  erect  or
ascending  at  base,  and  oval-cuneiform  leaflets  ;  it  grows  in  richer  soils
to  twelve  and  sixteen  inches  high,  and  flowers  from  June  to  August.

History.  —  Five-finger  is  common  to  the  United  States,  growing  by
roadsides,  on  meadow  banks  and  waste  grounds,  and  flowering  from
April  to  October.  It  is  the  Potentilla  Sarmentosa  of  some  botanists.
The  root  is  the  part  used;  it  has  a  bitterish,  styptic  taste,  and  yields  its
virtues  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plant  is  a  tonic  and  astringent.  A  decoc-
tion has  been  found  useful  in  fevers,  bowel  complaints,  night  sweats,
menorrhagia,  and  other  hemorrhages;  also  it  is  an  excellent  local
application  in  form  of  gargle,  for  spongy,  bleeding  gums,  and  ulcerated
mouth  and  throat.  The  European  herb,  Potentilla  Reptans,  possesses
similar  properties.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Potentillae.


POTENTILLA  TORMENTILLA.

Tormentil.

Nat.  Ord. — Rosacea*. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Polygynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Tormentil  or  Septfoil,  is  the  Tormentilla  Erecta  of  Will-
denow,  and  the  Tormentilla  Officinalis  of  Smith.  It  has  a  perennial,
tough,  woody  root  or  rhizoma,  about  the  thickness  and  length  of  the
upper  joint  of  the  fore-finger,  with  numerous  radicles.  The  stems  are
slender,  weak,  erect,  often  procumbent,  branching  toward  the  top,  and
six  or  eight  inches  high.  The  leaves  are  almost  sessile,  and  consist  on
the  stalk  of  seven,  on  the  branches  of  five  palmate,  elliptical,  villous,


772  Materia Medica.

deeply  serrated  leaflets,  three  of  which  are  larger  than  the  others.  The
flowers  are  small,  bright-yellow,  with  the  parts  of  the  calyx  and  corolla
in  fours,  on  slender  axillary  hairy  stalks  much  longer  than  the  leaves.
Carpels  corrugated  when  ripe.

History. — Tormentil  or  Septfoil  is  a  plant  common  to  Europe.  All
parts  of  it  are  astringent,  but  the  root  is  the  part  usually  employed.  It
is  cylindrical  or  roundish,  rather  larger  at  its  upper  extremitj'-,  an  inch
or  two  in  length,  about  as  thick  as  the  finger,  knotty,  sometimes  con-
torted, brown  or  blackish  externally,  and  reddish  within.  It  has  a
slight  aromatic  odor,  and  a  very  astringent  taste.  It  yields  its  virtues  to
boiling  water.  It  contains  an  abundance  of  tannic  acid,  a  red  coloring
principle  soluble  in  alcohol,  but  insoluble  in  water,  resin,  cerin,  myricin
gummy-extractive,  gum,  lignin,  extractive,  water,  and  a  trace  of  volatile
oil.  It  is  said  to  be  used  in  some  of  the  islands  of  Scotland  for  tanning
leather,  and  in  Lapland  for  staining  leather  red.  It  is  equally  applicable
in  medicine  with  catechu,  kino,  and  other  foreign  astringents.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  simple  and  powerful  astringent;  used  in  all
cases  of  disease  in  which  this  class  of  medicines  is  indicated.  It  may
be  given  in  substance,  decoction,  or  extract.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from
thirty  to  sixty  grains.

Off. Prep. — Decoctum  Tormentillae.


PRINOS  VERTICILLATUS.
Black  Alder.

Nat.  Ord. — Aquifoliaceas. Sex-.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK AND BERRIES.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  shrub  of  irregular  growth,  some-
times known  as  Winterberry,  having  a  stem  six  or  eight  feet  in  bight,
with  a  bluish-gray,  or  ash-colored  bark,  and  alternate,  horizontal,  and
spreading  branches.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  or  irregular,  on  short
petioles,  oval,  acute  at  the  base,  pointed,  sharply  serrate,  of  an  olive-
green  color,  smooth  above,  and  pubescent  beneath,  particularly  on  the
veins.  The  flowers  are  small,  white,  dioecious,  on  very  short  peduncles  ;
the  fertile  ones  somewhat  clustered  or  solitary  ;  the  sterile  ones  sub-um-
bellate ;  sometimes  the  flowers  are  monoecious.  The  calyx  is  small,  six-
cleft,  persistent.  Corolla  monopetalous,  spreading,  without  a  tube,  the
border  divided  into  six  obtuse  segments.  The  stamens  are  equal  in
number  to  the  divisions  of  the  corolla,  erect,  with  oblong  anthers  ;  in
the  fertile  flowers  they  are  shorter  than  the  corolla,  in  the  sterile  they
are  equal  in  length  to  it.  The  ovary  is  large,  green,  roundish,  with  a
short  style  and  obtuse  stigma.  The  fruit  consists  of  bright  scarlet,
globular  berries,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  supported  by  the  persistent


Prunus  Virginiana.  773

calyx,  and  crowned  with  the  stigma,  six-celled,  containing  six  long  seeds,
which  are  convex  outwardly,  and  sharp-edged  within.  Several  of  them
are  clustered  together  so  as  to  form  little  apparently  verticillate  bunches
at  irregular  intervals  on  the  stem.

History. — Black  Alder  is  found  in  nearly  all  parts  of  the  United
States,  from  Canada  to  Florida,  in  moist  woods,  swamps,  borders  of
ponds,  ditches,  etc.,  flowering  in  July,  and  ripening  its  fruit  late  in
autumn.  The  bark  and  berries  are  officinal.  The  dried  bark  is  in
slender  pieces,  more  or  less  rolled,  brittle,  greenish-white  internally,  and
covered  with  a  smooth,  whitish  ash  epidermis,  alternating  or  mingled
with  brown,  and  easily  separable.  It  has  a  bitter,  slightly  astringent
taste,  but  no  smell.  Boiling  water  extracts  its  virtues.  The  berries  are
sometimes,  but  improperly,  substituted  for  the  bark,  they  have  a  sweet-
ish, bitter,  acrid  taste,  and  impart  their  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.
These  have  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Black  Alder  is  tonic,  alterative,  and  astringent.
It  has  been  used  with  good  effect  in  jaundice,  diarrhea,  intermittent
fever,  and  other  diseases  connected  with  a  debilitated  state  of  the  system,
especially  gangrene  and  mortification  ;  it  has  also  been  of  service  in
dropsy.  Two  drachms  of  the  powdered  bark  and  one  drachm  of
powdered  golden-seal,  infused  in  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  and  when  cold,
taken  in  the  course  of  the  day,  in  doses  of  a  wineglassful,  and  repeated
daily,  has  proved  very  valuable  in  dyspepsia.  Externally,  the  decoction
forms  an  excellent  local  application  in  gangrene,  to  ill-conditioned  ulcers,
chronic  cutaneous  eruptions,  etc.  The  berries  are  cathartic  and  vermi-
fuge, and  form,  with  cedar-apples,  a  pleasant  and  effectual  worm  medi-
cine for  children.  (See  Juniperus  Virginiana.)  Dose,  of  the  powdered
bark,  from  half  a  drachm  to  one  drachm ;  of  the  decoction  four
fluidounces  three  or  four  times  a  day.  Black  Alder  bark  is  an  ingredi-
ent of  several  alterative  syrups.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Prinos.


PRUNUS  VIRGINIANA.

Wild Cherry.

Nat.  Ord. — Drupacere,  Be  Candolle ;  Amygdaleas,  Lindley.  Sex.  Syst. — Ico-
dandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  tree  is  the  Cerasus  Serotina  of  De  Candolle,  and
the  Cerasus  Virginiana  of  Michaux;  it  is  a  large  tree,  and  has  been  seen
from  eighty  to  one  hundred  feet  high.  Its  usual  size,  however,  is  from
fifty  to  eighty  feet  high,  from  two  to  four  feet  in  diameter,  being  of  uni-
form size  and  undivided  to  the  hight  of  twenty  or  thirty  feet.  The  bark
is  black  and  rough,  which  spontaneously  detaches  itself  semicircularly,


774  Materia Medica.

in  thick  narrow  plates.  The  wood  is  compact,  fine-grained,  and  receives
a  fine  polish,  and  is  extensively  used  by  cabinet  manufacturers.  The
leaves  are  deciduous,  oval-oblong,  or  lanceolate-oblong,  acuminate,  une-
qually serrate,  with  incurved,  short  and  callous  teeth,  thickish,  smooth
on  both  sides,  except  the  midrib,  shining  above,  of  a  beautiful  brilliant
green,  from  three  to  five  inches  long,  and  one-half  as  wide,  and  supported
alternately  on  petioles,  which  are  furnished  with  one  or  two  pairs  of  red-
dish glands.  The  flowers  are  small,  white,  and  disposed  in  elongate,
spreading,  and  sometimes  pendulous  racemes.  The  fruit  is  a  globular
drupe  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  of  a  purplish-black  color,  edible,  but
having  a  bitter  taste.

History. — The  Wild  Cherry  tree  is  found  in  many  parts  of  the  United
States,  but  is  most  abundant,  and  attains  the  greatest  magnitude,  in  the
south-western  States.  Its  flowers  appear  in  May,  and  the  fruit  ripens  in
August  and  September.  The  officinal  portion  is  the  bark,  and  that  of
the  root  should  be  preferred  to  that  of  the  trunk  or  branches.  When
dried  and  prepared  for  use,  it  is  in  pieces  of  various  lengths  and  sizes,
deprived  of  epidermis,  of  a  reddish-brown  color,  bitter,  and  easily  pul-
verized. Its  powder  is  of  a  fawn  color.  When  recent,  or  when  boiled
in  water,  it  emits  an  odor  resembling  that  of  peach-leaves  ;  and  its  taste
is  agreeably  bitter  and  aromatic,  with  a  flavor  similar  to  that  of  peach-
meats.  It  imparts  its  properties  to  alcohol  or  water,  whether  hot  or
cold ;  but  boiling  destroys  its  remedial  qualities,  partly  in  consequence
of  the  escape  of  its  volatile  principle,  and  partly  upon  a  chemical  change
effected  by  the  heat.  It  should  be  employed  in  a  recently  dried  state,
as  its  properties  are  much  impaired  by  keeping.  Mr.  S.  Procter  found
it  to  contain  starch,  resin,  tannin,  gallic  acid,  fatty  matter,  lignin,  red
coloring  matter,  salts  of  lime  and  potassa,  and  iron,  also  a  volatile  oil
associated  with  hydrocyanic  acid,  of  a  light-straw  color,  and  analogous
in  its  properties  to  the  essential  oil  of  bitter  almonds.  Two  drops  of  it
destroyed  a  cat  in  nearly  five  minutes.  This  volatile  oil  and  the  hydro-
cyanic acid  do  not  exist  ready  formed  in  the  bark,  but  are  caused  by  the
reaction  of  water  upon  amygdalin,  which  is  one  of  the  constituents  of
the  bark  ;  and  which  change  is  very  probably  effected  by  the  agency  of
another  principle,  analogous  to,  if  not  identical  with,  emvlsin,  or  the
synaptase  of  Robiquet.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Tonic  and  stimulant  in  its  operation  on  the
digestive  organs,  and  at  the  same  time  exercising  a  sedative  influence  on
the  circulatory  and  nervous  systems.  It  is,  therefore,  useful  in  all  dis-
eases where  it  is  of  importance  to  impart  tonicity,  and  yet,  to  avoid  any
undue  excitement  of  the  heart  and  blood-vessels,  as  for  instance,  during
the  first  stage  of  convalescence  from  inflammatory  attacks,  and  in  many
pulmonary  diseases.  It  is  very  generally  used  in  phthisis,  where  hectic
fever  exists,  and  has  also  been  used  with  benefit  in  some  forms  of


Prunus  Virginiana.  775

dyspepsia.  In  large  doses  it  diminishes  the  action  of  the  heart,  owing  pro-
bably to  the  hydrocyanic  acid  which  it  affords.  It  has  likewise  been  of
service  in  scrofula  and  other  diseases  attended  with  much  debility  and
hectic  fever.  Externally  it  has  been  found  useful  in  decoction  as  a  wash
to  ill-conditioned  ulcers.  An  excellent  preparation  is  a  syrup  made  by
macerating  four  ounces  of  the  powdered  bark  with  twelve  fiuidounces  of
water,  for  two  days  ;  the  mixture  is  then  placed  in  a  percolator  or  dis-
placement apparatus,  returning  the  liquid  which  passes  till  it  comes
away  clear — displacing  with  an  additional  quantity  of  water,  until  twelve
fiuidounces  of  infusion  are  obtained,  and  then  dissolving  in  this  thirteen
ounces  of  loaf  sugar  ;  the  dose  of  this  syrup  is  from  half  a  fluidounce  to
one  ounce.  Dose  of  the  powdered  bark,  one  or  two  drachms  ;  of  the
infusion,  one  ounce  of  bark  to  one  pint  of  cold  water,  and  allowed  to
stand  a  few  hours,  from  one  to  four  fiuidounces,  four  or  five  times  a  day,
and  which  is  the  best  mode  of  using  it.

The  Prunus  Domesticus,  or  cultivated  Prune  or  Plum  Tree,  may  be
referred  to  here.  The  dried  or  prepared  fruit  is  the  only  officinal  part,
and  furnishes  the  prunes  of  commerce.  Those  imported  into  this
country,  are  principally  from  the  south  of  France,  the  finest  kinds
coming  from  the  port  of  Bordeaux.  A  poorer  kind  is  brought  from
Germany.  Prunes  are  prepared  by  exposing  the  fresh  fruit  to  the  heat
of  an  oven,  and  then  drying  in  the  sun.  They  have  a  faint  odor,  a
sweet,  mucilaginous,  somewhat  acid  taste,  and  contain  crystallizable  and
uncrystallizable  sugar,  malic  acid,  and  mucilaginous  matter.  In  Ger-
many a  kind  of  brandy  is  obtained  from  this  fruit,  and  which  may  be
sometimes  had  of  the  importers  of  German  liquors.  Prunes  are  laxa-
tive and  nutritious,  and  stewed  with  water  form  an  excellent  diet  in  cases
of  constipation,  and  also  during  convalescence  from  febrile  or  inflamma-
tory diseases.  They  are  often  added  to  purgative  decoctions,  and  the
pulp  is  employed  in  the  preparation  of  laxative  confections.  When
taken  too  largely,  and  especially  in  those  whose  digestive  organs  are
debilitated  or  impaired,  they  are  apt  to  cause  flatulence,  and  griping.
The  following  preparation  has  been  administered  with  much  success  in
leucorrhea,  irregular  menstruation,  and  in  debility  from  frequent  abor-
tions :  Take  of  small  raisins  or  dried  currants  two  ounces,  aniseed,  mace,
and  cinnamon,  of  each,  half  an  ounce,  and  one  nutmeg  in  powder  ;  to
these  add  one  quart  of  prune  brandy,  and  let  them  macerate  for  two
weeks,  frequently  agitating.  This  is  the  formula  as  originally  given.
Of  the  clear  tincture  thus  made,  one  fluidounce  may  be  given  previous
to  a  meal,  and  repeated  three  times  daily.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Pruni  Virginianee  ;  Tinctura  Laricis  Composita ;
Vinum  Cinchonae  Compositum.


776  Materia Medica.

PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.

Shrubby  Trefoil.

Nat.  Ord. — Xanthoxylaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Wingseed,
Wafer- Ash,  and  Swamp- Dogwood.  It  is  a  shrub  from  six  to  eight  feet
in  hight,  with  the  leaves  trifoliate,  and  marked  with  pellucid  dots ;  the
leaflets  are  sessile,  ovate,  short  acuminate,  downy  beneath  when  young,
crenulate,  or  obscurely  toothed ;  lateral  ones  inequilateral,  terminal  ones
cuneate  at  base,  from  three  to  four  and  a  half  inches  long  by  one  inch
and  a  quarter  to  one  inch  and  three-quarters  wide.  The  flowers  are
polygamous,  greenish-white,  nearly  half  an  inch  in  diameter,  of  a  dis-
agreeable odor,  and  disposed  in  terminal  corymbose  cymes.  Stamens
mostly  four ;  style  short.  Fruit  a  two-celled  samara,  nearly  an  inch  in
diameter,  winged  all  round,  nearly  orbicular.

History.  —  Shrubby  Trefoil  or  Ptelea,  is  a  shrub  common  to  this
country,  growing  more  abundantly  west  of  the  Alleghanies  in  shady
moist  hedges  and  edges  of  woods,  and  in  rocky  places ;  it  flowers  in
June.  The  bark  of  the  root  is  officinal,  and  yields  its  properties  to
boiling  water ;  but  alcohol  is  its  best  solvent.  It  is,  when  dried,  of  a
light  brownish-yellow  color  externally,  in  cylindrical  rolls  or  quills,  a
line  or  two  in  thickness,  and  from  one  to  several  inches  in  length,  irregu-
larly wrinkled  and  furrowed  externally,  with  broad,  transverse  lines  or
rings  at  short  but  irregular  intervals,  and  is  covered  with  a  thin  epidermis;
internally  it  is  yellowish-white,  but  becomes  darker  on  exposure,  and  is
wrinkled  longitudinally ;  it  is  brittle  with  an  almost  smooth,  resinous
fracture,  granular  under  the  microscope,  resembling  wax.  It  has  a
peculiar  smell,  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  liquorice-root,  and  a  peculiar
bitter,  resinous,  pungent,  acrid,  and  rather  disagreeable  taste,  speedily
and  powerfully  acting  upon  the  mouth  and  fauces,  and  the  pungency  of
which  is  persistent,  and  which  is  probably  owing  to  its  oil.  It  has  not
been  analyzed. The  fruit  is  bitter  and  aromatic.

Properties  and  Uses. — Ptelea  is  tonic.  Used  in  intermittent  fevers,
remittent  fevers,  and  all  cases  of  debility  where  tonics  are  indicated.
Said  also  to  be  anthelmintic.  Equal  parts  of  Ptelea  and  the  Euonymus
Atropurpureus,  have  been  highly  recommended  in  pulmonary  affections.
A  tincture  of  Ptelea,  made  in  whisky,  is  reputed  to  have  cured  several
cases  of  asthma,  and  it  is  said  to  cause,  in  many  instances  where  it  has
been  used,  a  troublesome  external  erysipelatous  inflammation,  either
general  or  local,  but  which,  if  the  use  of  the  tincture  be  persisted  in,
finally  disappears,  and  the  patient  becomes  at  the  same  time  perma-
nently cured  of  the  disease  for  which  he  was  treated.  This  would
certainly  indicate  other  valuable  properties  in  this  plant,  than  those  with


Ptelein.  777

which  we  are  acquainted,  and  deserves  a  further  and  thorough  investi-
gation. It  may  be  used  in  powder,  tincture,  or  extract.  Dose  of  the
powder,  ten  to  thirty  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  of  the  tincture,
one  or  two  fluidrachms  ;  of  the  extract,  five  to  ten  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Pteleae  Hydro-alcoholicum  ;  Infusum  Ptelese;
Ptelein.


PTELEIN.
Ptelein.

THE OLEO-RESINOUS PRINCIPLE OF PTELEA TRIFOLIATA.

Preparation. — Make  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  bark  of  Ptelca  Tri-
foliata,  add  to  it  twice  its  volume  of  water,  and  distil  off  the  alcohol;
the  ptelein  remains  in  the  water,  from  which  it  must  be  separated.

History. — Ptelein,  I  believe,  was  first  prepared  by  Mr.  W.  S.  Mer-
rell,  and  is  obtained  from  the  tincture  of  the  bark  by  precipitation  with
water,  in  the  same  manner  by  which  podophyllin,  iridin,  eupurpurin,  etc.,
are  obtained.  It  is  of  the  consistence  of  thick  syrup  or  molasses,  dark-
brown  in  mass,  much  lighter  when  in  thin  layers,  and  has  a  peculiar  odor,
somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the  extract  of  liquorice,  and  an  oily,  bitterish,
acrid,  persistent  taste,  peculiar  and  rather  disagreeable,  and  acting  power-
fully on  the  fauces.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  oil  of  turpentine,  and
rather  imperfectly  in  alkaline  solutions  ;  insoluble  in  acids  and  water.
It  imparts  a  slight  milky  color  to  water,  and  separates  into  two  portions,
one  of  which  floats  on  the  water,  while  the  other  sinks.  Acetic  acid
added  to  its  alcoholic  or  ethereal  solution  does  not  disturb  them,  unless
added  in  excess.  Water  added  to  the  alcoholic  solution  produces  a
milky  color,  precipitating  the  resin;  added  to  the  ethereal  solution  it  sepa-
rates the  oil,  which  floats  on  the  surface.

Properties  and  Uses. — Ptelein  is  a  tonic,  and  possesses  other  proper-
ties not  yet  satisfactorily  understood.  It  is  a  valuable  medicinal  agent,
which  should  receive  the  especial  attention  of  the  profession.  I  have
used  it  extensively  and  successfully  in  cases  of  dyspepsia,  combined  with
equal  parts  of  Xanthoxylin,  and  given  in  doses  of  one  or  two  grains,
repeated  three  times  a  day ;  if  constipation  be  present,  I  have  found  the
following  an  admirable  combination :  Take  of  ptelein  nineteen  grains,
alcoholic  extract  of  nux  vomica  one  grain,  white  sugar,  or  lactin,  two
drachms.  Mix  thoroughly  together;  the  dose  is  six  grains  to  be  repeated
three  or  four  times  a  day.  I  have  found  the  following  a  valuable  pill  in
chronic  erysipelas,  hepatic  torpor,  enlarged  spleen,  habitual  constipation,
chronic  dysentery,  and  some  forms  of  dyspepsia :  Take  of  podophyllin
and  leptandrin,  of  each  one  grain,  sulphate  of  quinia  four  grains,
ptelein  eight  grains ;  mix  these  together,  and  divide  into  eight  pills.
The  dose  is  one  pill,  to  be  repeated  two  or  three  times  a  day,  and  the
alkaline  bath  to  be  used  daily.


778  Materia Medica.

PTERIS  ATROPURPUREA.

Rockbrake.
Nat. Orel. — Filices  ;  Polypodiacea;,  Brown. Bex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Filices.

THE PLANT.

Description. — Rock-brake  is  an  indigenous  perennial  fern,  with  a
frond  from  six  to  ten  inches  in  hight,  twice  as  long  as  wide,  of  a  gray-
ish hue,  pinnate,  the  two  lower  divisions  consisting  of  from  one  to  three
pairs  of  leaflets  with  a  large,  terminal  segment.  The  stipe  and  rachis,
dark-purple,  shining,  with  dense,  paleaceous  hairs  at  base.  The  lower
leaflets  ternate  or  pinnate,  lanceolate,  obtuse,  distinct,  obliquely  truncate
or  subcordate  at  base,  with  margins  conspicuously  revolute.  Involucre
rather  broad,  formed  of  the  inflected  margin  of  the  frond,  and  opening
inwardly.  Sori  in  a  broad  continuous  line  along  the  margin  of  the
frond.  The  several  varieties  of  this  species  possess  similar  properties,
as  the  Pteris  Venosa,  with  the  stipe  angled,  and  the  leaflets  veined
beneath ;  P.  Punctata,  with  the  stipe  terete,  and  the  leaflets  punctate
beneath.

The  Pteris  Aquilina  or  common  Brake  likewise  possesses  analogous
virtues.  It  is  a  fern  from  two  to  five  feet  in  hight,  upon  a  smooth,  dark-
purple,  erect  stipe.  The  frond  is  pinnate,  three-parted,  broad-triangular
in  outline.  The  branches  are  bipinnate.  The  leaflets  linear-lanceolate ;
the  lower  ones  pinnatifid,  the  upper  ones  entire;  segments  oblong,  obtuse.
Sori  covered  by  the  folding  back  of  the  margins  of  the  segments.

History. — Rock-brake  is  common  to  the  United  States,  usually  grow-
ing on  limestone  rocks;  the  common  Brake  is  found  in  greater  abundance,
in  woods,  pastures,  waste  grounds,  and  stony  hills.  The  whole  plant  is
used  in  medicine,  and  imparts  its  virtues  to  water.  No  analysis  has
been  made  of  it.  As  found  in  the  shops,  the  dried  root  consists  of  a
long  cylindrical  caudex,  of  a  dark-brown  color  externally,  and  light
brownish-red  internally,  of  an  astringent,  leathery  taste  and  around
which  are  closely  arranged,  overlapping  each  other  like  the  shingles  of
a  roof,  the  remains  of  the  leafstalks  or  stipes,  which  are  an  inch  or  two
in  length,  from  two  to  four  lines  thick,  somewhat  curved  and  directed
upward,  angular,  dark-brown,  furrowed  longitudinally,  and  from  between
which,  emerge  numerous  small  radical  fibers.  The  dried  leaves  are  of
a  light-grayish  or  greenish-yellow  color,  of  an  odor  resembling  that  of
sole  leather,  and  a  leathery,  astringent,  not  disagreeable  taste.  As  sold,
it  is  usually  in  broken  fragments.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Rock-brake  is  astringent  and  anthelmintic.
A  decoction  of  it,  taken  moderately,  has  proved  efficacious  in  diarrhea,
dysentery,  night-sweats,  and  hemorrhages ;  and  used  as  a  local  applica-
tion, it  is  beneficial  in  obstinate  and  ill-conditioned  ulcers,  ulcerations  of
the  mouth  and  fauces,  and,  as  a  vaginal  injection  in  leucorrhea. A


Pterocarptjs  Santalinus.  779

strong  decoction  is  in  some  repute  as  a  remedy  for  worms.  A  power-
ful astringent  infusion  may  be  made  by  adding  four  drachms  of  the
plant  to  one  pint  of  boiling  water,  and  which  has  been  used  in  diarrhea
and  dysentery,  in  half  fluidounce  doses  repeated  every  two  or  three
hours,  with  success.

A  plant  called  Winter-fern  or  Brake  is  much  employed  in  amenorrhea,
and  in  suppression  of  the  lochia ;  it  is  used  in  infusion,  and  taken  freely.
By  some  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  Pteris  Atropurpurea  ;  but  of  this  I  am
not  positive,  not  having  been  able  to  obtain  a  perfect  specimen  of  the
plant  for  examination.  Both  the  roots  and  tops  are  used,  and  are
worthy  the  attention  of  the  practitioner  in  the  above-named  derangements.


PTERO CARPUS SANTALINUS.

Red  Saunders.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabaceas,  or  Leguminosse. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Decandria.

THE WOOD.

Description. — This  is  a  large  tree  with  alternate  branches.  The  leaves
are  petiolate,  ternate,  and  alternate  ;  the  leaflets  are  alternate,  petiolate,
the  uppermost  larger,  ovate-roundish  or  oblong,  entire,  emarginate  or
retuse,  veined,  smooth  above,  and  hoary  beneath.  The  flowers  are
yellow,  in  axillary,  erect,  simple  or  branched  racemes ;  the  corolla  is
papilionaceous,  the  vexillum  or  banner  of  which  is  obcordate,  erect,
somewhat  reflexed  at  the  sides,  toothed  and  waved,  having  red  veins  ;
the  aloe  or  wings  spreading,  with  their  edges  apparently  toothed,  and
the  carina  or  keel  oblong,  short,  and  inflated.  The  calyx  is  brown.
Filaments  ten,  diadelphous.  Legume  roundish,  stalked,  falcate  upward,
compressed,  smooth,  keeled  on  the  lower  edge,  the  keel  being  mem-
branous and  undulated. Seeds  solitary.

History. — This  is  a  large  forest  tree  inhabiting  Ceylon,  and  the  moun-
tains of  the  opposite  Coromandel  coast  on  the  Indian  continent.  The
wood  is  the  officinal  Bed  Saunders  or  Red  Sandal  wood.  It  is  imported  in
billets  which  are  dense,  heavy,  dark-brown  externally,  and  internally
dark-red  with  light-red  rings.  It  is  usually  kept  in  the  shops  in  the
state  of  small  chips,  raspings,  or  coarse  powder.  It  has  a  faint,  pecu-
liar odor,  and  an  obscurely  astringent  taste,  and  is  of  difficult  pulveriza-
tion. It  may  be  distinguished  from  other  coloring  woods,  by  imparting
a  red  color  to  alcohol,  ether,  and  alkaline  solutions,  but  not  to  water.
The  alcoholic  tincture  causes  a  deep  violet  precipitate  with  the  sulphate
of  iron,  a  scarlet  with  the  bichloride  of  mercury,  and  a  violet  with  the
soluble  salts  of  lead.  About  seventeen  per  cent,  of  a  yellow  resinoid,
coloring  principle  was  obtained  from  it  by  Pelletier,  which  became  red
from  the  action  of  the  air ;  he  named  it  Santalin  Cio  Hi6  03.  It  may
be  obtained  either  by  precipitation  of  the  tincture  with  water,  or  by


780  Materia  Medica.

preparing  an  infusion  with  an  alkaline  solution,  and  precipitating  with  an
acid.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  soluble  in  alcohol  or  ether,  slightly  soluble  in
volatile  oils,  with  the  exception  of  those  of  lavender  and  rosemary,  which
readily  dissolve  it.  Soluble  in  acetic  acid,  and  readily  soluble  without
decomposition  in  alkalies;  the  acetic  solution  is  somewhat  astringent  to
the  taste,  and  is  precipitated  by  solution  of  gelatin.  It  is  said  to  be  pos-
sessed of  acid  properties.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic  and  astringent;  formerly  used  for  these
indications,  but  at  present  employed  only  for  coloring  tinctures,  etc.


PTEROSPORA  ANDROMEDA.

Crawley.

Nat.  Ord.  —  Ericaceae;  Suborder,  Monotropese.  Sex.  Syst.  —  Decandria
Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  various  names  of  Dragon's
Claw,  Pine-drops,  Albany  Beech-drops,  Fever-root,  etc.,  has  a  perennial,
fleshy,  tuberculous  root,  with  many  tubers  which  resemble  the  claws  of
a  fowl.  The  stem  or  scape  is  erect,  simple,  straight,  dark-purple,  cylin-
drical, covered  with  short  viscid  wool,  from  eight  to  thirty  inches  in
hight,  leafless,  and  sparsely  beset  with  scales.  Leaves  none.  The
flowers  are  pale  or  reddish-white,  lateral,  nodding,  and  disposed  in  a
terminal  raceme  from  six  to  twelve  inches  long,  and  composed  of  fifty  or
more  flowers ;  the  pedicels  are  irregularly  scattered,  from  six  to  eight
lines  in  length,  and  axillary  to  long,  linear  bracts.  The  calyx  is  five-
parted  ;  the  corolla  is  roundish-ovoid,  urn-shaped,  the  limb  five-toothed,
reflexed,  and  inclosing  the  stamens.  Stamens  ten ;  filaments  flat ;  anthers
peltate,  two-celled,  two-awned,  opening  lengthwise;  style  short;  stigma.
five-lobed,  capitate.  Capsule  or  pod  globose,  depressed,  five-lobed,  five-
celled,  loculicidal.  Seeds  very  numerous,  minute,  ovoid,  tapering  to
each  end,  the  apex  expanded  into  a  broad  reticulated  wing  many  times
larger  than  the  nucleus.

History. — This  is  a  rare  and  singular  plant,  found  on  barren  hills  and
shady  uplands,  and  in  hard  clay  soil,  in  the  State  of  New  York  and
some  other  of  the  northern  States  and  Canada,  flowering  in  July.  By
some  it  is  supposed  to  be  parasitic  on  the  roots  of  certain  trees.  It  was
first  discovered  in  1816  by  Dr.  D.  S.  C.  H.  Smith,  although  long  known
previous  to  that  time  by  herbalists.  The  entire  plant  is  destitute  of  ver-
dure. The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  it  is  small,  dark-brown,  resembling
cloves  or  a  hen's  claw,  has  a  strong,  nitrous  smell,  and  a  mucilaginous,
slightly-bitter,  astringent  taste.  It  has  not  been  analyzed,  hence  its
proper  menstruums  are  unknown.  —  There  are  four  varieties,  the  P.
Paucifiora,  or  Few-flowered  Crawley ;  the  P.Leucorhiza,  or  White-stalked


PULMONARIA OFFICINALIS.  781

Crawley ;  the  P.  Flaviculis,  or  Yellow-stalked  Crawley ;  and  the  P.  Ela-
tior,  or  High-stalked  Crawley — all  of  which  possess  similar  medicinal
virtues. The  first  two  are  found  in  the  Western  States.

Properties  and  Uses. — Crawley  is,  prohably,  the  most  powerful,  prompt,
and  certain  diaphoretic,  in  the  Materia  Medica,  but  its  scarcity  and  high
price  prevent  it  from  coming  into  general  use.  It  is  also  sedative,  and
promotes  perspiration,  without  producing  any  excitement  in  the  system.
Its  chief  value  is  as  a  diaphoretic  in  fevers,  especially  typhus,  and  in
inflammatory  diseases ;  it  has  proved  efficacious  in  acute  erysipelas,
cramps,  flatulency,  pleurisy  and  night-sweats ;  and  relieves  hectic  fever
without  debilitating  the  patient.  Probably  it  will  be  found  to  combine
tonic,  sedative,  diaphoretic,  and  febrifuge  properties.  Its  virtues  are
especially  marked  in  the  low  stage  of  fevers.  The  dose  is  from  twenty
to  thirty  grains  of  the  powdered  root,  given  in  water  as  warm  as  the
patient  can  drink,  and  repeated  every  hour  or  two,  according  to  circum-
stances. The  powder  should  always  be  kept  in  well-closed  vials ;  it  con-
stitutes the  "fever  powders"  of  some  practitioners.  Combined  with
caulophyllin  it  forms  an  excellent  agent  in  amenorrhea  and  dysmenor-
rhea; and  is  unsurpassed  in  after-pains,  suppression  of  lochia,  and  the
febrile  symptoms  which  sometimes  occur  at  the  parturient  period.  In
fevers  it  may  be  advantageously  combined  with  leptandrin,  or  podophyl-
lin,  where  it  is  found  necessary  to  act  upon  the  bowels  or  liver ;  and
mixed  with  dioscorein,  it  will  be  found  almost  a  specific  in  flatulent  and
bilious  colic.  It  is  an  agent  not  known  in  Aiiopathie  works  on  medicine,
and  one  which  deserves  more  attention  than  has  been  bestowed  upon  it.


PULMONARIA  OFFICINALIS.

Lungwort.

Nat.  Ord. — Boraginaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  a  rough  plant,  with  a  stem  about  one  foot  in
hitrht.  The  radical  leaves  are  ovate,  cordate,  scabrous,  and  the  cauline
ones  ovate  and  sessile.  The  flowers  are  blue,  and  in  terminal  clusters.
The  calyx  is  prismatic,  five-angled,  five-toothed,  and  as  long  as  the  tube
of  the  corolla;  the  corolla  is  infundibuliform,  with  a  cylindric  tube,  ori-
fice hairy  in  five  lines  alternating  with  the  stamens;  stigma  emarginate;
achcnia  roundish,  obtuse,  imperforate  at  base.

History. — This  is  a  herbaceous  perennial,  growing  in  Europe  and  this
country,  in  northern  latitudes.  In  Europe  it  is  a  rough-leaved  plant,  but
in  this  country  the  whole  plant  is  smooth.  The  Mertensia  Virginica,  or  Vir-
ginian Lungwort,  or  Cowslip,  is  frequently  employed  in  the  United  States ;
it  is  the  Pulmonaria  Virginica  of  Linnieus,  and  the  Lithospermum  Pulchrum


782  Materia  Medica.

of  Lehman.  It  is  a  smooth,  erect  and  elegant  plant,  about  twenty  inches
in  hight,  the  radical  leaves  of  which  are  obtuse,  obovate-elliptical,  and
become  from  five  to  six  inches  long,  and  about  two-thirds  as  wide,  many-
veined,  and  the  cauline  are  long-lanceolate  and  sessile.  The  flowers  are
blue,  and  in  terminal  clusters.  The  calyx  five-cleft,  much  shorter  than
the  tube  of  the  corolla,  limb  longer  than  the  tube ;  the  corolla  is  nearly
an  inch  long,  funnel- form,  four  times  the  length  of  the  calyx,  naked  in
the  throat,  and  the  much-spreading  border  slightly  five-lobed,  stamens
and  style  included ;  filaments  slender.  Disk  bearing  two  glands  as  long
as  the  ovaries.  The  stem  and  leaves  are  usually  pellucid-punctate.  This
plant  is  found  in  alluvial  banks,  growing  from  western  New  York  to
Georgia  and  the  Western  States,  and  flowering  in  May.  Being  a  showy
plant  it  is  frequently  cultivated. — The  leaves  of  these  plants  are  the
parts  used  ;  they  are  inodorous,  and  have  a  herbaceous,  somewhat
mucilaginous,  and  feebly  astringent  taste.  Water  extracts  their  pro-
perties.

Properties  and  Uses. — Demulcent  and  mucilaginous,  and  may  be  used
in  decoction,  whenever  this  class  of  agents  is  indicated.  They  have
been  much  used  in  catarrh,  hemoptysis,  and  other  diseases  of  the  respi-
ratory organs.

PUNICA  GRANATUM.

Pomegranate.
Nat.  Ord. — Myrtaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Monogynia.

THE  RIND  OF  THE  FRUIT  AND  BARK  OF  THE  ROOT.

Description. — The  Pomegranate  is  a  beautiful  shrub,  covered  with  a
brownish  bark,  with  many  slender  branches,  which  are  more  or  less
spiny.  In  favorable  situations  it  frequently  attains  the  hight  of  twenty
feet.  The  leaves  are  opposite  or  ternate,  sessile,  smooth,  waved,  entire,
oblong,  inclining  to  lanceolate,  of  a  bright-green  color,  two  or  three
inches  long,  by  from  five  to  ten  lines  wide,  and  without  a  marginal  vein.
The  flowers  are  large,  of  a  rich  scarlet  color,  solitary,  or  two  or  three
together,  terminal.  The  calyx  is  turbinate,  thick,  fleshy,  red,  and
divided  into  five  acute  segments,  which  are  valvate  in  aestivation.  The
corolla  consists  of  five  large,  wrinkled,  membranous  petals,  somewhat
spreading,  and  which  are  inserted  into  the  upper  part  of  the  tube  of  the
calyx.  The  stamens  are  indefinite,  with  capillary  filaments,  and  oblong,
two-celled  anthers,  bursting  in  front  by  two  chinks.  The  ovary  is  infe-
rior, with  a  simple  style,  crowned  by  a  papulose  stigma.  The  fruit  is
the  size  of  an  orange,  globular,  somewhat  compressed,  and  indehiscent;
it  is  filled  with  numerous,  angular,  exalbuminous  seeds,  each  enveloped
in  a  juicy  rose-colored  pulp,  and  is  crowned  with  the  limb  of  the  calyx,
and  covered  with  a  thick,  tawny,  coriaceous  rind,  which  is  the  dilated
calycine  tube. This  balaust,  as  it  is  termed,  is  divided  into  two  chambers


Punica  Granatum.  783

by  a  transverse  diaphragm.  The  upper  chamber  is  five  to  nine-celled,
and  the  lower  three-celled.  The  placentae  of  the  upper  division  extend
from  the  parietes  to  the  center,  while  those  of  the  lower  proceed  irregu-
larly from  the  bottom.

History. — The  Pomegranate  is  a  native  of  Northern  Africa,  Syria,
Persia,  China,  and  other  countries  of  Asia,  and  has  been  naturalized  in
the  West  Indies,  and  other  civilized  countries  in  warm  latitudes.  It  has
splendid,  dark-scarlet  flowers,  often  doubled,  which  appear  in  July  and
August.  The  flowers  have  a  bitterish,  astringent  taste,  without  odor,
and  their  infusion  gives  a  deep  bluish-black  precipitate  with  the  salts  of
the  sesquioxide  of  iron  ;  the  saliva  is  colored  agriolet-red  upon  chewing
them.  They  contain  tannic  and  gallic  acids,  and  together  with  the  seeds
are  recognized  as  officinal  in  some  foreign  Pharmacopoeias.  The  fruit
varies  in  size  and  flavor,  that  of  the  West  Indies  becoming  the  most
perfect;  it  contains  a  red,  succulent,  pleasantly  acid,  sweetish,  and
edible  pulp.  The  rind  of  the  fruit,  and  the  lark  of  the  root,  are  the  only
parts  employed  in  this  country.

The  Rind  of  the  fruit,  (  Granatum,  London ;  Punicce  Granati  Cortex,
Dublin,  or  Granati  Fructus  Cortex,  United  States,)  when  dry,  is  yellow-
ish or  reddish-brown  externally,  yellow  within,  about  a  line  in  thickness,
smooth  or  finely  tuberculated,  hard,  dry,  brittle,  in  irregular  fragments,
inodorous,  and  of  a  very  astringent,  slightly  bitter  taste.  Its  infusion
gives  an  abundant,  dark-bluish  precipitate  with  the  salts  of  iron.  It
contains  18.8  per  cent,  of  tannin,  17.1  of  mucilage,  10.8  extractive  matter,
30  lignin,  a  trace  of  resin,  and  29.9  moisture.

The  root  is  large,  ligneous,  knotty,  and  hard,  and  covered  with  a
yellowish-gray,  or  ash-gray  bark,  which  is  yellow  on  its  inner  surface.
The  Bark  of  the  root,  (Granati  Radicis  Cortex),  as  found  in  commerce,
is  generally  in  quills,  or  fragments  of  quills,  from  two  to  six  inches  in
length,  and  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  breadth,  and  nearly  a  line  in
thickness  ;  it  is  grayish-yellow  externally,  with  green  specks,  yellow
internally,  brittle,  and  not  stringy.  It  breaks  with  a  short  fracture,  has
a  faint,  peculiar  odor,  has  an  astringent,  bitter  taste  when  fresh,  the
bitterness  of  which  is  nearly  lost  by  drying.  When  chewed,  it  tinges
the  saliva  yellow.  Its  infusion  yields  a  deep-blue  precipitate  with  the
salts  of  iron,  a  yellowish  white  one  with  a  solution  of  gelatin,  a  grayish-
yellow  with  corrosive  sublimate,  and  potassa  or  ammonia  colors  it  purple.
The  inner  surface  of  the  bark,  steeped  in  water  and  then  rubbed  on
paper,  stains  it  yellow,  which  becomes  blue  by  the  contact  of  sulphate
of  iron,  and  a  slight  rose  tint  by  that  of  nitric  acid,  which  soon  vanishes.
These  properties  will  distinguish  it  from  the  barks  of  the  box  root  and
barberry  branches,  with  which  it  is  sometimes  adulterated  ;  the  box
bark  is  nearly  white,  bitter,  not  astringent,  and  its  infusion  is  not  preci-
pitated by  salts  of  iron. The  barberry  bark,  very  much  resembles  the


784  Materia  Medica.

pomegranate,  and  is  very  bitter  and  not  astringent,  and  is  not  affected
by  the  salts  of  iron,  solution  of  isinglass,  corrosive  sublimate,  or  potassa.
The  ligneous  portion  of  pomegranate  root  is  inert,  and  should,  therefore,
be  always  separated  from  the  bark.

Pomegranate  bark  has  been  analyzed  by  several  chemists,  and
contains  fatty  matter,  tannic  and  gallic  acids,  starch,  gum,  resin,  wax,
chlorophylle,  a  saccharine  substance  having  the  properties  of  mannite,
and  some  insoluble  matters.  Righini  obtained  a  peculiar  oleo-resinous
principle  from  it,  which  he  considers  to  be  the  source  of  its  activity  and
which  he  named  Punicin;  it  has  an  acrid  taste,  and  affects  the  nostrils
somewhat  similar  to  veratria.  It  may  be  prepared  by  rubbing  a  hydro-
alcoholic  extract  of  the  bark  with  one  eighth  of  hydrate  of  potassa,  heat-
ino-  the  mixture  with  eight  parts  of  pure  water  gradually  added,  then
dropping  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid  to  neutralize  the  alkaline  solution,  and
washing  on  a  filter  with  cold  water;  the  punicin  separates  and  is  obtained
in  the  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  flowers  and  rind  of  the  fruit  are  astrin-
gent, and  have  been  used  for  arresting  chronic  mucous  discharges,
passive  hemorrhages,  aphthous  disorders  of  the  mouth,  night-sweats,
colliquative  diarrhea,  etc.,  but  are  now  seldom  employed.  The  rind
has  also  been  found  serviceable  in  intermittent  fever,  and  tapeworm.
The  bark  of  the  root  possesses  anthelmintic  properties,  and  is  chiefly
serviceable  in  tapeworm.  The  bark  of  the  wild  pomegranate  is  consi-
dered by  the  French  to  be  more  active  than  the  cultivated  plant.  It
may  be  given  in  powder,  but  the  decoction  is  generally  preferred.  Two
ounces  of  the  bark  are  to  be  steeped  in  two  pints  of  water,  for  twelve
hours,  then  boil  the  whole  down  to  one  pint,  strain,  and  give  a  wine-
glassful  every  two  hours,  until  the  whole  is  taken.  It  commonly  occa-
sions several  stools,  an  increased  flow  of  urine,  or  nausea  and  vomiting,
owing,  it  is  supposed,  to  the  agitation  into  which  the  worm  is  thrown
from  its  presence.  Sometimes  joints  of  the  worm  begin  to  come  away
in  less  than  an  hour  after  the  last  dose.  But  often  the  doses  must  be
repeated  several  successive  mornings  before  they  take  effect,  and  it  is
right  to  repeat  them  occasionally  for  four  or  five  days  after  the  joints
have  ceased  to  come  away.  Laxatives  should  be  administered  from
time  to  time.  It  is  said  to  act  with  the  greatest  certainty  when  the  joints
of  the  worm  come  away  naturally.  The  dose  of  the  rind  or  flowers  in
powder,  is  from  one  to  two  scruples,  and  in  decoction  from  one  to  three
fluidounces.  The  seeds  are  demulcent.
Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Granati  Radicis.


Pycnanthemum  Pilosum  —  Pyrethrum  Parthenium. 785

PYCNANTHEMUM  PILOSUM.

Pycnanthemum.
Nat. Ord. — Lamiacea?,  or  Labiatse. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Monogynia.

THE PLANT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  perennial  plant,  with  long  and  soft
whitish  hairs,  and  a  subsimple  stem,  growing  from  one  to  two  feet  in
hight.  The  leaves  are  sessile,  nearly  entire,  lanceolate,  acute  at  both
ends,  and  pilose  beneath  ;  the  floral  ones  not  whitened.  The  flowers  are
white,  and  disposed  in  large,  terminal,  sessile  heads.  The  calyx-teeth
are  ovate-lanceolate,  acute,  and  with  the  lanceolate  bracts,  are  canes-
cently  villous  and  awnless.  The  corolla  is  pubescent,  and  the  stamens
exserted.

History. — This  plant  is  found  in  low  grounds,  dry  hills  and  plains,
from  Ohio  and  Illinois  extending  southward,  and  flowering  in  July  and
August.  The  whole  plant  is  used  and  yields  its  virtues  to  boiling  water ;
it  has  the  taste  and  odor  peculiar  to  the  Mint  family.  There  are  several
species  of  this  genus  which  possess  similar  medicinal  properties,  as  the
Pycnanthemum  Virginicum,  Narrow-leaf  Virginian  Thyme  or  Prairie-
Hyssop,  a  pubescent  plant  with  white  flowers,  sessile,  lance-linear,  entire,
and  punctate  leaves,  terminal  and  corymbed  heads,  and  acuminate  bracts.
Also  the  P.  Aristatum,  or  Wild  Basil,  with  lance-ovate,  subserrate,
pubescent,  acuminate,  and  short  petiolatc  leaves  ;  with  hirsute,  terminal,
capitate  and  subterminal  verticils;  bracts  lance-subulate,  and  with  the
calyx  terminated  by  awns. Likewise  P.  Incanum,  and  others.

Properties  and  Uses. — Pycnanthemum  is  diaphoretic,  stimulant,  anti-
spasmodic, carminative,  and  tonic.  A  warm  infusion  is  very  useful  in
puerperal,  remittent,  and  other  forms  of  fever,  coughs,  colds,  catarrhs,
etc.,  and  is  of  much  benefit  in  spasmodic  diseases,  especially  colic,  cramp
of  the  stomach,  and  spasms  of  infants.  The  cold  infusion  is  a  good
tonic  and  stimulant  during  convalescence  from  exhausting  diseases.  Dose
of  the  infusion,  either  warm  or  cold,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces,  three
or  more  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Pycnanthemi.


PYRETHRUM  PARTHENIUM.

Feverfew.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syrigenesia  Superflua.

THE HERB.

Description.  —  Feverfew is a  perennial, herbaceous  plant, with a

tapering root,  and  an  erect, branched,  leafy,  round, furrowed stem,

about  two feet  high. The leaves are alternate, petiolate, fiat,  bi-

pinnate  or  tripinnate,  of  a hoary green,  with  the  segments  or  leaflets

50


786  Materia  Medica.

inclining  to  ovate,  decurrent,  gashed  and  dentate.  The  flowers  are
"white  and  compound.  The  panicle  corymbose,  sometimes  compound;
the  peduncles  long,  naked,  single-flowered,  swelling  upward.  Flower-
heads  erect,  about  half  an  inch  broad,  with  a  convex  yellow  disk,  and
numerous  short,  broad,  abrupt,  two-ribbed,  white  rays  ;  often  wanting;
sometimes  multiplied,  and  the  disk  being  obliterated,  constitutes  a  double
flower.  Involucre  hemispherical,  imbricate,  pubescent,  with  the  scales
scarious  at  the  edge  ;  receptacle  flat  or  convex,  naked;  acltenia  wingless,
angular,  uniform,  crowned  by  a  coroneted  pappus  which  is  usually
toothed,  and  occasionally  auriculate.

History. — This  is  a  European  plant,  and  is  common  to  the  United
States,  found  occasionally  in  a  wild  state,  but  is  generally  cultivated  in
gardens,  and  flowers  in  June  and  July.  It  is  the  Matricaria  Purthenium
of  Linnaeus,  and  the  Chrysanthemum  Parlhenium  of  Persoon.  It
imparts  its  virtues  to  water,  but  much  better  to  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  carminative,  emmenagogue,  vermifuge,
and  stimulant.  The  warm  infusion  is  an  excellent  remedy  in  recent
colds,  flatulency,  worms,  irregular  menstruation,  hysteria,  suppression
of  the  urine,  and  in  some  febrile  diseases.  In  hysteria,  or  flatulency,
one  teaspoonful  of  the  compound  spirits  of  lavender  forms  a  valuable
addition  to  the  dose  of  the  infusion,  which  is  from  two  to  four  fluid-
ounces.  The  cold  infusion  or  extract,  makes  a  valuable  tonic.  The
leaves  in  poultice  are  an  excellent  local  application  in  severe  pain  or
swelling  of  the  bowels,  etc.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Pyrethri.


PYROLA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.
Round-leaved  Pyrola.

Nat.  Ord. — Ericaceae Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  is  a  perennial,  low,  scarcely  suffruticosc,  evergreen
herb,  known  by  the  various  names  of  False  Wintcrgreen,  Shindeaf,
Canker- Lettuce,  Pear-leaf  Winlergreen,  etc.  The  leaves  are  radical  or
nearly  so,  orbicular-ovate,  nearly  two  inches  in  diameter,  smooth,  shining,
thick,  entire  or  crenulate,  usually  shorter  than  the  petiole,  with  con-
spicuous, reticulate  veins.  The  petioles  are  margined,  as  long  as,  and
usually  much  longer  than  the  leaf.  The  scape  is  mostly  racemose,  three-
angled,  from  six  to  twelve  inches  high,  with  scaly  bracts  at  base  and  in
the  middle.  The  flowers  are  many,  large,  fragrant,  white,  drooping,
about  three-fourths  of  an  inch  broad,  and  disposed  in  an  oblong,  termi-
nal raceme.  The  calyx  is  five-parted,  persistent;  the  lobes  lanceolate,
acute,  with  somewhat  spreading  tips,  one-half  or  one-third  the  length  of


Ptrus  Malus.  787

the  petals.  Petals  five,  roundish -obovate,  nearly  spreading,  concave,
deciduous.  Slamens  ten,  ascending ;  filaments  awl-shaped,  naked  ;
anthers  large,  pendulous ;  stigmas  exserted  beyond  the  ring ;  style
declining  and  curved,  longer  than  the  petals.  Capsule  five-celled,  five-
valvod,  opening  at  the  angles,  many-seeded.

History. — This  plant  is  common  in  damp  and  shady  woods,  through-
out various  parts  of  the  United  States,  bearing  numerous  white  flowers
in  June  and  July.  The  whole  plant  is  used,  and  imparts  its  medical
properties  to  water. It  has  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Round-leaved  Pyrola  is  tonic,  astringent,  diu-
retic, and  antispasmodic.  Used  in  decoction,  both  internally  and  exter-
nally in  various  cutaneous  eruptions,  likewise  in  a  carcinomatous  or
scrofulous  taint  of  the  system,  and  in  leucorrhea,  and  some  uterine  dis-
eases. As  a  local  application  it  will  be  found  of  service  in  sore-throat,
and  ulcerations  of  the  mouth,  indolent  ulcers,  ophthalmia,  etc.,  and
forms  an  excellent  soothing  poultice  for  boils,  carbuncles,  and  all  painful
tumors  or  swellings.  The  decoction,  taken  internally,  is  said  to  be  valu-
able in  many  urinary  affections,  as  gravel,  hematuria,  and  ulceration  of
the  bladder,  and  in  some  nervous  diseases.  The  decoction  and  extract
have  been  used  with  success  in  convulsions,  and  form  a  large  portion  of
a  popular  nostrum  for  epilepsy.  Dose  of  the  decoction,  one  or  two  fluid-
ounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  of  the  extract,  from  two  to  five
grains.

Off. Prep. — Decoctum  Pyrolse  Rotundifoliae.


PYRUS  MALUS.

The  Apple-tree.
Nat.  Ord. — Rosaceae  ;  Suborder,  Pomete. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Pentagynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  is  a  well  known  tree,  growing  from  twenty  to  forty
feet  high,  with  rigid,  crooked,  spreading  branches,  and  a  rough,  blackish
bark.  The  leaves  are  from  two  to  three  inches  long,  and  about  two-
thirds  as  wide,  ovate,  or  oblong-ovate,  serrate,  acute,  or  short-acumi-
nate, pubescent  above,  tomentose  beneath,  and  on  petioles  from  half  an
inch  to  an  inch  in  length.  The  fiowers  are  large,  fragrant,  expanding
with  the  leaves,  pale-rose  color,  and  arranged  in  subumbellate  corymbs.
The  calyx-tube  is  urn-shaped,  limb  five-cleft ;  pedicels  and  calyx  villous-
tomentose.  Petals  five,  roundish,  or  obovate,  with  short  claws.  Stamens
numerous  ;  styles  five,  united  and  villose  at  base.  Fruit  or  pome
globose.

History. — The  Apple  Tree  is  a  native  of  Europe,  naturalized  in  this
country,  and  flowers  from  April  to  June. There  are,  probably,  nearly


788  Materia Medica.

one  thousand  varieties  cultivated  in  the  United  States,  and  all  of  which
are  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Wild  Crab.  From  the  fruit,  cider  is
manufactured,  and  both  the  fruit  and  its  cider  are  much  used  for  domes-
tic and  medicinal  purposes.  The  bark  is  bitter  and  has  been  employed
in  medicine,  it  contains  a  principle  called  Phloridzin;  the  root-bark  is
the  most  active,  and  yields  its  virtues  to  boiling  water.

Phloridzin  was  discovered  by  Dr.  Konink,  a  German  physician,  who
found  it  to  exist  in  the  bark  of  the  apple,  pear,  cherry,  and  plum  trees,
but  in  greater  abundance  in  the  fresh  root-bark.  To  obtain  it,  the  bark
of  the  recent  roots  is  boiled  with  water  sufficient  to  cover  them,  for
about  an  hour ;  the  fluid  is  poured  off,  and  as  much  more  poured  in  for
a  second  boiling.  The  decoctions  arc  placed  in  a  clean  vessel,  and  set
aside  to  remain  undisturbed  for  about  twenty-four  hours,  at  the  end  of
which  time  will  be  found  a  copious  precipitate  of  phloridzin,  of  a  deep-
red,  velvety-looking  color.  To  remove  the  color,  and  render  the  article
white,  it  is  to  be  boiled  with  distilled  water  and  animal  charcoal,  and
then  filtered  ;  this  process  is  to  be  repeated  two  or  three  times,  and  then
by  allowing  the  solution  to  cool  slowly,  the  phloridzin  is  deposited  in  the
crystalline  state.  By  evaporating  the  decoction,  (after  the  above  pre-
cipitate has  been  collected,)  to  about  one-fifth  of  its  bulk,  an  additional
quantity  of  phloridzin  may  be  obtained,  on  allowing  it  to  cool.  It  is
light,  white,  crystallizable  in  silky  needles,  of  a  bitter  taste,  soluble  in
alcohol  and  boiling  water,  scarcely  soluble  in  cold  water  or  ether,  and
dissolved  without  change  by  alkaline  solutions,  and  especially  by  ammo-
nia ;  heated  to  212°  it  is  deprived  of  its  water  of  crystallization,  and  at
a  higher  temperature  it  is  fusible.  It  is  without  acid  or  alkaline  reac-
tion, and  consists  of  carbon,  hydrogen  and  oxygen.

Properties  and  Uses. — Apple  Tree  Bark  is  tonic  and  febrifuge,  and  a
decoction  of  it  has  been  used  with  advantage  in  intermittent,  remittent,
and  bilious  fevers,  and  in  convalescence  from  exhausting  diseases.  It
may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  one  to  four  fluidounces,  three  times  a
day.  A  strong  decoction  or  syrup  of  the  Sweet-apple  tree  bark  has  been
employed  with  success  in  some  cases  of  gravel.  The  fruit  or  apple  con-
tains both  malic  and  acetic  acids,  has  a  pleasant  and  refreshing  flavor,
and  is  a  useful  and  healthy  article  of  diet.  However,  it  should  not  be
eaten  by  dyspeptics,  or  patients  afflicted  with  gout,  rheumatism,  or  renal
and  cutaneous  diseases.  When  baked,  stewed,  or  roasted,  it  becomes
valuable  as  an  agreeable  and  healthy  diet  in  febrile  diseases,  exan-
thema, etc.,  and  is  more  easily  digested  than  when  raw;  it  also  becomes
slightly  laxative  and  is  beneficial  in  cases  of  habitual  constipation.  Raw
apples  should  always  be  well  masticated  before  being  swallowed,  as
otherwise,  they  may  become  a  source  of  serious  difficulties,  especially
with  children.  An  apple  tea  may  be  made  for  fever  patients,  by  boiling
a  tart  apple  in  half  a  pint  of  water,  and  sweetening  with  sugar.


Quercus  Alba.  789

Cider  forms  not  only  a  refreshing  and  agreeable  drink  for  patients
with  fever,  but  actually  exerts  a  salutary  medicinal  influence,  especially
where  the  tongue  is  coated  brown  or  black.  This  is  an  Eclectic  agent,
which  has  recently  become  adopted  by  Allopaths  in  this  class  of  dis-
eases, and  it  is  truly  amusing  to  observe  how  much  trouble  they  take  to
persecute  and  misrepresent  us,  while  at  the  same  time  they  are  very
eager  to  seize  upon  all  our  valuable  remedial  means.  It  is  well  known
that  cider  in  which  horseradish,  etc.,  has  been  steeped,  has  long  been  an
Eclectic  agent  in  the  treatment  of  dropsy, — at  this  day  its  value  is  recog-
nized by  Allopathy,  as  may  be  seen  in  "  Wood's  Practice,"  under  the
treatment  of  dropsy.  Nor  is  this  the  only  agent  they  have  derived  from
Eclecticism,  without  giving  fair  and  honorable  credit.  Cooked  apples
form  an  excellent  local  application  in  ophthalmic  inflammation,  erysipe-
latous inflammation,  sore  and  swelled  throat  in  scarlatina,  ulcers,  etc.

Phloridzin  is  tonic  and  febrifuge,  and  in  the  dose  of  from  ten  to  fifteen
grains  has  cured  intermittent  fever  where  quinia  has  failed ;  unlike
quinia  it  does  not  induce  gastralgia.


QUERCUS  ALBA.
White  Oak.
Nat.  Ord.  —  Corylacese,  Lindley ;  Amentacea?,  Jussieu ;  Cupulifera?,  Richard.
Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Polyandria.

THE BARK.

Description. — Quercus  Alba  is  a  forest  tree,  varying  in  size  according
to  the  climate  and  soil,  attaining  the  hight  of  from  sixty  to  ninety  feet,
with  a  diameter  of  from  three  to  six  feet.  Its  trunk  and  large  branches
are  covered  with  a  whitish  bark,  which  serves  to  distinguish  it  from  most
of  the  other  species.  The  leaves  are  oblong,  pinnatifid,  sinuate,
smooth,  bright-green  above,  pale  or  glaucous  beneath,  and  regularly
and  obliquely  divided  into  from  three  to  five  lobes,  which  are  oblong,  or
linear,  obtuse,  mostly  entire,  and  sometimes  narrowed  at  their  base.
The  floioers  are  monoecious  and  amentaceous.  The  cup  is  hemispheri-
cal, naked,  much  shorter  than  the  acorn,  deep,  tuberculate.  The  acorns
are  large,  ovate,  coriaceous,  one-celled,  one-seeded,  surrounded  at  base
by  the  cup,  and  supported  singly  or  in  pairs  upon  peduncles  nearly  an
inch  in  length.

Quercus  Rubra,  or  Red  Oak,  is  a  lofty,  wide-spreading  tree,  attain-
ing the  hight  of  about  seventy  feet,  with  a  diameter  of  three  or  four
feet.  The  leaves  are  from  six  to  ten  inches  in  length,  on  long  petioles,
oblong,  smooth  on  both  sides,  pale  beneath,  obtusely  sinuate,  with  short,
and  entire  or  sparingly  dentate,  mucronate  lobes,  from  four  to  six  on
each  side.  The  fructification  is  biennial.  The  acorns  are  oblong-ovoid,
about  an  inch  long,  surrounded  at  base  by  a  saucer-shaped,  shallow,
even  cup,  very  much  shorter  than  the  acorn,  of  very  small  and  close
scales,  and  subsessile.


790  Materia Medica.

Qoercus  Tinctoria,  QuercUron  or  Black  Oak,  is  one  of  the  loftiest
trees  in  the  forest,  frequently  attaining  the  bight  of  from  eighty  to  one
hundred  feet,  with  a  diameter  of  four  or  five  feet.  The  bark  is  deeply
furrowed,  black  or  deep-brown.  The  leaves  are  from  six  to  eight  inches
long,  obovate,  oblong,  more  or  less  rusty-pubescent  beneath,  finally
glabrous,  slightly  or  sometimes  deeply  sinuate-lobed,  with  oblong,  obtuse,
mucronate,  somewhat  toothed  lobes.  The  acorns  are  brown,  nearly
spherical  or  depressed-globose,  about  one-half  immersed  in  a  deep,  thick,
flat,  conspicuously  scaly  cup,  which  is  subsessile.  The  leaves  turn  dark-
red  after  frost.

History. — Quercus  is  a  very  large  and  important  genus,  consisting  of
many  species,  a  large  proportion  of  which  grow  in  the  United  States.
Their  general  character  is  that  of  astringents,  and  the  three  above
medicine. The  bark  of  the  trees  is  the  officinal  portion.

White  Oak  grows  throughout  the  Union,  but  is  more  abundant  in  the
Middle  States.  Its  wood  is  strong  and  durable,  and  is  extensively  em-
ployed in  ship-building,  coopering,  carriage-making,  etc.  The  bark  is
sometimes  employed  for  tanning,  but  for  this  purpose,  that  of  the  Red  and
Spanish  Oaks  are  preferred;  its  principal  use  is  in  medicine.  It  should
be  deprived  of  its  epidermis,  which  contains  no  astringent  property ;  it
then  presents  a  coarse  fibrous  texture,  is  tough  and  not  easily  pulve-
rized, of  a  light  yellowish-brown  color,  a  feeble  odor,  and  a  strongly
astringent,  bitterish  taste.  Its  active  properties  are  extracted  by  water
or  alcohol.  It  contains  a  large  proportion  of  tannin,  some  gallic  acid,
and  extractive  matter.  The  inner  bark,  collected  during  the  spring,  is
said  to  afford  the  most  tannin.

A  bitter  principle  has  been  obtained  from  the  European  oak-bark
(Quercus  Pedunculata),  called  Quercin.  Our  own  oak-bark  is  fully
equal  in  medicinal  virtues  to  the  foreign,  and  may,  undoubtedly,  be
substituted  for  this  in  obtaining  quercin.  The  bark  must  be  boiled  with
water  acidulated  with  one-hundredth  of  sulphuric  acid,  after  which  the
sulphuric  acid  is  to  be  removed  by  the  addition  of  sufficient  milk  of
lime,  and  then  a  solution  of  carbonate  of  potassa  must  be  added  so  long
as  it  causes  a  white  precipitate ;  filter  the  liquor,  evaporate  to  the  con-
sistence of  a  thin  extract,  add  alcohol,  and  finally  evaporate  the  spiritu-
ous solution  down  to  a  small  volume,  and  let  it  stand  for  some  days ;
yellow  crystals  will  form,  which  may  be  obtained  colorless  by  repeated
crystallizations.  Thus  prepared,  quercin  is  in  small  white  crystals,  ino-
dorous, very  bitter,  soluble  in  water,  less  so  in  alcohol  containing  water,
insoluble  in  absolute  alcohol,  ether,  or  oil  of  turpentine,  and  is  neutral.

Black  Oak  is  likewise  a  forest  tree  common  to  the  United  States,  the
bark  of  which  is  much  used  in  tanning,  and  for  dyeing.  It  is  more
bitter  than  the  other  species  named,  and  when  chewed  stains  the  saliva
yellow. It  is  seldom  employed  internally  on  account  of  its  disposition


Quercus  Alba.  791

to  irritate  the  bowels,  but  is  valuable  as  an  external  astringent.  Boiling
■water  extracts  a  coloring  principle  from  its  cellular  integument,  of  a
brownish-yellow  color,  which  is  deepened  by  alkalies  and  rendered
brighter  by  acids.  This  bark,  deprived  of  its  epidermis  and  powdered,
is  exported  to  Europe  under  the  name  of  Quercitron,  where  it  is  exten-
sively used  for  dyeing  silk  and  wool  of  a  yellow  color.  The  coloring
principle,  called  Quercitrin  or  Quercitric  Acid,  may  be  obtained  by  add-
ing gelatin  to  a  decoction  of  the  bark,  which  precipitates  the  tannic  acid,
filtering  the  liquor,  adding  a  very  small  quantity  of  hydrated  oxide  of
lead,  which  produces  a  brown  precipitate,  pouring  off  the  golden-yellow
liquid  left,  precipitating  again  with  an  additional  quantity  of  the  hydrate,
and  decomposing  the  resulting  quercitrate  of  lead  by  hydrosulphuric
acid.  Filter  the  colorless  liquid  left,  evaporate  in  vacuo,  and  white  needle-
shaped  crystals  of  pure  quercitrin  will  be  obtained,  which  has  the  pro-
perty of  combining  with  salifiable  bases.  Black  oak  bark  contains  more
tannic  and  gallic  acids  than  the  other  officinal  species.

Red  Oak  is  more  common  in  the  Northern  States  and  Canada;  its
wood  is  reddish  and  coarse-grained,  and  used  principally  for  fuel ;  its
bark  is  extensively  used  in  tanning.  It  contains  considerable  tannin,
and  is  generally  employed  as  an  external  agent.  An  extract  of  the  bark,
as  well  as  the  potash  obtained  from  its  ashes,  are  both  much  employed
as  a  local  application  in  the  treatment  of  cancer,  indolent  ulcers,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oak  bark  is  somewhat  tonic,  powerfully  astrin-
gent, and  antiseptic.  Used  with  advantage  in  intermittent  fever,  obsti-
nate chronic  diarrhea,  chronic  mucous  discharges,  and  in  certain  forms
of  passive  hemorrhages;  likewise  in  phthisis,  and  diseases  attended  with
great  prostration,  colliquative  sweats,  etc.  In  such  cases,  a  decoction
of  it  may  be  combined  with  lime-water.  Externally,  a  decoction  forms
an  excellent  gargle  for  relaxed  uvula  and  sore-throat,  a  good  stimulating
astringent  lotion  for  ulcers  with  spongy  granulations,  and  an  astringent
injection  for  leucorrhea,  prolapsus  ani,  hemorrhoids,  etc.  A  poultice  of
the  ground  bark  has  often  proved  of  service  in  gangrene  and  mortifica-
tion. In  sickly,  debilitated  children,  and  in  severe  diarrheas,  especially
when  the  result  of  fevers,  the  decoction  given  internally,  and  used  as  a
bath  to  the  body  and  limbs,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  will  be  found  very
efficacious.  When  given  for  diarrhea  or  dysentery,  it  should  be  com-
bined with  aromaties,  and  sometimes  with  castor  oil.  A  bath  is  often
advantageous  in  some  cutaneous  diseases.  The  green  bark  of  elder  and
white  oak,  bruised  together,  or  in  strong  decoction,  forms  a  very  useful
and  valuable  application  to  abrasions.  Dose  of  the  decoction,  one  or
two  fluidounces ;  of  the  extract,  from  five  to  twenty  grains.  A  coffee
made  from  roasted  acorns,  has  been  highly  recommended  in  the  treat-
ment  of  scrofula.

Of.  Prep. — Decoctum  Quercus  Albae.


792  Materia  Medica.

QUERCUS  INFECTORIA.
Dyer's  Oak.

Nat.  Ord. — Cupulifera,  Richard;  Corylaceje,  Lindley ;  Amentaceas,  Jussieu.
Sex.  Syst. — Moncecia  Polyandria.

MORBID  EXCRESCENCES GALLS.

Description. — Quercus  Infectoria  is  a  small  shrub,  with  a  crooked  stem,
seldom  exceeding  six  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  from  an  inch  to  an
inch  and  a  half  long,  on  short  petioles,  ovate-oblong,  sinuate-dentate,
smooth,  of  a  bright-green  color,  shining  on  the  upper  side,  rounded  and
rather  unequal  at  the  base,  and  deciduous.  The  cup  is  hemispherical,
scaly,  and  sessile,  somewhat  downy ;  acorns  elongated,  obtuse,  and  two
or  three  times  longer  than  the  cup.

History.  —  Dyer's  Oak,  or  Gall  Oak,  grows  throughout  Asia  Minor,
and,  very  probably,  through  the  middle  latitudes  of  Asia.  It  affords
the  Gall  Nuts  or  Galls  (Galla,  U.  S.)  of  commerce.  These  are  pro-
duced by  the  puncture  of  the  shoots  and  young  boughs  by  a  hymcnope-
terous  insect  or  fly,  for  the  deposition  of  its  eggs.  This  insect  is  the
Cynips  Quercusfolii  of  Linnseus,  and  the  Diplolepis  Galla-tinctorice  of
Geoffroy ;  it  has  a  fawn-colored  body,  dark  antennae,  and  the'  upper  part
of  its  abdomen  a  shining  brown.  After  the  puncture  is  made,  the  egg
is  deposited  in  the  wound,  and  in  consequence  of  the  irritation  thus
produced,  a  morbid  secretion  takes  place,  which  concreting  as  it  flows,
forms  the  hard  excrescences  called  Galls.  The  egg  grows  with  the  gall,
is  converted  into  a  larva,  which  feeds  upon  the  morbid  excrescence  sur-
rounding it,  and  forms  a  cavity  in  its  center.  Toward  the  end  of  July,
the  young  insect,  having  passed  through  all  its  stages  of  transformation
into  the  state  of  a  fly,  eats  its  way  out  and  escapes.  The  best  galls  are
those  which  are  gathered  about  the  middle  of  July,  when  they  have
attained  their  full  size,  and  just  before  the  escape  of  the  insect.  They
are  then  called  green,  blue,  or  black  galls ;  those  which  are  gathered
later,  after  having  been  injured  by  the  insect,  are  usually  larger,  less
heavy  and  compact,  and  lighter-colored  than  the  former  —  they  are
termed  White  galls,  and  are  of  an  inferior  quality.

Galls  are  imported  from  the  Mediterranean  ports,  especially  Smyrna
and  Trieste,  or  from  London.  The  best  kind  were  formerly  called
Aleppo  Galls,  from  a  supposition  that  they  were  obtained  more  abun-
dantly in  the  vicinity  of  that  city,  but  at  present,  it  is  hard  to  discrimi-
nate between  the  finer  sorts  from  various  places.  An  excellent  article
has  been  brought  from  Calcutta,  of  equal  value  with  that  from  the
Mediterranean.  Galls  vary  in  size  from  that  of  a  large  pea  to  that  of  a
small  walnut;  they  are  roundish,  tuberculated  on  the  surface,  and
hollow  within.  The  best  are  of  middle  size,  dark-bluish  or  lead  color,
sometimes  with  a  greenish  tinge,  whitish  or  brownish  internally,  hard,
heavy,  brittle,  with  a  flinty  fracture,  a  striated  texture,  and  a  small


Quercus  Infectoria.  793

cavity  in  the  center,  containing  dust,  the  undeveloped  insect,  or  the
insect  itself  in  the  state  of  larva,  pupa,  or  of  fly.  It  forms  a  light
yellowish-gray  powder.  The  inferior  sorts  are  of  a  lighter  color,  some-
times reddish  or  nearly  white,  of  a  loose  texture,  with  a  large  cavity  in
the  center,  from  which  a  small  hole  or  perforation  passes  to  the  external
surface,  and  through  which  the  fly  effected  its  escape.  Both  kinds  are
brittle,  easily  pulverized,  inodorous,  and  have  an  intensely  astringent
taste.  Water  is  the  best  solvent  of  galls,  and  proof-spirit  the  next;
pure  alcohol  or  ether  acts  more  feebly  upon  them.  All  the  soluble  matter
of  galls  is  taken  up  by  forty  times  their  weight  of  boiling  water,  and  the
residue  is  tasteless  ;  alcohol  dissolves  seven  parts  in  ten,  ether  five  parts.
Upon  cooling,  a  saturated  decoction  deposits  a  copious  pale-yellow
precipitate.  An  infusion  or  tincture  of  galls  affords  precipitates  with
muriatic,  sulphuric,  nitric,  phosphoric,  and  arsenic  acids,  lime-water,
carbonate  of  ammonia,  carbonate  of  potassa,  solutions  of  acetate  and
subacetate  of  lead,  sulphates  of  iron  and  copper,  nitrates  of  silver  and
mercury,  tartrate  of  antimony  and  potassa,  gelatin,  infusions  of  Peruvian
bark,  Colombo,  opium,  and  many  other  vegetables,  especially  those  con-
taining proximate  alkaline  principles,  with  most  of  which  tannic  acid
forms  insoluble  compounds.  The  infusion  of  galls  reddens  litmus  paper,
and  is  rendered  orange  by  nitric  acid,  milky  by  corrosive  sublimate,
and  its  own  color  is  deepened  by  ammonia.  Galls  consist  of  a  large
proportion  of  tannic  acid  ;  according  to  Davy  500  parts  give  185  parts
of  matter  soluble  in  water,  of  which  130  were  tannic  acid,  31  gallic  acid
with  a  little  extractive,  12  mucilage  and  matter  rendered  insoluble  by
evaporation,  and  12  saline  matter  and  calcareous  earth.  Guibourt  found
galls  to  consist  of  65  per  cent,  of  tannic  acid,  10.5  of  lignin,  11.5  of
moisture,  5.8  of  gum,  sugar  and  starch,  4.0  of  gallic,  ellagic,  and  luteo-
gallic  acids,  beside  extractive,  chlorophylle,  volatile  oil,  albumen  and
salts.  The  gallic  and  ellagic  acids,  according  to  M.  Pelouze,  do  not  pre-
exist in  the  galls,  but  are  formed  by  the  action  of  atmospheric  oxygen
upon  their  tannin.

I  have  in  my  possession  a  specimen  of  an  excrescence  found  on  a
plant,  the  name  of  which  has  not  been  ascertained,  growing  in  Texas,
in  the  neighborhood  of  Red  river.  It  was  presented  to  me  by  Mr.  W.
S.  Merrell ;  he  obtained  it  from  a  physician  who  had  pursued  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  in  that  section  of  country,  and  who  states  that  it  is
caused  by  the  puncture  of  some  insect,  and  is  found  in  abundance.
According  to  his  account  these  morbid  growths  are  hollow,  globose,  and
whitish.  The  dried  specimens  which  I  have  are  of  a  light  brown  color
mixed  with  fragments  of  a  darker  color,  and  appear  to  be  pieces  of  a
hollow  body,  some  of  which  very  much  resemble  squill  in  color.
They  are  half  a  line  and  less  in  thickness,  of  various  sizes,  from  a  line
to  three-fourths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  irregular  in  their  shape,  having
an  external  convex  surface  which  is  very  finely  corrugated,  and  of  a


794:  Materia.  Medica.

shining,  resinous  appearance  under  the  microscope,  and  an  internal
concave  surface  which  is  much  smoother  that  the  external  one,  and  in
which  may  be  distinctly  traced  veins  running  in  various  directions.
They  are  translucent,  with  the  exception  of  the  darkest  colored,  have  a
short  fracture,  presenting  under  the  microscope  a  shining,  finely  granu-
lated, waxy  or  resinous  surface,  are  inodorous,  brittle,  of  a  taste  at  first
resembling  green  tea,  but  which  becomes  slightly  bitter  and  powerfully
astringent ;  the  light-colored  pieces  are  more  astringent  and  bitter  than
the  dark  ones.  One  piece  of  this  article,  about  one  quarter  of  an  inch
in  diameter  was  placed  in  an  ounce  of  water  and  agitated  for  a  few-
minutes,  and  was  not  dissolved  ;  to  this  about  five  or  six  grains  of  sul-
phate of  iron  were  then  added,  which,  on  agitation,  immediately  turned
the  liquid  black.  This,  used  as  an  ink,  formed  pale  lines  scarcely
discernible,  but  which,  in  a  few  minutes,  became  intensely  black.  I
consider  this  the  most  powerful  astringent  vegetable  product  ever  yet
found  in  a  natural  state,  and  trust  that  means  may  be  devised  to  intro-
duce it  into  our  markets.

Properties  and  Uses. — Galls  are  astringent  and  may  be  used  in  all
cases  where  astringents  are  indicated,  as  in  chronic  dysentery,  diarrhea,
passive  hemorrhages,  and  in  cases  of  poisoning  by  tartar-emetic  or  the
vegetable  alkaloids,  in  infusion  or  tincture.  Boiled  in  milk  they  are
good  for  the  diarrhea  of  children.  As  a  local  application,  the  infusion
is  employed  as  an  injection  in  gleet,  leucorrhea,  prolapsus  ani,  or  for
a  gargle  in  indolent  ulceration  of  the  fauces,  relaxed  uvula,  and  the
chronic  stage  of  mercurial  action  on  the  mouth ;  the  addition  of  alum  is
said  to  render  it  more  beneficial.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  five  to
twenty  grains  ;  of  the  tincture  half  a  fiuidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm  ;  of
the  infusion  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  a  fluidounce.

Off.  Prep. —  Acidum  Tannicum;  Decoctum  Gallae.


RANUNCULUS  BULBOSUS.

Crowfoot.
Nat.  Ord. — Ranunculacea}. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE CORMUS AND HERB.

Description.  —  Ranunculus  Bulbosus  has  a  perennial,  solid,  fleshy,
roundish,  depressed  cormus  or  root,  sending  out  radicles  from  its  under
side  ;  in  autumn  it  gives  off  lateral  bulbs  near  its  top,  which  afford  plants
for  the  following  year,  while  the  old  cormus  decays.  The  root  sends  up
annually,  several  erect,  round,  hairy,  and  branching  steins,  from  six  to
eighteen  inches  in  hight,  and  which  are  furrowed,  hollow,  and  bulbous
at  base.  The  radical  leaves  are  on  long  petioles,  ternate,  sometimes
quinate;  the  segments  variously  cut,  lobed  and  toothed,  hairy.  The
cauline  leaves  are  sessile  and  ternate,  the  upper  ones  more  simple. Each


Resina.  795

stem  supports  several  solitary,  golden-yellow  flowers,  upon  furrowed,
anfularand  hairy  peduncles.  The  sepals  are  oblong,  hairy,  and  reflexed
against  the  peduncle.  The  petals  are  five,  inversely  cordate,  longer
than  the  sepals,  and  arranged  so  as  to  represent  (he  shape  of  a  small
cup.  At  the  inside  of  the  claw  of  each  petal  is  a  small  cavity,  which  is
covered  with  a  minute  wedge-shaped  emarginate  scale.  The  stamens
are  numerous,  yellow,  with  oblong,  erect  anthers.  Ovaries  numerous,
with  reflexed  stigmas.  Receptacles  spherical.  Carpels  acute,  naked,
diverging,  tipped  with  very  short  recurved  beaks.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  Europe  and  the  United  States,
growing  in  fields  and  pastures,  and  flowering  in  May,  June,  and  July.
There  are  several  species,  possessing  similar  properties,  and  designated
by  the  common  name  of  Buttercup ;  among  these  the  R.  Acris,  R.
Repens,  R.  Sceleratus,  and  R.  Flammula,  may  be  indiscriminately  sub-
stituted, the  one  for  the  other.  In  all  these  species,  the  active  principle
depends  upon  a  volatile,  acrid  principle,  which  is  dissipated  by  drying,
or  by  the  application  of  heat,  and  which  may  be  separated  by  distillation
with  water.  The  fresh  plant  or  root,  when  chewed,  excites  violent
irritation  in  the  mouth  and  throat,  inflaming  and  even  excoriating  the
tongue,  and  inside  of  the  cheeks  and  lips,  if  not  quickly  discharged  ;
and  if  swallowed,  it  produces  much  heat  and  pain  in  the  stomach.  The
distilled  water  of  R.  Flammula  is  said  to  act  as  an  instantaneous  emetic.

Properties  and  Uses. — From  the  caustic  or  acrid  character  of  these
plants  they  are  seldom  used  internally ;  but  when  applied  externally,  are
powerfully  rubefacient  and  epispastic.  The  R.  Bulbosus  is  the  officinal
plant.  It  is  employed  in  its  recent  state,  in  rheumatic,  neuralgic  and
other  diseases  where  vesication  and  counter-irritation  are  indicated.  Its
action,  however,  is  so  uncertain,  and  sometimes  so  violent,  causing  deep
and  obstinate  ulcers,  that  it  is  seldom  used.  It  is  sometimes  used  by
the  beggars  of  Europe  to  produce  and  keep  open  sores,  for  the  purpose
of  exciting  sympathy.  I  have  cured  two  obstinate  cases  of  nursing  sore-
mouth,  made  by  adding  two  drachms  of  the  recent  root,  cut  into  small
pieces,  to  one  pint  of  hot  water ;  when  cold,  a  tablespoonful  was  given
three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  the  mouth  frequently  washed  with  a  much
stronger  infusion.


RESINA.

Resin  or  Rosin.
History. — This  is  the  residuum  after  the  distillation  of  the  volatile  oil
from  the  turpentine  of  the  Pinus  Palustris  and  other  pines.  When  the
distillation  is  not  carried  too  far,  the  rosin  contains  a  little  water.  This
is  the  officinal  article,  the  Resina  Flava,  or  yellow  rosin.  If,  when  in  a
state  of  fusion,  it  be  strongly  agitated  with  water,  it  acquires  a  dis-
tinct appearance,  and  is  called  Resina  Alba,  or  white  rosin. A  more


796  Materia  Medica.

continued  heat  than  that  prepared  in  making  the  yellow  rosin  expels  the
water,  and  produces  transparent  rosin ;  and  if  the  process  be  pushed  as
far  as  it  can,  without  producing  a  complete  alteration  of  properties,  the
residue  acquires  a  deeper  color,  and  is  termed  Brown  or  Black  rosin,
Fidler's  rosin,  Colophony.  If  melted  rosin  be  run  into  cold  water,  con-
tained in  shallow  tanks,  and  a  supply  of  cold  water  be  kept  up  until  the
rosin  has  solidified,  a  pale  yellow  product  is  obtained,  called  Flockton's
Patent  Rosin.  Rosin  is  translucent,  yellowish,  brittle,  pulverizable,
rather  heavier  than  water,  of  a  feeble  terebinthine  odor  and  taste,  fusi-
ble at  a  moderate  heat,  inflammable,  soluble  in  ether  and  many  volatile
oils,  insoluble  in  water,  partially  soluble  in  boiling  rectified  spirit,  and
capable  of  uniting  by  fusion  with  wax,  fixed  oils,  fats,  and  spermaceti.
The  concentrated  acids  dissolve  it,  especially  with  the  aid  of  heat;  sul-
phuric or  nitric  acids  slowly  convert  it  into  artificial  tannin.  Solutions
of  potassa  and  soda  partially  dissolve  it,  forming  soluble  soaps,  and
leaving  a  resinous  principle  undissolved.  Prof.  Olmstead  states  that
rosin  added  to  lard,  gives  it  a  degree  of  fluidity  not  before  possessed  by
the  lard,  and  also  prevents  the  latter  forming  those  acids  which  corrode
metals.  If  three  parts  of  lard  have  one  part  of  finely  powdered  rosin
added,  and  the  mixture  be  well  stirred,  without  the  application  of  heat,
it  softens,  and  so  nearly  approaches  a  fluid  as  to  run  freely  when  taken
up  on  the  stirring-rod,  at  a  temperature  of  72°.  On  melting  the  mix-
ture, and  setting  it  aside  to  cool,  the  following  changes  take  place :  At
90°  it  remains  transparent  and  limpid  ;  at  87°,  a  pellicle  begins  to  form
on  the  surface,  and  soon  after  it  begins  to  grow  slightly  viscid,  and
as  the  temperature  descends,  it  passes  through  different  degrees  of  vis-
cidity, until  at  76°  it  becomes  a  dense  semifluid.  A  compound  of  one
part  of  rosin  to  four  of  lard,  may  be  used  for  various  purposes :  by  add-
ing a  portion  of  black-lead,  and  applying  a  thin  coating  to  iron  stoves
and  grates,  it  prevents  them  from  rusting,  forming  a  complete  protection.
It  may  likewise  be  applied  to  various  other  purposes.

Properties  and  Uses. — Rosin  is  seldom  given  internally.  Its  principal
use  is  to  form  plasters  and  ointments,  to  which  it  is  an  excitant  ingre-
dient, and  renders  them  more  adhesive.  The  vapor  from  rosin  has  been
inhaled  in  chronic  bronchitis  and  affections  of  the  lungs  with  benefit;
and  the  fumes  from  burning  rosin,  if  received  upon  the  parts,  will,  it  is
said,  remove  the  irritation  attending  piles  and  prolapsus  ani.  Half  a
drachm  of  powdered  rosin  dissolved  in  a  sufficient  quantity  of  chloro-
form, so  as  to  make  a  thick  solution,  will  relieve  neuralgia  of  the  teeth,
or  toothache,  by  introducing  a  piece  of  cotton,  which  has  been  impreg-
nated with  the  solution,  into  the  hollow  teeth.

Off.  Prep. — Ceratum  Resinae ;  Ceratum  Sabinae  ;  Emplastrum  Cale-
faciens;  Emplastrum  Plumbi  Oxidi  Rubrum;  Emplastrum  Resinae;
Emplastrum  Resinae  Compositum.


Rhamnus Catharticus.  797

RHAMNUS  CATHARTICUS.

Buckthorn.

Nat. Ord. — Rhamnaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE BERRIES OR FRUIT.

Description. — Buckthorn  is  a  shrub  from  six  to  fifteen  feet  in  hight.
The  branches  are  alternate,  or  nearly  opposite,  spreading,  straight,  round,
smooth,  hard,  and  rigid,  each  terminating  in  a  strong  spine,  after  the
first  year.  The  leaves  are  from  one  to  two  inches  long,  and  about  two-
thirds  as  wide,  deciduous,  bright-green,  smooth,  simple,  entire,  veined,
ovate,  serrate,  and  in  fascicles,  on  short  downy  petioles ;  the  young  ones
are  downy ;  the  earlier  ones  in  tufts  from  the  flowering  buds,  and  the
rest  opposite,  on  the  young  branches.  Stipules  linear.  The  flowers  are
small,  numerous,  yellowish-green,  on  the  last  year's  branches,  and  usu-
ally dioecious  or  polygamous;  the  fertile  flowers  have  the  rudiments  of
stamens,  narrow  petals,  and  a  deeply  four-cleft  style  ;  the  barren  ones  have
an  abortive  ovary,  and  broader  petals.  The  anthers  are  small,  rounded,
and  borne  on  short,  subulate  filaments,  which  are  inserted  in  the  mouth
of  the  calyx.  The  berries  are  globular,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  bluish-
black,  containing  a  green  pulp,  with  four  cells,  and  as  many  seeds,  which
are  smooth,  elliptical,  convex  on  one  side  and  flattened  on  the  other.

History. — Buckthorn  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  is  found  growing  wild
in  some  parts  of  the  United  States,  flowering  in  May  and  June,  and
ripening  its  fruit  in  the  latter  part  of  September.  The  berries  are  the
officinal  portion.  They  are  round,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  black,  smooth
and  shining,  somewhat  flattened  on  the  summit,  with  an  unpleasant  odor,
and  a  bitter,  acrid  and  nauseous  taste.  The  juice  of  the  berries  stains
paper  green,  is  reddened  by  acids,  and  is  rendered  light-green  by  alkalies.
On  standing  it  ferments,  acetic  acid  is  formed,  and  it  becomes  red.  A
pigment,  known  as  Sap-green,  is  made  with  them,  by  adding  a  little  alum
to  the  inspissated  juice,  or  by  adding  lime-water  and  gum  arabic  to  it,
and  evaporating  to  dryness.  It  contains  green  coloring  matter,  sugar,
brown  mucilage,  and  bitter  extractive  supposed  to  be  its  active  princi-
ple. The  bark  of  Rhamnus  Frangula,  is  occasionally  used  in  Germany
as  a  carthartic,  under  the  name  of  Cortex  Frangulai.

Properties  and  Uses. — Buckthorn  berries,  (Rhamni  Baccce)  are  pow-
erfully cathartic  ;  twenty  of  the  recent  berries  cause  brisk  watery  purg-
ing, with  nausea,  dryness  of  the  throat,  thirst,  and  tormina.  These  effects
are  partly  removed  by  giving  the  juice  (Rhamni  Succus)  in  the  form  of
syrup,  and  which  formerly  enjoyed  much  reputation  as  a  hydragogue  in
gout,  rheumatism,  and  dropsy;  at  present  it  is  seldom  employed  in  prac-
tice, and  is  occasionally  employed  as  an  adjunct  to  other  cathartic  and
diuretic  mixtures.  Dose  of  the  syrup,  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  a  fluid-
ounce.


798  Materia  Medica.

RHEUM  PALMATUM.

Rhubarb.
Nat.  Ord. — Polygonacere. Sex.  Si/st. — Enneandria  Trigynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — In  relation  to  the  Rhubarb  root,  the  scientific  world  is  in
much  ignorance,  not  knowing  the  exact  plant  or  plants  from  which  it
is  produced.  All  that  is  known  is,  that  it  is  the  root  of  one  or  more
species  of  rheum,  supposed  to  be  the  Rheum  Palrnatum  and  R.  Undu-
latum.  The  species  from  which  the  medicinal  drug  is  obtained  inhabit
the  great  plains  of  Tartary,  the  steppes  of  Siberia,  and  the  great  ranges
of  mountains  lying  between  these  and  the  northern  parts  of  India,  and
great  caution  is  exhibited  in  monopolizing  the  trade  in  the  article.  Until
1732  but  little  was  known  as  to  the  true  origin  of  rhubarb;  but  at  that
time  Jussieu  and  Rand  received  specimens  from  Russia  which  were
named  Rheum  Rhabarbarum  by  Linnaeus,  under  an  impression  that  they
were  of  the  species  which  furnished  the  genuine  drug ;  this  name  has  since
been  changed  to  Rheum  Undulatum.  Subsequently  Kauw  Boerhaave
obtained  some  seeds  of  a  plant  said  to  produce  the  root,  and  which
upon  planting  yielded  two  distinct  species,  the  R.  Undulatum  and  R.
Palrnatum.  Several  other  species  have  from  time  to  time  attracted
the  attention  of  naturalists,  being  reputed  each  as  the  one  whidi  fur
nished  the  genuine  rhubarb  of  commerce,  but  the  presumption  is,  that
it  is  derived  from  several  species  of  Rheum,  and  that  the  differences  of
character  existing  between  the  cultivated  European  and  Asiatic  roots
are  owing  to  the  differences  in  soil,  climate,  mode  of  cultivation,  etc.
The  rhubarb  plants  are  herbaceous,  perennial,  with  large  branching
roots,  vigorous  stems  from  four  to  eight  feet  high,  with  numerous,  large,
petiolate  leaves  at  base,  and  terminating  in  branching  panicles  of  numer-
ous, smallholders.  The  leafstalks  of  the  various  species  have  a  pleasant
acid  taste,  and  several  of  them  are  cultivated  in  the  United  States  for
the  purpose  of  making  pies  and  tarts,  as  the  R.  Rhaponticum,  R.  Hy-
bridum,  and  R.  Compactum.  The  method  of  cultivation  and  preparation
of  rhubarb  in  its  native  country  is  not  satisfactorily  known,  though  vari-
ous statements  in  relation  to  it  have  been  published.  Lindley,  in  his
Flora  Medica,  gives  the  following  description  of  the  plants  which  furnish
rhubarb : —

Rheum  Palrnatum.  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  ii.  489 ;  Lindley,  Flor.  Med.  p.
358  ;  Carson,  Must,  of  Med.  Rot.  ii.  22,  pi.  69.  "Leaves  roundish-cordate,
half  palmate  ;  the  lobes  pinnatifid,  acuminate,  deep  dull-green,  not  wavy,
but  uneven  and  very  much  wrinkled  on  the  upper  side,  hardly  scabrous
at  the  edge,  minutely  downy  on  the  under  side ;  sinus  completely  closed;
the  lobes  of  the  leaf  standing  forward  beyond  it.  Petiole  pale  green,
marked  with  short  purple  lines,  terete,  obscurely  channeled  quite  at  the


Rheum  Palmatum.  799

upper  end.  Flowering  stems  taller  than  those  of  any  other  species."
This  species  is  said  to  inhabit  China  in  the  vicinity  of  the  great  wall.
It  has  been  cultivated  in  England  and  France,  for  the  sake  of  its  root,
which  is  generally  admitted  to  approach  more  nearly  in  odor,  taste,  and
the  arrangement  of  its  colors,  to  the  Asiatic  rhubarb  than  that  of  any
other  known  species.

R.  Undulatum.  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  ii.  489  ;  Lindley,  Flor.  Med.  p.
357;  Woodv.  Med.  Bot.  3d  ed.  v.  81.  "  Leaves  oval,  obtuse,  extremely
wavy,  deep-green,  with  veins  purple  at  the  base,  often  shorter  than  the
petiole,  distinctly  and  copiously  downy  on  each  side,  looking  as  if  frosted
when  young,  scabrous  at  the  edge  ;  sinus  open,  wedge-shaped,  with  the
lower  lobes  of  the  leaves  turned  upward.  Petiole  downy,  blood-red,
semicylindrical,  with  elevated  edges  to  the  upper  side,  which  is  narrower
at  the  upper  than  the  lower  end."  This  is  a  native  of  Siberia,  and
probably  of  Tartary  and  China.  It  was  cultivated  by  the  Russian  gov-
ernment as  the  true  rhubarb  plant;  but  theculture  has  been  abandoned.
It  contributes  to  the  rhubarb  produced  in  France.

R.  Compaction.  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  ii.  489  ;  Lindley,  Flor.  Med.  p.
358;  Carson,  Must,  of  Med.  Bot.  ii.  24,  pi.  71.  "  Leaves  heart-shaped,
obtuse,  very  wavy,  deep-green,  of  a  thick  texture,  scabrous  at  the  mar-
gin, quite  smooth  on  both  sides,  glossy  and  even  on  the  upper  side ;
sinus  nearly  closed  by  the  parenchyma.  Petiole  green,  hardly  tinged
with  red  except  at  the  base,  semicylindrical,  a  little  compressed  at  the
sides,  with  the  upper  side  broad,  flat,  bordered  by  elevated  edges,  and
of  equal  breadth  at  each  end."  This  plant  is  said  to  be  a  native  of  Tar-
tary and  China.  It  is  one  of  the  garden  rhubarbs,  and  is  cultivated  in
France  for  its  root.

R.  Australe.  Don,  Prod.  Flor.  Nepal,  p.  75. — R.  Emodi.  Wallich  ;
Lindley,  Flor.  Med.  p.  354  ;  Carson,  Must,  of  Med.  Bot.  ii.  24,  pi.  70.
"Leaves  cordate,  acute,  dull-green,  but  little  wavy,  flattish,  very  much
wrinkled,  distinctly  rough,  with  coarse  short  hairs  on  each  side  ;  sinus
of  the  base  distinctly  open,  not  wedge-shaped  but  diverging  at  an  obtuse
angle,  with  the  lobes  nearly  turned  upward.  Petioles  very  rough,
rounded-angular,  furrowed ;  with  the  upper  side  depressed,  bordered  by  an
elevated  edge,  and  very  much  narrower  at  the  upper  than  the  lower  end."
The  root  of  this  species  was  at  one  time  conjectured  to  be  the  source  of
officinal  Asiatic  rhubarb  ;  but  has  been  found  to  have  scarcely  any
resemblance  to  it.  The  plant  has  been  cultivated  both  in  Europe  and
this  country,  and  its  petioles  answer  well  for  tarts,  etc.

R.  Rhaponticum.  Willd.  Sp.  Plant,  ii.  488  ;  Lindley,  Flor.  Med.  p.
357;  Loudon's  Eneyc.  of  Plants,  p.  335.  "Leaves  roundish-ovate,
cordate,  obtuse,  pale-green,  but  little  wavy,  very  concave,  even,  very
slightly  downy  on  the  under  side,  especially  near  the  edge,  and  on  the


800  Materia Medica.

edge  itself;  scabrous  at  the  margin  ;  sinus  quite  open,  large,  and  cuneate.
Petiole  depressed,  channeled  on  the  upper  side,  with  the  edges  regularly-
rounded  off,  pale  green,  striated,  scarcely  scabrous.  Panicles  very  com-
pact and  short,  always  rounded  at  the  ends,  and  never  lax  as  in  the
other  garden  species.  Flowering  stem  about  three  feet  high."  The
Rhapontic  rhubarb  grows  upon  the  banks  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  in  the
deserts  between  the  Wolga  and  the  Oural,  and  in  Siberia.  It  is  said
also  to  grow  upon  the  borders  of  the  Euxine.  It  is  cultivated  as  a  gar-
den plant  in  Europe  and  this  country;  and  large  quantities  of  the  root
are  produced  for  sale  in  France.  It  is  said  by  Royle  to  be  the  source
of  the  English  rhubarb.  —  U.  S.  Disp.

Beside  the  above  species,  several  others  have  been  named,  as  the
R.  Cuspicum  from  the  Altai  mountains,  R.  Leucorrhizum  from  the  Tar-
tarian Kirghese  desert,  R.  Speciforme,  R.  Webbianum,  and  R.  Moor-
craftianum,  growing  on  the  Himalaya  mountains,  R.  Crassinervium,  R.
Hybrid um,  etc.

History. — Among  the  several  kinds  of  rhubarb  found  in  commerce
that  called  Russian  rhubarb,  is  considered  the  best.  It  was  formerly
derived  from  the  Turkish  ports,  and  in  consequence  received  the  name
of  Turkey  Rhubarb;  and  has  likewise  been  called  by  the  several  names
of  Persian,  Moscow,  Bucharian,  or  Siberian  Rhubarb.  It  is  prepared  in
Tartary,  from  which  place  it  is  conveyed  to  a  town  of  Kiachta  where  it
undergoes  a  rigid  inspection  by  an  apothecary  appointed  b}^  the  Russian
government,  who  burns  the  inferior  pieces,  and  forwards  the  remainder
to  St.  Petersburg,  where  it  is  again  sorted  and  shipped  for  other
countries.  It  is  in  irregular,  roundish  cylindrical  or  fiat  plano-convex
pieces,  usually  from  one  to  three  inches  in  breadth,  always  obscurely
angular,  owing  to  the  bark  of  the  root  together  with  a  small  portion  of  the
substance  immediately  beneath  the  bark,  having  been  apparently  sliced  off
longitudinally  with  a  knife,  and  with  large  perforations,  frequently  extend-
ing only  to  the  center,  and  evidently  made  to  ascertain  the  soundness  of  the
article  at  the  time  of  inspection.  Their  external  surface  is  yellow,  and  thinly
covered  with  a  yellow  powder,  caused  probably  by  the  friction  or  rub-
bing together  of  the  pieces ;  and  when  scratched  with  a  knife,  they  give
a  bright  yellow  streak.  They  have  rather  a  compact  texture,  an  uneven
fracture  exposing  a  surface  beautifully  marbled  with  irregular,  waving,
grayish  and  reddish  veins.  They  are  easily  pulverizable,  giving  a  bright
yellow  powder.  Russian  rhubarb  has  a  peculiar,  aromatic,  bitter,  faintly
astringent  taste,  and  a  strong,  peculiar  odor;  it  tinges  the  saliva  yellow,
and  produces  a  crackling,  or  sense  of  grittiness  between  the  teeth,  owing
to  crystals  of  oxalate  of  lime,  which  arc  largely  contained  in  it.  These
crystals  may  be  seen  under  the  microscope  by  previously  boiling  thin
slices  of  the  root  in  water  until  soft,  and  then  crushing  and  agitating
them  in  the  water;  in  100  grains  Mr.  Quekett  found  between  35  and  40
grains  of  these  minute  crystals.


Rheum  Palmatum.  801

The  Chinese  or  East  Indian  Rhubarb  is  brought  from  Canton ;  the
finest  quality  of  it,  termed  Batavlan  or  Dutch-trimmed  Rhubarb,  very
much  resembles  the  Russian  Rhubarb  in  appearance.  That  which  is
brought  to  this  country,  however,  as  Chinese  Rhubarb,  consists  of
irregular  cylindrical  or  roundish  pieces,  sometimes  flattened  on  one  or
both  sides,  and  never  angular,  like  Russian  or  Dutch-trimmed  Rhubarb,
of  a  duller  yellow  color  than  the  former  variety,  and  presenting  an
external  appearance  as  if  the  bark  had  been  removed  by  scraping  or
rasping,  and  the  surface  rendered  smooth  and  somewhat  powdery  by
attrition.  Their  density  is  somewhat  greater  than  that  of  Russian
Rhubarb,  and  their  texture  more  compact ;  but  the  appearance  of  a
fresh  fracture  is  very  nearly  the  same.  They  are  usually  perforated,
and  the  holes  frequently  contain  fragments  of  cord  by  which  they  were
suspended  during  the  drying  process.  They  are  not  of  such  uniform
quality  as  the  Russian  article,  being  often  imperfectly  stripped  of  their
bark,  and  more  or  less  attacked  by  insects,  moldiness,  or  other  impurity.
The  color,  odor,  taste  and  grittiness  are  very  nearly,  if  not  precisely  the
same  as  those  of  the  Russian  drug.  Their  powder  is  yellow,  with  a
reddish-brown  tinge,  but  in  the  finer  kind  it  is  hardly  discernible  from
the  powder  of  Russian  Rhubarb.  The  major  portion  of  the  rhubarb
consumed  in  this  country  is  the  Chinese  variety ;  it  is  somewhat  inferior
to  the  Russian,  but  is  less  expensive,  and  when  of  good  quality  is  suffi-
ciently active  to  answer  all  medical  purposes.

European  Rhubarb  is  obtained  from  England,  France,  Belgium,  and
Germany.  That  which  is  imported  into  this  country  comes  principally
from  England  and  France.  English  Rhubarb  is  obtained  from  the  roots  of
Rheum  Rhaponticum,  which  is  cultivated  in  various  parts  of  the  country,
but  chiefly  in  Oxfordshire  near  Banbury.  It  is  collected  in  October  and
November  from  plants  three  or  four  years  old.  The  pieces,  as  seen  in
this  country,  are  of  various  shape  and  size,  sometimes  cut  and  perforated
to  resemble  the  Russian,  frequently  cylindrical,  five  or  six  inches  long,
by  an  inch  or  less  in  thickness,  more  commonly  flat,  or  somewhat  lenti-
cular, and  quite  large.  It  has  an  external  reddish  hue,  and  brownish
spots  of  adhering  bark,  and  internally  a  looser,  softer,  and  more  spongy
texture  than  the  others,  with  occasional  cavities,  especially  in  the  center.
It  is  more  easily  scratched  with  the  nail,  and  yields  a  lighter  yellow
streak ;  and  the  surface  of  a  fresh  fracture  shows  the  same  marbled  red
and  gray  lines,  but  generally  more  straightly  radiated  from  the  center.
It  has  a  mucilaginous,  astringent  taste,  with  little  bitterness  and  a  flavor
similar  to  Eastern  Rhubarb,  but  much  more  feeble  in  odor,  more  muci-
laginous, and  without  any  grittiness  between  the  teeth.  The  long  or
inferior  pieces  are  often  met  with  in  this  country,  and  are  called  Stick-
rhubarb  in  England.  These  are  principally  used  for  adulterating  the
finer  Eastern  varieties,  when  in  powder.
51


802  Materia  Medica.

French  Rhubarr,  also  called  Rhapontic.  Rhuharb,  or  Krimca  Rhubarb,
is  made  in  abundance  at  an  establishment  called  Rheumpule,  near  the
port  of  L'Orient,  from  the  roots  of  Rheum  Rhaponticum,  R.  Undulatum,
and  7?.  Compactum.  It  bears  some  resemblance  externally  to  Chinese
Rhubarb,  but  has  neither  its  odor,  nor  aromatic  taste.  Its  properties
are  very  similar  to  the  English  variety,  and  like  that,  it  is  often  used  to
adulterate  the  powder  of  true  eastern  rhubarb.

A  mere  reference  to  other  varieties  of  rhubarb  will  be  sufficient  here.
The  Himalaya  or  Emodi  Rhubarb,  from  the  Rheum  Astrale,  and  other
species  growing  in  the  Himalaya  mountains,  is  brown,  fibrous,  inodor-
ous, and  inferior,  yet  is  said  to  be  nearly  as  active  as  the  Chinese.  The
a  superior  article,  of  white  color,  and  sweetish  taste;  but  according  to
Dr.  G.  Walpers,  who  has  made  some  inquiries  in  relation  to  it,  it  proves
to  be  one  of  those  fabulous  sayings,  in  which,  unfortunately,  some
travelers  are  very  apt  to  indulge.

Good  rhubarb  may  generally  be  known  by  being  of  a  lively  color,  mode-
rately compact  and  heavy,  of  an  aromatic  odor,  of  a  bitter  and  astring-
ent, not  mucilaginous  taste,  and  by  feeling  gritty,  and  staining  the
saliva  bright  yellow  ;  it  should  be  brittle,  presenting  a  marbled  appear-
ance of  reddish  and  yellowish  veins  intermingled  with  white,  when
freshly  broken,  and  affording  a  bright  yellow  powder,  perhaps  with  a
slight  reddish-brown  tinge.  When  very  compact  and  heavy  it  is  infe-
rior; when  very  light  it  maybe  rotten  or  worm-eaten.  Inferior  rhubarb
is  often  colored  with  turmeric,  which  may  be  detected  by  solution  of
boracic  acid,  which  turns  turmeric-yellow  to  brown,  but  does  not  affect
the  yellow  color  of  the  true  rhubarb.  When  in  powder,  the  adultera-
tions of  rhubarb  are  very  difficult,  if  it  all  possible,  to  detect.  Water,
either  cold  or  boiling,  extracts  the  active  properties  of  rhubarb,  and  the
infusion  is  of  a  dark  reddish-yellow  color,  with  the  peculiar  odor  and
taste  of  rhubarb  ;  and  the  residue  becomes  whitish,  tasteless  and  in-
odorous. Long  boiling  impairs  its  virtues.  The  infusion  prepared  by
percolation  with  cold  water,  is  preferable  to  that  obtained  wiih  boiling
water  alone,  as  this  last  becomes  turbid  on  cooling,  owing  to  a  partial
separation  of  some  of  the  principles  of  the  root;  this  may  be  prevented,
however,  by  the  addition  of  a  little  spirit.  Proof  spirit  is  a  more  ready
solvent  of  the  active  ingredients  of  rhubarb  than  water.  Nitric  acid
added  to  an  infusion  of  Russian  rhubarb  in  twenty  parts  of  water,  causes
a  dense  muddiness,  and  slowly  a  yellow  precipitate,  owing  to  the  sepa-
ration of  rhabarbarin;  tincture  of  iodine  causes  a  tawny  muddiness,
probably  for  a  similar  reason;  solution  of  potassa  combines  with  the  rha-
barbeiin  and  produces  a  fine  blood-red  color;  and  lime-water  causes  at
first  a  pale  cherry-red  haze,  which  slowly  gives  place  to  a  red  precipi-
tate composed  of  rhabarberin and  lime. Sesquichloride  of iron  pro-


Rheum  Plamatcm.  803

duces  a  green  precipitate,  and  solution  of  isinglass  a  yellow  curdy
deposit,  owing  to  the  presence  of  tannin.  Chinese  Rhubarb  is  affected
in  the  same  way  by  the  above  reagents.  Rhubarb  has  been  analyzed
by  several  chemists,  and  with  various  results.  In  1836  Brandes  found
the  Eastern  drug  to  consist  of  2  per  cent,  of  pure  rhabarbaric  acid  or
rhabarbarin,  7.5  of  the  same  acid  impure,  2.5  of  gallic  acid,  9  of  tannin,
4  starch,  11  of  uncrystallizable  sugar  in  union  with  tannin,  14.4  of
gummy  extractive,  3.5  of  coloring  extractive,  4  of  pectic  acid,  11  of
oxalate  of  lime,  1.1  of  malate  and  gallate  of  lime,  1.  5  of  sulphate  of
potassa  and  chloride  of  potassium,  1  of  silica,  0.5  of  phosphate  of  lime
and  oxide  of  iron,  25  of  lignin,  and  2  of  moisture.  The  principles  indi-
cated by  previous  investigators,  under  the  names  Rhein,  Rheumin,  Rha-
barbarin,  and  Cuphopicrite,  appear  to  be  complex  bodies,  consisting  of
the  Rhabarbaric  acid  of  Brandes  combined  with  other  principles.  It
may  be  obtained  by  purifying  the  alcoholic  extract  of  rhubarb  with
cold  water,  drying  the  residue,  dissolving  it  in  the  smallest  possible
bulk  of  spirit,  and  then  adding  ether  so  long  as  it  separates  anything.
The  ether  is  then  to  be  distilled  off,  and  the  residue  again  similarly
treated  with  spirit  and  ether.  The  solution  yields  it  pure  by  sponta-
neous evaporation.  It  is  granular,  yellow,  tasteless  and  inodorous,
fusible,  partially  volatile,  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  more  so  in  alcohol
or  ether,  and  acid  in  its  reactions.  Alkaline  solutions  dissolve  it  form-
ing intensely  red  solutions,  from  which  acids  separate  it  as  a  yellow
precipitate,  and  which,  with  the  earthy  salts,  give  yellow  precipitates  of
the  principle,  united  with  an  earthy  base.  Ultimate  analysis  shows  that
it  is  identical  with  a  coloring  matter  (chrysophanic  acid)  obtained  by
Rochleder  from  the  yellow  lichen  Parmelia  Parietina.

Schlossbergcr  and  Doepping,  in  a  recent  and  elaborate  analysis,  have,
in  addition  to  the  above  principles,  also  discovered  three  coloring  princi-
ples, which  are  freely  soluble  in  alcohol,  slightly  soluble  in  water,  and
hold  an  intermediate  place  betwen  resin  and  extractive  matter.  Two
of  these  were  uncrystallizable,  one  of  which  was  broxon  and  the  other
red,  and  were  named  Phceoretin  and  Erythroretin  ;  the  other  formed  in
granular  crystals,  and  was  named  Chrysophanic  acid.  Aporetin  was  the
name  given  to  another  resinous  substance,  which  was  insoluble  in  the
alcohol  from  which  it  had  been  precipitated  by  ether,  and  isomeric  with
phseoietin,  it  was  supposed  to  be  a  product  of  the  operation.  These
three  principles  were  obtained  by  pursuing  the  above-named  process  for
rhabarbaric  acid,  and  dissolving  the  yellow  precipitate,  had  by  evapora-
tion, in  alcohol  ;  the  insoluble  portion  is  aporetin,  and  the  phceoretin  is
taken  up  by  the  alcohol,  from  which  it  may  be  separated  by  evapora-
tion. It  is  a  yellowish-brown  powder,  very  slightly  soluble  in  water  or
ether,  freely  soluble  in  alcohol  and  alkaline  solutions,  with  which  it  pro-
duces an  intense  reddish-brown  color,  and  which  is  precipitated  yellow
by  the  mineral  acids. The  ethereal  solution  of  the  alcoholic  extract,


804  Materia  Medica.

after  all  the  aporetin  and  pheeoretin  had  been  separated  was  allowed  to
separate  spontaneously,  and  a  large  quantity  of  beautiful  yellow  crys-
talline granules  of  chrysophanic  acid  was  obtained,  possessing  properties
the  same  as  named  above  for  rhabarbaric  acid.  When  the  deposition
of  these  granules  ceased,  the  ethereal  solution  was  evaporated,  which
yielded  the  red  resin  or  erythroretin,  and  which  formed  beautiful  purple
combinations  with  potassa  or  ammonia.  The  cathartic  principle  of
rhubarb  has  not  yet  been  isolated,  and  is  supposed  to  be  more  or  less
volatile.

The  incompatible  substances  with  an  infusion  of  rhubarb,  are  gelatin,
most  of  the  acids,  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron,  acetate  of  lead,  nitrate
of  protoxide  of  mercury,  nitrate  of  silver,  protochloride  of  tin,  lime-water,
solutions  of  quinia,  tartar  emetic,  sulphate  of  zinc,  corrosive  sublimate,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Rhubarb  is  cathartic,  astringent  and  tonic ;  as  a
cathartic,  it  acts  by  increasing  the  muscular  action  of  the  intestines,
rather  than  by  augmenting  their  secretions,  and  affects  the  whole  intes-
tinal canal,  especially  the  duodenum.  Its  cathartic  effect  is  succeeded
by  a  mild  astringency,  which  has  gained  for  rhubarb  the  reputation  of
being  secondarily  a  calmative,  as  well  as  a  stimulant  of  the  digestive
canal  ;  with  its  astringent  influence,  it  likewise  exerts,  for  the  most  part,
a  tonic  action  on  the  stomach,  improving  the  appetite  and  digestive
powers.  It  is  absorbed  in  the  course  of  its  operation,  making  the  serum
of  the  blood  yellow,  the  sweat  tawny,  and  the  urine  red,  which  may  be
distinguished  from  bloody  urine  by  heating  it.  If  blood  be  present  it
will  coagulate,  and  remove  the  red  color,  which  will  not  happen  if  the
tint  be  owing  to  rhubarb.  Rhubarb  is  much  used  as  a  laxative  for
infants,  in  many  infantile  diseases  ;  its  mildness  and  tonic  qualities  ren-
dering it  peculiarly  applicable,  especially  when  enfeebled  digestion  and
irritation  of  the  alimentary  canal  are  present.  In  acute  or  chronic  diar-
rhea or  dysentery,  in  convalescence  from  exhausting  diseases,  and  in
some  irritable  habits  where  the  mildest  of  all  other  laxatives  are  apt  to
excite  hypercatharsis,  rhubarb  is  an  appropriate  medicine.  Its  combi-
nation with  soap  or  an  alkali  tends  to  counteract  its  astringent  effects,
and  it  thus  becomes  valuable  in  cases  of  constipation.  It  is  useful  in  all
cases  of  fecal  accumulations,  as  it  produces  fecal,  more  than  watery
discharges.  Sometimes  it  produces  griping,  which  may  be  obviated  by
aromatics.  The  following  pill  I  have  found  very  beneficial  in  dyspepsia
attended  with  constipation,  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  habitual
constipation,  hepatic  derangements,  piles,  etc. — Take  of  extract  of  rhu-
barb, leptandrin,  hydrastin,  and  castile  soap,  of  each,  half  a  drachm,
mix  them  well  together,  and  divide  into  thirty  pills  ;  of  these,  one,  two,
three,  or  four  may  be  taken  daily,  sufficient  to  kep  the  bowels  regular,
without  causing  catharsis.  When  more  than  one  are  required  daily,
they  should  be  given  in  doses  of  one  pill  at  a  time  at  regular  intervals


Rhododendron  Chrysanthum.  805

tbrouoh  the  day.  Rhubarb  is  generally  contra-indicated  in  cases  attended
with  much  inflammatory  action.  Toasting  it,  destroys  much  of  its  pur-
gative power,  while  its  astringency  remains  the  same,  and  it  is,  thus
prepared,  recommended  by  some  practitioners  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,
cholera  morbus,  and  other  diseases  where  astringents  are  indicated.

Dose  of  the  powder  as  a  purgative,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains  ;  as  a
laxative,  from  five  to  ten  grains  ;  as  a  tonic,  from  one  to  five  grains ;  of
the  tincture  or  syrup,  one  or  two  fluidrachms.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Rhei ;  Extractum  Rhei  Fluidum ;  Extractum
Rhei  et  Potassae  Fluidum  ;  Infusum  Rhei ;  Pilulae  Leptandrini  Compo-
sitae  ;  Pulvis  Rhei  Compositus  ;  Tinctura  Rhei.


RHODODENDRON CHRYSANTHUM.

Yellow  Rhododendron.
Nat. Ord. — Ericaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  a  small  bush,  with  the  stem  from  a  foot  to  a  foot
and  a  half  high,  with  numerous,  decumbent,  spreading  branches,  covered
with  a  brown  bark.  The  leaves  are  few,  alternate,  of  the  texture  of  a
laurel  leaf,  terminal,  ovate,  somewhat  acute,  tapering  into  the  stalk,
reticulated  and  rough  above,  of  a  dark-green  color,  paler,  or  somewhat
ferruginous  and  smooth  underneath,  with  their  margins  entire  and
involute.  The  flowers  are  large,  showy,  nodding,  yellow,  supported  on
long  peduncles,  and  varying  in  number  in  each  cluster  from  five  to  ten.
The  calyx  is  inferior,  persistent,  and  deeply  five-cleft.  The  corolla  is
campanulate,  five-cleft,  with  rounded  segments,  nearly  equal,  and
spreading,  the  three  upper  ones  somewhat  the  largest,  and  streaked  with
livid  dots  next  the  tube,  the  two  lower  unspotted.  The  stamens  are  ten,
with  unequal,  filiform,  declining  filaments,  and  oblong  incumbent  anthers.
The  ovary  is  five-sided,  with  a  long  slender  style  terminated  by  a  five-
lobed  stigma.  The  capsule  is  ovate,  somewhat  angular,  not  tomentose,
five  to  ten-celled,  containing  numerous  minute,  irregular  seeds.

History. — Rhododendron  is  a  beautiful  evergreen  shrub,  a  native  of
the  mountains  of  Siberia,  with  large,  yellow  flowers,  which  appear  in
June  and  July.  The  leaves  are  the  parts  used  in  medicine,  and  should
be  collected  in  September,  when  the  capsules  are  ripe.  When  dried,
they  are  inodorous,  but  have  an  austere,  astringent,  bitterish  taste,  and
yield  their  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  The  decoction  has  an  unplea-
sant odor,  and  a  rough,  bitter,  and  acrid  taste.  The  leaves  have  not
been  analyzed.  Our  native  species,  the  R.  Maximum,  and  R.  Punctatum,
according  to  Barton,  possess  properties  similar  to  the  R.  Chrysanthum,
but  milder ;  according  to  Bigelow  they  are  astringent,  but  not  narcotic.


806  Materia Medica.

Properties  and  Uses. — Yellow  Rhododendron  is  narcotic,  stimulant,
and  diaphoretic ;  when  first  taken,  the  action  of  the  heart  and  arteries
is  increased,  followed  by  a  diminished  frequency  of  the  pulse  ;  large
doses  produce  emeto-catharsis,  and  delirium.  They  are  recommended
in  infusion,  in  chronic  rheumatism,  gout,  syphilis,  and  palsy;  two  drachms
of  the  dried  leaves  being  infused  in  ten  fluidounces  of  hot  water,  for
twelve  hours,  in  a  close  vessel.  The  liquor  is  then  strained  and  taken
in  the  morning,  one-fourth  of  it  every  four  hours,  and  the  patient  kept
in  bed  ;  a  repetition  of  the  dose  three  or  four  days  successively,  gener-
ally effects  a  cure.  It  occasions  a  sensation  of  heat,  with  a  species  of
intoxication,  and  a  peculiar  creeping  or  pricking,  and  uneasy  sensation
in  the  affected  parts,  which  subsides  in  a  few  hours,  leaving  the  parts
free  from  pain.  It  is  a  valuable  remedy,  used  in  Russia,  Germany,  and
sometimes  in  France  and  England,  but  not  in  this  country.


RHUS GLABRUM.

Sumach.
Nat.  Ord. — Anacardiacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Trigynia.

THE BARK AND FRUIT.

Description. — As  there  are  several  species  of  this  genus  which  possess
poisonous  properties,  some  care  should  be  employed  in  distinguishing
them  apart.  Rhus  Glabrum,  or  Smooth  Sumach,  is  a  shrub  from  four  to
fifteen  feet  in  hight,  consisting  of  many  straggling,  glabrous  branches,
with  a  light-gray  or  somewhat  reddish  bark.  The  leaves  are  upon
smooth  petioles,  and  consist  of  from  six  to  fifteen  pairs  of  opposite  leaf-
lets, with  an  odd  one  at  the  extremity,  all  of  which  are  lanceolate,
acuminate,  acutely  serrate,  glabrous,  green  on  their  upper  surface  and
whitish  beneath,  sessile  except  sometimes  the  terminal  odd  one,  about
three  inches  long,  and  one-fourth  as  wide ;  in  the  autumn  their  color
changes  to  a  beautiful  red.  The  fiowers  are  greenish-red,  and  disposed
in  large,  erect,  terminal,  compound  thyrses,  and  are  succeeded  by  clus-
ters of  red  berries,  covered,  when  mature,  with  a  crimson  down,  which
is  extremely  sour  to  the  taste,  owing  to  the  presence  of  malic  acid  in
combination  with  lime.

History.  —  Rhus  Glabrum,  sometimes  called  Upland  ox  Pennsylvania
Sumach,  is  found  in  almost  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  growing  in
old  neglected  fields,  along  fences,  and  on  the  borders  of  woods,  flower-
ing in  June  and  July,  and  maturing  its  fruit  in  the  early  part  of  autumn.
The  bark  and  berries  are  officinal ;  the  latter  should  be  collected  before
their  acid  efflorescence  is  washed  away  by  the  rain.  They  have  an  acid,
astringent,  not  unpleasant  taste.  The  bark  and  leaves  are  astringent,
and  have  been  used  in  dying  and  tanning  leather;  when  broken  from
the  plant, a  milky  juice exudes  from them,  which  concretes  into  a


Rhus  Glabrum.  807

gummy  substance.  The  excrescences  which  form  upon  the  leaves,  con-
tain large  quantities  of  tannic  and  gallic  acids,  nearly  resembling  galls
in  character,  and  are  fully  equal  to  them  in  medicinal  action.

Malic  acid  may  be  obtained  from  the  berries  by  the  following  process:
Pour  boiling  water  on  the  ripe  berries,  and  let  them  macerate  for  twelve
hours ;  then  strain,  evaporate  to  one-fourth,  and  again  strain ;  resume
the  evaporation  and  continue  it  till  the  liquid  assumes  the  consistence  of
thin  syrup,  when  it  may  be  set  aside  to  crystallize.  Wash  the  crystals
of  bimalate  of  lime  which  are  formed,  with  a  little  water,  and  recrystal-
lize  from  a  boiling  solution.  Dissolve  the  salt  in  hot  water,  and  decom-
pose it  with  a  solution  of  acetate  of  lead.  Wash  the  precipitated  malate
of  lead,  suspend  it  in  water,  and  pass  sulphureted  hydrogen  through  the
liquid  until  the  whole  of  the  lead  is  separated.  Lastly,  filter  and  evapo-
rate to  dryness  in  a  porcelain  vessel.  Malic  acid  thus  prepared  may  be
used  for  obtaining  the  malates  of  iron  or  of  manganese.

The  Pharmaceutical  Institute  of  New  York  city  profess  to  have
obtained  from  the  leaves  of  the  Rhus  Glabrum,  the  active  principle  of
the  plant,  which  they  term  Rhusine.  It  is  said  to  be  prepared  by  per-
colation with  alcohol  of  specific  gravity  0.830,  and  then  displace  the
solvent  by  means  of  a  vacuum  apparatus.  The  Rhusine  is  then  precipi-
tated and  washed  with  distilled  water,  dried  on  filter-cloth,  in  an  airy,
dry  room,  and  reduced  to  a  fine  powder.  (See  Eclectic  Journal  of  Medi-
cine, Rochester,  Vol.  IV,  No.  VI,  page  232.)  It  is  said  to  be  a  light
brown  powder,  soluble  in  hot  water,  insoluble  in  alcohol  and  having  a
slightly  bitter  taste.  I  have  not  been  able  to  procure  any  of  it,  nor  a
more  detailed  account  of  its  preparation.  Both  the  bark  and  berries  of
Sumach  yield  their  active  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sumach  bark  is  tonic,  astringent  and  antiseptic ;
the  berries  are  refrigerant  and  diuretic.  In  decoetion  or  syrup,  the  bark
of  the  root  has  been  found  valuable  in  gonorrhea,  leucorrhea,  diarrhea,
dysentery,  hectic  fever  and  scrofula.  Combined  with  the  barks  of  Slip-
pery Elm  and  White  Pine,  in  decoction,  and  taken  freely,  it  is  said  to
have  proved  highly  beneficial  in  syphilis.  Externally,  the  bark  of  the
root  in  powder,  applied  as  a  poultice  to  old  ulcers,  forms  an  excellent
antiseptic ;  a  decoction  may  also  be  used  in  injection  for  prolapsus  uteri
and  ani,  and  leucorrhea,  and  as  a  wash  in  many  cutaneous  diseases;
simmered  in  lard  it  is  valuable  in  scald-head.  A  decoction  of  the  inner
bark  of  the  root  is  serviceable  in  the  sore-mouth  resulting  from  mercu-
rial salivation,  and  is  much  used  internally  in  mercurial  diseases.  The
berries  may  be  used  in  infusion  in  diabetes,  strangury,  bowel-complaints,
febrile  diseases,  etc.,  as  a  gargle  in  quinsy,  and  ulcerations  of  the  mouth
and  throat ;  and  as  a  wash  for  ringworms,  tetters,  offensive  ulcers,  etc.
The  excrescences  which  form  upon  the  leaves  of  the  sumach,  are  nearly
equal  in  astringency  to  galls,  and  if  pulverized  and  made  into  an  oint-
ment with  lard,  they  afford  a  soothing  application  for  piles. The  gum


808  Materia  Medica.

which  exudes  from  the  bark  on  being  punctured,  during  the  summer,  is
beneficial  in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  obstruction  of  the  urine,  and  leucorrhea;
the  following  is  a  good  preparation,  which  increases  the  secretion  of
urine,  and  lessens  its  burning  or  scalding :  Take  of  gum  sumach,  and
Canada  balsam,  of  each,  equal  parts,  form  into  four-grain  pills  with  a
sufficient  quantity  of  powdered  pokeroot;  dose,  one  or  two  pills,  three
times  a  day.  Dose  of  the  decoction  of  sumach,  from  one  to  four  fluid-
ounces.

There  are  several  varieties  of  this  plant,  as  the  R.  Typhinum,  Stag-
horn  or  Velvet  Sumach ;  and  the  R.  Copallinum,  Mountain  or  Dwarf
Sumach,  which  possess  similar  virtues,  and  which  must  be  carefully
distinguished  from  those  which  possess  poisonous  properties.  The  non-
poisonous  species  have  their  fruit  clothed  with  acid  crimson  hairs,  and
their  panicles  are  compound,  dense,  and  terminal ;  the  poisonous  vari-
eties have  axillary  panicles,  and  smooth  fruit.

Rhusine  is  said  to  be  tonic,  astringent,  and  antiseptic ;  and  to  be  of
service  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  bowel  diseases  generally,  in  doses  of
one  or  twro  grains,  every  two,  three  or  four  hours,  to  be  given  after  the
exciting  cause  of  these  diseases  has  been  removed  by  other  agents.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Rhus  Glabri ;  Extractum  Rhus  Fluidum.


RHUS TOXICODENDRON.
Poison  Oak.

Nat. Ord. — Anacardiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Trigynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — There  are  three  species  of  Rhus,  common  to  this  coun-
try, which  are  poisonous,  viz :  the  Rhus  Toxicodendron,  Rhus  Venenata,
and  Rhus  Pumilum.  They  possess  similar  medicinal  virtues,  in  a
greater  or  less  degree,  and  should  be  known  to  every  physician.

Rhus  Toxicodendron,  or  Poison  Oak,  is  a  creeping  shrub  from  one
to  three  feet  high,  the  root  of  which  sends  up  many  stems,  which  are
either  erect,  decumbent,  or  when  they  meet  support,  ascend  a  wall,
fence,  or  tree,  in  the  same  manner  as  ivy,  by  radicles  thrown  out  at
intervals.  The  bark  is  of  a  brownish -gray  color.  The  leaves  are  ternate,
on  long  semicylindrical  petioles ;  they  vary  considerably,  in  the  erect
varieties  being  usually  entire,  or  variously  and  irregularly  sinuate- toothed
or  lobcd,  while  in  the  climbing  kinds  they  are  almost  entire  or  nearly
so;  in  all  cases  they  are  smooth  on  the  upper  surface,  but  more  or  less
pubescent  beneath.  The  leaflets  are  from  two  to  six  inches  long,  and
about  two-thirds  as  wide,  ovate  or  rhomboidal,  acute,  entire,  or  sinuate-
dentate,  petiolate  ;  the  lateral  leaflets  are  always  inequilateral,  nearly
sessile,  and  smaller  than  the  central  ones.  The  flowers  are  small,
greenish-white,  dioecious,  and  grow  in  lateral,  usually  axillary,  racemose,


Rhus  Toxicodendron.  809

6ubsessile  panicles.  The  barren  flowers  have  a  calyx  of  five  erect,
acute  segments,  and  a  corolla  of  five  oblong  recurved  petals ;  stamens
erect  with  oblong  anthers;  in  the  center  is  a  rudiment  of  a  style.  The
•fertile  flowers  are  about  half  the  size  of  the  preceding,  with  calyx  and
corolla  similar,  but  more  erect.  They  have  five  small  abortive  stamens,
and  a  roundish  ovary,  crowned  by  a  short,  erect  style  bearing  three
small,  cordate  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  a  globular,  smooth,  dry  berry,  of
a  pale-green  color  approaching  to  white,  and  which  contains  a  single
bony  seed.

Rhus  Radicans  or  Poison  Ivy,  and  sometimes  Poison  Vine,  is  con-
sidered by  botanists  to  be  merely  a  variety  of  the  above  species ;  it  has
a  climbing  stem  from  three  to  twenty  or  more  feet  in  length,  and  ascends
trees,  rocks,  and  other  objects,  to  which  it  adheres  by  means  of  myriads
of  radicating  tendrils  thrown  out  from  its  sides.  The  leaves  are  smooth
on  both  sides,  sometimes  pubescent  on  the  veins  underneath.  In  other
respects  it  resembles  the  R.  Toxicodendron.  Rhus  Toxicodendron
grows  in  woods,  fields,  and  along  fences  from  Canada  to  Georgia,  flow-
ering in  June  and  July.  When  wounded,  it  emits  a  milky  juice  which
becomes  black  on  exposure  to  the  air,  and  leaves  upon  linen  or  cloth,  a
stain  which  deepens  by  age,  and  which  cannot  be  removed  by  soap  and
water,  or  alcohol.  Ether  dissolves  it.  It  has  been  proposed  as  an
indelible  ink.

The  Rhus  Venenata,  or  Poison  Sumach,  also  known  as  Poison  wood,
Poison  ash,  and  inappropriately  as  poison-elder,  and  poison  dog-wood.
This  has  been  confounded  with  the  Rhus  Vernix  of  Linnaeus,  a  species
which  grows  in  Japan.  It  is  a  shrub  or  small  tree,  from  ten  to  fifteen
and  sometimes  thirty  feet  in  hight,  with  the  trunk  from  one  to  five  inches
in  diameter,  and  branching  at  the  top.  The  bark  of  the  trunk  is  dark-
gray,  paler  on  the  branches,  and  red  on  the  extreme  twigs  and  petioles.
The  leaves  are  pinnate,  with  from  three  to  six  pairs  of  opposite  leaflets,
and  an  odd  terminal  one,  which  are  oblong  or  oval,  entire  or  slightly
sinuated,  acuminate,  smooth,  paler  underneath,  and  nearly  sessile,  except
the  odd  terminal  one  ;  they  are  about  three  inches  long,  and  nearly  half
as  wide.  The  flowers  are  dioecious  and  polygamous,  very  small,  green,
and  in  loose,  axillary,  pedunculate  'panicles.  The  panicles  of  the  barren
flowers  are  downy,  the  largest  and  most  branched.  Sepals  five,  ovate  ;
petals  five,  oblong ;  stamens  longer  than  the  petals,  and  projecting
through  their  interstices  ;  the  rudiment  of  a  three-cleft  style  in  the
center.  In  the  fertile  flowers,  the  panicles  are  much  smaller,  sepals  and
petals  resemble  the  last,  while  the  center  is  occupied  by  an  oval  ovary,
terminated  by  three  circular  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  a  bunch  of  dry  berries
or  drupes,  about  the  size  of  peas,  smooth,  greenish-yellow  or  greenish-
white,  sometimes  marked  with  slight  purple  veins,  and  becoming
wrinkled  when  old  ;  roundish,  a  little  broadest  at  the  upper  end,  and
compressed,  containing  one  white,  hard,  furrowed  seed.


810  Materia Medica.

Rhus  Venenata  grows  in  swamps  and  low  grounds,  from  Canada  to
Georgia,  and  flowers  in  June  and  July  ;  it  is  sometimes  termed  Swamp
Sumach.  It  furnishes  an  opake  whitish  juice  when  wounded,  which
becomes  permanently  black  on  exposure,  and  which  may,  by  sufficient
boiling,  be  made  to  afford  a  brilliant,  glossy,  durable  varnish,  very  anal-
ogous to  that  obtained  in  Japan  from  the  Rhus  Vernix.  It  is  much  more
poisonous  than  the  previous  species,  and  its  volatile  principle  taints  the
air  for  some  distance  around  with  its  pernicious  influence,  producing  in
many  persons  severe  swellings  of  an  erysipelatous  nature  ;  sometimes
the  body  becomes  enormously  swollen,  and  the  patient  unable  to  move.
Some  persons  are  hardly  or  not  at  all  affected  even  by  handling  it.  The
affection  caused  by  it,  generally  subsides  spontaneously  after  several
days,  and  may  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  named  for  the  poison-
ous effects  of  the  R.  Toxicodendron.

The  Rhus  Pumilum  is  considered  the  most  poisonous  of  the  genus.  It
grows  about  a  foot  in  bight,  and  may  be  distinguished  by  its  pubescent
brandies  and  petioles,  its  pinnate  leaves,  with  many  pairs  of  oval,  nearly
acuminate,  incised-dentate  leaflets,  downy  beneath,  and  by  its  silky  fruit.
It  is  a  southern  species,  growing  in  Upper  Carolina.

History. — Although  all  parts  of  the  Rhus  Toxicodendron  are,  prob-
ably, possessed  of  active  properties,  yet  the  leaves  only  are  officinal.
They  are  inodorous,  have  a  mawkish  acrid  taste,  and  yield  their  virtues
to  water  or  alcohol.  The  best  preparation  for  medical  use  is  a  saturated
tincture  of  the  recent,  leaves,  and  which  should  be  kept  well  corked.
They  have  not  been  satisfactorily  analyzed,  though  known  to  contain
tannic  and  gallic  acids.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  fresh  juice  of  the  Poison  Oak  is  powerfully
irritant.  In  some  persons  it  produces  vesication  wherever  it  is  applied,
accompanied  sometimes  by  much  symptomatic  fever, — and  even  the
emanations  from  the  plant  are  alleged  to  have  the  same  effect  on  certain
constitutions.  To  remove  these  effects,  the  parts  may  be  bathed  with  a
solution  of  borax  or  copperas,  or  a  wash  made  by  boiling  the  bark  of
the  elder  in  buttermilk  ;  accompanied  with  a  light  cooling  regimen,  and
cooling  purgatives  or  diuretics.  The  bruised  leaves  of  the  Collinsonia
Canadensis,  externally,  and  an  infusion  of  the  Verbena.  Urticifolia,  inter-
nally, have  been  successfully  used  in  internal  or  external  poisoning  by
these  plants.  In  large  doses  the  leaves  and  juice  are  narcotico-irritant,
and  in  small  doses,  they  are  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  laxative,  and  a  stimu-
lant of  the  nervous  system.  It  is  said  they  produce  twitchings  of  para-
lyzed muscles,  and  prickings  of  the  affected  limb,  similar  to  strychnia  or
nux  vomica.  They  have  been  highly  recommended  in  chronic  paralysis,
chronic  rheumatism,  cutaneous  diseases,  and  some  diseases  of  the  eye;
it  is  seldom  used  on  account  of  its  poisonous  consequences  and  the
volatility  of  its  active  principle. I  have  derived  much  advantage  from


Ribes  Nigrum.  811

the  following  preparation  in  paralysis,  chronic  rheumatism,  and  some
obstinate  cutaneous  affections:  Take  of  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  fresh
leaves  of  Rhus  Toxicodendron  half  a  fluidounce,  saturated  tincture  of
Aconitum,  volatile  tincture  of  Guaiacum,  of  each,  two  fluidrachms  ;  mix
together.  Of  this  give  forty  drops  every  three  or  four  hours,  having
previously  evacuated  the  bowels.  Rhus  Toxicodendron  has  been  em-
ployed successfully  in  paraplegia  without  any  actual  organic  lesion,
likewise  in  paralysis  of  the  bladder  and  of  the  rectum.  Dose  of  the
leaves,  in  powder,  half  a  grain  three  times  a  day,  gradually  increased
until  some  effect  is  produced;  of  the  saturated  tincture  from  five  to  ten
drops.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Rhus  Toxicodendri.


RIBES  NIGRUM.

Black  Currant.

Nat.  Ord. — Grossulacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE FRUIT.

Description. — The  Black  Currant  is  a  woody  bush  or  shrub  from  three
to  five  feet  in  hight,  stems  unarmed,  and  the  leaves  from  three  to  five
lobed,  punctate  beneath,  dentate-serrate,  longer  than  their  petioles.
Racemes  lax,  hairy,  somewhat  nodding.  Calyx  campanulate,  with
reflexed  segments;  petals  oblong,  yellowish  ;  bracts  minute,  subulate  or
blunt,  nearly  as  long  as  the  pedicels.  Fruit  large,  roundish-ovoid,
nearly  black.

Ribes  Rubrum,  or  common  Red  Currant,  has  unarmed,  straggling  or
reclined  stems,  with  leaves  obtusely  three  to  five-lobed,  smooth  above,
pubescent  beneath,  subcordate  at  base,  margin  mucronately  serrate.
The  racemes  are  from  lateral  buds  distinct  from  the  leaves,  pendulous,
and  nearly  glabrous.  Bracts  blunt,  shorter  than  the  pedicels.  Calyx
flattened  out,  short,  spreading,  with  obtuse  lobes ;  petals  obcordate,
green. Fruit  globose,  smooth,  red.

History. — The  Black  Currant  is  a  native  of  Europe  and  Siberia,  grow-
ing in  woods,  cultivated  in  Europe  and  this  country,  and  flowering  in
May.  The  Red  Cwrant  grows  in  cold  damp  woods  and  bogs  in  this
country  and  Europe,  and  is  extensively  cultivated  in  gardens  ;  it  also
flowers  in  May.  The  fruit  of  these  two  plants,  is  the  part  used,  and
imparts  its  virtues  to  water.  The  juice  of  Red  Currants  is  said  to  con-
tain citric  acid,  malic  acid,  sugar,  vegetable  jelly,  gum,  and  extractive ;
that  of  Black  Currants  contains  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  a  pecu-
liar volatile  principle,  and  a  violet  coloiing  matter.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  juice  of  these  berries,  especially  of  the
black  currant,  is  said  to  be  diuretic  and  diaphoretic.  They  may  be
made  into  a  jelly,  a  jam,  paste,  etc.,  and  are  very  useful  in  febrile  and


81 2  Materia Medica.

inflammatory  cases,  in  hoarseness  and  affections  of  the  throat.  The  raw
juice  is  an  excellent  refrigerant  beverage  in  febrile  diseases.  A  decoc-
tion of  the  bark  of  the  black  currant  has  proved  useful  in  calculous
affections,  dropsy,  and  hemorrhoidal  tumors.  The  wild  black  currant,
Hides  Floridum,  of  this  country,  possesses  similar  properties.  It  is  a
handsome  shrub,  growing  from  three  to  five  feet  high,  with  leaves  one  or
two  inches  long,  and  somewhat  wider,  subcordate,  from  three  to  five
lobed,  lobes  acute,  spreading,  sprinkled  on  both  sides  with  yellowish,
resinous  dots,  just  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  Flowers  greenish-yellow,
subcampanuiate,  in  pendulous,  pubescent,  many  flowered  racemes.  Calyx
cylindrical ;  bracts  linear,  longer  than  the  pedicels;  petioles  one  or  two
inches  long.  Fruit  obovoid,  smooth,  black,  insipid.  It  flowers  in  May
and  June.


ROBINIA  PSEUD 0- ACACIA.

Locust  Tree.

Nat.  Ord. — Fabaceas,  or  Leguminosae. Sex.  Syst. — Diadelphia  Decandria.

THE BARK AND LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  a  tree  from  forty  to  fifty,  and  in  favorable  situa-
tions, eighty  feet  in  hight,  with  a  diameter  of  from  one  to  four  feet,  and
covered  with  a  darkish-colored  rough  bark.  The  branches  are  numerous,
and  armed  with  short,  strong  spines.  The  leaves  are  unequally  pinnate;
the  leaflets  are  from  four  to  eight  or  twelve  pairs,  with  an  odd  one  at  the
end,  ovate,  and  oblong-ovate,  thin,  nearly  sessile  and  very  smooth,  with
minute,  setaceous,  partial  stipules,  and  of  a  bright  green  color.  The
flowers  are  produced  from  the  sides  of  the  branches,  in  long  pendulous
racemes,  are  numerous,  white,  fragrant,  and  are  succeeded  by  com-
pressed pods  or  legumes,  about  three  or  four  inches  in  length,  and  half
an  inch  in  width,  and  containing  five  or  six  brown,  hard,  reniform  seeds.
When  young,  the  tree  is  armed  with  thorns  which  disappear  in  its
maturity.

History. — This  tree,  known  also  by  the  names  of  Black  Locust,  and
Yellow  Locust,  is  found  in  many  parts  of  the  United  States,  principally
wrest  of  the  mountains,  being  seldom  found  north  of  Pennsylvania,  or  in
the  Atlantic  Southern  States  ;  it  blossoms  in  May.  It  is  highly  esteemed
for  the  durability,  hardness  and  lightness  of  its  wood.  The  bark  and
leaves  are  used,  and  yield  their  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.  The
bark  of  the  root  is  the  most  active.  The  seeds  are  sub-acrid,  and  fur-
nish a  large  quantity  of  oil  on  expression  ;  by  infusion  in  water,  they
become  perfectly  mild,  and  afford  an  excellent  farina.  The  inner  bark
is  fibrous,  and  capable  of  being  spun.  No  analysis  has  been  made  of
this  tree.


ROCCELLA TlNCTORIA.  813

Properties  and  Uses. — The  bark  of  the  root  is  sweetish,  but  emetic
and  cathartic  ;  in  small  doses,  tonic.  An  ounce  of  the  bark  boiled  in
three  gills  of  water  operates  as  a  cathartic  in  doses  of  half  an  ounce,
given  morning  and  evening.  The  bark  is  supposed  to  possess  some  aero-
narcotic  properties,  as  the  juice  of  it  has  been  known  to  produce  coma
and  slight  convulsions.  The  flowers  possess  antispasmodic  properties,
and  form  an  excellent  and  agreeable  syrup.  The  leaves  operate  mildly
and  efficiently  as  an  emetic,  in  doses  of  thirty  grains  every  twenty
minutes.


ROCCELLA TINCTORIA.

Litmus.

Nat.  Ord- — Lichenales. Sex.  Syst. — Cryptogamia  Lichens.

A PECULIAR COLORING MATTER.

Description. — Roccella  Tinctoria,  or  Or chilla- weed,  is  a  small  dry  lichen,
with  a  rounded,  glaucous,  nearly  erect  thallus,  forked  and  subdivided
into  numerous,  branchy,  roundish,  gray,  yellowish  or  brownish  threads  ;
apothecia  scattered  and  elevated  ;  disk  flat,  csesius,  pruinose,  as  broad  as
the  border.

History. — This  lichen  abounds  on  alpine  or  maritime  rocks  in  various
parts  of  the  world,  and  chiefly  upon  the  European  and  African  coasts,
and  the  neighboring  Madeira,  Canary,  Cape  de  Verds,  etc.  islands.  It
contains  a  resinoid  matter,  a  waxy  principle,  mucilaginous  extractive,
lichenin,  oxalate  of  lime  and  various  other  salts,  and  Roccellic  and
Erythric  acids.  Litmus  was  formerly  obtained  from  this  plant  alone,
but  other  lichens  have  now  in  a  great  measure  supplanted  it,  as  the
Roccella  Fusiformis  or  Angola-weed,  from  Angola  and  Madagascar,  the
Lecanora  Tartarea  or  Tartarean  Moss,  from  Norway  and  Sweden,  the
Variolaria  Dealbata  from  Auvergne  and  the  Pyrennees,  and  some  others.
The  principles  in  these  plants  upon  which  their  properties  depend,  are
themselves  colorless,  and  yield  coloring  substances  by  the  reaction  of
water,  air,  and  ammonia  ;  they  are  generally  acids.

Lacmus  or  Litmus  is  prepared  chiefly  in  Holland.  It  is  made  by
coarsely  powdering  the  lichen,  and  then  placing  it  in  close  wooden  ves-
sels, containing  urine,  lime,  and  potassa  or  soda  mixed  together,  allowing
it  to  macerate  for  several  weeks,  with  occasional  agitation.  Fermenta-
tion takes  place,  the  mass  becomes  red  and  then  blue,  is  mixed  with  cal-
careous or  siliceous  matter  to  give  it  consistence,  and  with  indigo  to
deepen  the  color,  and  placed  into  small  molds  to  harden.  It  is  in  rect-
angular cakes  from  a  quarter  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  length,  light,
friable,  finely  granular,  of  an  indigo  blue  or  deep  violet  color,  and
scattered  over  with  white  saline  points.  It  has  the  combined  odor  of
indigo  and  violets,  tinges  the  saliva  a  deep  blue,  and  is  somewhat  pungent


814  Materia  Medica.

and  saline  to  the  taste. It  is  reddened  by  acids,  and  restored  to  its
original  blue  color  by  alkalies.

Properties  and  Uses. — Litmus  is  much  used  in  investigations  of  the
urine,  and  other  analyses,  as  one  of  the  most  delicate  tests  of  uncom-
bined  acids,  which  change  its  blue  color  to  red  ;  and  of  alkalies  which
restore  the  reddened  litmus  to  its  original  hue.  It  is  used  either  in  infu-
sion, or  in  the  form  of  litmus  paper.  The  infusion,  called  Tincture  of
Litmus,  is  prepared  by  adding  one  part  of  litmus  to  twenty  of  distilled
water,  boiling  it,  and  then  adding  two  parts  of  alcohol  to  preserve  it.
Litmus  paper  is  prepared  by  first  boiling  for  half  an  hour,  one  part  of
litmus  with  four  of  water,  and  thus  forming  a  strong  and  clear  decoction  ;
then  by  means  of  a  brush,  apply  it  to  only  one  surface  of  white,  unsized
paper,  carefully  dry  it,  and  then  keep  it  in  well-closed  vessels,  and  not
exposed  to  the  action  of  the  light.

Orchil  or  Archil,  is  the  lichen,  turned  to  a  violet  or  deep  reddish-
purple  color.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  thickish  liquid,  or  consists  of  a  con-
fused mass  of  violet-colored  threads.  It  is  prepared  by  macerating
lichens,  in  a  covered  wooden  vessel,  with  an  ammoniacal  liquor,  either
consisting  of  stale  urine  and  lime,  or  prepared  by  distilling  an  impure
salt  of  ammonia  with  lime  and  water.  Cudbear  is  prepared  in  the  same
manner  as  Orchil  ;  but  after  the  development  of  the  color,  it  is  dried
and  pulverized,  forming  a  purplish-red  powder.  The  difference  in  the
preparation  of  these  dye-stuffs  and  litmus,  is  that  in  the  latter,  potassa
or  soda,  is  added  to  the  ammoniacal  liquid  used.


ROSA CANINA.

Dog-Rose.

Nat. Ord. — Kosaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Polygynia.

THE RECENT FRUIT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Hip-tree,  or
Wild-brier,  is  a  soft,  branched,  smooth  bush,  with  lon^  oreen  curved
rootshools,  which  are  covered  with  equal,  remote,  strong,  compressed,
falcate  prickles;  the  leaflets  are  from  five  to  nine,  ovate,  firm,  without
glandular  pubescence,  with  acute,  incurved  and  often  double  serratures.
The  flowers  with  leafy  bracts.  Sepals  partly  pinnated,  usually  naked  as
well  as  the  tube  of  the  calyx.  Petals  white  or  pink,  obcordate,  fragrant;
throat  of  the  calyx  thick  and  quite  closed  up.  Fruit  red,  succulent,  ovoid,
truncated  in  consequence  of  the  fall  of  the  sepals.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  introduced  into  this
country  ;  it  usually  attains  the  bight  of  eight  or  ten  feet,  and  flowers  in
June  and  July.  The  flowers  are  succeeded  by  a  scarlet  fruit  called  Hip.
The  fruit,  (Eosce  Fructus,)  is  the  only  offieinal  part,  it  is  inodorous,  but
possesses  a  rather  pleasant,  sweetish,  acidulous  taste,  which  is  increased


Rosa  Centifolia.  815

by  the  action  of  frost.  The  hip  or  fruit  consists  of  the  developed  tube
of  the  calyx,  inclosing  within  its  cavity  numerous  carpels  or  true  fruits  ;
these  must  be  carefully  removed  before  it  is  used  for  pharmaceutic  pur-
poses. It  then,  after  having  been  dried,  consists  of  gum,  citric  acid,
impure  malic  acid,  a  large  proportion  of  uncrystallizable  sugar,  various
salts,  and  traces  of  wax,  resin,  and  volatile  oil.  Its  properties  are  pre-
served by  beating  the  pulp  with  sugar.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  conserve  made  by  beating  the  pulp  with
sugar,  is  called  Conserve  of  Dog-Rose,  or  Conserve  of  Hips,  (  Cvnfectio
Rosea  Canince,)  and  is  tenacious,  retaining  its  softness  for  a  long  time,
even  under  exposure  to  the  air.  It  is  a  useful  material  for  forming  pill-
masses,  and,  as  it  contains  less  tannic  acid,  may  be  used  as  a  substitute
for  the  conserve  of  red  roses,  when  preparations  of  iron  are  to  enter  into
the  pill  mass.

ROSA  CENTIFOLIA.

Hundred-leaved  Rose.

Nat. Ord. — Rosacea. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Polygynia.

THE PETALS.

Description. — This  is  an  erect  shrub,  from  three  to  six  feet  in  bight,
and  having  the  branches  closely  covered  with  nearly  straight  prickles,
scarcely  dilated  at  base,  and  glandular  bristles  of  various  forms  and
sizes  ;  the  large  ones  falcate.  Shoots  erect.  The  leaves  consist  of  two
or  three  pairs  of  leaflets,  with  an  odd  one  at  the  end,  closely  attached  to
the  common  footstalk,  which  is  rough,  but  without  spines.  The  leaflets
are  ovate,  broad,  pointed,  glandular-ciliate  on  the  margin,  sub-pilose
beneath.  The  flowers  are  large,  several  together,  drooping,  on  peduncles
beset  with  short  hairs,  and  fringed  with  glands.  Sepals  leafy,  com-
pound, viscid.  Petals  usually  of  a  pale-red  color.  Fruit  ovoid,  and  the
segments  of  the  calyx  semi-pinnate.

History.  —  The  native  country  of  this  rose-bush  is  unknown;  but  it
is  extensively  cultivated  in  nearly  all  parts  of  the  world,  forming  a  valu-
able ornament  to  gardens.  Its  varieties  are  numerous,  differing  in  form,
size,  color,  etc.  The  most  fragrant  varieties  are  the  best  adapted  for
use.  The  parts  used  are  the  petals  of  the  fully  expanded  flowers,  well
dried,  or  preserved  by  means  of  salt.  They  have  a  delicious  fragrance,
and  a  sweetish,  slightly  acidulous  and  bitter  taste,  with  a  faint  astrin-
gency.  Iodine  is  said  to  increase  the  fragrance,  which  depends  on  a
volatile  oil  which  may  be  separated  with  water. (See  Oleum  Posce.)

Properties  and  Uses. — The  petals,  or  a  syrup  of  them  is  slightly  lax-
ative; their  principal  use,  however,  is  in  the  preparation  of  Rose-Avater,
so  much  used  in  collyria  and  other  lotions,  and  on  account  of  its  agreeable
odor.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Rosa? ;  Linimentum  Terebinthinse  ;  Lotio  .^Etheris
Composita  ;  Loli  Sassafras;  Ungucntum  Aquae  Roste.


816  Materia  Medica.

ROSA  GALLICA.
Red  Rose.

Nat.  Ord,— Rosacese. Sex.  St/st.— Icosandria  Polygynia.

THE PETALS.

Description. — The  Red,  French,  or  Provins  Rose,  is  a  dwarfish,  stiff,
short-branched  bush,  from  two  to  three  feet  high,  with  the  stem  and
petioles  armed  with  numerous  fine,  nearly  equal,  uniform  prickles  and
glandular  bristles  intermixed.  The  leaflets,  mostly  five,  are  stiff,  ellipti-
cal, and  rugose.  The  flowers  are  large,  erect,  several  together,  with
leafy  bracts.  The  sepals  are  ovate,  leafy,  compound.  The  petals  are
five  or  more,  obcordate,  large,  spreading,  and  of  a  rich  crimson  color.
The  fruit  is  oval,  shining,  and  of  a  firm  consistence.

History. — The  Red  Rose  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe,  but  is
cultivated  in  our  gardens,  flowering  in  June  and  July.  There  are  many
varieties,  some  of  which  are  very  unlike  the  original.  With  this  plant,
as  with  the  previous  ones,  cultivation  multiplies  the  petals  very  much,
by  the  conversion  of  stamina.  The  petals  are  the  parts  used.  They
should  be  gathered  before  the  flower  has  blown,  deprived  of  their
whitish  claws,  dried  in  the  sun,  or  by  a  warm  fire,  and  kept  in  a  dry
place.  They  retain  their  color  when  dried,  and  their  odor  becomes  much
improved.  They  have  a  velvety  appearance,  a  purplish-red  color,  and
an  aromatic,  bitterish,  astringent,  feebly  acid  taste  ;  and  which  is  com-
municated to  water.  The  pale-red  infusion  becomes  bright-red  on  the
addition  of  sulphuric  acid  ;  and  yields  a  black  precipitate  with  the  salts
of  sesquioxide  of  iron.  Exposure  to  light  and  air  impairs  their  proper-
ties, they  should  therefore  be  kept  in  well-closed  opake  vessels.  The
addition  of  honey  or  sugar,  preserves  their  properties,  whether  in  the
petals,  or  in  infusion.  They  contain  tannic  acid,  gallic  acid,  color-
ing matter,  a  volatile  oil,  a  fixed  oil,  alhumen,  soluble  salts  of  potassa,
insoluble  salts  of  lime,  silica,  and  oxide  of  iron.

Properties  and  Uses. — Red  Roses  are  slightly  astringent  and  tonic.
They  have  been  used  in  passive  hemorrhages,  and  excessive  mucous
discharges.  They  have  also  been  found  beneficial  in  bowel  complaints,
and  are  more  commonly  used  in  ophthalmic  diseases,  as  a  poultice,  or
the  pith  of  sassafras  and  infusion  of  roses  as  a  collyrium  in  acute  oph-
thalmia. The  infusion  is  also  used  as  a  vehicle  for  tonic  and  astringent
medicines.  The  infusion,  with  the  addition  of  sulphuric  acid,  is  an
agreeable  refrigerant  and  astringent  in  some  cases.  The  confection  is  a
very  common  pill  basis,  and  it  is  for  this  purpose  that  the  article  is
principally  employed.  If  iron  be  added  to  the  confection,  or  any  of  its
preparations,  it  forms  a  hard  pill,  which  passes  through  the  alimentary
canal  unchanged.

Off.  Prep. — Confectio  Rosee.


Rosmarinus  Officinalis  —  Rubia  Tinctorum.  817

ROSMARINUS  OFFICINALIS.

Rosemary.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE TOPS.

Description. — Rosemary  is  an  erect,  perennial,  evergreen  shrub,  three
or  four  feet  high,  divided  into  many  long,  slender,  ash-colored  branches,
and  densely  leafy.  The  leaves  are  sessile,  opposite,  linear,  over  an  inch
in  length,  and  about  two  lines  broad,  entire,  obtuse  at  the  summit,  revo-
lute  at  the  margins,  of  a  firm  consistence,  smooth  and  green  on  the
upper  surface,  whitish  and  downy  beneath.  The  flowers  are  few,  pale
blue  or  white,  subsessile,  and  disposed  in  short,  opposite,  axillary  and
terminal  racemes.  The  brads  are  shorter  than  the  calyx.  The  calyx  is
purplish,  campanulate  and  villous;  the  corolla  is  ringent,  longer  than
the  calyx,  with  the  upper  lip  erect  and  bifid;  the  lower  divided  into
three  segments,  the  middle  one  of  which  is  largest,  concave,  and  emar-
ginate.  The  leaves  and  flowers  exhale  a  fragrant  camphoraceous  odor.
The  stamens  are  two,  longer  than  the  corolla,  curved  and  furnished
with  a  minute  tooth  near  the  base ;  the  anthers  are  oblong  and  of  a  blue
color.  The  style  is  as  long  as  the  stamens,  curved  and  furnished  with
pointed  stigmas.  The  seeds  are  four,  naked  and  situated  at  the  base  of
the  calyx.

History.  —  Rosemary  is  a  native  of  the  countries  surrounding  the
Mediterranean,  and  is  cultivated  in  the  gardens  of  Europe  and  this
country.  The  flowers  and  leaves  of  the  wild  variety  are  said  to  be
larger  than  those  of  the  cultivated.  The  officinal  parts  are  the  flower-
ing tops,  which  have  a  powerful,  diffusive,  camphoraceous  odor,  and  an
aromatic,  bitter  taste;  they  yield  their  properties  to  water  or  spirit,  but
more  completely  to  alcohol.  Age  and  drying  impair  their  odor  and
properties,  which  are  owing  to  a  volatile  oil,  and  which  may  be  obtained
by  distillation.  On  standing  for  some  time,  the  oil  deposits  crystals  of
camphor.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Rosemary  is  stimulant,  antispasmodic,  and
emmenagogue ;  seldom  used  in  this  country,  except  as  a  perfume  for
ointments,  liniments,  embrocations,  etc.  The  oil  is  principally  employed.
Dose,  internally,  from  three  to  six  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Oleum  Rosmarini.


RUBIA  TINCTORUM.

Madder.

Nat.  Ord. — Rubiaceac. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Dyers'  Madder  has  a  perennial  root,  composed  of  numer-
ous long  succulent  fibers,  of  various  sizes,  and  united  to  a  common  head.

52


818  Materia  Medica.

The  stems  are  many,  slender,  quadrangular,  jointed,  decumbent,  diffuse,
brittle,  branched  and  furnished  at  the  angles  with  short  prickles,  by
means  of  which  they  can  climb  on  a  support.  The  leaves  are  from  four
to  six  in  a  whorl,  elliptical,  acuminate,  rough  on  edges  and  midrib,
somewhat  membranous,  with  pinnated  veins,  about  three  inches  long,
and  nearly  one  inch  broad.  The  flowers  are  small,  yellow,  and  termi-
nal, forming  a  ramose  panicle.  The  corolla  is  rotate,  four-eleft,  with
the  lobes  ovate-lanceolate,  apiculate,  and  somewhat  callous.  The  sta-
mens are  short;  anthers  ovate-oblong;  styles  short;  and  stigmas  conical.
The  fruit  is  a  round,  shining  black  berry,  or  rather  double  berry,  one
of  which  is  abortive.

History. — Madder  is  a  native  of  the  South  of  Europe,  and  is  exten-
sively cultivated  in  France  and  Holland;  from  which  last  place  is  derived
the  principal  supply.  The  root  is  the  part  used;  it  is  dug  up  in  the  third
summer,  deprived  of  its  cuticle,  dried  by  artificial  heat,  and  then
reduced  to  a  coarse  powder,  which  is  of  a  brownish-red  color.  The  root
consists  of  a  thin  epidermis,  covering  an  easily  separable  cortex,  and  a
ligneous  meditullium,  which  is  at  first  yellow,  but  on  drying  becomes
reddish.  The  plant  is  cultivated  in  the  State  of  Ohio.  Madder  has  a
weak  peculiar  odor,  a  bitterish,  astringent  taste,  and  imparts  its  color
and  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.  According  to  analysis,  madder
contains  sugar,  resin,  and  five  coloring  matters,  and  according  to  Runge,
Madderic  and  Rubiacic  acids.  The  coloring  substances  are  a  red,  a
purple,  an  orange,  a  yellow,  and  a  brown.  One  of  these,  Xanthin,  has
been  noticed  by  Kuhlmann,  and  two  others  Purpurin  and  Alizarin,  by
Robiquet  and  Colin.  The  coloring  matters  are  probably  all  modifica-
tions of  a  single  substance,  which  appears  to  be  the  Xanthin,  as  at  first
the  juice  of  the  root  is  yellow,  and  does  not  become  red  only  under
exposure  to  the  atmospheric  oxygen.  The  alizarin  is  the  most  interest-
ing of  the  coloring  substances.  It  is  of  an  orange-red  color,  inodorous,
tasteless,  crystallizable,  sublimes  without  change,  hardly  soluble  in  cold
water,  but  soluble  in  boiling,  readily  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  fixed  oils,
and  alkaline  solutions.  The  alcoholic  and  watery  solutions  are  rose-
colored  ;  the  ethereal,  golden  yellow  ;  the  alkaline,  violet  and  blue  when
concentrated,  but  violet-red  when  sufficiently  diluted.  A  precipitation
of  a  mixture  of  the  solutions  of  alum  and  alizarin,  affords  a  beautiful
rose-colored  lake.  When  taken  into  the  stomach,  the  coloring  matter
of  madder  is  absorbed,  and  the  urine,  milk,  and  bones  become  colored
red,  though  none  of  the  other  tissues  are  affected  by  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — Madder  is  supposed  to  be  emmenagogue  and
diuretic,  and  has  been  recommended  for  such  purposes  by  various  prac-
titioners. However,  it  is  not  in  general  use,  as  the  profession  lack
confidence  in  its  action.  The  dose  is  thirty  grains,  three  or  four  limes
a  day.


Rubus  Strigosus — Rubus  Trivialis — Rubus  Villosus. 819

RUBUS  STRIGOSUS.

Red  Raspberry.

RUBUS  TRIVIALIS.

Dewberry  or  Low  Blackberry.

RUBUS  VILLOSUS.

Blackberry.

Nat.  Ord. — Eosaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Polygynia.

THE  BARK  OF  THE  ROOT,  AND  RASPBERRY  LEAVES.

Description. — Rubus  Strigosus  is  a  shrubby,  strongly  hispid  plant,
about  four  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  pinnately  three  or  five-foliate,
with  the  leaflets  oblong-ovate  or  oval,  obtuse  at  base,  pointed,  coarsely
and  unequally  serrate,  green  above,  canescent  tomentose  beneath,
lateral  ones  sessile,  odd  one  often  subcordate  at  base,  and  distinctly
petiolulate  ;  they  are  from  one  and  a  half  to  two  and  a  half  inches
long,  and  about  from  one-third  to  two-thirds  as  wide.  The  flowers  are
white,  and  in  panicled  corymbs.  The  corolla  is  cup-shaped,  and  about
the  length  of  the  calyx.  The  fruit  is  a  red  berry,  hemispherical,  com-
posed of  many  juicy,  one-seeded  acini,  on  a  dry  receptacle,  of  a
rich  delicious  flavor.

Rubus  Trivialis  or  Rubus  Canadensis,  sometimes  called  Low  or  Creep-
ing Blackberry,  has  a  slender,  prickly  stem,  which  runs  along  the  ground
for  several  yards.  The  leaves  are  petiolate  and  composed  of  three,  (or
pedately  five  or  seven)  leaflets,  which  are  elliptical,  or  rhomboidal-oval,
acute,  thin,  membranaceous,  sharply  and  unequally  cut-serrate,  often
somewhat  incised,  somewhat  pubescent,  from  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a
half  long,  and  about  one-half  as  wide.  The  common  petioles  are  one
or  two  inches  long,  and  together  with  the  peduncles,  are  armed  with
recurved,  hispid  prickles  ;  sometimes  naked.  The  stipules  are  linear,
subulate,  entire,  or  serrate.  The  flowers  are  large,  white,  nearly  soli-
tary, on  slender,  elongated,  prickly,  somewhat  corymbed  pedicels,  with
leafy  bracts  ;  the  lower  peduncles  distant,  the  upper  crowded.  The
petals  are  obovate,  in  one  variety  orbicular,  and  twice  as  long  as  the
calyx. Fruit  large,  black,  very  sweet  and  juicy.

Rubus  Villosus,  is  a  pubescent,  viscid  and  prickly  shrub,  with  a
horizontal,  perennial,  irregularly  tuberous,  woody  root,  of  a  reddish-
brown  color,  from  which  arise  tall,  slender,  angular,  and  biennial  stems
from  three  to  seven  feet  high,  of  a  brownish  color,  branching,  recurved
at  top,  more  or  less  furrowed,  and  armed  with  strong,  curved  prickles.
The  smaller  branches  and  new  shoots  are  decumbent,  herbaceous,
greenish,  pubescent  and  prickly.  The  leaves  are  ternate  or  quinate,  and
are  composed  of  from  three  to  five  leaflets,  which  are  ovate,  acuminate,


820  Materia Medica.

sharply  and  unequally  serrate,  and  pubescent  on  both  sides ;  the  petioles
and  midrib  usually  armed  with  short  recurved  prickles.  The  fiowers  are
large,  white,  and  in  erect  terminal  panicles  or  racemes  ;  the  calyx  is
short,  with  acuminate  segments ;  the  petals  are  five,  obovate  or  oblong,
obtuse;  stamens  numerous  ;  filaments  slender ;  angers  small.  The  fruit
is  large,  at  first  green,  then  red,  and  when  matured,  black,  it  consists  of
about  twenty  roundish,  shining,  black,  fleshy  carpels,  closely  collected
into  an  ovate  or  oblong  head,  subacid,  well-flavored,  and  ripening  in
August  and  September.

History. — The  Red-raspberry  grows  wild,  and  is  common  to  Canada
and  the  Northern  United  States,  growing  in  hedges,  neglected  fields,
thickets  and  hills,  flowering  in  May,  and  ripening  its  fruit  from  June  to
August.  The  leaves  are  the  officinal  parts.  They  impart  their  proper-
ties to  water,  giving  to  the  infusion  an  odor  and  flavor  somewhat  similar
to  that  of  some  kinds  of  black  tea.

The  Dewberry  likewise  grows  wild  in  dry,  stony  fields,  gravelly  soil,
and  neglected  grounds,  and  is  common  from  Canada  to  Virginia,  flow-
ering in  May,  and  ripening  its  fruit  in  July  and  August.  The  root  is
the  officinal  part,  it  is  generally  smaller  than  the  blackberry  root,  with
transverse  fissures  through  the  epidermis,  but  no  longitudinal  wrinkles,
of  a  dark-ash  color,  without  any  reddish  tinge,  inodorous,  with  a  bitter-
ish, strongly  astringent  taste.  Blackberry  grows  abundantly  in  most
parts  of  the  United  States,  in  neglected  fields,  along  fences,  on  the
borders  of  woods,  etc.  Its  flowers  appear  from  May  to  July,  and  its
fruit  is  matured  in  August.  The  root  is  the  officinal  portion,  it  is  branch-
ing, cylindrical,  of  various  dimensions,  from  an  inch  down  to  two  or
three  lines  in  diameter,  ligneous,  covered  with  a  thin  light  brown  or
reddish  brown  bark,  which  when  dried  is  wrinkled  longitudinally.

These  plants  possess  similar  medicinal  properties,  and  may  be  substi-
tuted the  one  for  the  other;  and  as  they  belong  to  the  same  genus,  I
have  placed  them  together.  The  bark  of  the  old  roots,  or  the  smaller
roots,  of  dewberry  and  blackberry,  should  always  be  selected  for  use,
as  the  woody  portion  is  inert ;  their  odor  and  taste  are  similar,  and  they
impart  their  virtues  to  boiling  water,  or  diluted  alcohol.  They  contain
a  large  quantity  of  tannic  acid,  with  bitter  extractive  ;  no  accurate
analysis  has  been  made  of  them.  The  fruits  of  these  plants  are  much
esteemed  as  an  article  of  diet,  and  have  been  manufactured  into  cordial,
jam,  jelly,  and  syrup.  They  contain  volatile  oil,  citric  and  malic  acids,
sugar,  mucus,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  plants  are  tonic  and  strongly  astringent.
An  infusion  or  decoction  of  the  leaves  of  raspberry,  or  of  the  bark  of  the
roots  of  the  other  two,  has  been  found  an  excellent  remedy  in  diarrhea,
dysentery,  cholera-infantum,  relaxed  conditions  of  the  intestines  of
children,  passive  hemorrhage  from  the  stomach,  bowels,  or  uterus,  and


RUDBECKIA IiACTNIATA.  821

in  colliquative  diarrhea.  The  decoction  used  as  an  injection,  is  useful  in
gonorrhea,  gleet,  leucorrhea,  and  prolapsus  uteri  and  ani ;  in  prolapsus
uteri,  it  may  be  used  either  alone  or  combined  with  the  internal  use  of
a  decoction  of  equal  parts  of  black  cohosh  and  blackberry  roots,  taken
freely.  The  leaves  of  raspberry,  in  decoction  with  cream,  will  allay
nausea  and  vomiting,  and  combined  with  aromatics  has  been  found  useful
in  diarrhea,  cholera-morbus  and  cholera-infantum.  It  is  said  that  the
raspberry  exerts  an  influence  over  the  uterus  during  parturition,  exciting
its  contractions  when  other  agents  have  failed,  and  has  been  found  ser-
viceable in  after-pains.  The  fruit,  especially  that  of  the  blackberry,
makes  an  excellent  syrup,  which  is  of  much  service  in  dysentery,  being
grateful  to  the  patient,  relieving  the  tenesmus  which  so  constantly
attends  the  disease,  and  ultimately  effecting  a  cure.  The  fruit  of  the
raspberry  contains  very  little  nourishment,  but  is  an  agreeable  acidulous
article,  rarely  disturbing  the  stomach,  and  when  eaten  freely,  promotes
the  action  of  the  bowels.  Raspberry  syrup  added  to  water,  forms  a
refreshing  and  beneficial  beverage  for  fever-patients,  and  during  con-
valescence. The  jelly  or  jam  may  likewise  be  used  in  similar  cases  ;
that  of  the  blackberries  being  more  astringent,  is  better  adapted  to  cases
of  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  cholera-infantum.  Dose  of  the  decoction  of
these  plants,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces  several  times  a  day ;  of  the
pulverized  root-bark  from  twenty  to  thirty  grains.

The  Rubus  Odoratus,  or  Rose-flowering  Raspberry,  has  an  erect  or
reclining,  unarmed,  glandular-pilose,  shrubby  stem,  from  three  to  five
feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  from  four  to  eight  inches  long,  nearly  as
wide,  cordate  at  base,  palmately  three  to  five-lobed,  unequally  serrate,
lobes  acuminate,  the  middle  one  prolonged,  petioles  two  or  three  inches
long,  and  with  the  peduncles,  calyx  and  branches,  clothed  with  viscid
hairs.  Flowers  many,  large,  nearly  two  inches  in  diameter,  in  terminal
corymbs.  Petals  orbicular,  purple-rose  color ;  stamens  numerous,  whit-
ish. Fruit  broad  and  thin,  bright-red,  sweet.  This  plant  grows  on
rocky  banks,  and  in  upland  woods  in  the  United  States  and  Canada,
flowering  in  June  and  July,  and  ripening  its  fruit  in  August.  A  decoc-
tion of  it  is  said  to  be  powerfully  diuretic,  and  may  be  used  freely  in
affections  of  the  urinary  organs,  and  dropsy.


RUDBECKIA LACINIATA.

Thimbleweed.
Nat.  Ord. — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Frustranea.

THE WHOLE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Cone-disk  Sun-
flower, and  Tall  Cone-flower,  is  a  tall,  showy,  indigenous,  perennial  plant,
with  a  round,  glabrous,  branching  stem,  from  three  to  eight  feet  in  hight.


822  Materia  Medica.

The  leaves  are  alternate,  smooth  or  roughish,  the  lower  ones  pinnate
with  from  five  to  seven  cut  or  three-lobed  leaflets,  petiolate,  the  upper
ones  irregularly  three  to  five-parted  ;  the  lobes  ovate-lanceolate,  pointed.
The  flowers  are  large,  and  terminal ;  pappus  crenate  ;  chaff  truncate  and
downy  at  the  tip.  Rays  one  or  two  inches  long,  oblanceolate,  bright
yellow,  spreading  or  drooping.  Disk  oblong-conical,  and  columnar  in
fruit,  greenish-yellow.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  in
damp  places,  low  thickets,  edges  of  swamps  and  ditches,  etc.,  flowering
from  July  to  September.  The  whole  herb  is  recommended  to  be  used.
Its  chemical  reactions,  as  well  as  formation,  are  not  known.  It  imparts
its  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Thimbleweed  is  a  valuable  diuretic,  tonic  and
balsamic.  Useful  in  many  diseases  of  the  urinary  organs,  and  highly
recommended  in  strangury,  Bright's  disease,  and  wasting  or  atrophy  of
the  kidneys. Dose  of  the  decoction,  ad  libitum.

The  Rudbeckia  Purpurea  of  Linnseus,  variously  called  Bed  Sun-
flower, Comb-flower,  or  Purple  Cone-flower  (the  Echinacea  Purpurea  of
Moenchausen),  has  a  thick,  black  root,  with  branched,  sulcate,  smooth
or  rough  stems,  growing  from  three  to  five  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are
alternate,  from  four  to  eight  inches  long,  and  about  one-fifth  as  wide,
rough,  with  short  stiff  bristles ;  the  lower  ones  broad-ovate,  attenuate  at
base,  five-nerved,  veiny,  long-petioled,  remotely-toothed;  the  cauline
ones  lanceolate-ovate,  acuminate,  nearly  entire.  Beads  large,  solitary,
on  long  peduncles.  Disk  thickly  beset  with  the  stiff,  pointed,  brown
chaff.  Rays  from  fifteen  to  twenty,  two  or  three  inches  long,  dull  purple,
pendulous,  bifid.  This  plant  is  common  to  the  Western  prairies  and
banks,  and  is  found  also  in  the  Southern  States  flowering  from  July  to
September.  The  root  is  very  pungent  to  the  taste,  and  has  been  popu-
larly used  in  medicine  under  the  name  of  Black  Sampson;  it  is  stated
to  have  been  employed  with  much  benefit  in  syphilis.  Both  of  the  above
plants,  deserve  a  full  and  thorough  investigation  from  the  profession.
From  all  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  the  latter  plant  is  equal  to  the  Stil-
lingia  in  medicinal  efficacy.

RUMEX ACETOSA.

Sorrel.
Nat.  Ord. — Polygonaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Trigynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Rumex  Acetosa  has  a  long  and  tapering,  somewhat
woody  root,  with  an  erect,  simple,  leafy,  striated  stem,  one  or  two  feet
high.  The  lower  leaves  are  petiolate,  somewhat  ovate,  arrow-shaped,
with  two  lateral  teeth  ;  the  upper  ones  are  sessile,  more  oblong  and
narrower. Stipule tubular, membranous, fringed. Clusters erect,


Rumex  Aquaticus,  Britannica,  etc.  823

compound,  whorled,  leafless.  Flowers  dioecious.  Males  green  with  a
reddish  tinge ;  inner  sepals  ovate,  rather  larger  than  the  outer.  Females
rather  redder ;  inner  sepals  ovate,  obtuse,  red,  entire,  each  bearing  an
oblong  pale  tubercle.  The  whole  herb  is  smooth  and  powerfully  and
agreeably  acid.  The  root  is  astringent.  The  plant  is  common  to  Eng-
land, and  is  sometimes  cultivated  in  this  country.

Rumex  Acetosella,  Field  or  Sheep  Sorrel,  has  a  leafy  stem  from  six
to  twelve  inches  in  hight,  with  lanceolate-hastate,  pleasantly  acid  leaves.
The  flowers  small,  reddish,  collected  in  panicled  racemes,  the  valves  are
ovate  scarcely  enlarging  in  fruit,  destitute  of  granules.  The  stamens  and
styles  on  separate  plants;  the  styles  adherent  to  the  angles  of  the  ovary.
This  weed  is  found  in  abundance  throughout  the  United  States,  growing
in  pastures,  waste  grounds,  and  worn  fields,  and  flowering  all  summer.

History. — The  leaves  of  these  two  plants  are  the  parts  used  in  medi-
cine ;  they  are  inodorous,  and  have  an  agreeable  sourness,  which  latter
depends  on  the  presence  of  binoxalate  of  potassa,  with  a  small  propor-
tion of  tartaric  acid ;  by  drying  them  this  taste  is  lost.  They  are  used
alone,  or  in  an  infusion  of  the  fresh  leaves.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fresh  Sorrel  leaves  are  refrigerant  and  diuretic ;
an  infusion  is  useful  in  febrile  and  inflammatory  diseases,  and  in  scorbutic
complaints.  They  may  likewise  be  prepared  in  the  form  of  salad,  or
boiled  like  spinage.  The  leaves  eaten  largely  are  said  to  have  produced
poisonous  effects,  owing  to  the  oxalic  acid  they  contain.  Wrapped  up
and  roasted,  the  leaves  form  an  excellent  application  to  indolent  tumors,
wens,  boils,  etc.,  hastening  suppuration.  The  inspissated  juice,  applied
on  leather,  is  said  to  form  an  effectual  but  painful  cure  for  tumors  and
incipient  cancers.  Acting  upon  this  hint,  the  following  preparation  has
been  found  a  useful  remedy  in  cutaneous  cancer,  viz :  Take  of  Burnt
Alum,  one  drachm;  Citric  or  Tartaric  Acid,  two  drachms;  Oxalic  Acid,
two  drachms ;  Rain  Water,  half  a  pint.  Mix.  To  be  applied  by  means
of  a  camel's  hair  pencil.

RUMEX AQUATICUS.

Great  Water  Dock.

RUMEX BRITANNICA.

Water  Dock.

RUMEX OBTUSIFOLIUS.

Blunt  Leaved  Dock.

RUMEX  CRISPUS.

Yellow  Dock.

Nat.  Ord. — Polygonacese. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Trigynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Rumex  Aquaticus  has  a  large  thick  root,  externally
black,  internally  whitish,  with  an  erect  stem  from  three  to  five  feet  high;


824  Materia Medica.

the  leaves  are  a  foot  or  more  in  length,  and  three  to  five  inches  wide,
smooth,  lanceolate,  pointed,  the  lower  ones  cordate,  on  long  petioles.
The  flowers  are  verticillate,  and  are  disposed  in  a  terminal  leafy  panicle.
Pedicels  capillary,  drooping.  The  three  petals,  or  as  termed  by  some
botanists,  the  three  inner  divisions  of  the  calyx,  approach  each  other,  so
as  to  assume  a  triangular  shape,  and  in  this  state  are  called  valves;  these
are  large,  ovate,  obtuse,  entire,  and  are  each  furnished  with  a  small,
linear,  often  obscure  grain,  extending  down  the  middle.  The  plant  is  a
native  of  Europe,  but  naturalized  in  America.  It  grows  in  this  country
in  ponds  and  ditches,  and  flowers  in  July  and  August.

Rumex  Britannica,  or  Yellow-rooted  Water  Dock,  has  a  lanj-e  root,
externally  dark,  internally  yellowish,  with  an  angular,  furrowed,  branch-
ing stem,  two  or  three  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  broad-lanceolate,  acute
at  both  ends,  from  three  to  five  inches  long,  petiolate,  flat,  smooth,  with
the  sheathing  stipules  slightly  torn.  The  flowers  are  perfect,  in  verticil-
late  fascicles,  collected  into  a  large,  terminal  panicle,  the  spikes  of  which
are  nearly  leafless.  The  pedicels  are  capillary  and  nodding  in  fruit.
The  calyx  valves  large,  cordate,  entire,  graniferous,  two  of  the  grains
small  or  abortive.  This  plant  is  indigenous,  growing  in  low,  wet  places,
in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  and  flowering  in  June  and  July.

Rumex  Obtusifolius,  or  Blunt  Leaved  Dock,  has  its  root  brown  exter-
nally, and  yellow  internally  ;  the  stern  is  two  or  three  feet  high,  furrowed,
somewhat  roughish,  branching,  and  leafy.  The  radical  leaves  are  about
a  foot  long,  and  five  or  six  inches  in  width,  ovate-cordate,  obtuse,  rather
downy  on  the  veins  underneath,  somewhat  wavy  margined,  often  with
stalk  and  veins  red ;  the  upper  ones  are  oblong-lanceolate,  and  acute.
The  flowers  are  in  long,  nearly  naked  racemes  ;  whorls  loose  and  distant;
valves  ovate-halbert  shaped,  sharply  denticulate  at  the  base,  strongly
reticulated,  one  of  them  principally  bearing  a  granule  on  the  back.
This  is  a  common  weed,  growing  in  rich  grounds  and  pastures,  and
about  houses,  flowering  in  June  and  July.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been
introduced  from  Europe.

Rumex  Crispus,  or  Yellow  Dock,  is  the  species  of  Dock  more  com-
monly used  by  Eclectics,  and  is,  perhaps,  the  only  one  entitled  to  an
officinal  rank  in  our  Dispensatory.  It  has  a  deep  spindle-shaped,  yellow
root,  with  a  stem  two  or  three  feet  high,  angular,  furrowed,  somewhat
zigzag,  smooth  to  the  touch,  panicled,  leafy.  The  leaves  are  lanceolate,
acute,  strongly  undulated,  and  crisped  at  the  edges,  of  a  light-green
color ;  the  radical  ones  on  long  petioles,  truncate,  or  subcordate  at  base ;
the  uppermost  narrower,  and  nearly  sessile.  The  flowers  are  numerous,
pale-green,  drooping,  disposed  in  a  large  panicle  consisting  of  many
wand-like  racemes  of  half-whorls,  interspersed  with  leaves  below.
Inner  sepals,  or  valves,  much  larger  than  the  outer,  veiny,  waved,  entire,
ovate,  each  bearing  a  large  ovate  brown  grain  or  tubercle  on  the  back.


Ruta  Graveolens.  S25

Nut  contracted  at  each  end,  with  three  blunt  or  tumid  angles.  This  plant
is  a  native  of  Europe,  introduced  into  this  country,  where  it  grows  wild
in  pastures,  dry  fields,  waste  grounds,  etc.,  flowering  in  June  and  July.

History.  — I  have  placed  these  four  species  of  dock  together,  in  con-
sequence of  their  possessing  similar  medicinal  properties,  and  which
under  separate  heads  would  lead  to  an  unnecessary  repetition.  The
roots  of  several  other  species  have  been  medicinally  employed,  and  may
be  used  indiscriminately  with  the  above,  as  the  R.  Patientia  and  R.
Alpinus  of  Europe,  and  the  R.  Acidus  and  R.  Sanguineus  of  this  coun-
try. These  various  dock-roots  have  little  or  no  odor,  a  bitter  astringent
taste,  and  readily  yield  their  virtues  to  water  by  decoction.  They  have
not  all  been  analyzed.  The  R.  Obtusifolius  contains  a  peculiar  princi-
ple called  Rumicin,  resin,  extractive  matter  resembling  tannic  acid,
starch,  albumen,  mucilage,  lignin,  sulphur,  and  various  salts.  The
young  leaves  of  some  of  the  species  are  occasionally  used  as  spinage.
As  found  in  the  shops,  yellow  dock-root  is  in  slices  cut  transversely
and  dried,  and  occasionally  the  root  is  divided  longitudinally  into
halves  or  quarters;  it  is  sometimes  called  Sour  Dock,  Narrow  Dock,
or  Curled  Dock.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  dock-roots  are  alterative,  tonic,  mildly
astringent,  and  detergent,  and  are  eminently  useful  in  scorbutic,  cuta-
neous, scrofulous,  scirrhous,  and  syphilitic  affections,  leprosy,  elephan-
tiasis, etc.;  for  which  purpose  we  prefer  the  Rumez  Crispus.  The  fresh
root  bruised  in  cream,  lard,  or  fresh  butter,  forms  an  excellent  ointment
for  scrofulous  ulcers,  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  itch,  and  a  discutient  for
indolent  glandular  tumors.  An  ointment  of  the  root  of  R.  Crispus,  and
the  root-bark  of  Celastrus  Scandens,  with  gunpowder,  is  said  to  form  a
certain  cure  for  the  itch,  as  well  as  being  of  value  in  other  cutaneous
diseases,  and  ulcers.  The  powdered  root  is  recommended  as  a  dentifrice,
especially  when  the  gums  are  spongy.  Dose  of  the  decoction  or  syrup,
from  one  to  four  fluidounces,  three  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Rumecis ;  Extractum  Rumecis  Hydro-alcoholi-
cum  ;  Syrupus  Rumecis  Compositus.


RUTA GRAVEOLENS.

Rue.

Nat.  Ord. — Rutaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

LEAVES AND UNRIPE FRUIT.

Description. — Rue  is  a  perennial  plant,  with  shrubby  branching  stems,
two  or  three  feet  in  hight,  woody  at  the  lower  part  and  covered  with  a
rough,  gray  bark,  but  smooth,  green,  and  herbaceous  in  the  upper  part
and  branches.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  smooth,  glaucous,  a  little
tomentose,  transparently  dotted,  and  doubly  pinnate ; the  leaflets  are


826  Materia  Medica.

sessile,  unequal,  obscurely  eremite,  somewhat  thick  and  fleshy ;  the
lateral  lobes  linear  or  nearly  so  ;  and  the  terminal  ones  larger  and  obo-
vate.  The  flowers  are  of  a  pale  greenish-yellow  color,  and  disposed  in
terminal  corymbose  panicles,  upon  subdividing  peduncles  ;  the  terminal,
or  first  unfolded,  only  having  the  full  number  of  the  parts  of  fructifica-
tion ;  the  others  having  eight  stamens  and  four  sepals  and  petals.  The
petals  are  large,  rounded  a  little,  toothed  at  the  extremity,  and  concave,
attached  by  narrow  claws.  The  stamens  are  equal,  with  small  yellow
anthers.  The  ovary  is  oval,  with  crucial  furrows,  and  is  surmounted  by
a  short  style.  The  capsule  is  gibbous,  four-lobed,  and  bursts  at  the
summit  of  each  lobe,  for  the  passage  of  numerous,  angular,  blackish
seeds.  The  process  of  impregnation  is  singular,  each  anther  in  turn
approaching  the  style,  and  after  shedding  its  pollen,  retiring.

History.  —  Rue  is  a  well  known,  hardy,  evergreen  undershrub,  a
native  of  the  south  of  Europe  and  north  of  Africa,  and  cultivated  in  our
gardens,  flowering  from  June  to  September.  The  whole  plant  has  a
strong,  peculiar,  disagreeable  odor.  The  whole  herbaceous  portion  of
it  possesses  medicinal  activity,  but  the  leaves  are  more  generally  em-
ployed. They  have  a  strong,  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  disagreeable,
bitter,  acrid  taste.  In  the  recent  state  they  will  inflame  and  vesicate
the  skin.  They  should  be  gathered  when  the  seed  vessels  are  well-
developed,  yet  still  green ;  the  seed-vessels  of  the  unripe  fruit  are
covered  with  large  oil  vesicles,  and  may  likewise  be  used  for  medical
purposes.  The  virtues  of  this  plant  are  owing  to  a  volatile  oil,  which  is
abundantly  contained  in  glandular  vesicles,  with  which  it  is  covered,  and
which  may  be  obtained  by  distillation  with  water.  It  yields  its  properties
to  boiling  water  in  infusion,  but  alcohol  is  its  best  solvent.  The  plant
loses  much  of  its  activity  by  drying.  Beside  volatile  oil,  the  plant  is
said  to  contain  albumen,  chlorophylle,  extractive,  gum,  starch  or  inulin,
an  azotized  matter,  malic  acid,  lignin,  and  a  peculiar  acid  called  JRutinic
acid.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Rue  is  emmenagogue,  ecbolic,  anthelmintic
and  antispasmodic.  In  large  doses  it  acts  as  a  narcotico-acrid  poison.
It  has  been  taken  by  pregnant  women,  and  produced  dangerous  symp-
toms of  gastro-intestinal  inflammation,  and  cerebral  derangement,  termi-
nating in  miscarriage.  Its  action  is  chiefly  directed  upon  the  uterus,
and  is  capable  of  exciting  menorrhagia,  inflammation,  and  miscarriage.
It  has  been  successfully  used  in  flatulent  colic,  hysteria,  some  nervous
complaints,  epilepsy,  and  as  an  excellent  vermifuge.  Dose  of  the  leaves,
from  ten  to  twenty  grains  ;  of  the  decoction,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces  ;
of  the  oil,  from  two  to  six  drops.

Of.  Prep. — Infusum  Rutse ;  Oleum  Rutae.


Sabbatia Angularis — Saccharum  Officinarum.  827

SABBATIA  ANGULARIS.

American  Centaury.

Nat.  Ord. — Gentianaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE HERB.

Description. — This  plant,  also  called  Rose-pink,  has  a  yellow,  fibrous,
biennial  root,  with  an  erect,  smooth,  quadrangular  stem,  with  the  angles
winged,  having  many  opposite  branches,  and  growing  from  one  to  two
feet  in  night.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  sessile,  ovate,  cordate  at  base,
clasping  the  stem,  five-veined,  smooth,  entire,  and  from  one  to  two
inches  in  length  by  half  an  inch  to  one  and  a  half  inches  in  width.  The
flowers  are  numerous,  from  an  inch  and  a  quarter  to  an  inch  and  a  half
in  diameter,  of  a  rich  rose  color,  terminal,  on  elongated  peduncles,
greenish  or  whitish  in  the  center,  and  forming  a  large  corymbose  panicle.
The  calyx  with  five  narrow,  lanceolate,  almost  subulate  segments,  about
half  the  length  of  the  corolla;  tube  angular.  Corolla  with  five  obovate
segments.  Stamens  five,  erect,  with  short  slender  filaments  and  oblong
anthers  of  a  yellow  color,  which  are  spirally  twisted  after  fecundation.
The  ovary  is  ovate,  with  a  terete,  declined,  and  bifid  style,  and  the
stigmas  twisted  spirally  together.  Capsule,  one-celled,  two-valved,
many-seeded.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  the  Middle  and  Southern  States,
growing  in  low  meadow  grounds,  and  in  wet  seasons  upon  uplands,  in
woods  and  neglected  fields,  and  flowering  in  July  and  August.  The
herb  is  employed,  and  should  be  collected  when  in  flower.  It  has  a
strong  bitter  taste,  and  yields  its  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.  It  is  pref-
erable to  the  European  Centaury.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic.  Used  as  a  prophylactic  and  remedy  in
autumnal  intermittent  and  remittent  fevers ;  also  useful  in  dyspepsia,
and  convalescence  from  fevers.  When  administered  in  warm  infusion  it
is  a  domestic  remedy  for  worms,  and  to  restore  the  menstrual  secretion.
Dose  of  the  powder  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm  ;  of  the  cold  infu-
sion four  fluidounces  every  two  or  three  hours  ;  of  the  tincture  one  or
two  fluidrachms  ;  and  of  the  extract  from  two  to  six  grains.
Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Sabbatiee.


SACCHARUM  OFFICINARUM.

Sugarcane.
Nat. Ord. — Graminaceaa. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Digynia.

THE SUGAR, OR CONCRETE JUICE.

Description. — Sugarcane  is  a  herbaceous  plant,  with  a  jointed,  succu-
lent root,  from  which  arise  several  shining,  jointed,  solid  stems,  one  or
two  inches  in  diameter,  from  six  to  twelve  feet  in  hight,  colored  yellow,


828  Materia  Medica.

greenish  -yellow,  purple,  or  striped,  and  containing  a  white  juicy  pith.
The  leaves  are  about  three  or  four  feet  long,  and  an  inch  wide,  flat,
acuminate,  longitudinally  striated,  furnished  with  a  white  midrib,  gla-
brous, finely  dentate,  of  a  yellowish-green  color,  and  originating  at  the
joints  of  the  stems  which  are  about  three  inches  apart,  and  at  which
places  the  stem  is  embraced  by  their  lower  portion.  The  panicle  is
terminal,  spreading,  erect,  oblong,  from  one  to  three  feet  in  length,  and
grayish  from  the  quantity  of  long  loose  hairs  surrounding  the  florets ;
the  branches  are  alternate  and  very  spreading.  Rachis  striated.  Florets
dioecious,  in  pairs.  Glumes  smooth.  Palece  smooth,  membranous,  of
a  pink  color.

History. — The  native  country  of  sugarcane  is  unknown,  though  sup-
posed to  be  indigenous  to  the  south-eastern  parts  of  Asia.  Those  canes
which  have  not  flowered,  or  have  no  tendency  to  flower,  are  the  richest
in  sugar ;  and  the  lower  part  of  them  contains  the  greatest  proportion.
The  juice  constitutes  nearly  one-half  of  the  cane,  and  when  expressed,
ferments  rapidly,  forming  an  acid,  so  that  it  requires  to  be  promptly
evaporated,  and  its  acidity  neutralized,  before  the  sugar  can  be  made.
It  has  been  analyzed  a  number  of  times,  and  is  found  to  consist  of  crys-
tallizable  and  uncrystallizable  sugar,  water,  malic  acid,  gum,  extractive,
chlorophylle,  etc.  The  sugar  and  molasses  of  commerce  are  obtained
from  the  juice  of  this  plant,  and  are  prepared  as  follows :  the  ripe  canes
are  cut  down  close  to  the  ground,  and  with  their  tops  and  leaves  removed,
are  crushed  between  vertical  iron  rollers.  The  juice  thus  obtained,  con-
stituting from  fifty  to  ninety  per  cent.,  is  of  a  pale-greenish  color,  sweet,
with  a  balsamic  odor,  and  a  specific  gravity  from  1.033  to  1.106.  The
juice  ferments  quickly,  and  is  therefore,  at  once  conveyed  from  the
vessels  which  have  received  it,  into  boilers,  where  every  eight  hundred
parts  of  it  are  immediately  mixed  with  about  one  part  of  milk  of  lime,  or
sufficient  to  render  the  liquor  neutral,  or  very  slightly  alkaline,  and
heated  to  140°.  A  thick  scum  forms  on  the  top,  consisting  of  albumen
and  gluten,  and  the  liquid  beneath  is  drawn  off  by  means  of  a  cock  into
a  copper  boiler,  where  it  is  sufficiently  concentrated  by  ebullition,  the
scum  being  removed  as  it  forms.  If  the  juice  be  filtered,  previous  to
the  last  boiling,  it  improves  the  sugar.  When  of  the  proper  consistence,
the  concentrated  juice  is  removed  to  shallow  coolers,  and  again  con-
veyed, before  cooling,  into  wooden  vessels  having  perforated  bottoms,
with  the  holes  temporarily  plugged.  As  the  sugar  concretes,  the  liquid
is  stirred  from  time  to  time,  which  accelerates  its  granulation.  When
completed,  the  stoppers  are  removed  from  the  holes,  and  the  syrup  is
allowed  to  drain  off.  A  yellowish,  moist  sugar  is  the  result,  which  is
further  dried  in  the  sun,  and  constitutes  the  brown  sugar  of  commerce  ;
the  liquid  which  is  left,  is  again  concentrated,  and  a  further  supply  of
sugar  obtained,  as  well  as  of  drainings,  and  which  last  is  molasses.  The
brown  sugar  is  formed  into  Havanna  sugar  by  being  again  boiled  with


Saccharum  Officinarum.  829

lime-water,  sufficiently  concentrated,  placed  in  large  inverted  conical
vessels,  and,  when  sufficiently  solid,  covered  with  a  thin  mixture  of  clay
and  water,  the  latter  of  which  percolates  through  the  sugar,  and  removes
the  colored  syrup  through  a  small  opening  in  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,
rendering  it  of  a  whitish  color.  The  sugar  is  still  further  purified  by
again  boiling,  filtering,  clarifying,  and  placing  it  into  molds,  where  it  is
again  clayed,  and  when  all  the  syrup  is  removed,  the  sugar  is  placed  in
a  warm  oven  to  dry,  and  constitutes  white  or  refined  sugar.  And  by  one
or  more  repetitions  of  the  process,  is  obtained  single,  double,  and  treble
refined  sugar.  In  clarifying  the  sugar,  it  is  at  first,  while  in  the  form
of  syrup,  heated  with  bullock's  blood,  and  then  decolorized  by  passing
it  through  a  layer  of  coarse-grained  animal  charcoal,  two  or  three  inches
thick.  In  the  process  of  manufacturing  sugar,  a  large  proportion  of  it  is
lost,  to  prevent  which  several  plans  have  been  offered,  but  which  have
not,  as  yet,  received  sufficient  confidence  to  induce  sugar-manufacturers
to  adopt  them.

Beside  the  sugarcane,  sugar  may  be  obtained  from  the  beet,  (Beta
Vulgaris),  and  the  sap  of  the  sugar-maple,  (Acer  Saccharinum)  and
likewise  from  corn-stalks,  turneps,  onions,  etc.  In  Fiance  considerable
quantities  are  manufactured  from  the  beet;  and  in  Canada  and  the
United  States,  wherever  the  sugar-maple  tree  grows  abundantly,  maple
sugar,  as  it  is  termed,  is  largely  made.  A  large  quantity  of  sugar  is
also  obtained  from  the  sap  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  (  Cocos  JVucifera)  as
well  as  other  species  of  palm  growing  in  India.

Other  saccharine  principles  are  recognized  by  the  chemist,  as  Glucose,
or  Grape-sugar;  this  is  not  so  sweet  as  canesugar,  nor  so  readily  soluble
in  water,  but  is  much  more  soluble  in  alcohol.  The  crystallizable  sugar
of  honey,  starch  sugar,  and  diabetic  sugar  are  identical  with  it.  It  is
hardly  acted  upon  by  concentrated  mineral  acids,  which  destroy  cane-
sugar  with  facility  ;  alkalies,  which  form  definite  compounds  with  cane-
sugar,  destroy  grape-sugar.  It  undergoes  very  little  change  by  long
boiling  with  water,  which  is  apt  to  decompose  cane-sugar,  causing  a  loss
in  the  amount  of  sugar  obtained.  Its  solution  rotates  the  plane  of  polar-
ization of  polarized  light  to  the  right,  and  is  capable  of  undergoing  the
vinous  fermentation  immediately,  without  passing  through  any  interme-
diate state. Its  specific  gravity  is  1.38G,  and  its  formula  C12  H14  Oit.

Uncry 'stalli 'zable  or  Fruit-sugar,  called  by  Souberain,  Chulariose.  This
is  found  in  honey,  and  in  the  juice  of  fruits,  and  may  be  obtained  from
cane-sugar  by  solution  in  water  or  weak  acids,  and  long  boiling.  A
watery  solution  of  this  sugar  turns  the  plane  of  polarization  to  the  left,
and  is  as  susceptible  of  the  vinous  fermentation,  without  intermediate
change,  as  the  grape-sugar.  Its  formula,  when  dried  at  212°,  is  C12  H12
O12.  Lactin  or  Sugar  of  Milk,  see  Saccharum  Lactis.  Sugar  of  Ergot,
obtained  by  Wiggers  from  ergot  of  rye,  is  soluble  in  water  and  alco-
hol, crystallizes  in  transparent  rhombic  prisms,  and  is  susceptible  of  the


830  Materia Medica.

vinous  fermentation.  Its  formula  is  given  as  C12  H13  Oi3.  For  a  descrip-
tion of  the  other  saccharine  principles,  mannite  and  glycerin,  see  articles
Manna  and  Glycerina.

Sugar  has  been  known  from  the  earliest  ages,  and  was  used  in  Europe
exclusively  as  a  medicine,  from  the  time  of  its  introduction,  about  the
period  of  the  Crusades,  until  the  cultivation  of  the  sugar-cane  in  the  New
World,  when  it  soon  became  a  common  article  of  food  throughout  the
civilized  world.  The  greater  part  of  the  sugar  of  commerce  at  this
day,  is  manufactured  in  the  West  Indies,  and  some  of  the  Southern
United  States.  In  the  United  States,  a  variety  of  sugar-cane,  called  the
Otaheite-cane,  has  recently  been  introduced ;  it  is  said  to  be  hardier,
more  productive,  and  better  suited  to  the  climate  of  the  Southern
States.

The  first  concretion  of  the  juice  of  sugar-cane,  as  before  remarked,
gives  rise  to  brownish  crystalline  grains,  and  a  thick,  empyreumatic
syrup,  called  molasses,  Sacchari  Fcex,  or  Sacchari  Syrupus  JEmpyreu-
malicus.  Of  this,  there  are  two  varieties,  the  West  India  and  Sugar-
House.  The  West  India  Molasses  is  a  black  ropy  liquid,  of  a  peculiar
odor,  and  a  sweet  empyreumatic  taste.  When  mixed  with  water  and
the  skimmings  of  the  vessels  used  in  the  manufacture  of  sugar,  it  forms
a  liquor,  which,  when  fermented  and  distilled,  yields  rum.  Svgar-house
Molasses  is  the  officinal  one,  it  is  thicker  than  the  West  India,  about  the
same  color,  with  a  peculiar,  sweet,  rather  pleasant  taste,  differing  in
flavor  from  the  former  ;  it  consists  chiefly  of  gummy  extract  and  uncrys-
tallizable  sugar,  and  thickens  very  slowly  under  exposure  to  the  air.
Its  specific  gravity  is  1400.

The  grains  constitute  the  brown  sugar,  raw  sugar,  or  muscovado  sugar
of  commerce,  Saccharum  Commune,  (Saccharum  non  Purificatum)  ;  six
or  eight  pounds  of  the  juice  yield  one  pound  of  raw  sugar,  and  this
when  purified  is  the  refined  loaf,  or  white  sugar,  Saccharum  Purum.
Ra%o  sugar,  of  good  quality,  is  in  small  shining  grains,  which  are  short,
broken,  four-sided  prisms  varying  in  color  from  very  pale  yellowish-gray,
to  rather  deep  yellowish-brown,  dry  when  recent,  but  afterward  some-
what clammy,  of  a  purely  sweet  taste,  and  of  a  feeble  honey-like  odor.

Pure  Sugar  is  usually  prepared  in  compact,  crystalline,  conical  loaves,
which  are  snow-white,  dry,  easily  pulverizable,  inodorous,  of  an  intense
sweet  taste,  without  any  aroma,  permanent  in  the  air,  phosphorescent
by  friction,  and  of  a  specific  gravity  from  1.5629  to  1.6.  It  crystal-
lizes in  oblique,  four-sided  prisms,  terminated  by  two  converging  planes,
or  in  derived  figures,  in  which  form  it  contains  5.3  per  cent,  of  water  of
crystallization.  When  heated  to  365°,  it  melts  into  a  viscid,  colorless
liquid,  which  on  being  suddenly  cooled,  forms  a  transparent  amorphous
mass,  called  Barley-sugar ;  between  400°  and  420°,  it  loses  two
equivalents  of  water,  swells,  emits  a  peculiar  odor,  and  is  converted
into  a  black  porous  mass,  having  a  high  luster,  like  anthracite,  called


Saccharum  Officinarum.  831

Caramel.  At  a  still  higher  temperature,  it  yields  combustible  gases,  car-
bonic acid,  empyreumatic  oil,  and  acetic  acid,  leaving  about  one-fourth
its  weight  of  charcoal,  which  burns  without  residue.  Sugar  is  soluble  in
twelve  parts  of  rectified  spirit  and  in  eighty  parts  of  alcohol ;  it  dissolves
readily  in  half  of  its  weight  of  temperate  water,  and  to  an  almost  un-
limited extent  in  boiling  water,  which  solution,  when  thick  and  ropy,  is
called  Simple  Syrup,  Syrupus  Simplex.  The  fixed  and  volatile  oils  are  to
a  certain  extent  rendered  miscible  with  water  by  means  of  sugar,  with
the  volatile  oils  it  imperfectly  combines,  forming  the  Oleum- saccharum
of  the  pharmaceutist.  Sugar  may  be  distinguished  from  most  other
organic  principles,  by  not  being  precipitated  by  subacetate  of  lead,  when
in  solution.  Strong  nitric  acid,  with  the  aid  of  heat,  converts  sugar  into
oxalic  acid  ;  and  when  weak,  into  saccharic  acid.  Chlorine  converts  it
into  saccharic  acid.  Concentrated  sulphuric  or  muriatic  acid  chars  it;
diluted  muriatic  acid,  converts  it  into  a  solid,  brown",  gelatinous  mass,  by
boiling.  Diluted  sulphuric  acid  changes  it  into  uncrystallizable  sugar,
then  into  grape  sugar* and  ultimately  into  sacchulmin,  which  is  insolu-
ble, and  sacchulmic  acid,  which  is  soluble  in  ammonia.  Sugar  in  fine
powder,  treated  with  a  mixture  of  sixteen  parts  of  sulphuric  and  eight
of  nitric  acid,  and  cooled  to  the  temperature  of  60°,  is  converted,  in  a
few  seconds,  into  a  pasty  substance,  which,  after  having  being  washed
in  cold  water  and  dissolved  in  alcohol,  furnishes,  on  the  addition  of  an
excess  of  carbonate  of  potassa  to  the  alcoholic  solution,  a  peculiar  explo-
sive and  inflammable  substance,  resembling  common  rosin  in  its  physical
properties,  and,  like  it,  insoluble  in  water,  but  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,
and  the  volatile  oils.  Oxalic,  tartaric,  citric,  malic,  and  acetic  acids,
prevent  sugar  from  crystallizing  from  its  watery  solution,  effecting
changes  in  it  similar  to  those  resulting  from  the  action  of  mineral  acids.
If  sugar  be  boiled  in  open  vessels  wilh  weak  sulphuric  acid,  for  several
days,  oxygen  will  be  absorbed,  and  formic  acid  will  be  generated  with
sacchulmin  and  sacchulmic  acid.  Sugar  combines  with  the  alkalies,
losing  its  sweet  taste,  and  forming  compounds  which  render  the  sugar
less  liable  to  change ;  it  likewise  unites  with  various  metallic  oxides
rendering  them  soluble.  Boiled  for  a  long  time  with  aqueous  solutions
of  potassa,  lime,  or  baryta,  the  liquid  becomes  brown,  formic  acid  is  pro-
duced, and  melassic  and  glucic  acids  are  generated ;  the  former  being
brown  or  black,  and  insoluble  in  water,  the  latter  colorless  and  very
soluble.  When  distilled  with  lime,  sugar  yields  a  volatile  liquid  called
acetone,  and  an  oily  substance  termed  Metacetone.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sugar  is  nutritive,  alterative,  demulcent,  and
topically  antiseptic.  It  cannot  sustain  life  alone,  owing  to  the  absence
of  nitrogen  in  its  composition,  and  only  becomes  eminently  nutritive  when
combined  with  other  alimentary  proximate  principles.  Used  in  large
quantities  it  is  injurious  to  digestion.  In  relation  to  both  vegetable  and
animal  matters  it  is  a  powerful  antiseptic  ;  the  former  of  which  may  be


832  Materia  Medica.

preserved  indefinitely  in  syrup,  so  long  as  the  syrup  is  secured  against
fermentation;  while  the  latter,  after  long  immersion  in  syrup,  or  in
moistened  sugar,  may  be  perfectly  mummified.  On  this  account  it  is
now  used  considerably  in  preserving  fish  and  meat,  instead  of  salt,  to
which  it  is  superior,  as  it  requires  a  less  quantity  of  sugar  than  salt,  and
does  not  change  the  taste  nor  injure  the  nutritive  qualities  of  the  aliment.
Suo-ar  or  molasses,  when  freely  eaten  by  children,  prove  excellent  anthel-
mintics ;  it  has  proved  beneficial  in  scurvy,  and  in  some  chronic  cutane-
ous diseases,  and  powdered  loaf  sugar  has  been  applied  externally  to
fungous  ulcers,  and  for  the  removal  of  specks  on  the  cornea.  It  has
long  been  a  popular  idea  that  sugar  is  injurious  to  the  teeth,  this,  how-
ever, is  erroneous  ;  if  particles  of  sugar  become  lodged  between  the
teeth,  and  are  allowed  to  decompose,  decay  will  inevitably  ensue,  but
if  the  particles  be  removed  at  an  early  period,  sugar  will  be  found  to
exert  a  beneficial  influence  upon  the  teeth  and  gums.  As  a  demulcent,
sugar  has  been  used  in  various  forms  in  catarrhal  affections;  and  when
it  is  used  daily  in  very  large  quantities,  say  a  pound  or  more  dissolved
in  a  quart  of  cold  water,  it  is  said  to  be  powerfully  antiphrodisiac.  The
use  of  it,  however,  is  mainly  confined  to  the  preparation  of  syrups,  to
cover  the  taste  of  nauseous  drugs,  for  rendering  oils  miscible  with  water,
for  suspending  many  drugs  in  the  form  of  mixture  or  emulsion,  to  pro-
tect certain  ferruginous  preparations  from  oxidation,  and  also  for  con-
verting some  agents  into  the  state  of  conserve,  confection,  electuary,  pill,
or  lozenge.  For  pills,  molasses  is  most  generally  preferable  to  syrup,  as
it  does  not  so  readily  harden,  and  preserves  them  in  a  soft,  moist  state,
for  a  long  time,  while  its  antiseptic  properties  prevent  them  from  becom-
ing moldy.

Sugar  may  be  detected  in  urine  by  the  liquid  fermenting  on  the  addi-
tion of  yeast ;  or  by  yielding  a  reddish-brown  precipitate  when  boiled
with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper,  and  solution  of  caustic  potassa ;
boiled  with  solution  of  potassa  alone,  it  acquires  a  dark-brown  or  bistre
tint.  Dr.  Donaldson  gives  the  following  simple  and  easy  method  for  dis-
covering the  presence  of  sugar  in  the  blood,  urine,  or  bile  :  Take  of
crystallized  carbonate  of  soda,  and  caustic  potassa,  of  each,  five  parts,
bitartrate  of  potassa  six  parts,  crystallized  sulphate  of  copper  four  parts,
distilled  water  thirty-two  parts  ;  mix  together,  boil,  and  filter.  A  few
drops  of  this  solution,  thrown  into  urine  or  other  liquid  suspected  of
being  saccharine,  and  heated  over  a  spirit-lamp,  will  discover  the  small-
est quantity  of  sugar  present.  After  a  few  minutes'  application  of  heat,
the  liquid  acquires  first  a  yellowish-green  color,  and  becomes  more  and
more  reddish-yellow,  as  the  proportion  of  sugar  is  more  considerable.
Sugar  in  solution  absorbs  a  very  large  quantity  of  lime.  A  saccharate
of  lime  has  been  found  very  beneficial  in  the  chronic  diarrheas  of  child-
ren, as  well  as  to  prevent  acidity  of  the  stomach,  and  the  disposition  to
diarrhea  so  common  in  children  of  a  certain  age  at  particular  seasons.


Saccharum Lactis — Sagapenum.  833

It  is  made  by  saturating  simple  syrup  with  lime,  and  then  filtering  it ;  it
forms  a  transparent  mixture  of  an  extremely  alkaline  taste,  and  may  be
added  to  water  or  milk.  It  is  altogether  superior  to  the  bicarbonate  of
soda.  Dose  for  an  infant,  from  a  fourth  to  half  a  drachm,  given  in  some
of  the  mother's  milk  ;  for  an  adult,  from  one  drachm  to  two  and  a  half.

Off.  Prep,  of  Saccharum  Purum. — Syrupus.

Off.  Prep,  of  Saccharum  Commune. — Confectio  Sennse.


SACCHARUM  LACTIS.

Sugar  of  Milk. Lactin.

Preparation.  —  Evaporate  whey  to  the  consistence  of  syrup  ;  when
cool,  clarify  it  by  white  of  eggs,  strain,  and  carefully  evaporate  by  a
gentle  heat,  that  it  may  crystallize  on  cooling.  For  further  purification,
use  animal  charcoal,  and  repeated  crystallizations.

History. — Sugar  of  Milk  is  a  white,  gritty,  crystalline,  semi-transpa-
rent substance,  permanent  in  the  air,  soluble  in  five  or  six  parts  of  cold
water,  and  two  and  a  half  or  three  of  boiling  water,  without  forming  a
syrup,  and  insoluble  in  alcohol  or  ether.  It  is  inodorous,  feebly  sweet,
but  much  more  so  in  a  concentrated  solution,  and  of  the  specific  gravity
1.54.  It  is  frequently  met  with  in  cylindrical  masses,  in  the  axis  of
which  is  a  cord,  around  which  the  crystals  have  been  deposited.  When
converted  into  grape-sugar  by  the  action  of  diluted  acids,  it  is  susceptible
of  vinous  fermentation,  and  affords  an  intoxicating  spirituous  liquor.
Mucic  acid  is  formed  by  the  action  of  diluted  nitric  acid  upon  it.  Its
formula  is  Gu  Hu  Oi9+5HO  ;  and  when  anhydrous  C24  Hiu  0.9.

Properties  and  Uses. — Its  principal  medicinal  use  is  in  the  trituration
of  drugs  ;  to  aid  in  rendering  them  finer  and  more  energetic,  as  well  as
to  assist  in  more  easily  dividing  active  agents  which  are  to  be  given  in
minute  doses  :  thus,  if  we  wish  to  divide  one  grain  of  strychnia  into
twenty  doses,  it  may  be  thoroughly  triturated  with  nineteen  grains  of
sugar  of  milk,  and  one  grain  of  the  mixture  gives  the  required  dose.
Or,  one  grain  of  podophyllin,  which,  in  general,  is  a  cathartic  dose,  by
long  trituration  with  ten  grains  of  sugar  of  milk,  will  form  several  pur-
gative doses.  In  these  cases,  the  trituration  should  always  continue  for
from  one  hour  to  an  hour  and  a  half.  As  a  medicinal  agent  Sugar  of
Milk  is  inert.


SAGAPENUM.
Sagapenum.

THE GUM-RESIN OF AN UNCERTAIN PLANT.

History. — This  gum-resin  is  brought  from  Alexandria,  Smyrna,  and
other  parts  of  the  Levant. It  is  the  concrete  juice  of  a  plant  growing
53


834  Materia  Medica.

in  Persia,  the  history  of  which  is  not  fully  known.  It  is  in  irregular
masses,  composed  of  agglutinated  fragments,  slightly  translucent,  of  a
brownish-yellow,  olive,  or  reddish-yellow  color  externally,  paler  inter-
nally, brittle,  in  consistence  resembling  wax,  with  an  alliaceous  odor,
and  a  hot,  nauseous,  bitterish  taste.  It  softens  and  becomes  tenacious
by  the  heat  of  the  hand.  It  is  almost  entirely  soluble  in  diluted  alco-
hol. A"-e  and  exposure  harden  it  as  well  as  render  it  darker.  It  is
inflammable,  burning  with  a  white  flame  and  considerable  smoke,  and
leavino-  a  light  spongy  charcoal.  An  inferior  kind  is  browner,  softer,
and  uniform,  without  any  appearance  of  tears.  It  consists  of  resin,
gum,  bassorin,  volatile  oil,  salts,  etc.  The  oil  is  pale-yellow,  very  fluid,
lighter  than  water,  and  of  an  intense  alliaceous  odor.

Properties  and  Uses. — Gentle  stimulant,  antispasmodic,  and  emmena-
gogue  ;  inferior  to  assafetida.  Occasionally  employed  externally  as  a
discutient,  in  the  form  of  plaster,  to  indolent  tumors.  Dose  from  ten  to
thirty  grains,  in  pill  or  emulsion.

SAGUS  RUMPHII.

Sago.

Nat.  Ord.— Pal maceas. Sex.  Syst. — Moncecia  Hexandria.

THE  PREPARED  FECULA  OF  THE  PITH.

Description. — The  Sagus  Rumphii,  or  Sago  Palm,  is  one  of  the  small-
est trees  of  the  family  to  which  it  belongs,  seldom  exceeding  thirty  feet
in  bight.  The  trunk  is,  proportionably,  very  thick,  quite  erect,  cylindri-
cal, covered  with  the  remains  of  the  old  leaf-stalks,  and  surrounded  by
a  beautiful  crown  of  foliage,  consisting  of  numerous,  very  large,  pinnate
leaves,  extending  in  every  direction  from  the  summit,  and  curving  grace-
fully downward.  From  the  basis  of  the  leaves  proceed  long,  divided
and  subdivided  flowers,  and  fruit-bearing  spadices,  the  branches  of  which
are  smooth.  The  fruit  is  a  roundish  nut,  covered  with  a  checkered
imbricated  coat,  and  containing  a  single  seed.

History. — This  tree  is  a  native  of  Malacca,  and  the  adjacent  islands,
thriving  in  low  and  moist  situations.  Previous  to  maturity,  the  trunk
consists  of  an  external  ligneous  part  about  two  inches  in  thickness,  and
an  internal  spongy  medullary  substance,  somewhat  like  the  pith  of  elder.
After  the  appearance  of  fruit  this  internal  substance  is  gradually
absorbed,  and  the  trunk  eventually  becomes  hollow.  The  maximum  age
of  the  tree  does  not  exceed  thirty  years.  There  are  two  other  species
of  palm  known  to  produce  sago,  namely  :  Sagus  Lcevis,  Jack,  or  Sagus
Inermis,  Roxburgh,  a  native  of  Borneo  and  Sumatra  ;  and  Sagueris
Rumphii,  abounding  in  all  the  eastern  isles  of  the  Indian  Ocean.  These,
with  the  Sagus  Rumphii,  contain  a  farinaceous  pith,  and  probably  fur-
nish the  finest  kinds  of  sago. Sago  has  likewise  been  obtained  from  the


Sagus  Rumphii.  835

Sagus  Ruffia,  Pkoenix  Farinifera,  Cycas  Revoluta,  Cycas  Circinalis,
Zamia  Lanuginosa,  and  Caryota  Urens.

As  soon  as  the  pith  or  medullary  matter  has  become  fully  developed,
the  tree  is  cut  down,  and  the  pith  extracted.  This  is  then  reduced  to  a
coarse  powder,  and  stirred  with  water ;  the  water  is  allowed  to  stand
until  the  starch  has  subsided,  and  is  then  strained  off;  the  remaining
amylaceous  matter  is  then  made  into  cakes,  dried,  and  used  by  the  na-
tives as  food,  under  the  name  of  Meal  Sago.  When  made  into  a  paste
with  water,  and  rubbed  into  grains,  it  forms  the  Granular  Sago  of  com-
merce. Sago  is  abundantly  manufactured  in  the  Moluccas,  but  the  finest
quality  is  obtained  from  the  eastern  coast  of  Sumatra.  In  several
places  it  is  refined  by  some  process  not  yet  satisfactorily  ascertained,  and
which  gives  the  grains  a  fine  pearly  luster.  In  this  state  it  is  called
Pearl  Sago.  A  single  tree,  it  is  stated,  will  yield  from  five  to  six  hun-
dred pounds  of  sago.

Sago  Meal  is  rarely  met  with  in  this  country,  though  imported  into
England.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  fine  amylaceous  powder,  of  a  pale  yel-
lowish-white, or  reddish-white  color,  of  a  feeble,  somewhat  musty,
peculiar  odor,  and  composed  of  unbroken  starch  globules.  Under  the
microscope  it  is  found  to  consist  of  oval  or  ovate  particles,  many  of
which  appear  as  if  truncated,  so  as  to  be  more  or  less  muller-shaped.
They  are  generally  more  or  less  broken,  and  the  surface  of  the  greater
part  of  them  is  irregular  or  tuberculated.  Their  surface  exhibits  con-
centric rings,  which,  however,  are  not  so  distinct  as  in  the  potato-starch.
The  hilum  is  circular  when  perfect,  and  cracks  either  with  a  simple  slit,
a  cross,  or  in  a  stellate  manner.  Common  Sago  is  in  roundish  grains  of
the  size  of  pearl-barley,  or  sometimes  larger,  mottled  with  various  tints
of  gray  and  brown,  and  composed  of  aggregated,  unbroken  globules.
Under  the  microscope,  their  appearances  are  similar  to  those  of  the  sago
meal,  except  that  they  are  less  regular,  and  more  broken.  The  above
varieties  do  not  yield  any  soluble  starch  or  amidin  to  cold  water.  Pearl
Sago  is  the  kind  most  generally  used,  and  is  the  most  esteemed.  It  is
in  pale  yellowish-white,  reddish-white,  grayish-white,  or  translucent
grains,  about  the  size  of  a  pin's  head,  inodorous,  nearly  tasteless,  of  a
somewhat  pearly  luster  externally,  and  forms  a  solution  with  cold  water
which  is  rendered  blue  by  tincture  of  iodine.  A  solution  of  chloride  of
lime  will  render  it  perfectly  white.  Its  partial  solubility  in  cold  water,
is,  probably,  owing  to  the  action  of  heat  used  in  preparing  it.  It  pos-
sesses the  chemical  properties  of  starch.  Under  the  microscope,  the
granules  are  of  the  same  form  as  in  the  preceding,  but  are  all  ruptured,
and  exhibit  very  indistinct  traces  of  the  external  concentric  rings,  which
have  been,  undoubtedly,  altered  in  the  process  employed  in  their
preparation.

Common  Sago  is  insoluble  in  cold  water,  but  upon  being  boiled,  it
becomes  at  first  soft  and  transparent,  and  ultimately  forms  a  gelatinous


836  Materia  Medica.

solution.  Pearl  sago  is  more  soluble.  Imitation  pearl  sago,  prepared
from  potato-starch,  may  be  known  by  exhibiting  larger  granules  under
the  microscope,  which  are  more  regularly  oval  or  ovate,  smoother,  less
broken,  and  more  distinctly  marked  with  the  concentric  rings  on  their
surface ;  and  when  cracks  occur  at  the  hilum,  they  are  usually  in  two
diverging  fissures.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sago  is  nutritive  and  demulcent,  and  is  a  con-
venient and  agreeable  article  for  making  puddings,  gruel  and  diet  drinks
for  the  sick  room.  It  should  always  be  long  boiled  before  it  is  used.
It  is  not  so  much  used  as  formerly,  being  superseded  by  the  purer  arrow-
root and  tapioca.  A  tablespoonful  of  sago  to  a  pint  of  water,  is  sufficient
for  ordinary  purposes  ;  and  the  solution  may  be  sweetened  with  loaf-
sugar,  and  seasoned  with  nutmeg  or  other  spice,  wine,  etc.,  when  these
are  not  contra-indicated.

Castillon's  Powders,  a  popular  article  of  diet  for  invalids,  in  cases  of
indigestion,  chronic  dysentery,  etc.,  is  composed  of  Sago,  Salep,  Traga-
canth,  of  each,  in  powder,  four  drachms,  powdered  prepared  oyster-
shells  one  drachm.  These  are  to  be  well  mixed,  and  divided  into  twelve
powders  ;  sometimes  it  is  colored  with  a  small  quantity  of  cochineal.
For  use,  each  powder  is  to  be  boiled  with  a  pint  of  milk  ;  which  may  be
sweetened  and  flavored  to  suit  the  patient's  taste.


SALIX  ALBA.

Willow.
Nat.  Ord. — Salicacese. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Diandria.

THE BARK.

Description. — Salix  Alba,  or  White-willow  is  a  tree  from  thirty  to
eighty  feet  in  bight,  with  numerous  round,  widely  spreading  branches,
the  younger  of  which  are  silky.  The  bark  is  brown,  thick,  and  full  of
cracks  ;  that  of  the  smaller  branches  smooth  and  greenish.  The  leaves
are  alternate,  on  short  petioles,  lanceolate,  or  elliptic-lanceolate,  broadest
a  little  above  the  middle,  pointed,  tapering  toward  each  end,  acutely
serrate  with  the  lower  serratures  glandular ;  both  sides  of  a  grayish,
somewhat  glaucous,  green,  beautifully  silky,  with  close-pressed  silvery
hairs,  especially  on  the  under  surface,  and  which  is  very  dense  and
brilliant  on  the  uppermost,  or  youngest  leaves  ;  the  lowermost  on  each
branch,  like  the  bracteas,  are  smaller,  more  obtuse,  and  greener.  The
stipules  are  variable,  either  roundish  or  oblong,  small,  and  often  wanting.
The  flowers  appear  at  the  same  time  with  the  leaves.  The  aments  are  on
short  stalks,  with  three  or  four  spreading,  leafy  bracteas,  terminal,  cylin-
drical, and  elongated.  Scales  brown,  elliptical,  lanceolate,  pubescent  at
the  margin ;  those  of  the  barren  aments  narrower  toward  the  base  ;  of
the  fertile,  dilated  and  convolute  in  that  part. Stamens  two,  yellow,


Salix  Alba.  837

rather  longer  than  the  scales,  with  one  obtuse  gland  before,  and  one
behind  ;  filaments  hairy  in  their  lower  part.  Anthers  roundish,  yellow.
Ovary  very  nearly  sessile,  green,  smooth,  ovate-lanceolate,  bluntish,
longer  than  the  scale.  Style  short ;  stigmas  short,  thick,  two-parted,
recurved,  and  nearly  sessile.  Capsule  ovate,  brown,  smooth,  rather
small.

History.  —  The  White  or  European  Willow  has  been  introduced  into
this  country  from  Europe,  and  is  now  very  common.  It  flowers  in
April  and  May  ;  and  the  bark  is  easily  separable  throughout  the  sum-
mer. When  dried  it  rolls  up  into  quills,  having  a  brown  epidermis,  and
being  flexible,  fibrous,  and  of  difficult  pulverization.  It  has  a  feebly
aromatic  odor,  and  a  peculiar,  bitter,  astringent  taste.  Water  extracts
its  active  properties,  and  the  decoction  is  of  a  reddish-brown  color.
Willow  bark  contains  a  large  proportion  of  tannin,  a  bitter  yellow  coloring
matter,  a  green  fatty  matter,  gum,  wax,  lignin,  an  organic  acid  com-
bined with  magnesia,  and  a  crystalline  principle,  named  Salicin.

There  are  not  less  than  one  hundred  and  thirty  species  comprised  in
this  genus,  which  chiefly  abound  in  the  northern  and  temperate  parts  of
Europe  and  America ;  and  probably  all  of  them  are  possessed  of  similar
medical  properties  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.  The  best  method  of
determining  the  value  of  the  various  species,  is,  probably,  by  the  degree
of  bitterness  in  the  bark.  Among  those  which  have  been  used,  are  the
S.  Alba,  S.  Caprea,  S.  Fragilis,  S.  Mvsselliana,  S.  Purpurea,  and  S.
Pentandra.  The  Weeping  Willow  or  Babylonian  Willow,  Salix  Baby-
lonica,  is  cultivated  as  an  ornamental  tree.

Properties  and  Uses. — Willow-bark  is  tonic  and  astringent,  and  has
been  employed  as  a  substitute  for  Peruvian  bark  in  intermittent  fever,
to  which,  however,  it  is  inferior.  In  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery,
the  tonic  and  astringent  combination  of  the  willow,  renders  it  very
eligible.  It  may  be  given  in  substance,  in  doses  of  one  drachm  of  the
powder,  repeated  as  indicated  ;  or  of  the  decoction,  one  or  two  fluid-
ounces,  four  or  five  times  a  day.  The  decoction  has  also  proved  effica-
cious as  a  local  application  to  foul  and  indolent  ulcers.

Salix  Nigra,  Black,  or  Pussy  Willow,  is  a  tree  growing  from  fifteen
to  twenty-five  feet  high,  covered  with  a  rough  blackish  bark,  and  found
on  the  banks  of  rivers,  especially  in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania.  The
leaves  are  narrowly  lanceolate,  pointed  and  tapering  at  each  end,  serru-
late, smooth  and  green  on  both  sides ;  petioles  and  midveins  tomentose.
The  stipules  are  small,  deciduous,  dentate  ;  aments  erect,  cylindric,
villous  ;  scales  oblong,  very  villous,  Sterile  aments  three  inches  long ;
glands  of  the  sterile  flowers  two,  large,  and  deeply  two  or  three  cleft.
Stamens  four  to  six,  often  but  three  in  the  upper  scales ;  filaments
bearded  at  base.  Ovary  pedicellate,  smooth,  ovoid  ;  style  very  short;
stigmas  bifid. The  branches  are  pale  yellow,  and  brittle  at  base,  and  are


838  Materia Medica.

much  used  for  the  manufacture  of  baskets  and  other  kinds  of  wicker-
work.  The  bark  of  black  or  pussy  willow,  is  recommended  as  a
poultice  in  gangrene,  and  as  an  external  application  to  foul  and  indolent
ulcers,  in  which  it  stands  unrivaled.  It  is  made  by  simmering  the
powdered  bark  in  cream.  It  has  also  been  successfully  used  in  various
swellings  of  the  neck.  Internally,  the  root  is  a  bitter  tonic,  effectual  in
intermittents.  Some  have  highly  recommended  it  in  asthma  and  gout.
A  decoction  of  the  black  willow  buds  or  aments  is  useful  in  gangrene,
taken  internally,  and  applied  locally;  and  drank  freely  it  proves  a  pow-
erful anaphrodisiac,  suppressing  venereal  desires  for  a  long  time,  and  is
highly  recommended  in  the  treatment  of  spermatorrhea.


SALICIN.

Salicin.

THE ACTIVE PRINCIPLE OF THE WILLOW.

Preparation.  —  Several  processes  are  given  for  the  preparation  of
Salicin.  Merck  obtained  251  grains  from  sixteen  ounces  of  the  bark  and
young  twigs,  by  the  following  process  :  Treat  a  boiling  concentrated
decoction  of  the  bark  with  litharge,  until  it  becomes  nearly  colorless ;
this  removes  the  gum,  tannin  and  extractive  from  the  liquid,  the  presence
of  which  would  impede  the  crystallization  of  the  salicin,  while  at  the
same  time  a  portion  of  the  oxide  is  dissolved,  probably  in  union  with  the
salicin.  To  separate  this  portion  of  oxide,  sulphuric  acid  is  first  added,
and  then  sulphuret  of  barium,  and  the  liquor  is  filtered  and  evaporated.
Salicin  is  deposited,  and  may  be  purified  by  repeated  solution  and  crys-
tallization. Erdmann  obtained  300  grains  of  salicin,  from  sixteen  ounces
of  the  bark  of  Salix  Pentandra.  Sixteen  ounces  of  the  bark  are  mace-
rated for  twenty-four  hours  in  a  mixture  of  four  quarts  of  water,  and  two
ounces  of  lime,  and  the  whole  is  then  boiled  for  half  an  hour.  This
process  is  repeated  twice  with  the  residue.  The  decoctions  are  mixed,
allowed  to  become  clear  by  subsidence,  the  liquor  poured  off,  and  con-
centrated to  a  quart ;  this  concentrated  liquid  is  then  digested  with
eight  ounces  of  ivory- black,  filtered,  and  evaporated  to  dryness.  The
extract  in  powder  is  then  exhausted  with  spirit  containing  28  per  cent.
of  alcohol,  and  the  tincture  evaporated,  or  the  spirit  distilled  off,  so  that
the  salicin  may  crystallize.  It  may  be  purified  by  again  dissolving,
treating  with  ivory-black,  and  crystallizing.  Another  method  is  as
follows : — Willow-bark  is  boiled  with  caustic  lime  in  water;  the  decoction
is  filtered,  and  sulphate  of  zinc  added  so  long  as  it  produces  a  precipi-
tate. The  liquid  having  been  again  filtered,  is  evaporated  to  the  con-
sistence of  an  extract,  and  the  residue  is  treated  with  alcohol.  The
tincture  thus  obtained,  if  carefully  evaporated,  yields  crystals  of  salicin,
which  may  be  purified  by  washing  with  a  saturated  solution  of  the  same
principle  in  cold  water.


Salvia  Officinalis.  839

History. — Salicin,  when  pure,  is  white,  forming  minute,  shining,  rect-
angular crystals,  permanent  in  the  air,  inodorous,  of  a  persistent  bitter
taste  with  the  peculiar  aromatic  flavor  of  the  bark,  soluble  in  twenty-
parts  of  temperate  water,  and  also  soluble  in  alcohol,  but  insoluble  in
ether  or  oil  of  turpentine.  It  is  a  neutral  body  and  is  not  precipitated
by  any  reagent.  Concentrated  sulphuric  acid  decomposes  it,  forming  a
new  compound  of  a  permanent  bright-red  color,  called  Rutulin.  Dis-
tilled with  bichromate  of  potassa  and  sulphuric  acid,  it  yields  formic  and
carbonic  acids,  hyduret  of  salicyle,  and  a  resinous  matter.  Hyduret  of
salicyle,  or  salkylous  acid,  is  an  oily  colorless  liquid,  having  a  fragrant
aromatic  odor,  and  a  burning  taste.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1.1731,  it
boils  at  about  380°,  and  its  formula  is  Ci4  Ha  Oi,  H=Sa  H.  With  bases
it  forms  salicylurets,  water  being  separated.  It  may  be  obtained  by
distilling  one  part  of  salicin,  one  part  of  bichromate  of  potassa,  two  and
a  half  parts  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  twenty  parts  of  water,  together.
The  salicin  is  dissolved  in  part  of  the  water,  and  the  acid  diluted  with
the  rest.  The  mixture  is  then  made  in  a  retort,  and  after  the  effer-
vescence which  takes  place  is  over,  the  whole  is  distilled,  and  yields  the
hyduret,  to  the  amount  of  one-fourth  of  the  salicin  employed.  By  con-
tact with  synaptase,  salicin  is  decomposed,  being  resolved  into  grape-
sugar  and  a  new  body  called  Saligenine  ;  this  latter,  boiled  with  a
diluted  acid,  or  heated  beyond  its  melting  point,  is  changed  into  a  white,
tasteless,  insoluble,  resinous  powder,  named  Saliretin.  The  formula  of
salicin  is  C26  His  On.

Properties  and  Uses. — Salicin  is  tonic,  antiperiodic,  and  febrifuge  ;
and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  quinia,  to  which,  however,  it  is
slightly  inferior.  It  is,  however,  less  likely  to  offend  the  stomach  and
affect  the  nervous  system,  for  which  properties  it  may  be  administered
in  cases  where  cinchonism  would  be  produced  by  the  exhibition  of
quinia.  It  is  often  employed  to  adulterate  quinia  with,  and  may  be
detected  by  sulphuric  acid,  which  will  turn  the  Salicin  red,  even  in
minute  quantity.  The  dose  of  salicin  is  from  two  to  ten  grains  to  be
repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  three  doses  of  six  grains  each,  have
been  known  to  cut  short  intermittent  fevers  in  one  day.

Off.  Prep. — Salicin  ;  Quinise  et  Saliciniae  Tartras.


SALVIA  OFFICINALIS.

Sage.
Nat.  Ord. — Lamiacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Salvia  Officinalis  or  Garden  Sage  is  a  perennial,  shrubby
plant,  about  two  feet  in  hight,  with  a  quadrangular,  pubescent,  branch-
ing stem. The  leaves  are  opposite,  petiolate,  ovate-lanceolate,  crenulate,


840  Materia  Medica.

"wrinkled,  of  a  grayisli-green  color,  sometimes  tinged  with  red  or  purple;
the  lowermost  tomentose  beneath.  The  flowers  are  blue,  variegated  with
white  and  purple,  and  arranged  in  long,  terminal  spikes,  composed  of
distant  whorls,  each  composed  of  few  flowers,  and  accompanied  with
sessile,  ovate,  acuminate  and  deciduous  bracts,  which  are  membranous
and  striated  at  the  base.  The  calyx  is  campanulate,  membranous,
colored,  striated,  downy,  and  bilabiate ;  the  upper  lip  is  three-toothed,
the  lower  bifid ;  all  the  teeth  subulate,  acuminate.  The  corolla  is  two
or  three  times  as  long  as  the  calyx,  with  a  large  projecting  tube,  ringed
in  the  inside,  and  bilabiate ;  the  upper  lip  is  arched  and  concave,  and
the  lower  one  divided  into  three  rounded  lobes,  of  which  the  middle  is
the  largest,  the  lateral  ones  reflexed.  The  stamens  are  affixed  to  short
pedicels  transversely  about  their  middle.

History. — Sage  is  indigenous  to  the  South  of  Europe,  and  is  exten-
sivelj'  cultivated  in  gardens  in  this  country,  where  it  flowers  in  June,  at
■which  time  the  leaves  and  tops  which  are  officinal,  should  be  collected,
and  dried  in  a  shady  place.  They  have  a  strong,  fragrant  odor,  and  a
warm,  bitterish,  aromatic,  somewhat  astringent  taste,  which  are  due  to
the  presence  of  an  abundance  of  volatile  oil  containing  considerable
camphor,  and  which  may  be  obtained  by  distillation  with  water.  It
imparts  its  virtues  to  boiling  water  in  infusion,  but  more  readily  to  alco-
hol. The  infusion  becomes  black  on  the  addition  of  sulphate  of  iron.
Numerous  other  species  have  similar  properties  as  the  S.  Sclarea  or
Clarry,  a  native  of  Southern  Europe,  which  is  said  to  be  antispasmodic
and  balsamic.  Also  the  S.  Horminum,  S.  Bengalensis  of  India,  S.
Pomifera  of  Greece,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sage  is  feebly  tonic  and  astringent,  expectorant,
diaphoretic,  and  having  properties  common  to  aromatics.  An  infusion
is  beneficial  in  flatulence  connected  with  gastric  debility,  and  will,  it  is
stated,  prove  efficacious  in  checking  the  exhausting  sweats  of  hectic  fever;
it  may  likewise  be  used  warm,  as  an  anthelmintic,  and  for  the  purpose
of  causing  diaphoresis  in  some  febrile  diseases.  The  warm  infusion
will  cause  active  diuresis  by  checking  its  diaphoretic  tendency.  Dr.
James  Anton  of  Georgia,  considers  it  an  excellent  remedy  for  sperma-
torrhea ;  also  a  valuable  antiphrodisiac  to  check  excessive  venereal
desires.  It  may  be  used  in  connection  with  moral,  hygienic,  and  other
aids,  if  necessary.  Van  Swieten  states  that  a  vinous  infusion  forms  an
excellent  fomentation  to  the  breasts  of  nurses,  when  it  is  desirable  to
check  the  flow  of  milk.  The  infusion  is  much  used  as  a  gargle  for
inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  throat,  and  relaxed  uvula,  either
alone,  or  combined  with  vinegar,  honey,  alum,  or  sumach  berries.  The
oil  may  be  used  in  small  doses  as  a  carminative  and  stimulant;  and
externally,  applied  with  friction  in  rheumatism.  Dose  of  the  infusion,
from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  of  the  powdered
leaves,  twenty  to  thirty  grains.


Sambucus Canadensis.  841

Salvia  Lyrata,  variously  named  Wild  or  Meadow  Sage,  Lyre-leaved
Sage,  or  Cancer  Weedis  a  perennial  plant,  growing  from  Canada  to  Florida
in  shady  woods  and  meadows,  and  flowering  in  May  and  June.  It  has
an  erect  quadrangular,  nearly  leafless  stem,  one  or  two  feet  high,  branch-
ing above  and  covered  with  hairs  pointing  downward.  The  radical  leaves
are  obovate,  lyre-shaped  or  sinuate-pinnatifid,  sometimes  almost  entire,
and  petiolate ;  the  cauline  leaves  mostly  but  one  or  two  pairs,  just  below
the  raceme,  smaller  and  narrower  than  the  radical.  The  Jlowers  are
blue,  in  loose  and  distant  whorls  of  about  six,  forming  a  long,  interrupted
raceme ;  bracts  oblong-linear,  not  longer  than  the  calyx.  The  upper  lip
of  the  blue-purple  pubescent  corolla,  short,  straight,  not  vaulted  ;  the
tube  much  exserted.  The  fresh  radical  leaves  of  this  plant  will,  it  is
positively  asserted,  when  bruised,  and  applied  to  warts,  generally
destroy  them;  the  application  to  be  continued  for  a  day  or  two,  and
renewed  every  twelve  hours. It  is  also  reputed  to  have  cured  cancers.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Salviae  Compositum.


SAMBUCUS  CANADENSIS.

Elder.

Nat.  Ord. — Caprifoliaceas. Sex.  Si/st. — Pentandria  Trigynia.

THE FLOWERS AND BERRIES.

Description. — Sambucus  Canadensis  is  an  indigenous  shrub  from  six  to
ten  feet  high,  with  a  branching  stem,  which  is  covered  with  a  rough  gray
bark,  and  contains  a  large  spongy  pith.  The  small  branches  and  the
leafstalks  are  very  smooth.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  pinnate,  sometimes
bipinnate,  and  generally  composed  of  three  or  four  pairs  of  leaflets,
with  an  odd  one,  and  which  are  oblong-oval,  serrate-acuminate,  smooth,
shining,  deep-green,  with  the  midribs  somewhat  pubescent;  the  lower
ones  are  often  trifoliate.  Petioles  smooth.  The  Jlowers  are  small,  white,
and  disposed  in  loose  cymes,  which  are  level-topped  and  five-parted.
The  fruit  consists  of  numerous  small,  globular  berries,  which  are  of  a
dark-purple  color  when  ripe.

Sambucus  Nigra  or  European  Elder,  is  larger  than  the  preceding,
approaching  in  size  to  that  of  a  small  tree.  The  stem  is  much  and
irregularly,  though  always  oppositely  branched,  and  of  quick  growth  ;
after  a  year's  growth  the  branches  become  filled  with  a  light  spongy
pith,  and  covered  with  a  smooth  gray  bark.  The  bark  of  the  stem  is
rough  and  whitish.  The  leaves  are  long,  and  composed  of  two  opposite
pairs  of  leaflets  and  an  odd  terminal  one,  which  are  oval,  acuminate,
serrate,  smooth,  and  of  a  shining  green  color.  The  Jlowers  are  small,
numerous,  cream-colored,  and  form  large  five-parted  cymes  ;  the  calyx
is  persistent,  five-cleft;  the  corolla  rotate,  five-cleft,  with  obtuse  and
somewhat  reflexed  segments. The  stamens  are  five,  subulate,  as  long


842  Materia  Medica.

as  the  corolla,  and  furnished  with  roundish,  cordate,  yellow  anthers.
The  ovary  is  ovate,  supporting  three  obtuse  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  a  globu-
lar berry,  of  a  purplish-black  color  when  ripe,  on  a  reddish  footstalk.

History.— Sambucus  Canadensis  is  an  indigenous  shrub  growing  in  all
parts  of  the  United  States,  in  low  moist  grounds,  thickets,  and  waste
places,  flowering  from  May  to  July,  and  maturing  its  berries  early  in
the  autumn.  S.  Nigra  is  indigenous  to  many  parts  of  Europe,  growing
in  situations  similar  to  those  of  the  American  variety.  The  two  plants
possess  similar  medical  properties.  The  officinal  parts  are  the  flowers,
the  berries  and  the  inner  bark.

The  flowers  have  a  peculiar  sweetish  odor,  very  strong  when  recent,
but  feeble  when  dried ;  they  are  somewhat  aromatic,  with  a  bitterish
taste,  and  yield  their  properties  to  hot  water  in  infusion.  The  active
principle  probably  depends  upon  a  volatile  oil,  which  is  dissipated  by
boiling,  but  which  maybe  obtained  by  distillation  with-  water;  when
cold  it  has  the  consistence  of  butter.  Water  distilled  from  the  flowers
contains  ammonia  in  appreciable  quantity.  They  contain  volatile  oil,
acrid  resin,  tannin,  extractive,  etc.

The  berries  are  nearly  inodorous,  with  a  sweetish,  acidulous  taste ;
the  juice  expressed  from  them  is  susceptible  of  fermentation,  and  forms
a  vinous  liquor.  It  is  of  a  purplish  color,  and  may  be  used  as  a  delicate
test  for  acids  and  alkalies.  Acids  color  it  bright  red,  and  alkalies  violet;
and  acetate  of  lead  precipitates  its  coloring  principle  blue.  The  berries
contain  malic  acid,  a  little  citric  acid,  sugar,  pectin,  and  coloring  matter.

The  inner  bark  is  greenish-white,  inodorous,  of  a  sweetish  taste  at
first,  but  subsequently  slightly  bitter,  acrid,  and  nauseous,  and  imparts
its  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.  Its  active  principle  is  stated  by  Simon
to  be  a  soft  resin,  which  may  be  obtained  by  exhausting  the  powdered
bark  with  alcohol,  filtering  the  tincture,  evaporating  to  the  consistence
of  syrup,  then  adding  ether,  which  dissolves  the  active  matter,  and
finally  evaporating  to  the  consistence  of  a  thick  extract.  Twenty  grains
of  this  will  purge  and  vomit  actively.  The  bark  contains  valerianic  acid,
traces  of  volatile  oil,  resin,  albumen,  an  acid  sulphurous  fat,  wax,  chloro-
phylle,  tannic  acid,  grape-sugar,  gum,  extractive,  starch,  pectin,  and
various  salts.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  warm  infusion  the  flowers  are  diaphoretic,
and  gently  stimulant;  in  cold  infusion  they  are  diuretic,  alterative,  and
cooling,  and  may  be  used  in  all  diseases  requiring  such  action,  as  in
hepatic  derangements  of  children,  erysipelas,  erysipelatous  diseases,  etc.
In  infusion  with  maidenhair  and  beech-drops,  they  will  be  found  very
valuable  in  all  erysipelatous  diseases.  The  expressed  juice  of  the  berries,
evaporated  to  the  consistence  of  a  syrup,  is  a  valuable  aperient  and  alter-
ative ;  one  ounce  of  it  will  purge.  An  infusion  of  the  young  leaf-buds
are  likewise  purgative,  and  sometimes  act  with  violence. The  flowers


Sanguinaria  Canadensis.  843

and  expressed  juice  of  the  berries  have  been  beneficially  employed  in
rheumatic,  gouty,  eruptive,  scrofulous,  and  syphilitic  diseases.  The
inner  green  bark  is  cathartic ;  an  infusion  of  it  in  wine,  or  the  expressed
juice  will  purge  moderately,  in  doses  of  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  a  fluid-
ounce  ;  large  doses  produce  emesis ;  in  smaller  ones  it  proves  an  effica-
cious deobstruent,  promoting  all  the  fluid  secretions,  and  is  much  used
in  dropsy,  especially  that  following  scarlatina,  and  other  febrile  and
exanthematous  diseases,  as  well  as  in  many  chronic  diseases.  Beaten
up  with  lard  or  cream,  it  forms  an  excellent  discutient  ointment,  and
which  is  of  much  value  in  burns,  scalds,  and  some  cutaneous  diseases.
The  juice  of  the  root  in  ounce  doses,  daily,  acts  as  a  hydragogue  cathar-
tic and  diuretic,  and  will  be  found  valuable  in  all  dropsical  affections.

Off.  Prep.  — Aqua  Sambuci ;  Syrupus  Sarsaparillae  Compositus  ;  Un-
guentum  Sambuci ;  Vinum  Sambuci.


SANGUINARIA CANADENSIS.

Bloodroot.

Nat.  Orel. — Papaveraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Bloodroot,  or  Red  Puccoon,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  is
a  smooth,  herbaceous,  perennial,  indigenous  plant,  with  a  horizontal,
truncate  or  premorse  root  or  rhizoma,  giving  off  a  few  fibers,  and  abound-
ing in  a  bright-orange  juice  ;  it  is  about  as  thick  as  the  finger,  two  or
three  inches  long,  fleshy,  reddish-brown  externally,  and  brighter  red
internally.  From  each  bud  of  the  root-stalk  there  springs  a  single,
large,  smooth  leaf,  and  a  scape  about  six  inches  high,  with  a  single
flower;  and  as  they  arise,  the  folded-leaf  envelops  the  flower-bud,  and
rolls  back  as  the  latter  expands.  The  leaf  is  erect,  supported  on  a  long-
channeled  petiole,  cordate  or  subreniform,  with  large  roundish  lobes
separated  by  obtuse  sinuses,  yellowish-green  on  the  upper  surface,  paler
on  the  under,  and  strongly  marked  by  orange-colored  veins.  The
scape  is  erect,  round,  and  smooth.  The  flower  is  white,  scentless,  of  a
quadrangular  outline,  and  of  short  duration.  The  calyx  formed  of  two
concave,  ovate,  obtuse  sepals,  which  fall  off  as  soon  as  the  corolla
expands;  the  corolla  is  composed  of  eight  (or  more,  by  cultivation)
petals,  which  are  spreading,  ovate,  obtuse,  concave,  white,  but  some-
times slightly  tinged  with  rose  or  purple.  The  stamens  are  numerous,
short,  with  oblong,  orange-colored  anthers.  The  ovary  is  oblong,  and
compressed,  and  supports  a  sessile,  persistent,  somewhat  two-lobed
stigma..  Style  wanting.  The  capsule  is  oblong,  acute  at  each  end,  two-
valved,  and  contains  numerous,  obovate,  dark  shining  red  seeds,  half
surrounded  by  a  white  arillus.  The  whole  plant  is  pervaded  with  an
acrid  orange-colored  juice,  which  is  in  greatest  abundance  in  the  root.


844  Materia  Medica.

History. — Bloodroot  is  found  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  grow-
ing in  woods,  groves,  and  on  shaded  banks,  in  rich  light  soil ;  it  is  one
of  the  earliest  and  most  beautiful  spring-flowers  of  this  country,  appear-
ing in  March  and  April.  When  dried,  bloodroot  is  in  pieces  from  one  to
three  inches  in  length,  from  three  to  nine  lines  in  thickness,  somewhat
flattened,  much  wrinkled  and  twisted,  often  furnished  with  abrupt  offsets
and  numerous  short  fibers,  of  a  reddish-brown  color  externally,  with  a
spongy,  uneven  fracture,  and  of  a  bright-orange  color  internally,  but
which  becomes  dull  brown  by  long  exposure.  It  forms  a  brownish
orange-red  powder.  It  has  a  faint  virose  odor,  and  a  bitterish,  very
highly  and  persistently  acrid  taste.  It  imparts  its  properties  to  boiling
water  or  alcohol.  The  root  should  be  kept  in  a  dry  place ;  age  or  mois-
ture impairs  its  activity.  An  alkaloid  and  resinoid  are  prepared  from
the  root,  the  former  termed  Sanguinarina,  the  latter  Sanguinarin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bloodroot  is  an  acrid  emetic,  with  narcotic  and
stimulant  properties;  it  is  also  expectorant,  sudorific,  alterative,  emmena-
gogue,  tonic,  antiseptic,  detergent,  escharotic,  and  errhine,  according  to
the  mode  in  which  it  is  employed.  It  is  a  very  active  agent,  and  is
capable  of  exercising  a  powerful  influence  on  the  system.  When  given
in  small  doses  it  stimulates  the  digestive  organs,  and  accelerates  the  cir-
culation;  in  larger  doses,  it  occasions  nausea  and  consequent  depression
of  the  pulse;  and  in  a  full  dose,  it  produces  active  vomiting.  In  over-
doses it  causes  violent  emesis,  a  burning  sensation  in  the  stomach,
tormenting  thirst,  faintness,  vertigo,  dimness  of  vision,  alarming  pros-
tration, and  even  death.  It  has  been  successfully  used  in  pulmonary
and  hepatic  affections,  catarrh,  croup,  pertussis,  typhoid  pneumonia,
rheumatism,  jaundice,  dyspepsia,  and  hydrothorax,  either  as  an  emetic,
nauseant,  or  alterative.  In  torpid  conditions  of  the  liver  it  is  very  valu-
able, and  it  has  also  proved  beneficial  in  scrofula,  amenorrhea,  and
dysentery.  Used  as  a  snuff,  either  alone  or  combined  with  bay  berry
bark,  it  is  beneficial  in  coryza,  some  headaches,  and  is  recommended  as
a  remedy  for  nasal  polypus.  Applied  to  fungous  growths,  indolent  and
ill-conditioned  ulcers,  and  fleshy  excrescences,  the  powder  often  proves
of  utility,  removing  the  fungous  growth  by  its  escharotic  action,  and
creating  a  new  and  healthy  energy  in  the  ulcers.  An  infusion  made  in
vinegar  has  been  found  valuable  in  several  obstinate  cutaneous  diseases,
tetter,  ringworm,  and  warts.  Dose  of  the  powder,  as  an  emetic,  from
ten  to  twenty  grains ;  of  the  tincture,  from  twenty  to  sixty  drops ;  as  a
stimulant  or  expectorant,  from  three  to  five  grains;  as  an  alterative,  from
half  a  grain  to  two  grains.  It  may  be  used  in  powder,  pills,  tincture,
or  extract.

Off.  Prep. — Acetum  Sanguinarise ;  Extractum  Sanguinarise  Hydro-
alcoholicum  ;  Mistura  Sanguinarise  Composita;  Pilulse  Taraxaci  Com-
posites; Pulvis  Ipecacuanhse  Compositus ;  Pulvis  Lobeliae  Compositus;


Sanguinarina.  845

Pulvis  Myricae  Compositus ;  Sanguinarin ;  Sanguinarina ;  Tinctura
Lobelise  Composita;  Tinctura  Sanguinariae ;  Tinctura  Sanguinariae  Ace-
tata;  Tinctura  Sanguinariaa  Composita;  Tinctura  Viburni  Composita.


SANGUINARINA.

Sanguinarina.

THE ALKALOID PRINCIPLE OF BLOODROOT.

Preparation.  —  Digest  six  ounces  of  finely  powdered  bloodroot  in
twelve  ounces  of  diluted  muriatic  or  acetic  acid ;  at  the  expiration  of  ten
days,  filter,  and  add  to  the  filtered  tincture  two  and  a  half  ounces  of
aqua  ammonia,  and  pour  the  mixture  into  a  vessel  containing  two  pints
of  distilled  water ;  filter  and  collect  the  brown  matter  which  subsides,  and
carefully  wash  it  with  a  small  quantity  of  distilled  water,  and  remove
the  coloring  by  means  of  purified  charcoal.  Then  treat  it  with  boiling
alcohol,  which  dissolves  the  sanguinarina,  and  cautiously  evaporate.  Or
it  may  be  prepared  by  forming  a  strong  ethereal  tincture  of  the  root;
passing  through  this  muriatic  acid  gas,  drying  the  precipitated  muriate
which  is  insoluble  in  ether,  dissolving  it  in  hot  water,  filtering,  precipi-
tating by  ammonia,  drying  the  precipitate,  dissolving  it  in  ether,  decolor-
izing by  animal  charcoal,  again  precipitating  by  means  of  muriatic  acid
gas,  and  decomposing  the  muriate  as  before.

History. — Pure  sanguinarina  is  a  white,  pearly  substance,  of  an  acrid
taste,  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  soluble  in  ether,  and  very  soluble  in
alcohol.  Exposure  to  the  air  changes  it  to  a  light  yellow  color.  It  forms
soluble  salts  with  the  acids,  which  have  some  shade  of  red  or  scarlet,
and  are  acrid  and  pungent  to  the  taste. Its  formula  is  NC37  Hi6  Os.

Properties  and  Uses. — Same  as  the  bloodroot.  One  grain  of  this  alka-
loid may  be  thoroughly  triturated  with  twenty  or  thirty  grains  of  sugar
of  milk,  and  divided  into  ten  or  thirty  doses,  according  to  the  effect
desired.  However,  it  is  not  much  used  in  practice,  the  Sa7iguinarin
being  preferred.


SANGUINARIN.
Sanguinarin.

THE ALKA-RESINOID PRINCIPLE OF BLOODROOT.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  coarsely  pulverized  bloodroot,  any  quan-
tity, alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity  to  make  a  saturated  tincture.  When
made,  filter  the  tincture  and  add  distilled  water  equal  in  quantity
to  that  of  the  alcohol ;  distil  off  the  alcohol,  and  allow  the  residue
to  rest  for  several  days,  or  until  precipitation  ceases.  Remove  the
supernatant  liquid,  wash  the  precipitate  in  a  fresh  supply  of  dis-
tilled water,  dry  it  carefully  by  a moderate heat,  and  pulverize  for


846  Materia  Medica.

use.  As  thus  prepared  it  consists  of  a  portion  of  the  alkaloid  Sanguin-
arina  in  combination  with  the  Sunguinarin,  and  which  is  generally  sold
and  used  under  the  name  of  Sanguinarin.

History. — As  thus  prepared,  sanguinarin  is  of  a  deep  reddish-brown
color,  a  peculiar  odor,  of  a  bitterish,  rather  nauseous  taste,  followed  by
a  sense  of  pungency  in  the  fauces,  which  is  persistent,  soluble  in  boiling
alcohol,  insoluble  in  water,  and  does  not  coalesce,  unless  it  is  heated  or
exposed  to  moisture.  It  is  fusible,  forming  a  black  shining  mass,  and  is
also  inflammable.  It  is  partially  soluble  in  alkaline  solutions,  acetic  acid,
and  ether.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  article  is  prepared  by  W.  S.  Merrell,  and
is  an  elegant  and  valuable,  as  well  as  important  Eclectic  agent.  It
possesses  properties  similar  to  bloodroot,  and  acts  as  a  tonic,  hepatic,  and
alterative.  One  or  two  grains,  repeated  every  two  hours,  diminishes  the
velocity  of  the  pulse  in  from  eight  to  twelve  hours;  after  which  it  only
requires  a  small  dose  two  or  three  times  a  day,  to  maintain  its  influence;
and  in  effecting  this  sedative  action  on  the  arterial  system,  it  does  not
produce  any  unfavorable  cerebral  results.  It  may  be  employed  with
advantage  in  the  treatment  of  pulmonary  diseases,  influenza,  hooping-
cough,  rheumatism,  jaundice,  etc.  In  combination  with  leptandrin  and
podophyllin  it  forms  a  medicine,  which  for  safety  and  efficacy  in  the
treatment  of  hepatic  diseases  is  superior  to  any  other  remedies  yet  known
in  medicine ;  the  combination  may  be  formed  into  pills  with  extract  of
rhubarb,  hydro-alcoholic  extract  of  cimicifuga,  or  of  bitter  root.  Com-
bined with  equal  parts  of  caulophyllin,  and  hydro-alcoholic  extract  of
cimicifuga,  it  will  be  found  very  efficacious  in  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,
and  other  functional  disorders  of  the  female  generative  system.  It  may
also  be  used  as  a  sternutatory,  and  as  a  local  application  to  indolent
ulcers.  When  used  alone  it  should  be  triturated  with  sugar,  sugar  of
milk,  or  some  other  article.  As  a  tonic,  the  dose  is  from  one-fourth  of
a  grain  to  a  grain,  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  as  a  hepatic  and  alterative,
from  one-half  of  a  grain  to  two  grains.


SANGUIS  DRACONIS.
Dragon's  Blood.

RESIN OF CALAMUS DRACO.

Description. — Calamus  Draco  is  a  small  palm  growing  in  the  Molucca
Islands,  and  other  parts  of  the  East  Indies.  "While  the  plants  are  young,
the  trunk  is  erect,  and  resembles  an  elegant,  slender  palm  tree,  armed  with
innumerable  dark-colored,  flattened  elastic  spines,  often  disposed  in  ob-
lique rows,  with  their  bases  united.  By  age  they  become  scandent,  and
overrun  trees  to  a  great  extent.  The  leaves  are  pinnate,  their  sheaths  and


Sanguis  Draconis.  847

ensiform,  margins  remotely  armed  with  stiff,  slender  bristles,  as  are  also
the  ribs  ;  from  twelve  to  eighteen  inches  long  and  about  three-fourths
of  an  inch  broad.  Spadix  of  the  female  hermaphrodite  inserted  by
means  of  a  short,  armed  petiole  on  the  mouth  of  the  sheath  opposite  to
the  leaf,  oblong,  decompound,  resembling  a  common  oblong  panicle.
Spathes  several,  one  to  each  of  the  four  or  five  primary  ramifications
of  the  spadix,  lanceolate,  leathery;  all  smooth  except  the  exterior  or
lower  one  which  is  armed  on  the  outside.  Calyx  turbinate,  ribbed,
mouth  three-toothed,  by  the  swelling  of  the  ovary  split  into  three  por-
tions, and  in  this  manner  adhering,  together  with  the  corolla,  to  the
ripe  berries.  Corolla  three-cleft;  divisions  ovate-lanceolate,  twice  as
lono-  as  the  calyx,  permanent.  Filaments  six,  very  broad,  and  inserted
into  the  base  of  the  corolla.  Anthers  filiform,  and  seemingly  abortive.
Ovary  oval;  style  short;  stigma  three-cleft;  divisions  revolute,  glandu-
lar on  the  inside. Berry  round,  pointed,  of  the  size  of  a  cherry.

History. — On  the  surface  of  the  ripe  fruit,  an  exudation  forms,  which
is  removed  by  rubbing,  or  shaking  in  a  bag,  or  by  exposure  to  the  vapor
of  boiling  water,  or,  finally,  by  decoction.  The  first  two  modes  procure
the  finest  resin,  which  comes  in  small  oval  masses,  from  a  half  inch  to
two  inches  in  diameter,  covered  with  the  leaves  of  the  plant,  and  arranged
together  in  a  row  like  beads  when  strung ;  sometimes  it  is  found  in  cylin-
drical sticks,  about  a  foot  and  a  half  in  length,  and  from  two  to  six  lines
in  diameter,  thickly  covered  with  palm  leaves,  and  bound  round  with
slender  strips  of  cane.  In  these  forms  it  is  opake,  pulverizable,  and  dark-
reddish-brown,  yielding  a  fine  scarlet  powder.  It  also  comes  in  tears  or
small  irregular  fragments,  in  the  form  of  a  reddish  powder.  When  the
fruit  is  boiled  in  water,  it  yields  an  inferior  resin,  which  is  in  flat  circular
cakes  about  an  inch  thick,  and  two  or  three  inches  in  diameter,  and
which  affords  a  fine  red  powder.  That  in  large  disks,  six  to  twelve
inches  in  diameter  by  an  inch  thick,  is  a  very  inferior  article,  and  is
usually  mixed  with  pieces  of  the  shell,  stem,  and  other  impurities.

Dragon's  Blood  is  hard,  opake,  brittle,  with  a  smooth,  shining  fracture,
of  a  deep  red  color,  inodorous,  tasteless,  insoluble  in  water,  but  soluble
in  alcohol,  ether,  and  the  fixed  or  volatile  oils.  It  is  composed  of  90.7
parts  of  a  red  resin,  called  Draconin,  2.0  of  fixed  oil,  3.0  of  benzoic  acid,
1.6  of  oxalate  of  lime,  and  3.7  of  phosphate  of  lime.

Properties  and  Uses. — Dragon's  Blood  was  formerly  considered  an
astringent,  and  used  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  thirty  grains  in  passive
hemorrhages,  diarrhea,  etc.  It  is  sometimes  used  to  impart  color  to
plasters,  in  dentifrice  preparations,  and  as  an  ingredient  of  paints  and
varnishes.  It  is  an  ingredient  of  the  following  preparation,  which,
whether  deservedly  or  not,  has  acquired  much  reputation  in  the  treat-
ment of  syphilis :  Take  of  Dragon's  Blood  and  Colocynth,  of  each,  two
drachms,  Gamboge  half  an  ounce,  Sweet  Spirits  of  Nitre  and  Balsam


848  Materia Medica.

Copaiba,  of  each,  two  ounces.  Mix  the  first  three  articles  in  a  mortar,
and  then  add  to  them  three  gills  of  boiling  water ;  keep  it  hot,  and  stir
for  one  hour,  then  cool,  and  after  uniting  the  last  two,  add  them  to  the
first  mixture,  stirring  for  some  time.  The  dose  is  a  half  ounce  to  pro-
duce free  catharsis;  after  which,  a  drachm,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  to
keep  up  a  gentle  action  on  the  bowels.  Notwithstanding  the  character
of  this  compound,  it  is  said  to  have  effected  cures  in  very  severe  forms
of  the  disease.


SANICULA  MARILANDICA.

Sanicle.
Nat. Ord. — Apiaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous,  umbelliferous,  perennial  herb,
sometimes  known  by  the  name  of  Blacksnake  Root,  with  a  stem  from
one  to  three  feet  high,  smooth,  furrowed,  and  dichotomously  branched.
The  leaves  are  from  three  to  five-parted,  digitate,  mostly  radical,  on
petioles  from  six  to  twelve  inches  long;  segments  from  two  to  four  inches
long,  half  as  wide,  oblong,  irregularly  and  mucronately  toothed.  Cauline
leaves  few,  nearly  sessile.  The  flowers  are  mostly  barren,  white,  some-
times yellowish ;  the  sterile  flowers  on  slender  pedicels ;  the  fertile  ones
sessile.  Segments  of  the  calyx,  entire.  Involucres  six-leaved,  serrate.
Umbels  often  proliferous;  umbellets  capitate.  Fruits  several  in  each  urn-
bellet,  and  densely  clothed  with  hooked  bristles.

History. — Sanicle  is  common  to  the  United  States  and  Canada,  and  is
found  in  low  woods  and  thickets  flowering  in  June.  The  root  is  the  part
used;  it  is  fibrous,  and  has  an  aromatic  smell  and  taste.  Water  or
alcohol  extracts  its  properties.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sanicle  is  nervine,  tonic,  astringent,  and  slightly
anodyne;  it  is  very  analogous  to  valerian,  and  may  be  substituted  for
it.  It  has  been  used  with  advantage  as  a  domestic  remedy  in  intermit-
tent fever,  sore-throat,  croup,  hives,  and  other  cutaneous  diseases.  It
is  very  efficacious  in  chorea,  in  doses  of  half  a  drachm  of  the  powdered
root,  three  times  a  day,  to  children  eight  or  ten  years  of  age.  It  has
also  been  beneficially  employed  in  various  other  nervous  affections.  The
decoction  of  it  is  said  to  be  valuable  in  gonorrhea,  dysentery,  passive
hemorrhages,  and  leucorrhea,  administered  in  doses  of  from  two  to  four
fluidounces,  and  repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day.  The  decoction
used  freely,  at  the  same  time  bathing  the  wound  with  it,  is  reputed  a
certain  cure  for  the  bites  of  poisonous  snakes.


Sapo.  849

SAPO.

Soap.

Soaps  embrace  all  those  compounds  which  result  from  the  reaction  of
salifiable  bases  with  oils  and  fats.  Oils  and  fats  consist  of  two  solid
principles,  and  one  liquid.  Of  the  former,  one  is  called  Slearin,  and  is
the  chief  ingredient  of  solid  fats,  as  suet  and  tallow,  the  other  is  called
Margarin,  being  the  principal  ingredient  of  soft  fats,  as  laid  ;  and  the
liquid  Olein  characterizes  the  fluid  fats  or  oils.  Stearin  is  considered  to
be  a  combination  of  stearic  acid  and  glycerin,  or  an  acid  stearate  of  the
oxide  of  glycerile;  stearic  acid  is  a  firm,  white  solid,  fusible  at  167°,
forming  brilliant  white  needles  on  cooling,  greasy  to  the  touch,  pulve-
rizable,  soluble  in  alcohol,  very  soluble  in  ether,  but  insoluble  in  water.
It  burns  like  wax,  and  is  used  in  the  formation  of  improved  candles.
Margarin  is  viewed  as  a  combination  of  margaric  acid  and  glycerin,  or  a
margarate  of  glycerin  ;  margaric  acid  is  a  white  solid  fat,  of  distinct  acid
properties,  fusible  at  140°,  very  soluble  in  hot  alcohol,  and  in  ether,
and  combines  instantly  with  alkaline  bases.  Olein  is  a  combination  of
oleic  acid  and  glycerin,  or  an  oleate  of  oxide  of  glycerile  ;  oleic  acid,  is  a
colorless  oily  fluid  at  temperatures  above  57°,  but  when  once  melted,  it
does  not  solidify  until  cooled  to  40°,  and  when  soluble  it  does  not  melt
until  heated  to  57°,  and  crystallizes  in  needles  a  little  below  32°.  It
rapidly  absorbs  oxygen  from  the  air,  and  becomes  brown,  is  insoluble  in
water,  soluble  in  alcohol  and  ether,  lighter  than  water,  and  has  a  slight
smell  and  a  pungent  taste.  It  forms  salts  with  bases.  The  theory  of
saponification  is,  that  these  fatty  acids  unite  with  the  alkaline  base  and
form  soaps,  which  are  stearates,  margarates,  or  oleates,  as  the  case  may
be,  of  the  particular  base  which  has  been  added,  while  at  the  same  time
a  non-saponifiable,  sweet  principle  is  set  free,  called  glycerin, — which
see  under  its  proper  head  "  Glycerina."  When  these  fatly  acids  com-
bine with  soda,  potassa,  or  ammonia,  they  form  soluble  soaps  ;  when
united  with  earths  and  metallic  oxides,  as  in  the  case  of  lead-plaster,
lime-liniment,  etc.,  the  soaps  formed  are  insoluble.  Among  the  soluble
soaps,  those  are  the  hardest  which  contain  the  most  stearate,  and  those
the  softest  which  have  a  predominance  of  oleate,  while  an  excess  of
margarate  ranks  in  solidity  between  the  two  ;  again,  those  soaps  formed
with  soda  are  the  hardest  and  least  soluble,  while  the  reverse  is  the  case
with  those  formed  with  potassa.  Consequently,  the  hardest  and  least
soluble  soap  is  a  stearate  of  soda,  while  the  softest  and  most  soluble,  is
an  oleate  of  potassa.

The  theory  of  soap-making  is  very  simple,  depending  on  the  affinity
between  the  alkalies  and  the  fat  acids  ;  on  the  solubility  in  water  of  the
alkaline  stearates,  margarates,  oleates,  etc.;  and,  finally,  on  the  power
of  a  certain  amount  of  free  alkali  or  sea-salt,  to  coagulate  the  soap,  and
render  it  insoluble  in  the  liquid  in  which  it  swims,  and  which  in  fact
54


850  Materia Medica.

runs  off  its  surface  as  water  does  off  the  surface  of  fat,  while  yet  the
soap  retains  perfectly  its  solubility  in  pure  water.

Preparation. — The  fat  or  oil  is  boiled  with  a  solution  of  caustic  alkali,
by  which  it  becomes  gradually  dissolved  in  the  water,  if  there  be  not  too
great  an  excess  of  alkali  present,  until  a  ropy  or  gelatinous  solution  is
formed,  capable  of  being  drawn  out  into  long  clear  threads.  After  the
soap  is  fully  made,  it  is  then  to  be  separated  from  the  remaining  excess
of  alkali,  glycerin,  and  water.  This  may  be  accomplished  by  boiling  the
solution  down,  until  a  strong  alkaline  solution  is  obtained,  in  which  the
soap  is  insoluble,  and  it  then  rises  to  the  surface  in  a  soft,  half-melted
state.  As  soon  as  it  ceases  to  froth  in  boiling  it  is  ladled  out  into  molds
or  frames,  and  on  cooling  forms  soap,  which  is  cut  into  bars  by  means
of  a  wire.  Another  method  of  causing  the  soap  to  separate  from  the
water  in  which  it  is  dissolved,  is  to  add  a  very  strong  alkaline  ley,  in
which  the  soap  is  insoluble,  or  common  salt  which  at  once  coagulates
the  soap,  converting  it  into  a  soap  of  soda,  if  it  be  a  soap  of  potassa.  In
either  case  the  glycerin  is  carried  off  in  the  mother  liquid.  As  first
separated,  the  soap  is  called  Grain  soap,  which  may  be  purified  by  dis-
solving it  in  an  alkaline  ley,  and  separating  it  by  common  salt.  During
this  process  the  impurities  subside,  the  soap  combines  with  more  water,
and  becomes  weaker,  but  purer  and  whiter.  If  grain  soap  be  not  puri-
fied it  forms  marbled  soap,  the  marbled  appearance  being  produced  by
adding  to  the  soap  as  soon  as  it  is  completely  separated,  a  fresh  portion
of  ley,  and  immediately  afterward  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron.  The
black  oxide  of  iron  is  precipitated,  giving  rise  to  dark-colored  streaks,
which,  by  exposure  to  the  air,  become  red,  in  consequence  of  the  conver-
sion of  the  black  into  the  sesquioxide  of  iron.

History.  —  There  are  three  varieties  of  soap,  which  arc  officinal,
namely,  Spanish  or  Castile  soap,  Sapo  Darns,  which  is  made  with  soda
and  olive  oil.  Common  soap,  Sapo  Vulgaris,  made  with  soda  and  a
concrete  animal  oil ;  it  is  white,  and  usually  formed  from  barilla  and
tallow,  and  is  used  as  the  only  proper  soap  for  making  opodeldoc.  Also
Soft  soap,  Sapo  Mollis,  made  with  olive  oil  and  potassa.  It  is  likewise
made  with  other  oils,  as  oil  from  various  seeds,  fish  oil,  and  much  of  it
in  our  own  country  is  made  with  refuse  fat  and  grease,  and  a  ley  of
wood  ashes.  It  is  a  potassa  soap,  completely  dissolved  in  an  alkaline
solution  in  excess.  White  Castile  soap  is  a  mixed  margarate  and  oleate
of  soda;  common  soap  is  a  stearate  of  soda,  and  soft  soap  is  a  mixed
margarate  and  oleate  of  potassa.  Beside  these,  there  are  other  varieties
used  more  or  less  for  medicinal  or  economical  purposes,  as  follows  :
Sapo  Amygdalinus,  or  Amygdaline  soap,  made  by  adding  to  oil  of
almonds  twenty-one  ounces,  in  small  proportions  and  stirring  frequently,
a  solution  of  caustic  soda,  (at  1.334  sp.  gr.)  ten  ounces;  leave  the
mixture for  some  days  at  a  temperature  of  64° to  68° F., stirring


Sapo.  851

occasionally ;  then  put  into  molds,  until  sufficiently  solid.  It  should  be
exposed  to  the  air  for  two  months,  before  being  used.  Sapo  Ariimalis,
or  Beef's  marrow  soap,  made  by  boiling  beef-marrow  with  two  parts  of
water,  and  half  a  part  of  soda  ley ;  when  saponified,  add  one-fifth  of
common  salt,  stir,  remove  the  soap  from  the  surface,  and  place  it  in
molds.  Sapo  Terebinthince,  or  Starkey's  soap,  made  by  triturating
together  equal  parts  of  subcarbonate  of  potassa,  oil  of  turpentine,  and
Venice  turpentine,  until  they  combine.  Sapo  Wi?idsor,  or  Windsor
soap,  a  scented  soda  soap,  made  of  one  part  of  olive  oil,  and  nine  parts
of  tallow.  Likewise  Palm  soap,  made  of  palm  oil  and  soda,  and  to
which  tallow  is  added  to  increase  its  firmness.  Transparent  soap,  pre-
pared by  saponifying  kidney  fat  with  soda  free  from  foreign  salts,  drying
the  resulting  soap,  dissolving  it  in  alcohol,  filtering  and  evaporating  the
solution,  and  running  it  into  molds  when  sufficiently  concentrated.  It  is
yellow  or  yellowish-brown,  and  preserves  its  transparency  after  drying.
Common  Yellow  or  Rosin  soap  derives  its  peculiarities  from  an  admixture
of  rosin,  and  a  little  palm  oil  with  the  tallow  employed,  the  oil  being
added  to  improve  its  color.

The  several  varieties  of  soap  have  the  same  general  properties,  as —
a  peculiar  smell,  a  slightly  alkaline  taste,  and  being  more  readily  soluble
in  hot  than  cold  water,  or  alcohol.  With  alcohol  it  forms  the  Tincture  of
soap,  which  is  a  convenient  test  for  discovering  lime  in  natural  waters.
Soap  is  heavier  than  water,  melts,  swells  up  and  is  decomposed  by  heat,
and  renders  grease  soluble  in  water.  Acids  give  a  milky  appearance  to
an  aqueous  solution  of  soap,  in  consequence  of  setting  free  the  oily  acids,
which  become  diffused  through  the  water.

Soap  is  adulterated  by  lime,  gypsum,  gelatin,  etc.,  which  may  be
known  by  its  imperfect  solubility  in  alcohol.  Good  white  Castile  Soap,
is  white,  inodorous,  entirely  soluble  in  alcohol  or  water,  is  incapable  of
imparting  an  oily  stain  to  paper,  should  not  feel  greasy,  nor  grow  moist,
but  should  become  dry  when  exposed  to  the  air,  without  exhibiting  any
saline  efflorescence.  Marbled  castile  soap  is  not  so  pure  as  the  above.
Soap  is  incompatible  with  all  acids,  which  decompose  it  by  uniting  with
its  alkali,  and  setting  free  its  fatty  acids;  also  with  earths  and  earthy  and
metallic  salts,  which  form  an  insoluble  soap  with  their  base,  and  a  saline
combination  between  their  acid  and  the  alkali  of  the  soap.  It  may  be
used  in  hard  water,  when  this  has  had  all  its  lime  precipitated,  by  the
addition  of  sufficient  carbonate  of  soda  or  carbonate  of  potassa,  in  the
form  of  carbonate  of  lime.

Properties  and  Uses. — Soap  is  antacid,  antilithic,  and  in  some  measure
laxative;  it  is  usually  given  in  combination  with  rhubarb  in  dyspepsia,
torpor  of  the  liver,  and  constipation.  It  has  a  tendency  to  correct  the
astringency  of  the  rhubarb ;  and  when  combined  with  aloes,  gamboge,
or  other  resinous  cathartics,  it  modifies  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  their
irritating  properties. Being  easily  decomposed  by  the  weakest  acids,


852  Materia Medica.

which  unite  with  its  alkali,  it  lias  proved  beneficial  in  acid  stomach,  and
as  a  remedy  in  the  uric  acid  diathesis,  but  it  does  not  dissolve  calculi.
It  has  also  been  recommended  in  solution  as  a  remedy  for  poisoning
with  the  concentrated  acids,  in  which  case  it  should  be  administered
without  delay  every  two  or  three  minutes,  until  chalk,  lime,  or  the
bicarbonates  of  potassa  or  soda  can  be  had.  Externally,  it  is  a  stimu-
lating discutient,  and  has  been  used  by  friction,  or  in  the  form  of  plaster,
in  sprains,  bruises,  and  various  tumors.  A  strong  solution  of  soft  soap
forms  a  valuable  enema  in  constipation,  especially  when  arising  from
hardened  feces  in  the  rectum.  In  the  preparation  of  pills,  liniments,  or
plasters,  care  must  be  taken  not  to  associate  soap  with  a  substance
which  may  be  decomposed  by  it.  The  dose  of  soap,  is  from  five  grains
to  half  a  drachm,  in  the  form  of  pill.

Off.  Prep,  of Common  Soap. — Linimentum Cajuputi  Compositum  ;
Linimentum  Opii ;  Linimentum  Saponis  Camphoratum.

Off.  Prep,  of  Castile  Soap. — Pilulse  Aloes  Compositae ;  Pilulae  Podo-
phyllini  Compositse  ;  Pilulae  Saponi  Composite.

Off.  Prep,  of  Soft  Soap. — Unguentum  Sulphuris  Compositum.


SAPONARIA  OFFICINALIS.

Soapwort.
Nat.  Ord. — Caryophyllacese. Sex.  Si/st. — Decandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT AND LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  a  stout  perennial  herbaceous  plant,  sometimes
known  by  the  name  of  Bouncing  Bet,  with  a  stem  from  one  to  two  feet  in
bight.  The  leaves  are  lanceolate,  inclining  to  elliptical,  very  acute,
smooth,  two  or  three  inches  long,  and  about  one-third  as  wide.  The
flowers  are  many,  large,  flesh-colored  or  pale  pink,  often  double  and
disposed  in  paniculate  fascicles.  The  calyx  is  cylindrical,  and  slightly
downy.  Petals  five,  unguiculate  ;  crowns  of  the  petals  linear.  Stamens
ten  ;  styles  two  ;  capsule  oblong,  one-celled.

History. — Soapwort  is  found  growing-  in  Europe  and  the  United  States,
by  roadsides  and  in  waste  places,  flowering  in  July  and  August.  The
root  and  leaves  are  the  parts  employed  ;  they  are  inodorous,  of  a  bitter-
ish and  somewhat  sweetish  taste,  succeeded  by  a  persistent  pungency,
and  imparting  a  slight  sense  of  numbness  to  the  tongue.  When  agitated
with  water  they  form  a  lather  like  soap-suds,  which  property  together
with  its  medical  virtues,  depend  upon  a  peculiar  principle  termed  saponin,
which  constitutes  about  thirty-four  per  cent.,  of  the  dried  root,  the
remainder  being  gum,  bassorin,  resin,  extractive,  lignin  and  water.
Water  or  alcohol  extracts  the  properties  of  the  root  and  leaves.  Sapo-
nin is  obtained,  though not absolutely  pure,  by  treating the  watery


Sarracenia  Purpurea.  853

extract  with  alcohol,  and  evaporating;  it  is  brown,  somewhat  translu-
cent, or,  white  and  amorphous,  hard,  brittle,  with  a  sweetish  taste  at
first,  then  styptic,  and  finally,  followed  by  a  sense  of  acrimony  in  the
fauces.  It  is  soluble  in  water  and  officinal  alcohol,  but  not  in  anhydrous
alcohol,  ether,  or  the  volatile  oils,  When  acted  upon  by  alkalies,  it  is
converted  into  saponic  acid,  C26  H23  O12.  Its  aqueous  solution  froths
when  agitated,  like  a  solution  of  soap.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Soapwort  is  tonic,  diaphoretic,  and  alterative  ;
and  forms  a  valuable  remedy  in  the  treatment  of  syphilitic,  scrofulous
and  cutaneous  diseases,  also  in  jaundice,  liver-affections,  rheumatism
and  gonorrhea.  It  is  generally  used  in  decoction  ;  although  an  extract,
or  the  inspissated  juice  will  be  found  equally  efficacious.  Dose  of  ihe
decoction,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  of
the  extract,  or  inspissated  juice,  from  ten  to  twenty  grains.  Saponin,
may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  the  root,  and  will  likewise  be  found  a
powerful  sternutatory. Dose,  from  two  to  six  grains.


SARRACENIA PURPUREA.

Sarracenia.

Nat. Ord. — Sarraceniaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  as  Side-saddle  Flower,  Fly-trap,
and  Huntsman' s  Cup,  is  an  indigenous,  perennial  plant,  of  a  very  curious
character.  The  leaves  or  ascidia  are  from  six  to  nine  inches  long,  radi-
cal, short-globose,  inflated  or  cup-form,  contracted  at  the  mouth,  having
a  broad  arched  lateral  wing  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  width,  and
extended  on  the  outside  of  the  mouth  into  a  broad-cordate,  erect  lamina,
or  hood,  covered  above  with  reversed  hairs.  The  scape  is  from  one  to
two  feet  in  hight,  terete,  smooth,  and  supporting  a  single,  large,  purple,
nodd'mgJloiDer.

History. — This  plant  owes  its  strange  appearance  to  a  curious  pitcher-
shaped  metamorphosis  of  the  leaf,  which  resembles  very  much  an  old-
fashioned  side-saddle  ;  six  of  these  generally  belong  to  each  plant.  The
leaf,  which  springs  from  the  root,  is  formed  by  a  large  hollow  tube  swell-
ing out  in  the  middle,  curved  and  diminishing  downward  till  it  ends  in
a  stem,  contracted  at  the  mouth,  and  furnished  with  a  large  spreading,
heart-shaped  appendage  at  the  top,  which  is  hairy  within,  the  hairs
pointing  downward,  so  as  to  cause  everything  which  falls  upon  the  leaf,
to  be  carried  toward  the  petiole  ;  a  broad  wavy  wing  extends  the  whole
length  on  the  inside;  these  lie  upon  the  ground  with  their  mouths  turned
upward,  so  as  to  catch  the  water  when  it  falls.  They  hold  nearly  a
wineglassful,  and  are  generally  filled  with  water  and  aquatic  insects,
which  undergo  decomposition  or  a  sort  of  digestion,  and  serve  as  nutri-


854  Materia  Medica.

ment  to  the  plant.  The  stem  rises  direct  from  the  root,  it  is  round,
quite  smooth,  and  bears  an  elegant,  deeply  reddish-purple  terminal
flower,  having  two  flower-cups ;  the  external  consisting  of  three  small
leaves  ;  the  internal  of  five  egg-shaped,  obtuse  leaves,  shiny,  and  of  a
brownish-purple.  The  blossoms  are  five,  guitar-shaped,  obtuse,  repeat-
edly curved  inward  and  outward,  and  finally  inflected  over  the  stigma,
which  is  broad  and  spreading,  divided  at  its  margin  into  five  bifid  lobes,
alternating:  with  the  petals,  and  supported  on  a  short  cylindrical  style ;
this  is  surmounted  by  the  stamens,  which  are  numerous,  having  short
threads,  and  large  two-celled,  oblong,  yellow  anthers  attached  to  them
on  the  under  surface.  In  the  yellow-flowered  species  of  the  Southern
States,  the  bottle  is  very  long,  resembling  a  trumpet,  by  which  name  it
is  often  called.

The  whole  species  are  water  plants,  and  are  found  only  in  wet  mea-
dows, wet  boggy  places,  marshes,  mud-lakes,  etc.,  and  are  found  from
Labrador  to  Florida,  flowering  in  June.  There  are  several  varieties,  as
the  S.  Heterophylla,  found  in  the  swamps  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  and
the  S.  Rubra,  S.  Flava,  S.  Variolaris,  S.  Drummondii,  and  S.  Psytta-
cina,  which  are  common  to  the  South,  and  all  of  which,  probably,  pos-
sess similar  medical  virtues.  The  root  is  the  part  used,  it  has  a  bitter
and  astringent  taste,  and  yields  its  properties  to  water.  It  contains
coloring  matter,  resin,  an  acid  salt  of  lime,  an  unknown  salt,  and
lignin.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  The  therapeutical  actions  of  sarracenia,  are
not  fully  ascertained.  It  is  supposed  to  be  a  stimulating  tonic,  diuretic,
and  laxative  ;  in  connection  with  Osmunda  Regalis  and  blue  cohosh,  it
will  form  a  valuable  syrup  for  chlorosis,  all  uterine  derangements,  dys-
pepsia, and  other  gastric  difficulties.  An  infusion  of  the  leaf  has  been
found  equally  available  with  that  of  the  root.  The  best  mode  of  em-
ploying it,  is  not  well  determined  ;  though  the  powder  may  be  given  in
doses  of  from  twenty  to  thirty  grains  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  and  the
infusion  from  one  to  three  fluidounces.  In  relation  to  this  plant,  Dr.  C.
H.  Cleaveland  makes  the  following  remarks  :

"  During  the  year  1847,  Dr.  F.  P.  Porcher,  of  South  Carolina,  experi-
mented with  the  root,  or  that  portion  of  the  stem  which  is  below  the
surface  of  the  ground ;  and  he  details  the  following  results  :  He  thinks
the  bitter,  and  astringent  principles  of  the  plant  are  imperfectly  extracted
by  water,  and  that  the  decoction  is  even  more  destitute  of  these  proper-
ties, than  the  cold  infusion.  He  made  trial  of  the  root,  in  a  recent  state,
as  well  as  of  the  dried  root,  on  his  own  person,  and  he  gives  the  follow-
ing, as  the  result  of  one  of  his  experiments  :  '  Dec.  4th.  We  again
commenced  experimenting  with  it.  It  had  become  dry,  having  been
rolled  into  pills  of  three  grains  each.  Of  these  we  took  sixty  (180  grs.),
between  ten  and  twelve  o'clock,  p.  m.,  upon  a  comparatively  empty
stomach,  swallowing  them,  at  intervals,  six  or  eight  at  a  time. Its  diu-


Sarracenia  Purpurea.  855

retic  action  in  this  instance  was  frequently  repeated — the  secretion  being
increased  in  quantity,  pure,  limpid,  and  colorless,  with  scarcely  any
sediment  after  -everal  hours'  standing.

"  '  Its  action  on  the  stomach,  resembled  that  following  its  first  employ-
ment, being  attended  with  the  same  phenomena.  A  feeling  of  emptiness
was  produced  in  the  course  of  an  hour.  After  retiring  to  bed,  the  whole
abdominal  region  was  in  a  state  of  commotion  —  extending  along  the
tract  of  the  ascending  and  descending  colon,  all  of  which  appeared  to
participate  in  a  kind  of  rolling  motion  produced  by  it.  To  these,  were
added  involuntary  rumbling  sounds,  as  if  the  entire  alimentary  tube  was
stimulated,  and  apparently  forewarning  a  cathartic  effect.  We  are  led
to  believe,  that  its  astringent  property  presented  this  result.  There  was,
also,  tenderness  on  pressure  at  the  epigastrium.

"  '  The  feeling  of  congestion  about  the  head,  with  irregularity  of  the
heart's  action,  which  lasted  several  days,  was  again  observed.  Before
morning,  the  pulse  rose  to  100  by  the  watch  —  resuming  its  usual  fre-
quency after  a  time.  We  were  prevented  by  sleep,  which  was  much
disturbed,  from  ascertaining  positively  the  co-existence  of  strange  im-
pressions on  the  sensorial  functions.  The  general  vigor  of  the  digestive
apparatus  was  increased.  The  appetite  following  the  next  day  was
unusually  active — seeming  to  demand  much  more  to  satisfy  its  require-
ments; but  there  was  a  sense  of  pain  about  the  stomach,  like  that  fol-
lowing inflammation,  or  that  felt  in  the  muscular  tissue  after  a  limb  has
been  overtasked.'

"In  the  first  experiment,  in  which  Dr.  Porcher  took  140  grains  of
the  fresh  root,  the  symptoms  produced  were  very  similar  to  those
detailed  in  the  above  quotation  —  pointing  distinctly  to  the  parts  of  the
system  influenced  by  the  drug :  namely,  the  gastric  filaments  of  the
ganglionic,  or  organic  system  of  nerves.  This  produced  an  increased
action  of  the  circulatory  system,  and  drove  the  blood  to  the  head.  It
also  increased  the  peristaltic  motion  of  the  entire  alimentary  canal,  and
promoted  the  renal,  and  other  glandular  secretions,  without  any  appa-
rent effect  upon  the  nerves  of  animal  life.

"As  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Porcher  are  directly  corroborative  of
those  made  by  the  writer,  and  confirmatory  of  the  utility  of  the  plant  in
all  cases  where  there  is  a  sluggish  or  torpid  condition  of  the  stomach,
the  intestines,  the  liver,  the  kidneys,  or  the  uterus,  producing  costive-
ness,  dyspepsia,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  and  the  various  functional
derangements  which  are  so  commonly  to  be  met  with,  it  must  be  evident,
that  this  plant  possesses  valuable  properties,  which  render  it  well  worthy
the  attention  of  the  enlightened  practitioner.

"  The  plant  has  not  yet  been  much  used.  It  would,  therefore,  appear
improper  to  speak  of  the  best  mode  of  preparing  it,  or  of  the  amount
necessary  to  be  given  to  produce  the  desired  result.  Probably,  how-
ever, it  will  seldom  be  found  necessary  to  resort  to  the  heroic  doses


856  Materia Medica.

taken  by  Dr.  Porcher,  or  to  expect  from  its  use  the  immediate  effects
observed  by  him.  In  almost  all  cases,  gastric  debility,  dyspepsia,  sick-
headache,  etc.,  are  accompanied  with  a  constipated  condition  of  the
bowels;  and  it  would  seem  desirable  to  prepare  the  article  in  such  a  way
as  not  to  extract  the  astringent  principle,  whatever  that  may  be;  and
doubtless  the  infusion  or  the  syrup  is  as  good  a  preparation  as  any.  In
those  cases,  however,  which  sometimes  occur,  when  there  is  chronic
diarrhea,  without  much  inflammation  of  the  intestines,  it  is  altogether
probable,  that  a  cold  infusion  would  be  preferable.

"  It  is  even  possible,  that  a  new  salt,  similar  to  morphia  or  quinia,
might  be  extracted  from  the  plant,  and  a  new  and  valuable  remedy  be
added  to  our  Materia  Medica."


SATUREJA HORTENSIS.

Summer  Savory.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceze. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Summer  Savory  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  branching
and  bushy  stem,  about  eighteen  inches  in  hight,  woody  at  base,  fre-
quently changing  to  purple.  The  leaves  are  numerous,  small,  linear-
oblong,  entire,  acute  at  the  end.  The  flowers  are  pink-colored,  on
axillary,  cymose  peduncles.  The  calyx  is  tubular,  ribbed,  and  about  as
long  as  the  corolla.  The  corolla  is  bilabiate,  with  nearly  equal  divisions ;
stamens  diverging,  scarcely  exserted.

History. — This  well  known  plant  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe,
and  is  extensively  cultivated  in  the  gardens  of  this  country  and  Europe
for  culinary  purposes,  flowering  in  July  and  August.  The  leaves  are
the  parts  employed.  They  have  an  aromatic  odor  and  taste,  analogous
to  those  of  thyme,  and  impart  their  properties  to  boiling  water  in  infusion,
but  more  freely  to  alcohol. Its  virtues  depend  upon  a  volatile  oil.

Properties  and  Uses. — Summer  Savory  is  stimulant,  carminative,  and
emmenagogue.  A  warm  infusion  is  bene6cial  in  colds,  menstrual  sup-
pression, and  flatulent  colic  ;  the  cold  infusion  is  a  gentle  stimulating
tonic,  during  convalescence  from  fevers.  The  infusion  may  be  used  in
doses  of  from  two  to  four  ounces,  several  times  a  day.  The  oil  is  some-
times used  as  a  local  application  to  carious  teeth  for  relieving  toothache;
and  its  tincture  is  a  valuable  carminative.  The  S.  Montana,  or  Winter
Savory,  with  mucronate  leaves,  somewhat  one-sided  peduncles,  and  acu-
minate and  mucronate  segments  of  the  calyx,  possesses  similar  properties.


SCILLA MARITIMA.  857

SCILLA MARITIMA.

Squill.
Nat.  Ord. — Liliacese. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE BULB.

Description.  —  Squill  is  a  perennial  plant  with  a  roundish-ovate  bulb,
very  large,  half  above  ground,  with  the  integuments  either  pale-green
or  red,  and  giving  off  fibrous  roots.  The  leaves  proceeding  from  the
bulb,  are  broad-lanceolate,  channeled,  spreading,  recurved,  shining,
deep-green,  and  make  their  appearance  long  after  the  flowers.  The
scape  is  two  or  three  feet  high,  and  terminated  by  a  rather  dense,  long,
ovate  raceme.  The  flowers  are  about  three-fourths  of  an  inch  in  diame-
ter, spreading,  pale  yellowish-green,  with  a  green  mark  on  the  middle
of  each  segment.  Peduncles  purplish  ;  bracts  linear,  twisted,  deciduous.
Filaments  shorter  than  the  segments  of  the  perianth.

History. — Squill  is  a  native  of  almost  every  part  of  the  Mediterranean
coast,  and  is  also  met  with  in  Portugal  and  France.  It  flowers  in
August  and  September.  Steinheil  has  proposed  to  remove  it  into  a  new
genus  under  the  name  of  Squilla  Marilirna,  as  the  structures  of  its  nec-
taries and  seeds  distinguish  it  from  the  genus  Scilla.  The  only  officinal
part  is  the  bulb.  When  recent  it  is  pear-shaped,  from  three  to  six
inches  in  its  largest  diameter,  and  consists  of  concentric  scales,  the  outer
ones  of  which  are  thin  and  membranous,  while  the  inner  are  whitish,
thick,  fleshy,  and  full  of  juice ;  they  weigh  on  an  average  from  one  to
four  pounds,  though  they  have  attained  a  weight  of  ten  pounds  and  a
half.  There  are  two  varieties  known  as  the  Red  and  White  Squill ;  the
former  being  distinguished  by  its  reddish-brown  external  coat,  its  light-
pink  epidermis,  and  yellowish-white  parenchyma  of  the  inner  scales;
the  latter  being  white  throughout.  The  medicinal  properties  are  the
same  in  each.  In  the  recent  state  the  bulb  contains  a  viscid,  very  acrid
juice,  which  will  inflame  and  even  excoriate  the  skin,  and  the  acrimony
of  which  is  much  diminished  by  drying.  When  intended  for  medical
use,  squill  bulbs  ought  not  to  be  kept  entire,  but  should  be  stripped  of
their  outer  scales,  cut  transversely  into  thin  slices,  and  dried  carefully  at
a  temperature  about  100°  F.  When  recent,  these  slices  have  a  mucila-
ginous, disagreeably  bitter,  and  somewhat  acrid  taste,  with  a  feeble
radish-like  odor.

As  found  in  the  shops  of  this  country,  dried  squill  is  in  irregular,
oblong  pieces,  often  more  or  less  contorted,  of  a  dull  yellowish-white
color,  with  a  reddish  or  rosy  tint,  sometimes  entirely  white,  translucent,
brittle,  and  pulverizable  when  perfectly  dry,  but  generally  flexible  from
the  presence  of  moisture,  for  which  they  have  a  great  affinity.  Occa-
sionally a  parcel  will  be  found  consisting  of  vertical  slices,  some  of  which
adhere  together  at  their  base. The  odor  is  very  feeble,  and  the  taste


858  Materia  Medica.

bitter,  nauseous,  and  acrid.  Squill  yields  its  properties  to  water,  spirit,
or  diluted  acids;  but  the  best  solvents  are  proof  spirit  or  vinegar.  It
contains,  according  to  analysis,  Scillitin,  gum,  a  trace  of  tannin,  traces
of  citrate  of  lime  and  saccharine  matter,  lignin,  and  an  acrid  principle.
When  kept  dry,  squill  retains  its  virtues  for  a  long  time,  but  exposed  to
moisture  it  speedily  becomes  moldy.

Scillitin  may  be  obtained  pure  by  treating  a  decoction  of  squill  with
acetate  of  lead,  in  order  to  separate  the  viscid  matter,  then  filter,  add
finely  powdered  purified  animal  charcoal  and  when  cold  agitate  briskly,
and  afterward  allow  it  to  rest.  The  charcoal,  as  it  subsides,  carries  along
the  bitter  and  coloring  principles.  Decant  the  liquid,  and  dry  the
remaining  solid  matter,  and  treat  it,  when  dried,  with  hot  alcohol,  which
becomes  intensely  bitter.  Distil  off  the  alcohol,  and  allow  the  milky
liquid  which  is  left  to  evaporate  spontaneously.  Scillitin  thus  procured
is  pure,  solid,  uncrystallized,  easily  decomposable  by  heat,  almost  caustic
to  the  taste,  not  deliquescent,  neuter,  slightly  soluble  in  water,  to  which
it  imparts  excessive  bitterness,  very  soluble  in  alcohol,  dissolved  by  con-
centrated sulphuric  or  nitric  acid,  but  at  the  same  time  decomposed,  and
imparting  to  the  first  a  purple  color,  instantly  becoming  black.  By
allowing  the  last  alcoholic  solution  to  evaporate  spontaneously,  scillitin
has  loeen  obtained  in  long,  flexible,  needle-shaped  crystals.  A  single
grain  has  killed  a  dog.

A  crystalline  principle  has  been  discovered  in  squill  by  Landerer,
Scillitina,  which  is  bitter,  but  not  acrid,  insoluble  in  water  or  the  volatile
oils,  sparingly  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  capable  of  neutralizing  acids.  It
is  procured  by  exhausting  the  bruised  fresh  bulb  with  diluted  sulphuric
acid,  concentrating  the  solution,  neutralizing  it  with  lime,  drying  the
precipitate,  exhausting  it  with  alcohol,  and  evaporating  the  tincture,
which  on  cooling,  deposits  the  scillitina  in  prismatic  crystals.  The
acrid  and  bitter  principles  of  squill  are  supposed  to  be  distinct.

Properties  and  Uses. — Squill  is  irritant,  emetic,  cathartic,  diuretic,
and  expectorant.  In  large  doses  it  is  a  dangerous  irritant  poison,  pro-
ducing inflammation  of  the  alimentary  canal,  and  urinary  organs,  and
proving  fatal  in  the  dose  of  only  twenty-four  grains  of  the  powder.
Some  constitutions  are  so  susceptible  of  its  irritant  action,  that  it  cannot
be  safely  used  in  any  dose,  unless  combined  with  opium.  It  is  seldom
used  as  an  emetic  or  cathartic,  on  account  of  its  uncertainty  in  producing
these  effects.  In  small  doses  it  causes  nausea  and  depression  of  the
pulse,  and  never  stimulates  the  circulation.  Its  expectorant  action  is
greatly  increased  by  the  addition  of  opium  ;  and  its  diuretic  by  the  con-
junction of  digitalis,  or  some  other  vegetable  or  saline  diuretic.  It  is
used  in  dropsy,  catarrh,  pneumonia,  asthma,  and  phthisis.  It  acts  better
in  general  than  in  local  dropsies,  and  also  in  those  of  an  asthenic  charac-
ter. As  an  expectorant  it  will  be  found  useful  both  in  cases  of  deficient
and of abundant secretion from the bronchial mucous  membrane.


SCROPHULARIA NODOSA.  S50

Troublesome  vomiting  or  purging  caused  by  squill  is  best  corrected  by
opium.  Where  there  is  much  inflammation  or  vascular  excitement,  it
is  contra-indicated.  Dose  of  the  powder,  as  a  diuretic  and  expectorant,
from  one  to  three  grains  ;  as  an  emetic,  from  six  to  twelve  grains  ;  of
the  syrup,  one  or  two  fluidrachms.  When  given  in  substance,  its  best
form  is  that  of  pill.

Off.  Prep. — Acetum  Scillse ;  Syrupus  Scillee.


SCROPHULARIA NODOSA.

Figwort.
Nat.  Ord. — Scrophulariaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Angiospermia.

THE  LEAVES  AND  ROOT.

Description. — Figwort  has  a  perennial,  whitish,  tuberous,  and  knotty
root,  with  a  herbaceous,  erect,  quadrangular,  smooth  stem,  from  two  to
six  feet  in  hight,  with  paniculate,  opposite  branches  above.  The  leaves
are  opposite,  petiolate,  ovate,  ovate-oblong,  or  the  upper  lanceolate,
acute,  sharply  and  unequally  serrated,  rounded,  acutish,  or  broadly
cordate  at  base,  veined,  of  a  deep  green  color,  and  from  three  to  seven
inches  in  length.  The  flowers  are  small,  three  or  four  lines  long,  ovoid,
dark-purple,  slightly  drooping,  and  borne  on  axillary  and  terminal,
forked,  angular,  glandular  peduncles  in  oblong  thyrsoid  panicles.  Calyx
in  five  segments  which  are  broadly  ovate,  obtuse,  slightly  margined  ;
corolla  of  a  dull  green,  with  a  livid  purple  lip,  subglobose  ;  limb  con-
tracted, sublabiate,  having  a  green  scale  or  sterile  filament,  adnate  to
the  upper  side.  Stamens  didynamous  ;  sterile  anthers,  broadly  orbicular.
Capsule  ovate-oblong.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  found  growing  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  United  States,  in  woods,  hedges,  damp  copses,  and
banks,  flowering  from  July  to  October.  The  S.  Marilandica  and  S.
Lanceolata,  known  by  the  names  of  Carpenter's  Square,  Healall,  Square-
stalk,  etc.,  are  mere  varieties,  possessing  similar  medicinal  properties.
The  leaves  and  root  are  the  officinal  parts,  and  yield  their  virtues  to
water  or  alcohol.  The  leaves  have  a  rank,  fetid  odor,  and  a  disagree-
able, bitter  taste ;  the  root  has  also  a  nauseous  odor,  and  a  sweetish,
subacrid  taste.  Much  of  the  odor  and  taste  are  lost  by  drying.  The
aqueous  infusion,  which  is  reddish,  is  blackened  by  the  sulphate  of  the
sesquioxide  of  iron.  They  contain  a  brown  bitter  resin,  an  extractive
having  the  odor  of  benzoic  acid,  extractive,  gum,  starch,  inulin,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — Figwort  is  alterative,  diuretic,  and  anodyne;
highly  beneficial  in  hepatic  diseases,  scrofula,  cutaneous  diseases,  dropsy,
and  as  a  general  deobstruent  to  the  glandular  system  when  used  in  infu-
sion or  syrup.  Externally,  in  the  form  of  fomentation,  or  ointment,  it
is  valuable  in  bruises,  inflammation  of  the  mamruae, ringworm,  piles,


860  Materia  Medica.

painful  tumors,  itch,  and  cutaneous  eruptions  of  a  vesicular  character.
The  root,  in  decoction,  and  drank  freely,  is  said  to  restore  the  lochial
discharge  when  suppressed,  and  to  relieve  the  pains  attending  difficult
menstruation.  This  plant  possesses  valuable  and  active  medicinal  pro-
perties. Dose  of  the  infusion  or  syrup,  from  two  to  four  fiuidounces.
Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Scrophularise  ;  Syrupus  Rumecis  Compositus.


SCUTELLARIA  LATERIFLORA.

Scullcap.

Nat.  Ord. — Lamiaceas. Sex. Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE WHOLE HERB.

Description.  —  Scutellaria  Lateriflora  has  a  small,  fibrous,  yellow,
perennial  root,  with  an  erect,  very  branching,  diffuse,  quadrangular,
nearly  glabrous  stem,  from  one  to  three  feet  in  Light  ;  the  branches  are
opposite.  The  leaves  are  on  petioles  about  an  inch  long,  opposite,  thin,
entire,  nearly  membranous,  subcordate  on  the  stem,  ovate  on  the
branches,  acuminate,  or  acute,  coarsely  serrate  and  slightly  rugose.
The  flowers  are  small,  of  a  pale  blue  color,  and  are  disposed  in  long,
lateral,  axillary  racemes,  with  ovate,  acute,  entire,  subsessile,  distichous
bracts,  each  flower  axillary  to  a  bract,  and  pedunculated.  The  calyx
has  an  entire  margin,  which  after  the  corolla  has  fallen,  is  closed  with  a
helmet-shaped  lid.  The  tube  of  the  corolla  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch
long,  the  upper  lip  concave  and  entire,  the  lower  three-lobed.  Seed,  four
in  the  closed  calyx,  oval,  verrucose.

History. — Scullcap  is  an  indigenous  herb,  growing  in  moist  places,
meadows,  ditches,  and  by  the  sides  of  ponds,  flowering  in  July  and
August.  It  is  known  by  the  names  of  Blue- Scullcap,  Side- Flowering
Scullcap,  Mad-Dog-weed,  and  Hood-  Wort.  The  whole  plant  is  officinal ;
it  should  be  gathered  while  in  flower,  dried  in  the  shade,  and  kept  in
well-closed  tin  vessels.  It  is  inodorous,  but  has  a  bitterish  taste ;
alcohol  or  boiling  water  extracts  its  properties.  Scullcap  is  said  to
contain  an  essential  oil ;  a  fixed  oil,  yellowish-green,  and  soluble  in
ether  ;  a  bitter  principle  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,  or  ether ;  chloro-
phylle ;  a  peculiar  volatile  matter;  albumen;  a  sweet  mucous  substance;
a  peculiar  astringent  principle ;  lignin,  chloride  of  soda  and  other  salts.

Projierties  and  Uses. —  Scullcap  is  tonic,  nervine,  and  antispasmodic.
This  is  one  of  those  valuable  agents  which  a  certain  class  of  physicians
consider  inert ;  yet  it  has  proved  especially  useful  in  chorea,  convulsions,
tremors,  intermittent  fever,  neuralgia  and  all  nervous  affections.  In
delirium  tremens,  an  infusion  drank  freely  will  soon  produce  a  calm
sleep.  In  intermittents,  it  may  be  beneficially  combined  with  bugle.
Where  teething  has  impaired  the  health  of  children,  an  infusion  may  be
given  with  advantage. In  all  cases  of  nervous  excitability,  restlessness,


Secale  Cereale.  861

or  wakefulness,  attending  acute  or  chronic  diseases,  or  from  other  causes,
it  may  be  drank  freely  with  every  expectation  of  beneficial  results.  The
warm  infusion  has  a  tendency  to  keep  the  skin  moist  ;  the  cold  has  a
tonic  influence,  and  either  may  be  drank  freely.  When  its  soothing
effects  have  ceased,  it  does  not  leave  an  excitable,  irritable  condition  of
the  system,  as  is  the  case  with  some  other  nervines.  Half  an  ounce  of
the  dried  leaves  or  herb,  to  a  half  pint  of  boiling  water,  will  make  a  very
strong  infusion.  Scullcap  has  been  extolled  as  a  remedy  in  hydropho-
bia, but  this  is  still  a  matter  of  uncertainty.  The  S.  Hyssopifolia  and
S.  Integrifolia  possess  similar  properties.

The  Pharmaceutical  Institute  of  the  city  of  New  York,  profess  to
have  prepared  a  concentrated  preparation  of  Scullcap,  in  the  form  of  a
whitish  powder,  which  they  name  Scutelline,  and  recommend  as  a  tonic,
nervine,  etc.,  highly  useful  in  nervous  diseases.  Having  never  seen  the
article,  and  not  having  been  able  to  learn  its  mode  of  preparation,  which
appears  to  be  kept  a  secret,  with  many  of  their  other  preparations,  I  can
only  refer  to  it  as  an  article  said  to  have  been  prepared.

Off.  Prep.  —  Extractum  Scutellariae  Hydro-alcoholicum  ;  Infusum
Scutellariae  ;  Pilulae  Valerianae  Compositae.


SECALE  CEREALE.

Rye.

Nat.  Orel. — Graminacea3. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Digynia.

THE SEED OR GRAIN.

ERGOT  A. (Secale  Cornutum.)
Ergot. Spurred,  or  Smut  Rye.

THE DISEASED SEEDS OF SECALE CEREALE.

Description. — Rye  has  a  stem  from  four  to  six  feet  high,  hairy  beneath
the  spike,  in  a  wild  state  seldom  over  a  foot  high.  The  leaves  are  lance-
linear,  rough-edged  and  rough  above,  glaucous ;  the  lower  ones,
together  with  their  sheaths,  covered  with  a  soft  down.  Rachis  bearded
on  each  side  with  white  hairs.  Glumes  subulate,  ciliated,  scabrous,
shorter  than  the  florets,  taken  together  with  their  awns.  Outer  palcm
folded  up,  keeled,  tri-nerved,  with  very  long  awns  ;  the  two  nerves  and
awns  very  rough. Stamens  three. Ooarypyriform,  pilose. Stiymas  two.

History. — Rye  is  now  cultivated  in  all  temperate  latitudes  ;  though  its
native  country  is  unknown.  At  present  it  is  thought  to  be  originally
from  the  countries  around  Caucasus.  Ground  into  fine  flour,  it  is  used
as  an  article  of  diet  in  the  form  of  bread  or  mush.  Bread  made  from
rye-flour  is  dark-colored,  and  less  digestible  than  that  from  wheat.  Rye
in  grain  consists  of  water,  flour,  and  envelope  ;  the  flour  consists  of
6tarch,  gluten,  albumen,  uncrystallizable  sugar,  gum,  vegetable  fiber,  etc.


862  Materia  Medica.

Rye  is  very  subject  to  a  disease,  caused  by  the  growth  of  a  fungus  on
the  grains,  which  is  called  Ergot,  or  Spurred  Rye.  In  relation  to  this
substance,  much  difference  of  opinion  has  existed,  having  been  thought
by  some  as  the  seed  altered  by  disease  ;  by  others  as  the  result  of  exces-
sive heat  and  moisture  ;  and  again,  as  a  morbid  condition  produced  by
an  insect.  The  general  view,  at  the  present  time,  is,  that  it  is  caused  by
the  growth  of  a  fungus  on  the  grain,  and  which  opinion  is  strengthened
by  the  microscopic  observations  of  Mr.  Quekett  of  London.  He  states
that  the  beginning  of  the  growth  of  ergot,  is  marked  by  the  appearance
of  numerous  minute  filaments,  which  run  over  all  parts  of  the  young
grain  and  its  appendages,  cementing  anthers  and  stigmas  together,  and
of  a  white  coating  upon  the  surface  of  the  grain,  from  which  a  multi-
tude of  minute  particles  separate,  and  sink,  when  immersed  in  water.
These  particles  are  about  the  four-thousandth  of  an  inch  long,  and  are
sporidia  or  the  reproductive  agents  of  a  species  of  fungus,  which  may
be  observed  to  sprout  and  propagate  in  various  ways,  under  favorable
circumstances,  and  which  give  rise  to  the  filaments.  These  sporidia  and
filaments  do  not  increase  with  the  growth  of  the  ergot ;  and  when  this
has  projected  beyond  the  paleee  and  become  visible,  it  lias  lost  a  portion
of  its  white  coating,  and  presents  a  dark  violet  color.  The  grain
increases  rapidly,  and  attains  its  size  in  a  few  days,  when  it  exhibits  very
few  of  the  filaments  or  sporidia  upon  its  surface.  It  is  stated  that  this
fungus  exists  independent  of  the  perverted  grain,  and  that  the  sporidia
will,  upon  application  to  the  seeds  of  other  Graminacese  before  germina-
tion, give  rise  to  ergotized  fruit.  Mr.  Quekett  believes  that  the  germs
of  the  fungus  emit  their  filaments  through  the  tissue  of  the  ergot  when
young  and  tender,  and  that,  as  this  increases,  it  is  made  up  partly  of  the
diseased  structure  of  the  grain,  and  partly  of  the  fungous  matter ;  he
named  the  fungus  Ergoloclia  Abortifaciens.  Ergot  generally  projects  out
of  the  glume  beyond  the  ordinary  outline  of  the  spike,  and  sometimes
wholly  occupies  the  place  of  the  seeds,  and  at  others  only  two  or  three
spurs  will  be  found  in  a  spike.  When  gathered  before  harvest  it  is  said
to  be  more  energetic,  and  should  not  be  collected  until  several  days  after
its  formation,  as,  according  to  M.  Bonjean,  it  does  not  possess  the  poison-
ous properties  on  the  first  day  of  its  formation,  which  it  exhibits  on  the
sixth.

Ergot  is  in  grains  of  a  somewhat  cylindrical,  or  obscurely  triangular
form,  slightly  curved  like  a  cock's  spur,  from  a  third  of  an  inch  to  one
inch  and  a  half,  or  rarely  two  inches  in  length,  from  one  to  three  lines  in
diameter,  solid,  brittle,  marked  with  one  or  two  longitudinal  furrows,
often  irregularly  cracked  or  fissured,  obtuse  at  the  extremities,  and  ter-
minated at  the  apex  by  a  pale-gray  excrescence,  which,  however,  is
generally  rubbed  off  in  what  is  found  in  the  shops  ;  externally,  it  is  of  a
dingy  purple  hue,  or  violet-brown  color,  and  often  somewhat  glaucous,
and  internally  it  is  pale  grayish-red,  grayish-white,  or  violet-white. It


Secale Cereale.  863

has,  when  pulverized,  a  peculiar,  musty,  unpleasant  smell,  and  a  sweet-
ish,  slightly  bitter,  obscurely  acrid  taste.  It  is  lighter  than  water,  some-
what of  the  consistence  of  horn,  and  under  the  microscope  its  external
surface  presents  more  or  less  of  the  sporidia,  while  its  internal  structure
is  composed  of  minute  roundish  cells,  many  of  which,  contain  particles
of  oil.  Unless  kept  carefully  excluded  from  the  air,  it  softens  and  swells,
and  becomes  infected  with  numerous  brown  insects,  about  the  size  of  a
pin's  head,  while  at  the  same  time  it  acquires  a  deep  black  color  and
heavier  odor.  Its  powder  quickly  becomes  damp,  and  full  of  animal-
cules. It  should  always  be  used  recently  pulverized,  or  if  kept  in  pow-
der, it  should  be  in  well-closed  and  darkened  vials,  and  with  a  few  lumps
of  camphor  added.  It  imparts  its  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol  ;  long
boiling  renders  it  inert.  The  best  ergot  is  dry,  and  easily  broken,  free
from  insects,  burns  with  a  clear  flame,  and  is  incapable  of  forming  a
dark-blue  pulp  when  its  powder  is  triturated  with  iodine  and  water.
Ergot  has  been  analyzed  by  various  chemists  ;  according  to  a  recent
investigation  by  M.  Legrip,  he  found  it  to  contain  in  100  parts,  34.50  of
a  thick,  fine  yellow,  very  fluid,  fixed  oil  ;  2.75  of  starch  ;  1.00  of  albu-
men ;  2.25  of  inulin  ;  2.50  of  gum;  1.25  of  uncrystallizable  sugar;
2.75  of  a  brown  resin  ;  3.50  of  funoin  ;  13.50  of  vep'eto-animal  matter  ;
0.75  of  osmazome  ;  0.50  of  a  fatty  acid  ;  24.50  of  lignin  ;  0.50  of  color-
ing principles;  an  odorous  principle  not  isolated;  2.25  of  fungate  of
potassa  ;  0.50  of  chloride  of  sodium  ;  0.50  of  sulphate  of  lime  and  mag-
nesia ;  1.25  of  subphosphate  of  lime  ;  0.25  of  oxide  of  iron  ;  0.15  of
silica;  2.50  of  water,  and  2.35  loss.  H.  L.  Winckler  gives  as  the  most
important  chemical  constituents,  secaline  in  combination  with  ergotine,  a
red  ferruginous  coloring  matter  with  a  base  yet  to  be  eliminated,  albu-
men soluble  in  water  and  in  a  coagulated  condition,  a  large  quantity  of
fatty  oil,  which  in  the  normal  grain  appears  to  be  replaced  by  amylon,
fungous  sugar,  which  disposes  the  watery  extract  of  ergot  of  rye  so
strongly  to  fermentation,  formiates,  and  phosphates.  He  considers  the
specific  action  of  ergot  ascribable  to  the  secaline  compound,  or  the  color-
ing matter,  or  both  of  these  compounds  together  and  not  to  the  fatty
oil.  A  watery  extract  is,  he  states,  the  most  active  preparation,  but  it
cannot  be  kept ;  a  tincture,  prepared  with  alcohol  of  40  per  cent.,  by
several  days'  digestion  at  an  ordinary  temperature,  from  finely  pulver-
ized ergot,  is  of  a  dark-brown  color,  and  contains  all  the  active  constitu-
ents of  the  ergot,  with  very  little  fatty  oil,  which  separates  in  a  crystal-
line form  at  very  low  temperatures.  The  spirituous  extract  is  best  kept
and  most  effective  when  it  is  prepared  by  twice  extracting  the  fine  pow-
der with  an  equal  quantity  of  cold  distilled  water,  clarifying  the  concen-
tra  ed  extract,  and  treating  it  with  alcohol  of  80  per  cent,  as  long  as  a
precipitate  results  on  the  addition  of  a  fresh  portion.  The  spirituous
fluid  is  after  twenty-four  hours  separated  from  the  precipitate  by  filtra-
tion ;  the  filtrate  subjected  to  distillation  in  a  water-bath,  and  the  residue


864  Materia  Medica.

evaporated  to  the  consistence  of  an  extract.  Obtained  in  this  way,  the
extractive  ergotine  is  a  little  hygroscopic,  has  a  light-brown  color,  a
slight  narcotic  odor,  dissolves  under  the  separation  of  a  little  ergotine
(  Wiggers)  in  water,  and  evolves,  when  treated  with  a  solution  of  caustic
potassa,  the  penetrating  odor  of  secaline  in  a  high  degree.  By  distilla-
tion of  the  concentrated  watery  extract  with  caustic  lime,  a  very  concen-
trated solution  of  secaline  is  also  obtained.  Winckler  has  found  the
compound  of  ergotine  with  secaline,  ergotinate  of  secaline  in  the  black
sporous  mass  of  Lycoperdon  Cervinum.

Wiggers  digested  ergot  in  ether,  and  afterward  in  alcohol,  evaporated
the  alcoholic  solution,  and  treated  the  extract  thus  obtained  with  water,
which  left  a  reddish-brown  powder,  undissolved.  Supposing  this  to  be
the  active  principle  of  ergot,  he  named  it  Ergotin  ;  it  possessed  a  pecu-
liar nauseous  odor,  and  a  bitter,  slightly  acrid  taste,  and  was  soluble  in
alcohol,  but  insoluble  in  water  or  ether.  Dr.  Christison  and  Dr.  Wright
have  not  been  able  to  obtain  ergotin  after  the  process  of  Wiggers.
Winckler  dried  some  recent  ergot  of  rye  at  139°  F.,  pulverized  it,  and
extracted  first  with  ether,  then  with  water.  The  aqueous  solution  was
treated  with  strong  alcohol,  and  separated  from  albuminous  matter  by
filtration  ;  the  spirit  was  distilled  off,  and  the  residue  brought  to  dryness.
During  this  operation  a  small  quantity  of  a  brown  powder,  {the  Ergotine
of  Wiggers,)  was  precipitated,  which  again  dissolved  in  the  concentrated
liquid.  The  residue  above,  (  Winckler' s  Extractive  Ergotine,)  dissolved
readily  in  alcohol  and  water  under  the  precipitation  of  a  light-brown
powder,  (the  Ergotine  of  Wiggers).  It,  had  a  bitterish,  cooling  taste,  and,
when  distilled  with  quicklime,  afforded  a  distillate  with  the  odor  of  her-
rings, containing  propylamine  or  trimethylamine,  but  no  ammonia.  The
residue  consisted  of  a  compound  of  secaline,  (a  volatile  base,)  with  Wig-
gers' ergotine,  which  Winckler  regards  as  an  acid.  The  solution  with
ether,  first  extracted,  contained  a  fatty  oil,  equal  to  31  per  cent,  of  the
ergot.  By  treating  ergot  with  alcohol  acidified  with  sulphuric  acid,  he
extracted  a  red  ferruginous  coloring  matter.

The  Oil  of  Ergot,  introduced  into  practice  by  Dr.  Wright,  contains  the
active  principle  of  ergot,  and  is  very  generally  employed  as  a  substitute
for  the  crude  article.  It  may  be  obtained  by  forming  an  ethereal  tincture
of  ergot  by  the  process  of  displacement,  and  evaporate  by  means  of  gen-
tle heat.  It  is  sometimes  colorless,  but  generally  reddish-brown,  has  a
disagreeable,  somewhat  acrid  taste,  is  lighter  than  water,  and  is  soluble
in  alcohol,  or  alkaline  solutions.  Its  effects  are  identical  with  those  of
ergot.  When  the  oil  is  obtained  by  simple  expression,  it  is  destitute  of
the  peculiar  medicinal  influences  of  that  prepared  by  means  of  ether.

Ergot  is  incompatible  with  acetate  and  subacetate  of  lead,  nitrate  of
silver,  and  tincture  of  galls.  Iodine  does  not  indicate  starch  in  it.  Its
aqueous  infusion  is  claret-colored,  and  has  an  acid  reaction.


Secale  Cereale.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  free  and  long-continued  use  of  ergot,  gives
rise  to  very  terrible  and  dangerous  symptoms,  even  when  no  immediate
effects  are  perceptible,  as  dry  gangrene,  typhus  fever,  or  convulsions.
In  doses  of  from  thirty  to  sixty  grains,  it  often  occasions  nausea,  vomit-
ing, and  in  still  larger  doses,  it  causes  a  sense  of  pain  and  weight  in  the
head,  giddiness,  dilated  pupils,  delirium  and  stupor.  It  reduces  the
frequency  of  the  pulse,  even  without  nausea.  Medicinally,  ergot  is  used
on  account  of  its  power  of  promoting  uterine  contraction  in  languid
natural  labors.  When  thus  employed,  it  produces  a  strong  and  contin-
uous contraction  and  rigidity,  without  any  alternation  of  contraction
and  relaxation,  as  observed  in  the  natural  process  of  labor;  conse-
quently, unless  the  os  uteri  and  external  parts  are  sufficiently  soft  and
yielding,  the  constant  pressure  exerted  upon  the  child,  causes  injury  to
it,  and  very  often  death.  Its  use  should  always  be  avoided,  if  pos-
sible, in  first  pregnancies.  The  conditions  for  safety  and  success  are,
that  labor  be  somewhat  advanced,  the  mouth  of  the  womb  moderately
dilated,  that  no  mechanical  obstruction  to  delivery  exists,  from  deformity
of  the  pelvis,  rigidity  of  the  os  uteri,  mal-presentation,  or  disparity  of
the  size  of  the  child  to  the  parts  of  the  mother,  and  that  the  only  cause
of  the  slow  progress  of  labor  is  insufficiency  of  the  uterine  contractions,
in  point  of  force  or  frequency.  One  or  two  drachms  of  the  powder  may
be  stirred  in  four  fiuidounces  of  hot  water,  and  when  sufficiently  cool,  may
be  given  in  tablespoonful  doses  every  ten  minutes,  until  labor-pains  are
induced ;  usually  in  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  the  labor-pains  increase
in  force  and  frequency,  and  gradually  become  continuous,  and  effect  the
expulsion  of  the  child  within  an  hour.  Many  objections  are  raised  to  its
use,  but,  in  general,  if  prudently  administered,  no  bad  effects  will  ensue.
Dr.  Catlett  asserts  that  it  will  give  rise  to  puerperal  convulsions,  hour-
glass contraction  of  the  uterus,  and  hydrocephalus  in  the  new-born
infant.  It  may  also  be  given  in  cases  where  the  fetus  is  dead,  and  cir-
cumstances require  speedy  delivery,  as  great  exhaustion,  or  dangerous
constitutional  irritation.  It  may  likewise  be  administered  to  facilitate
abortion  when  it  has  once  commenced,  as  well  as  to  check  uterine
hemorrhage  in  the  gravid  or  non-gravid  state ;  it  has  likewise  proved
serviceable  in  hemorrhages  from  other  organs,  as  the  lungs,  stomach,
etc.  It  may  likewise  be  given  with  advantage  in  retained  placenta,  as
well  as  promoting  the  expulsion  of  a  mole,  hydatids,  a  clot  of  blood,  or
other  uterine  contents,  when  the  womb  has  once  begun  to  act.  It  is
doubted  by  many  whether  it  will  excite  uterine  contractions  in  any  in-
stance, unless  a  natural  movement  toward  such  action  has  commenced.
In  small  doses,  it  has  been  recommended  in  painful  dysmenorrhea,  where
membranous  shreds  pass  off.  It  has  also  been  recommended  in  leucor-
rhea,  gleet,  gonorrhea,  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  paraplegia,
paralysis  or  debility  of  the  bladder,  and  of  the  rectum,  spermatorrhea,
hysteria,  and  intermittent  fever.  In  these  affections  it  may  be  given  in
55


866  Materia Medica.

doses  of  from  five  to  ten  or  fifteen  grains  three  times  a  day ;  but  its  use
should  not  be  continued  for  a  great  length  of  time,  on  account  of  its  ten-
dency to  cause  dangerous  symptoms.

The  Oil  of  Ergot  may  likewise  be  used  as  an  aid  to  parturition,  and
in  uterine  affections,  in  the  place  of  ergot;  it  is  equally  effectual  in  doses
varying  from  twenty  to  fifty  drops,  and  which  may  be  given  in  water,
tea,  or  some  aromatized  syrup.  In  the  dose  of  ten  drops,  it  has  been
beneficially  employed  in  diarrhea,  and  in  gastric  irritability  and  spasm;
the  dose  may  be  repeated  every  three  or  four  hours.  Externally,  the
oil  has  been  found  serviceable  as  an  anodyne  in  rheumatism,  toothache,
and  as  a  styptic  in  hemorrhage  from  wounds ;  in  this  latter  instance  care
must  be  employed  in  its  application,  as  ergot  has  produced  sloughing,
when  applied  to  abraded  surfaces  on  the  lower  animals.  The  oil  will
retain  its  properties  for  several  years,  if  kept  in  well-closed  bottles  in  a
cool  place,  and  excluded  from  light;  an  elevated  temperature  or  a  pro-
longed exposure  to  the  sun's  rays  diminishes  its  activity.

Rye  flour,  in  the  form  of  mush,  is  an  excellent  laxative  article  of  diet,
and  may  be  given  with  much  benefit  in  hemorrhoids  and  prolapsus  ani,
with  accompanying  constipation,  mixed  with  molasses.  In  the  dry  state,
rye  flour  has  been  found  an  excellent  application  to  erysipelatous  inflam-
mations, and  some  other  eruptive  affections,  allaying  the  burning  and
itching,  and  absorbing  the  irritating  secretions.  In  the  form  of  poultice,
it  is  often  applied  to  discuss  tumors  or  swellings,  or  to  hasten  their  sup-
puration when  far  advanced.  Green  rye,  when  from  six  to  ten  inches
high,  made  into  a  salve  by  simmering  in  fresh  cream,  I  have  known  to
cure  several  most  inveterate  cases  of  tinea-capitis  ;  to  be  applied  to  the
scalp,  twice  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Ergotae  Fluidum ;  Infusum  Ergots;  Tinctura
Ergotse ;  Vinum  Ergotse.


SELINUM  PALUSTRE.

Marsh  Smallage.
Nat. Ord. — Apiacece. Sex. Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  This  plant  is  the  Cnidium  Palustre  of  Sprengel,  the
Peucedanum  Montanum  of  Koch,  and  the  Conioselinum  of  Fischer.  It
has  a  simple,  tapering,  perennial  root,  with  many  long  fibers.  The  stem
is  erect,  four  or  five  feet  high,  hollow,  deeply  furrowed,  not  hairy,
branched  and  corymbose  in  the  upper  part,  bright-purple  at  the  base.
The  leaves  are  about  five  or  six  on  the  stem,  alternate,  remote,  ternate  with
bipinnate  divisions  ;  the  leaflets  are  opposite,  deeply  pinnatifid,  dark-green,
smooth,  their  segments  linear-lanceolate,  never  quite  linear,  acute,
entire,  or  trifid ;  the  petioles  are  smooth,  striated,  dilated,  and  sheathing
at  the  base,  with  a  reddish  membranous  margin. Umbels  large,  horizon-


Selinum  Palustre  —  Sempervivum  Tectorum.  867

tal,  of  numerous,  angular,  general  and  partial  rays.  General  bracts
several,  lanceolate,  pointed,  dependent,  not  half  the  length  of  the  rays,
their  margins  membranous  and  partly  colored ;  partial  ones  similar,
rather  longer  in  proportion,  and  often  confluent.  Flowers  white,  numer-
ous, uniform,  with  involute  petals.  Fruit  very  light  straw  color,  four
lines  long,  shining,  obovate ;  the  dorsal  ridges  very  near  each  other,  dis-
tinctly elevated,  sharp,  the  lateral  depressed  and  far  within  the  broad
thin  margin ;  vittce  of  the  commissure  subulate,  straight,  about  half  the
length  of  the  fruit.

History. — This  plant  grows  in  marshes  and  boggy  meadows  in  the
north  and  middle  of  Europe.  The  root  abounds  in  a  white  fetid,  bitter
juice,  which  hardens  into  a  brown  acrid  resin ;  it  is  the  part  employed.
It  imparts  its  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Marsh  Smallage  is  emmenagogue,  diuretic,
and  antispasmodic,  but  abandoned  as  an  internal  remedy,  on  account  of
its  caustic  and  dangerously  poisonous  properties.  Ten  or  twenty  grains,
according  to  the  patient's  age,  repeated  every  five  hours,  and  after  a
time  gradually  augmented,  have  cured  several  cases  of  epilepsy ;  but  it
must  not  be  used  where  abdominal  obstructions  exist,  or  where  there  is
an  exalted  sensibility  of  the  genital  apparatus.  In  nervous  and  sanguine
persons,  especially  those  of  irritable  habits,  it  increases  the  violence  of
the  disease.  Two  grain  doses,  repeated  twice  daily,  have  proved  almost
immediately  beneficial  in  the  convulsions  of  children  during  the  process
of  dentition.  The  Marsh  or  Hemlock  Parsley,  Selinum  Canadense,  or
Cnidium  Canadense  of  Sprengel,  and  Conioselinum  Canadense  of  Fischer,
which  grows  in  swamps,  wet  woods,  and  around  the  mouth  of  large
rivers  from  Canada  to  Carolina,  and  westward,  is  a  species  of  the
above  plant,  and  deserves  a  trial  in  the  diseases  just  mentioned.  It  is  a
plant  from  two  to  four  feet  in  hight,  somewhat  resembling  the  Conium
Maculatum,  and  having  an  angular,  flexuous,  hollow  stem.  The  leaves
are  on  large,  inflated  petioles,  ternately  divided;  the  divisions  bipinnate,
with  linear-oblong,  acute  lobes.  Umbels  compound.  Petals  white,
spreading.  Involucre  wanting,  or  two  or  three-leaved.  Styles  slender,
diverging.  Fruit  about  two  lines  long,  oblong-oval.  Vittce  solitary  in
the  dorsal  intervals,  two  or  three  in  the  lateral.  It  flowers  in  August
and  September.

SEMPERVIVUM  TECTORUM.
Common  Houseleek.
Nat.  Ord. — Crassulacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description.  —  Houseleek  has  a  fibrous  root  crowned  with  several
rosaceous  tufts  of  numerous,  oblong,  acute,  keeled,  fringed,  extremely


868  Materia Medica.

succulent  leaves.  The  stem  from  the  center  of  one  of  these  tufts,  is  about
a  foot  high,  erect,  round,  downy,  clothed  with  several,  more  narrow,
sessile,  alternate  leaves,  and  terminating  in  a  sort  of  many-flowered
cyme,  with  spiked  branches.  Flowers  large,  pale  rose-colored,  without
scent.  Segments  of  the  calyx  twelve  or  more,  with  a  similar  number  of
petals,  stamens,  and  pistils. Of  sets  spreading.

History. — This  is  a  well  known  perennial  plant,  a  native  of  Europe,
where  it  is  found  growing  on  rocks,  old  walls,  and  the  roofs  of  houses,
flowering  in  August,  and  is  remarkable  for  its  tenacity  of  life.  It  sends
out  runners  with  axillary  offsets  by  which  it  is  propagated,  and  rarely
flowers.  It  is  sometimes  cultivated  as  an  ornament,  or  as  a  domestic
medicine.  The  recent  leaves  are  the  parts  used,  they  are  from  half  an
inch  to  two  inches  in  length,  thick,  fleshy,  succulent,  flat  on  one  side,
somewhat  convex  on  the  other,  smooth,  of  a  light  green  color,  inodo-
rous, and  of  a  cooling,  slightly  saline,  astringent,  and  sourish  taste;
they  contain  a  large  proportion  of  supermalate  of  lime.  The  juice  of
the  leaves  filtered  with  an  equal  quantity  of  alcohol,  forms  a  beautiful,
white,  highly  volatile  coagulum.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  leaves  of  Houseleek  are  usually  employed
in  the  recent  state,  bruised,  and  applied  as  a  cooling  application  to  burns,
stings  of  insects,  ulcers,  erysipelas,  and  other  external  inflammations.
The  leaf  sliced  in  two,  and  the  inner  surface  applied  to  warts  or  corns,
and  changed  twice  a  day,  will,  it  is  said,  positively  cure  them.  The
juice,  applied  locally,  has  cured  ringworm,  shingles,  and  many  other
cutaneous  affections.  Dr.  A.  Brown,  of  Cincinnati,  recommends  the
following  in  many  cases  of  deafness  :  fill  a  four  or  six  ounce  vial  with
the  leaves  of  houseleek,  cork  it  tightly,  and  place  it  within  an  unbaked
loaf  of  bread.  When  the  bread  is  baked  remove  the  bottle,  and  there
will  be  found  a  liquid  of  a  soft,  oily  character,  which  may  be  dropped
into  the  ear,  say  one  or  two  drops,  every  night.  When  applied  it  pro-
duces a  singular,  stimulating  sensation.  In  erysipelas,  he  has  found
much  benefit  from  the  free  interna]  use  of  the  leaves  bruised  in  milk
and  water,  in  quantity  sufficient  merely  to  stain  the  liquid.  The  bruised
leaves  applied  as  a  poultice,  have,  in  his  hands,  cured  severe  cases  of
shingles  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  leaves  also  possess  an  astringent
property,  which  is  beneficial  in  many  cases.


SENECIO  AUREUS.
,  Life  Root.

Nat.  Ord.  — Asteracese  ;  Tribe,  Senecionidese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Su-
porflua.

THE ROOT AND HERB.

Description. — This  plant  is  known  by  several  other  names,  as  Rag-
wort, False  Valerian,  Golden  Senecio,  Squaw-weed,  and  Female  Regulator.


Senecio  Aureus.  869

It  has  an  erect,  smoothish,  striate  stem,  one  or  two  feet  high,  floccose-
woolly  when  young,  simple  or  branched  above,  terminating  in  a  kind  of
umbellate,  simple,  or  compound  corymb.  The  radical  leaves  are  simple
and  rounded,  the  larger  mostly  cordate,  crenate-serrate,  and  long-
petioled ;  the  lower  cauline  leaves  lyre-shaped  ;  the  upper  ones  few,
slender,  cut-pinnatifid,  dentate,  sessile  or  partly  clasping,  the  terminal
segments  lanceolate.  Peduncles  subumbellate  and  thick  upward.
Corymb  umbel-like.  Rays  from  eight  to  twelve,  four  or  five  lines  long,
spreading.  Flowers  golden-yellow.  Scales  linear,  acute,  and  purplish
at  the  apex.

History.  —  This  is  an  indigenous,  perennial  plant,  growing  on  the
banks  of  creeks  and  on  low  marshy  grounds,  throughout  the  northern
and  western  part  of  the  Union,  flowering  in  May  and  June.  The  root
and  herb  are  the  officinal  parts,  and  the  medicine  is  peculiar  to  Eclectics,
not  being  known  to  other  practitioners ;  it  yields  its  properties  to  water
or  alcohol.  It  has  not  been  analyzed.  There  are  several  varieties  of
this  species,  which  possess  similar  medicinal  virtues,  as  the  Senecio  Bal-
samitce,  or  Balsam  Groundsel,  with  the  stem  and  peduncles  villous  at  base  ;
the  leaves  few,  small  and  distant,  pubescent;  the  radical  ones  oblong,
spatulate,  or  lanceolate,  sometimes  cut-toothed,  tapering  into  the  petiole  ;
cauline  ones  lyrate  or  pinnatifid  ;  flowers  subumbellate.  This  variety
grows  in  pastures  and  on  rocky  hills.

Another,  the  Senecio  Gracilis,  Unkum,  or  Female  Regulator,  a  slender
state  of  the  species,  found  on  rocky  shores ;  its  radical  leaves  are  orbic-
ular, on  long  petioles,  subcordate,  crenate ;  cauline  ones  very  few,
remote,  linear-oblong,  dilated  at  the  base,  incisely  dentate  ;  peduncles
very  short,  pilose,  subumbelled  ;  involucre  smooth ;  rays  few,  very
short.  The  Senecio  Obovatus  with  the  radical  leaves  obovate,  crenate-
serrate,  petioled  ;  cauline  ones  pinnatifid,  toothed  ;  flowers  subumbelled
long-peduncled,  bracted,  with  a  cavity  under  the  receptacle  like  some
other  of  the  genus ;  stem  somewhat  glabrous. Found  in  meadows,  etc.

Senecio  Lanceolaius,  found  in  shady  cedar  swamps  in  Vermont ;  it  has
all  the  leaves  lanceolate-oblong,  thin,  sharply  and  unequally  toothed,
either  wedge-shaped  or  somewhat  cordate  at  the  base,  the  upper  cauline
ones  being  pinnatifid-cut  toward  the  base.  Among  these  varieties,  the
Senecio  Gracilis  is  considered  the  most  efficient  in  uterine  difficulties,
and  it  is  from  this  that  the  Senecin  is  prepared.

The  whole  herb  is  used.  The  root  grows  just  below  the  surface  of
the  ground,  and  runs  along  horizontally ;  it  is  from  half  an  inch  to  six
or  eight  inches  in  length,  and  about  two  lines  in  diameter,  reddish  or
purplish  externally,  white-purplish  internally,  with  an  aromatic  taste,
and  having  scattered  fibers.  When  dried,  and  mixed  with  the  herb,  it
is  found  of  various  lengths  from  one- fourth  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  or  two,
greenish-brown,  or  yellowish-brown  externally,  with  very  fine  longitudinal


870  Materia Medica.

lines,  a  few  fibers  attached,  short  fracture,  presenting  under  the  micro-
scope a  shining,  waxy  surface,  with  a  central  pale-purple  substance
surrounded  by  a  greenish-yellow  one,  with  a  light-yellowish  ring  between
the  two;  it  is  inodorous,  and  has  a  faintly  bitter,  herbaceous,  peculiar,
resinous  taste,  with  a  very  slight  degree  of  pungency.  It  yields  its
properties  best  to  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Life  Root  is  diuretic,  pectoral,  diaphoretic,  tonic,
and  exerts  a  peculiar  influence  upon  the  female  reproductive  organs,
which  has  given  to  it,  especially  the  S.  Gracilis,  the  name  of  Female
Regulator.  It  is  very  efficacious  in  promoting  the  menstrual  flow  ;  and
may  be  given  alone,  in  infusion,  or  combined  with  equal  parts  of  asarum
and  savin,  in  amenorrhea  not  connected  with  some  structural  lesion.  It
will  also  be  found  valuable  in  dysmenorrhea.  In  menorrhagia,  com-
bined with  cinnamon  and  raspberry  leaves,  it  has  been  found  very  ser-
viceable, when  administered  during  the  intermenstrual  period,  as  well
as  at  the  time  of  ovulation.  It  has  proved  an  excellent  diuretic  in  gravel
and  other  urinary  affections,  either  alone,  or  given  in  combination  with
other  diuretics ;  and  is  said  to  be  a  specific  in  strangury.  In  pulmonary
and  hepatic  affections  it  has  proved  advantageous ;  and  taken  freely,  the
decoction  has  effected  cures  of  dysentery.  This  is  one  of  our  valuable
agents  in  the  treatment  of  female  diseases.  Dose  of  the  decoction,  four
fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Decoctum  Senecii ;  Extractum  Senecii  Fluidum. Senecin.


SENECIN.
Senecin.

THE CONCENTRATED ACTIVE PRINCIPLE OF SENECIO GRACILIS.

Preparation. — Make  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  root  and  herb  of  Sen-
ecio  Gracilis,  add  to  it  an  equal  quantity  of  water,  and  distil  off  the
alcohol ;  the  senecin  remains  in  the  water,  which  must  be  removed  by
filtration.

History. — Senecin  thus  prepared,  is  an  oleo-resin  of  thick  consistence,
of  a  very  dark-green  color,  appearing  quite  black  in  mass,  having  a
peculiar,  herbaceous  odor,  and  a  bitter,  slightly  pungent,  persistent,  and
rather  unpleasant  taste.  A  portion  of  it,  probably  the  oil,  is  soluble  in
alcohol,  imparting  a  green  color  to  the  solution  ;  on  the  addition  of  liquor
potassa  to  the  alcoholic  solution,  the  senecin  is  rendered  wholly  soluble,
and  if  muriatic  acid  be  added  in  small  quantity,  it  changes  the  green
solution  to  greenish-white,  without  precipitation.  It  is  entirely  soluble
in  sulphuric  ether,  forming  a  greenish  solution,  which  is  not  precipitated
by  water,  nor  acetic  acid.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  but  becomes  soluble
on  the  addition  of  strong  alkaline  solutions.


Sesamitm  Indicum.


871


The  Franklin  Institute  of  the  city  of  New  York,  publish  a  preparation
as  Senecin,  the  active  principle  of  Senecio  Gracilis ;  they  state  that  it  is
a  whitish-brown  powder,  agreeable  to  the  stomach,  and  pleasant  to  the
taste.  I  have  never  seen  the  article,  nor  do  I  know  how  it  is  prepared,
but  from  a  specimen  of  their  Stillingin,  I  am  inclined  to  view  it  as  the
oleo-resin  triturated  with  sugar,  or  sugar  of  milk.  And  if  such  be  the
case,  it  shows  the  necessity  that  exists,  for  practitioners  to  employ  no
secret  agents,  nor  such  as  are  prepared  by  secret  processes,  lest  they  be
imposed  upon  in  the  article  itself,  as  well  as  in  the  exorbitant  price
demanded  for  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — Senecin  possesses  the  virtues  of  the  plant  from
which  it  is  obtained,  in  a  high  degree.  It  is,  however,  more  especially
employed  in  the  treatment  of  female  diseases,  as  amenorrhea,  dys-
menorrhea, and  other  uterine  derangements.  Combined  with  aletrin,
caulophyllin,  or  cimicifugin  it  will  be  found  especially  useful  in  these
complaints.  In  monorrhagia  it  may  be  combined  with  geraniin  advan-
tageously ;  or  its  ethereal  tincture  may  be  administered  in  some  astrin-
gent infusion.  A  pill  of  senecin,  aletrin,  and  sulphate  of  iron,  will  be
found  of  benefit  in  chlorosis  accompanied  with  amenorrhea.  In  dys-
menorrhea it  may  be  combined  with  extract  of  belladona  and  sulphate
of  quinia.  It  is  one  of  those  agents  which  exert  a  tonic  influence  upon
the  uterus,  thereby  restoring  its  various  functional  derangements  to  a
normal  condition.  Dose  of  Senecin,  from  three  to  five  grains,  three
times  a  day.


SESAMUM  INDICUM.
Benne.

Nat.  Orel. — Pedaliaceas,  Lindley  ;  Bignonias,  Jussieu.  Sex.  Syst.  —  Didyna-
mia  Angiospermia.

THE LEAVES AND SEEDS.

Description.  —  Sesamum  Indicum  is  an  annual  plant  with  an  erect,
pubescent,  branching  stem  from  two  to  four  feet  in  hight.  The  leaves
are  ovate-lanceolate,  or  oblong  ;  the  lower  ones  trilobed  and  sometimes
ternale  ;  the  upper  undivided,  irregularly  serrate  and  pointed.  The
flowers  are  of  a  reddish-white  color,  axillary,  on  short  glandular  pedicels.
The  fruit  is  an  oblong,  mucronate,  pubescent  capsule,  containing  numer-
ous small,  oval,  yellowish  seeds.

History. — There  are  two  species  of  this  genus,  the  S.  Indicum,  and
the  S.  Orientate,  both  of  which  are  natives  of  the  East  Indies,  and  are
now  extensively  cultivated  in  many  parts  of  Asia,  Africa,  West  Indies,
and  in  the  Southern  United  States.  That  growing  in  the  South  is  the
S.  Indicum,  and  flowers  in  August.  Both  the  seeds  and  leaves  are  offi-
cinal. The  first  are  small,  yellowish,  or  in  some  cases  blackish,  of  a


872  Materia  Medica.

pleasant,  mucilaginous  taste,  and  yield  by  expression  an  excellent,  bland,
sweetish,  inodorous,  fixed  oil,  closely  resembling  olive  oil,  and  which
may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  it  in  all  cases.  Five  pounds  of  the
seeds  afford  about  one  pound  of  oil,  which  will  keep  several  years  with-
out becoming  rancid.  The  seeds  are  much  employed  by  the  negroes  as
an  article  of  food ;  they  parch  them,  and  prepare  them  into  puddings,
broths,  and  various  other  ways.  The  leaves  abound  in  a  gummy  matter,
which  they  impart  to  water,  forming  a  rich,  bland  mucilage.

Properties  and  Uses. — One  or  two  fresh  leaves,  stirred  in  about  half
a  pint  of  cool  water,  forms  a  bland  and  demulcent  drink,  very  useful  in
catarrh,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  summer-complaint,  and  irritation  of  the
urinary  organs.  When  the  leaves  are  dried,  hot  water  should  be  used.
This  mucilage  likewise  forms  an  excellent  soothing  application  in  oph-
thalmia, irritations  and  diseases  of  the  skin,  etc.,  but  is  not  at  all  supe-
rior to  that  of  slippery  elm,  or  of  sassafras  pith.  The  oil  may  be  used
as  an  application  to  furfuraceous  eruptions — or,  in  large  doses,  as  a  laxa-
tive. In  India  it  is  considered  to  possess  emmenagogue  properties,  and
capable  of  producing  abortion.


SEVUM.
Suet.


THE  PREPARED  FAT  OP  OVIS  ARIES.

History. — Suet,  Mutton  Suet  or  Sheep  Tallow,  is  the  fat  of  the  domestic
sheep,  ovis  aries.  For  medical  purposes  it  is  usually  obtained  from  the
fat  around  the  kidneys,  cut  into  pieces,  melted  with  a  moderate  heat,
and  strained  through  linen  or  flannel.  It  is  sometimes  purified  by
boiling  it  in  a  little  water,  thus  avoiding  too  great  a  heat.  It  is  some-
what similar  in  its  properties  to  lard,  but  is  of  a  firmer  consistence,  and
requires  a  higher  temperature  (103°)  for  its  fusion  than  any  other
animal  fat.  When  fresh  and  well  prepared,  it  is  white,  inodorous,  of  a
bland  taste,  sometimes  brittle,  insoluble  in  water,  and  nearly  so  in  alco-
hol; when  long  kept  it  is  apt  to  become  yellow,  rancid,  and  consequently
unfit  for  pharmaceutic  purposes.  According  to  Chevreul,  it  consists
of  stearin,  olein,  and  a  small  proportion  of  hircin;  and  its  ultimate
composition  is  Carbon  78.99,  Hydrogen  11.70,  Oxygen  9.30.  Hircin  is
a  liquid-like  olein,  but  is  more  soluble  in  alcohol ;  by  saponification  it  is
convertible  into  hirsic  acid  and  glycerin,  and  is  therefore  a  hircate  of
oxide  of  glyceryle.

Mr.  Wiggin,  of  Ipswich,  has  patented  a  mode  for  melting  and  puri-
fying tallow  and  other  kinds  of  grease.  The  process  consists  in  heating
the  fatty  substance  in  the  state  in  which  it  is  removed  from  the  animal,
with  a  small  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid  of  specific  gravity  1.3  to  1.45.
The  acid  dissolves  the  membrane  and  other  impurities  present,  acquir-


SlLPHIUM PERFOLIATUM.  873

ing  a  dark  color  and  thick  syrupy  consistence,  while  the  fat  separates  in
a  state  of  great  purity.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  fats  obtained
by  this  process  were  probably  the  fatty  acids  resulting  from  the  decom-
position of  the  neutral  fats  by  the  oil  of  vitriol ;  but  Mr.  Wiggin  replies
that  in  using  the  sulphuric  acid  at  the  density  indicated,  no  decomposi-
tion of  the  fats  was  effected,  and  that  no  sulphurous  acid  was  evolved
in  the  process.

Properties  and  Uses. — Suet  is  nutritive  and  emollient,  but  not  so  easy
of  digestion  as  the  fat  of  the  pig  or  ox;  yet  made  into  a  broth,  with  or
without  aromatics,  and  used  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  general  debility.
It  is  sometimes  used  as  a  dressing  to  blisters,  and  may  be  applied  to
most  of  the  purposes  for  which  lard  is  used,  on  account  of  its  superior
hardness,  and  higher  melting  point.  For  forming  an  ointment,  it  will
be  found  preferable  to  lard,  especially  when  it  is  to  be  applied  to  several
forms  of  cutaneous  disease.


SlLPHIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

Indian  Cup-plant.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Necessaria.

THE BOOT.

Description. — This  plant,  also  known  by  the  name  of  Ragged  Cup,  has
a  perennial,  horizontal,  pitted  rhizome,  beset  with  radicles,  and  a  large,
smooth,  square  herbaceous  stem,  from  four  to  seven  feet  high,  and  often
branched  above.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  connate-perfoliate,  ovate,
coarsely  toothed,  abruptly  narrowed  into  winged  petioles  at  the  base,
the  upper  pairs  forming  a  cup-shaped  disk  with  their  connate  bases  ;
they  are  from  eight  to  fourteen  inches  long,  by  four  to  seven  wide.  The
flowers  are  terminal,  with  from  fifteen  to  twenty-five  oblong,  lanceolate,
yellow  rays,  and  a  large  dark  colored  disk.  Heads  in  a  trichotomous
cyme,  the  central  on  a  long  peduncle;  scales  ovate,  obtuse,  squarrose;
achenia  broadly  ovate,  winged,  emarginate.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  the  Western  States,  and  is  found
growing  in  rich  bottom  or  interval  lands,  bearing  numerous  yellow  flowers
in  August.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part ;  it  is  large,  long  and  crooked,
and  imparts  its  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.  It  has  a  persistent,  acrid
taste.  There  are  several  species  of  Silphium,  which  yield  by  exuda-
tion and  incision  a  fine  fragrant  and  bitterish  gum  like  Frankincense,
white  or  amber  color,  and  which  is  chewed  by  the  Indians  to  sweeten
the  breath.

Properties  and  Uses. — Cup-plant  is  tonic,  diaphoretic,  and  alterative.
A  strong  infusion  of  the  root,  made  by  long  steeping,  or  an  extract,  is
said  to  be  one  of  the  best  remedies  for  the  removal  of  aguecake,  or
enlarged  spleen ;  it  is  also  useful  in  intermittent  and  remittent  fevers,


874  Materia Medic  a.

inward  bruises,  debility,  ulcers,  liver  affections,  and  as  a  general  altera-
tive restorative.  The  gum  is  said  to  be  stimulant  and  antispasmodic.
The  S.  Gummiferum,  or  Rosin-weed,  and  S.  Laciniatum,  or  Compass-
weed,  are  said  to  be  emetic  in  decoction.  They  have  effected  cures  in
intermittent  fever,  and  are  beneficial  in  dry,  obstinate  coughs.  Said  to
cure  the  heaves  in  horses.  The  dose  of  the  powdered  root  of  S.  Per-
foliatum  is  twenty  grains.

SIMARUBA OFFICINALIS.

Simaruba.
Nat. Orel.  —  Simarubaceje. Sex. Syst.  —  Decandria  Monogynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — Simaruba,  called  in  Jamaica  Mountain  Damson,  is  a  tree
with  long,  horizontal,  creeping  roots,  and  a  trunk  about  sixty  feet  in
hight,  covered  with  a  blackish,  furrowed  bark,  and  sending  off  alternate
spreading  branches,  whose  bark  is  smooth,  gray,  and  marked  with  broad
yellow  spots.  The  wood  is  hard,  white,  and  has  scarcely  any  bitter
taste.  The  leaves  are  alternate  and  abruptly  pinnate,  with  a  long,  naked
petiole,  sometimes  nearly  fourteen  inches  long,  to  which  the  leaflets  are
attached  by  short  footstalks.  The  leaflets  are  alternate,  from  two  to  nine
on  each  side,  about  two  inches  long,  obovate,  entire,  somewhat  coria-
ceous, smooth,  dark-green  above,  and  whitish  beneath.  The  flowers
are  of  a  yellowish-white  color,  and  are  disposed  in  long  axillary
last  is  said  to  be  the  case  with  the  tree  in  Jamaica.  The  calyx  is  small,
and  divided  into  five  obtuse,  erect  segments.  The  petals  are  stiff,  lan-
ceolate, equal,  spreading,  somewhat  refiexed,  and  much  longer  than  the
calyx.  The  stamens  are  ten,  equal,  about  as  long  as  the  corolla,  bearing
oblong,  incumbent  anthers,  with  a  small  hairy  scale  at  the  base.  The
ovary  is  ovate,  five-parted,  crowned  with  an  erect,  cylindrical  style,
bearing  a  five-lobed  stigma,  and  surrounded  at  base  with  a  ring  of  hairy
scales.  The  fruit  consists  of  five  ovate,  black,  smooth,  one-celled  ber-
ries, all  connected  with  a  fleshy,  pentagonal  receptacle,  and  opening  by
a  fissure  when  ripe,  each  containing  a  single,  oblong  seed.

History. — Simaruba  is  found  in  Jamaica,  Guiana,  and  several  parts  of
South  America.  Although  placed  in  the  class  and  order  Decandria  Mono-
gynia of  the  Sexual  System,  it  evidently  is  pentagynous;  for  although
the  styles  are  connected  above,  yet  they  are  distinct  below,  are  crowned
with  five  connected  stigmas,  and  spring  from  a  five-lobed  ovary.  It
prefers  a  sandy,  arid  soil,  and  flowers  in  November  and  December.
The  bark  of  the  root  is  the  officinal  part.  The  root  is  rough,  scaly,  and
warty,  and  its  bark  is  intensely  bitter.  When  dried,  as  met  with  in
commerce,  it  is  in  pieces  several  feet  in  length,  and  some  inches  in
breadth,  folded  lengthwise,  light,  flexible,  tenacious,  very  fibrous,  exter-


Sinapis  Alba  —  Sinapis  Nigra.  875

nally  of  a  light  brownish-yellow  color,  rough,  warty,  and  marked  with
transverse  ridges,  and  internally  pale-yellow.  It  is  inodorous,  of  a
purely  bitter  taste,  not  easily  pulverizable,  and  imparts  its  bitterness  to
water  or  alcohol.  It  is  said  to  contain  a  bitter  principle  identical  with
quassin,  resin,  a  volatile  oil  with  the  odor  of  benzoic  acid,  malic  acid,
traces  of  gallic  acid,  oxide  of  iron,  silica,  and  several  other  unimpor-
tant ingredients.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  In  large  doses  Simaruba  is  said  to  purge
and  vomit.  In  smaller  doses  it  is  tonic,  and  may  be  used  in  infusion
in  all  cases  where  simple  bitter  tonics  are  indicated.  It  may  be
used  in  all  cases  as  a  substitute  for  quassia.  It  was  at  first  introduced
to  the  profession  as  a  calmative  astringent  in  chronic  dysentery  and  diar-
rhea. However,  it  merely  acts  as  a  tonic,  proving  beneficial  in  relaxed
and  debilitated  states  of  the  alimentary  canal,  and  would  do  harm,  if
used  indiscriminately  in  dysentery.  The  infusion  is  the  best  form,  two
or  three  drachms  of  the  bark  being  added  to  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  the
dose  of  which,  as  a  tonic,  is  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  two  fluidounces.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Simarubae.


SINAPIS  ALBA.

White  Mustard.

SINAPIS NIGRA.

Black  Mustard.

Nat. Ord. — Brassicace«. Sex.  Syst. — Tetradynamia  Siliquosa.

THE SEEDS.

Description.  —  Sinapis  Alba  is  an  annual  plant,  with  a  thinly  hirsute
stem,  from  two  to  five  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  smoothish,  lyrately  pin-
nate, irregularly  dentate,  rugged,  and  pale-green  ;  the  lower  lobes  oblong
and  deeper,  the  terminal  larger.  The  flowers  are  in  racemes,  with  yellow
petals,  and  linear,  green,  calycine  leaflets.  The  silupj.es  or  pods  are
spreading,  hispid,  torose  at  the  place  of  the  seeds,  ribbed,  shorter  than
the  compressed,  ensiform  beak,  and  about  four-seeded.  The  seeds  are
globose,  large,  and  pale.

Sinapis  Nigra  is  also  an  annual  plant,  with  a  round,  smooth,  striate,
branching  stem  from  three  to  six  feet  high.  The  lower  leaves  are  large,
rough,  variously  lobed,  and  dentate;  those  higher  on  the  stem  more
smooth  and  less  lobed ;  and  the  uppermost  are  linear-lanceolate,  entire,
smooth,  and  pendulous;  all  are  petiolate.  The  flowers  are  small,  with
yellowish,  spreading  calyx,  and  yellow,  obovate  petals,  and  stand  closely
together  upon  peduncles  at  the  upper  part  of  the  branches.  The  pods
are  very  numerous,  nearly  an  inch  long,  bluntly  quadrangular,  nearly
even  and  smooth,  appressed  close  to  the  rachis  of  the  raceme,  tipped
by  a  small,  short,  four-sided  style,  but  wholly  destitute  of  the  ensiform


876  Materia Medica.

beak  of  the  above  species. Seeds  numerous,  small,  globose,  blackish-
brown,  veined.

History. — These  plants  are  natives  of  Europe,  and  have  been  intro-
duced into  this  country,  where  they  are  cultivated  in  gardens,  and  are
found  growing  in  old  fields  and  waste  places,  flowering  in  June  and  July.
The  seeds  of  the  Black  Mustard  are  small,  about  the  size  of  millet  seed,
globular,  of  a  deep-brown  color,  slightly  rugose  on  the  surface,  and
internally  yellow;  when  pulverized,  they  form  a  greenish -yellow  powder,
and  have  a  faint  smell  when  dry,  but  when  mixed  with  water  or  vinegar,
they  have  a  peculiar,  penetrating,  diffusive  odor,  and  a  hot,  bitterish,
pungent,  but  not  persistent  taste.  White  Mustard  seeds  are  nearly  three
times  the  size  of  the  black,  yellowish  externally  and  in  its  substance,
and  of  an  odor  and  taste  similar  to  the  preceding,  but  more  feeble ;  it
affords  a  yellow  powder,  of  a  somewhat  unctuous  appearance,  coalescing
when  compressed.  Both  kinds  of  mustard  seed  are  employed  in  medi-
cine, in  the  form  of  flour,  and  the  white  seeds  are  likewise  used  entire.
Table  mustard  is  prepared  from  the  white  seeds ;  but  the  finest  quality
is  prepared  with  the  purest  flour  of  both  the  white  and  black,  in  nearly
equal  quantities.  An  English  quality  of  table  mustard  is  said  to  be
prepared  by  mixing  145  pounds  of  mustard  flour,  made  by  grinding
together  two  bushels  of  black  and  three  of  white  seed,  with  fifty-six
pounds  of  wheat  flour,  to  diminish  the  pungency,  and  two  pounds  of  tur-
meric to  improve  the  color;  then  to  restore  the  acrimony  without  the
pungency,  one  pound  of  chilly  pods,  and  half  a  pound  of  ginger,  is
added.  The  officinal  flour  of  mustard  should  be  made  with  the  black
and  white  seeds  only,  without  any  adulteration.

Upon  pressure,  both  kinds  of  seed  yield  a  fixed  oil,  thick  like  castor
oil,  of  a  greenish-yellow  color,  little  smell,  and  a  mild,  not  unpleasant
taste,  called  Oil  of  Mustard,  which  yields  upon  saponification  a  peculiar
acid,  to  which  the  name  of  Erucic  Acid  has  been  applied.

When  black  mustard  seeds  have  been  deprived  of  their  fixed  oil  by
pressure,  a  volatile  oil  is  then  obtained  from  them  by  distillation  with
water,  called  the  Volatile  oil  of  mustard ;  it  contains  sulphur,  is  colorless,
or  pale-yellow,  heavier  than  water,  of  an  exceedingly  pungent  odor,  and
an  acrid,  burning  taste ;  it  is  slightly  soluble  in  water,  but  readily  so  in
alcohol  or  ether.  It  boils  at  about  298°,  and  when  treated  with  alkaline
solutions,  forms  sulphocyanurets ;  with  an  equivalent  of  ammonia,  it
forms  a  white,  inodorous,  crystalline  compound,  possessing  many  of  the
characters  of  an  organic  base,  called  Thiosinnammin,  C$  Hs  N2  Sa.  The
volatile  oil  consists  of  nitrogen,  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  sulphur  ;  its  for-
mula is  C8  Ho  NS2,  and  its  specific  gravity  1.010.  Dr.  Will  considers  it
a  sulphocyanuret  of  allyle  Co  Hs  +  C2  NS2.  It  is  the  active  principle
of  black  mustard  seeds.

Black  mustard  seed  contains  two  peculiar  principles,  Myronic  Acid,  in
the  state  of  Myronate  of  polassa,  and  Myrosyne,  an  indifferent  nitrogenized


Sinapis  Alba  —  Sinapis  Nigra.  877

body,  analogous  in  character  to  the  emulsin  of  almonds.  When  the
seeds  are  bruised  and  macerated  in  water,  the  myrosyne,  acting  the  part
of  a  ferment,  causes  a  reaction  between  the  water  and  myronate  of
potassa,  which  results  in  the  production  of  the  volatile  oil.  The  same
thino-  happens  when  any  one  of  the  myronates  is  brought  into  contact
with  water,  and  the  essential  fermenting  principle,  myrosyne.  As  with
emulsin,  when  coagulated  by  heat,  alcohol,  or  acids,  the  myrosyne
becomes  inert,  and  no  volatile  oil  is  obtained.

Myronate  of  potassa  may  be  obtained  by  pulverizing  black  mustard
seeds,  drying  the  powder  at  a  temperature  of  212°,  and  then  depriving
it  of  its  fixed  oil  by  pressure.  The  powder  is  then  to  be  treated  with
strong  alcohol  in  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  when  nearly  exhausted
of  everything  soluble  in  this  liquid,  it  is  to  be  again  pressed,  and  then
treated  with  water.  The  aqueous  solution  must  next  be  evaporated,
adding  Aveak  alcohol  before  it  is  too  much  concentrated,  which  precipi-
tates a  glutinous  matter.  The  solution  then  being  filtered,  and  carefully
evaporated,  deposits  crystals  of  myronate  of  potassa,  which  may  be
obtained  very  pure  and  white  by  washing  the  mass  with  diluted  alcohol.
It  is  unalterable  in  the  air,  very  soluble  in  water,  insoluble  in  pure  alco-
hol, and  of  a  bitter  taste.

Myronic  acid  may  be  obtained  by  adding  to  a  solution  of  one  hundred
parts  of  myronate  of  potassa,  thirty-eight  parts  of  crystallized  tartaric
acid,  concentrating  the  solution  by  evaporation,  and  then  adding  weak
alcohol,  which  precipitates  the  bitartrate  of  potassa,  and  retains  the
myronic  acid  in  solution.  It  is  a  fixed,  inodorous  substance,  of  a  bitter
and  sour  taste,  and  an  acid  reaction.  When  obtained  separate  from  its
bases,  it  forms  a  colorless  solution,  which,  by  evaporation  becomes  thick,
like  molasses,  without  crystallizing.  It  is  soluble  in  water  or  alcohol,
but  not  in  ether;  and  forms  soluble  salts  with  the  alkalies,  baryta,  lime,
and  the  oxides  of  lead  and  silver,  all  of  which  yield  volatile  oil  of  mus-
tard, when  mixed  with  an  aqueous  solution  of  myrosyne.  It  contains
sulphur,  nitrogen,  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen.

White  mustard  seeds  contain  myrosyne  but  no  myronate  of  potassa,
and  consequently  no  volatile  oil  can  be  obtained  from  them ;  yet  if  they
be  added  to  black  mustard  seeds  in  which  the  myrosyne  has  been  coagu-
lated, the  volatile  oil  will  be  generated  on  the  application  of  water  and
distillation.  Although  no  volatile  oil  is  had  from  white  mustard  seed,  yet
upon  the  addition  of  water,  a  fatty  acrid  principle  is  developed,  which
renders  these  seeds  applicable  to  the  same  purposes  as  the  black  variety.
This  acrid  principle  is  the  result  of  the  reaction  of  water  upon  sulpko- sina-
pism, a  principle  found  in  the  seed,  and  which  is  accomplished  through
the  presence  and  influence  of  myrosyne ;  for  if  this  be  absent,  or  coagu-
lated by  heat,  alcohol,  etc.,  no  change  takes  place.  Boutron  and  Fremy
state  that  with  the  development  of  the  fixed,  fatty,  inodorous,  acrid


878  Materia  Medica.

principle,  hydrosulphocyanic  acid  is  also  produced.  White  mustard
seeds  contain  more  fixed  oil  than  the  black.

Sulpho-sinapisin  may  be  obtained  by  freeing  white  mustard  seeds  of
their  fixed  oil  by  expression,  then  boiling  them  in  water,  evaporating
the  decoction  to  the  consistence  of  honey,  mixing  the  residue  with  six
or  eio-ht  times  its  volume  of  anhydrous  alcohol,  which  precipitates  vari-
ous substances,  then  distilling  off  the  alcohol,  and  setting  the  syrupy
residue  aside,  to  crystallize.  The  crystals  may  be  purified  by  repeated
solution  in  alcohol  and  crystallization.  It  is  white,  crystallizable,  ino-
dorous, bitter,  and  soluble  in  alcohol  or  water,  forming  yellow  solutions.
It  is  neutral,  and  consists  of  sulphur,  nitrogen,  carbon,  hydrogen,  and
oxygen.

Myrosyne  may  be  procured  by  treating  white  mustard  seed  with  cold
water,  filtering  the  solution,  evaporating  it  by  a  heat  not  exceeding  100°,
and  when  it  is  of  the  consistence  of  syrup,  carefully  adding  alcohol,
which  causes  a  precipitate  easily  separable  by  decantation.  If  this
precipitate  be  dissolved  in  water,  and  the  solution  cautiously  evaporated
as  before,  myrosyne,  not  entirely  pure,  is  obtained.  When  dry,  it  has
the  character  of  an  albuminous  substance,  is  soluble  in  water,  forming  a
viscid  solution  which  froths  when  agitated,  and  is  coagulated  and  ren-
dered inert  by  heat,  alcohol,  and  the  acids.  Though  closely  analogous
to  emulsin,  yet  it  is  a  distinct  principle,  as  its  place  cannot  be  supplied
by  emulsin  with  the  same  results,  and  which  is  supposed  by  Simon  to
be  owing  to  the  absence  of  sulphur  in  the  latter  article.

Simon  obtained  a  peculiar  principle  by  the  following  process,  and  which
he  called  Sinajmin  :  He  exhausted  black  mustard  seeds  with  strong
alcohol,  distilled  off  the  greater  part  of  the  alcohol,  treated  the  residue
several  times  with  four  or  five  times  its  weight  of  ether,  distilled  off  all
the  ether  from  the  ethereal  solutions,  treated  the  extract  again  with  a
smaller  quantity  of  ether  so  as  to  leave  behind  insoluble  substances,  and
repeated  this  process  until  the  extract  formed  a  perfectly  clear  solution
without  residue.  The  extract  was  then  dissolved  in  cold  strong  alcohol,
and  the  solution,  having  been  decolorized  with  animal  charcoal,  was
allowed  to  evaporate  in  the  air.  Fifty-five  pounds  of  the  seeds  yielded
only  eighty  grains  of  crystallized  Sinapisin.  It  was  in  brilliant,  white,
scaly  crystals,  sublimable  by  heat,  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  or  the  fixed
and  volatile  oils,  but  insoluble  in  acids  and  alkalies.  Upon  contact  with
water  and  myrosyne,  it  emitted  the  odor  of  the  oil  of  mustard.

From  the  above  statements,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  water  at  com-
mon temperatures  is  the  best  vehicle  for  mustard,  whether  for  internal  or
external  use  ;  and  that  boiling,  or  uniting;  it  with  alcohol  or  acids,  must
impair  its  active  properties.

Properties  and  Uses. — Mustard  is  an  irritant,  stimulant,  rubefacient,
vesicant,  and  diuretic. It  is  used  in  small  quantities,  internally,  as  a


Sisymbrium  Officinale.  879

condiment,  and  safe  stimulant  of  the  digestive  organs.  In  large  doses  it
is  a  good  emetic,  and  may  be  used  in  cases  of  torpor  of  the  stomach,
poisoning  by  narcotics,  to  rouse  gastric  susceptibilit}T,  and  also  to  facili-
tate the  action  of  other  emetics.  In  inordinate  doses  it  is  poisonous,
producing  gastro-enteritis,  and  perverting  the  vital  processes  by  its
absorption  into  the  system,  as  known  by  the  horse-radish  smell  of  the
urine,  and  the  mustard  odor  in  the  blood.  Externally,  it  quickly  excites
redness  of  the  skin,  and  if  too  long  applied,  inflammation,  ulceration,  and
even  sloughing  ;  but  if  removed  in  time,  the  redness  is  succeeded  only
by  induration  of  the  cuticle,  and  occasionally  desquamation.  The  sting-
ing pain  which  remains  after  the  removal  of  the  mustard,  may  be  miti-
gated by  sponging  the  part  with  cold  water,  or  dropping  ether  on  it.
Sinapisms  are  beneficially  applied  over  the  abdomen  and  spine,  in  gas-
tric and  enteritic  inflammations,  and  over  the  epigastrium,  in  vomiting
from  irritability  of  the  stomach  ;  also  to  the  spine,  wrists  and  ankles,  to
arouse  the  system  in  apoplectic  and  comatose  conditions,  and  in  typhus
fever  ;  to  the  feet  and  legs,  for  pains  in  the  head  during  fevers  and  other
diseases,  and  in  determinations  to  the  head  ;  and  to  various  parts  for
removing  pain,  mitigating  local  inflammations,  or  arousing  from  stupor.
In  the  treatment  of  cholera,  mustard  is  an  excellent  rubefacient  applica-
tion, likewise  in  dyspepsia  and  obstinate  constipation.  Applied  to  the
breasts  it  will  often  relieve  suppression  of  the  menses,  as  well  as  menor-
rhagia  ;  to  be  applied  intermittingly.  In  no  case  should  a  sinapism  be
continued  too  long,  as  vesication  and  ulceration  followed  by  sphacelus,  may
result.  The  volatile  oil  of  mustard,  is  a  powerful  rubefacient  and  vesica-
tory ;  and  in  the  dose  of  two  drops,  several  times  a  day,  in  some  muci-
laginous vehicle,  it  is  a  good  diuretic,  useful  in  dropsy,  and  has  been
serviceable  in  colic.  A  liniment  composed  of  one  part  of  the  oil,  dissolved
in  sixteen  parts  of  alcohol,  or  in  ten  parts  of  olive  or  almond  oil,  is  a
good  substitute  for  a  sinapism.  White  mustard  seeds,  taken  entire,  were
formerly  used  as  a  favorite  tonic  in  dyspepsia.  Dose  of  mustard,  as  an
emetic,  one,  two  or  three  drachms,  with  six  or  eight  ounces  of  warm
water.

Off.  Pre}). — Cataplasma  Sinapis.


SISYMBRIUM  OFFICINALE. {Erysimum Officinale.)

Hedge  Mustard.

Nat.  Ord. — Cruciferaj. Sex.  Syst — Tetradynamia  Siliquosa.

THE SEEDS AND HERB.

Description. — This  is  an  annual,  herbaceous  plant,  with  a  round  more
or  less  hairy,  branching  stem,  from  one  to  three  feet  high.  The  leaves
are  runcinate  ;  the  lower  ones  from  three  to  eight  inches  long  by  one  to
three  wide,  the  lower  segments  placed  at  right  angles  to  the  midvein,  or


880  Materia  Medica.

pointing  backward,  the  terminal  segment  largest;  upper  ones  in  three
lanceolate  segments  placed  at  right  angles.  The  flowers  are  small,  yel-
low, and  terminate  the  slender,  virgate  raceme,  which  becomes  one  or
two  feet  long.  The  siliques  or  pods  are  subulate,  erect,  sessile,  and
closely  appressed  to  the  rachis.  Seeds  in  a  single  row  in  each  cell,
ovoid,  marginless.

History. — This  is  an  unsightly  weed  growing  in  the  United  States  and
Europe,  along  the  roadsides,  by  walls  and  hedges,  and  on  heaps  of  rub-
bish, flowering  from  May  to  September.  The  whole  plant  is  employed ;
it  has  a  herbaceous,  acrid  taste,  somewhat  resembling  mustard.  The
seeds  have  considerable  pungency. Water  extracts  the  active  properties.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diuretic  and  expectorant ;  recommended  in
chronic  coughs,  hoarseness,  ulceration  of  the  mouth  and  fauces,  asthma,
and  urinary  obstructions.  The  juice  of  the  plant  may  be  mixed  with
honey,  or  the  seeds  may  be  taken  in  substance.  The  Sisymbrium  Sophia,
or  Flixweed,  of  a  biting  acrid  taste,  and  pungent  odor  when  rubbed,
has  been  used  externally  in  indolent  ulcers,  and  the  seeds  internally  in
worms,  calculous  complaints,  etc.  Its  leaves  are  bipinnately  divided,  the
lobes  oblong-linear,  incised  ;  pedicels  four  times  the  length  of  the  calyx;
petals  smaller  than  the  sepals.

SMILAX OFFICINALIS.

Sarsaparilla.
Nat.  Ord. — Smilacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Dicecia  Hexandria.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  Smilax  Officinalis  has  a  twining,  angular,  prickly,  and
shrubby  stem;  the  young  shoots  being  unarmed.  The  leaves  are  ovate-
oblong,  acute,  cordate,  netted,  five  or  seven-nerved,  coriaceous,  smooth,  a
foot  long,  and  four  or  five  inches  broad  ;  the  young  ones  lanceolate,
oblong,  acuminate,  and  tri-nerved.  The  jietioles  are  an  inch  long,  smooth,
bearing  tendrils  above  the  base.  Flowers  unknown.  The  natives  on
the  banks  of  the  Magdalena  river,  in  New  Grenada,  call  this  plant  Zar-
zaparilla,  and  send  great  quantities  of  it  down  the  river  to  Carthagena
and  Mompox,  from  whence  it  is  shipped  for  Jamaica  and  Cadiz.  Pereira
supposes  this  to  be  the  Jamaica  Sarsaparilla,  the  best  and  most  valuable
kind  in  commerce.  It  is  not  known,  however,  by  this  name  in  the
United  States,  and  differs  from  the  Honduras  sarsaparilla  in  the  reddish
color  of  its  epidermis,  and  in  containing  less  starch,  and  yielding  a
greater  proportion  of  extract.  It  is  usually  had  in  bundles  a  foot  or  a
foot  and  a  half  in  length,  by  four  or  five  inches  in  thickness,  consisting
of  long  slender  roots  folded  up,  with  numerous  radical  fibers  attached.

Smilax  Syphilitica  has  a  round,  smooth  stem,  furnished  only  at  the
joints  with  from  two  to  four  short,  thick,  straight  prickles. The  leaves


Smilax  Officinalis.  881

are  a  foot  long,  oblong-lanceolate,  acuminate,  shining,  coriaceous,  three-
nerved,  and  terminated  by  a  long  point.  This  plant  has  been  seen
growing  upon  the  banks  of  the  river  Cassiquiare  in  New  Grenada,  and
in  Brazil  at  Yupura,  and  near  the  Rio  Negro.  Pereira  supposes  it  to
yield  the  Lisbon  or  Brazilian  Sarsaparilla,  which  is  imported  from  Para
and  Maranham,  in  cylindrical  bundles,  from  three  to  rive  feet  long,  and
about  a  foot  in  thickness  ;  it  is  bound  by  close  circular  turns  of  a  very
flexible  stem,  and  consist  of  unfolded  roots,  without  rhizoma  and  stems,
and  with  but  few  radical  fibers.  It  has  an  amylaceous  interior  structure,
with  considerable  acrimony.  It  is  considered  as  a  valuable  variety  of
the  drug.  According  to  Richard  it  has  been  ascertained  to  be  the  pro-
duct of  the  S.  Papyracea  of  Poiret,  instead  of  S.  Syphilitica.

Smilax  Papyracea  is  an  under  shrub  with  a  compressed  stem  angular
below,  and  furnished  with  spines  at  the  angles.  The  leaves  are  ellipti-
cal, acuminate,  and  three-nerved.  It  inhabits  Brazil,  on  the  banks  of
the  Amazon  and  its  tributaries,  and  is  thought  to  furnish  the  Brazilian
Sarsaparilla.

Smilax  Medica  has  an  angular  stem,  armed  with  straight  piickles
at  the  joints,  and  a  few  hooked  ones  in  the  intervals.  The  leaves
are  of  the  texture  of  paper,  smooth,  bright-green  on  both  sides,  cordate,
auriculate,  shortly  acuminate,  five-nerved,  with  the  veins  of  the  under-
side prominent;  they  vary  much  in  form,  being  ovate,  somewhat  pan-
duriform,  auriculate,  and  somewhat  hastate,  with  the  lobes  of  the  base
obtuse,  sometimes  obsolete,  sometimes  divaricating;  their  edge  not
straight,  but  as  if  irregularly  crenate  ;  petioles  and  midrib  armed,  when
old,  with  straight,  subulate  prickles.  Peduncles  smooth,  axillary,  vary-
ing in  length  from  three  lines  to  an  inch  or  more.  Umbel  about  twelve-
flowered,  with  the  pedicels  about  three  lines  long.  Schiede  found  this
plant  on  the  east  slope  of  the  Mexican  Andes,  where  the  root  is  col-
lected and  then  carried  to  Vera  Cruz  ;  it  is  supposed  to  furnish  the  Vera
Cruz  Sarsaparilla  of  commerce.  This  is  imported  from  Vera  Cruz  and
Tampico,  in  large,  loose  bales  of  about  two  hundred  pounds  each,  bound
with  cord  or  leather  thongs,  and  usually  holding  the  roots  folded  upon
themselves,  and  separately  packed.  These  consist  of  a  caudex,  with
numerous  long  radicles,  smaller  than  in  the  Honduras  variety,  and  having
a  thinner  bark.  They  are  frequently  soiled  with  earth.  Although  not
much  esteemed,  it  possesses  considerable  acridity,  and  is,  probably,  not
inferior  to  any  of  the  other  kinds.

Smilax  Sarsaparilla  has  a  long,  slender,  shrubby,  slightly  four-
angled  stem,  aculeate  above.  The  leaves  are  unarmed,  ovate,  lanceolate,
cuspidate,  abruptly  contracted  at  each  end,  with  three  strong  veins,  and
two  lateral  smaller  secondary  ones,  glaucous  beneath,  two  or  three
inches  in  diameter,  and  supported  alternately  upon  short,  margined
petioles  with  two  long  tendrils  at  their  bases.  The  flowers  are  in  small,
56


882  Materia  Medica.

thin  umbels,  yellowish-while,  usually  tlirec  or  four  together,  upon  a
common  peduncle  which  is  longer  than  the  petioles.  The  berries  are
three-seeded,  red  according  to  Wooduille,  black,  to  Pursh.  This  species
is  indigenous,  growing  in  swamps  and  hedges  in  the  Middle  and  Southern
States.  It  does  not  furnish  any  of  the  sarsaparilla  of  commerce,  and  is
supposed  to  be  destitute  of  any  active  medicinal  properties,  but  on  what
grounds  I  do  not  know.  There  is  a  plant  in  the  South  extensively  known
as  Bamboo  Brier,  the  root  of  which  I  have  much  used  in  practice,  and
with  decidedly  more  successful  results  than  from  the  use  of  any  of  the
Sarsaparillas  of  the  shops  —  from  the  description  of  the  plant,  given  to
me  by  those  who  have  seen  it  growing,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  it  is  one
of  the  species  of  Sarsaparilla,  probably  S.  Sarsaparilla,  and  I  invite  the
attention  of  Eclectics  to  it,  as  a  remedy  in  every  respect  superior  to  the  usual
commercial  article,  especially  in  primary  and  secondary  syphilitic  diseases.

Smilax  China  has  a  hard,  large,  knotty,  uneven  rhizoma,  brown  or
blackish  internally,  whitish  within.  The  stem  is  tapering,  slightly
prickly,  growing  two  or  three  feet  high  without  support,  but  acquiring
a  greater  length  if  scrambling  among  bushes.  The  leaves  aie  thin,
membranous,  roundish,  five-nerved,  acute  or  obtuse  at  each  end,  and
mucronate  at  the  point  ;  the  stipules  are  distinct,  obtuse.  Umbels  small,
ten-flowered,  greenish -yellow.  Fruit  red,  about  the  size  of  a  bird  cherry.
This  is  a  native  of  China  and  Japan,  and  has  been  employed  under  the
name  of  China  root  as  a  substitute  for  the  officinal  Sarsaparilla.  As
found  in  the  shops,  it  is  in  pieces  from  two  to  ten  inches  1  >ng,  an  inch
or  two  in  diameter,  somewhat  compressed,  more  or  less  knotty,  often
branched,  brownish  or  grayish-brown  externally,  whitish  or  light  flesh
color  internally,  inodorous,  of  an  insipid  taste  at  first,  but  succeeded  by
a  slight  bitterness  and  acridity,  similar  to  that  of  sarsaparilla.

History. — All  of  the  Sarsaparilla  plants  are  climbing  or  trailing  plants,
with  prickly  stems  ;  there  are  many  species  of  them,  some  of  which  are
destitute  of  any  useful  medicinal  power.  Hancock,  among  six  or  eight
species  growing  in  the  woods  of  Cuiana,  found  only  one  possessing  any
degree  of  medicinal  activity.  There  are  several  varieties  of  the  drug
sarsaparilla  in  commerce,  but  from  our  present  imperfect  knowledge  on
the  subject,  we  cannot  determine  with  certainty  the  species  which  afford
them.  Those  growing  in  Mexico  and  South  America,  have  long  and
slender  roots,  originating  in  great  numbers  from  a  common  head  or
rhizoma,  from  which  arise  the  stems  of  the  plant.  The  whole  root  is
usually  dug  up,  with  the  rhizoma  attached.  Beside  the  varieties  of
this  drug,  heretofore  referred  to,  there  are  one  or  two  others,  viz;  the
Caracas  Sarsaparilla  from  La  Guayra.  It  comes  in  oblong  packages
of  about  one  hundred  pounds,  surrounded  with  broad  strips  of  hide,
which  are  connected  laterally  with  thongs  of  the  same  material,  and
leave  much  of  the  root  exposed.  The  roots  are  separately  and  carefully
packed.


Smilax  Officinalis.  883

Honduras  Sarsaparilla  is  the  variety  most  esteemed  and  more  com-
monly employed  in  this  country.  It  comes  from  the  bay  of  Honduras,
and  is  in  bundles  two  or  three  feet  long,  composed  of  several  roots
folded  lengthwise,  and  compactly  secured  by  a  few  circular  turns.
These  are  packed  in  bales  of  a  hundred  pounds  or  more,  and  are  imper-
fectly covered  with  skins.  Externally  the  roots  are  of  a  dirty-grayish
color,  frequently  re'ddish-brown,  the  epidermis  is  thin,  inner  bark  thick,
and  the  root  is  brittle,  and  so  amylaceous  when  broken,  that  a  fine  white
dust  is  easily  driven  out  by  rubbing  it.  Its  botanical  source  is  not  accu-
rately known.  There  are  some  other  varieties  of  an  inferior  sort,  which
it  is  unnecessary  to  notice.

The  sarsaparilla  of  commerce  is  composed  of  roots  of  several  feet  in
length,  as  thick  or  thicker  than  a  goosequill,  cylindrical,  more  or  less
wrinkled  longitudinally,  flexible,  having  a  thick  bark  externally,  covered
with  a  thin,  easily  separable  epidermis,  an  inner  layer  of  ligneous  fiber,
and  a  central  pith.  The  epidermis  varies  in  color,  but  is  mostly  grayish,
or  reddish-brown,  and  occasionally  very  dark ;  the  bark  also  varies  in
color,  being  whitish,  brown,  pink,  and  occasionally  white,  brittle,  and
pulverulent.  The  ligneous  portion  is  thin,  and  is  composed  of  longitu-
dinal fibers,  which  allow  the  whole  root  to  be  readily  split  through  its
whole  length.  The  central  medulla  often  abounds  in  starch.  The  root
is  very  faintly  odorous,  except  when  boiled  in  water,  which  gives  a
decided  and  peculiar  odor.  Its  taste  is  at  first  mucilaginous,  but  which
gradually  becomes  slightly  bitter  and  disagreeably  and  persistently
acrid.  Water,  either  cold  or  hot,  readily  extracts  its  virtues,  which  are,
however,  much  impaired  by  long  boiling  ;  diluted  alcohol  may  also  be
used  as  a  menstruum.  According  to  Hancock,  water  does  not  take  up
all  the  active  principle.  In  speaking  of  the  Para  and  Rio  Negro  Sarsa-
parilla, he  states  :  "  After  exhausting  half  a  pound  of  this  sort  by  two
digestions,  boiling  and  pressure,  I  added  to  the  dregs  half  a  pint  of
proof  spirit,  and  digested  this  with  a  gentle  heat  for  a  few  hours  in  a
close  vessel,  then  affusing  hot  water  to  the  amount  of  that  taken  off  from
the  first  boiling,  and  pressing  again,  I  procured  by  the  last  operation
about  four  pints  of  an  infusion  which  possessed  the  acrid  properties  of
the  sarsa  in  a  much  higher  degree  even  than  that  obtained  by  the  first
decoction  with  simple  water."  There  is  no  doubt,  that  alcohol  added  to
infusions  of  the  root,  will  increase  their  medicinal  power,  in  consequence
of  its  superior  efficacy  as  a  solvent.  According  to  analysis,  sarsaparilla
contains  a  peculiar  crystalline  substance,  a  coloring  matter,  resin,  starch,
lignin,  a  thick,  aromatic,  fixed  oil,  a  waxy  substance,  chloride  of  potas-
sium, and  nitrate  of  potassa.  Also  said  to  contain  a  minute  proportion
of  volatile  oil,  gum,  bassorin,  albumen,  gluten,  gliadine,  lactic  and  acetic
acids,  and  various  salts.

The  crystalline  substance  found  in  Sarsaparilla  is  supposed  to  be  its
active  principle,  and  has  been  variously  named  by  chemists. Palota,


884r  Materia  Medica.

its  first  discoverer  in  1824,  named  it  Pariylin ;  M.  Folchi,  supposing  he
had  subsequently  discovered  a  new  principle,  called  it  Smilacin.  M.
Thubeuf,  in  1831,  announced  it  as  another  newly-discovered  principle
under  the  name  of  Salseparin ;  and  in  1833  M.  Batka,  from  a  similar
supposition,  gave  an  account  of  it  as  Parillinic  acid,  under  an  impres-
sion that  it  contained  acid  properties.  In  1 834,  M.  Poggiale  proved  that
all  these  substances  are  identical,  though  procured  by  different  pro-
cesses. If  it  is  the  active  principle  of  sarsaparilla  it  should  be  named
Sarsa2Jarillin.  The  best  process  for  obtaining  it,  is  that  of  M.  Thubeuf,
as  follows  :  Treat  the  bruised  root  with  hot  alcohol,  until  it  is  deprived
of  taste,  distil  the  tincture  and  draw  off  seven-eighths  of  the  alcohol ;
treat  the  remainder  with  animal  charcoal,  and  at  the  end  of  twenty-four
or  forty-eight  hours,  filter.  The  sarsaparillin  will  be  deposited  in  the
form  of  a  granular  powder.  This  must  be  dissolved  in  a  fresh  portion
of  alcohol  and  crystallized.  The  alcoholic  mother  liquors  may  be  de-
prived of  that  portion  of  this  principle  which  they  retain,  by  evaporating
to  dryness,  dissolving  the  product  in  water,  filtering,  again  evaporating
to  dryness,  redissolving  in  alcohol,  and  crystallizing.  Sarsaparillin  is
white,  inodorous,  neutral,  almost  tasteless  in  the  solid  state,  but  of  a
bitter,  acrid,  nauseous  taste,  when  dissolved  in  alcohol  or  water.  It  is
sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water,  but  more  readily  in  boiling  water,  which
deposits  it  on  cooling.  Boiling  alcohol  also  dissolves  it  more  readily
than  cold  ;  and  it  is  likewise  soluble  in  ether  and  the  volatile  oils.  The
aqueous  solution  froths  very  much  when  agitated.  It  is  found  in  the
greatest  abundance  in  the  bark  of  the  root.  In  doses  of  from  two  to
thirteen  grains,  it  has  been  found  to  produce  nausea,  and  diminish  the
force  of  the  circulation.  M.  Beral  procured  it  pure,  by  preparing  a
tincture  of  the  root  with  very  dilute  alcohol,  and  distilling  by  means  of
a  salt-water  bath.  It  is,  therefore,  volatile,  and  this  explains  the  cause
of  the  inefficiency  of  a  long  boiled  decoction  of  sarsaparilla.

Sarsaparilla  should  never  be  purchased,  unless  it  leaves  a  decidedly
acrid  impression  on  the  mouth  and  fauces,  after  having  been  chewed
for  a  short  time  ;  without  this  effect,  it  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  an
efficient  article.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Sarsaparilla  is  generally  considered  as  an
alterative,  though  stated  by  some  to  possess  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  and
emetic  properties.  Its  mode  of  action,  however,  is  not  well  understood,
as  it  effects  normal  changes  in  the  system  without  any  apparent  influence
over  any  of  the  functions.  No  medicine  has,  probably,  ever  passed
through  so  many  changes  of  reputation,  having  been  at  various  times
most  highly  lauded  as  an  efficient  alterative,  and  as  often  been  pro-
nounced inert.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  when  properly  pre-
pared, it  exerts  a  favorable  influence  over  the  system.  The  diseases
in  which  it  has  been  more  particularly  recommended,  are  inveterate


Sodium.  885

syphilis,  pseudo-syphilis,  mercurio-syphilis,  and  struma  in  all  its  forms.
It  has  also  been  advised  in  chronic  rheumatism,  chronic  cutaneous
diseases,  passive  general  dropsy,  gonorrheal  neuralgia,  and  other  de-
praved conditions  of  the  system,  where  an  alterative  is  required.  A
beer  is  made  in  South  America,  which  enjoys  much  reputation  there  as
an  alterative  beverage  ;  it  is  made  of  Rio  Negro  Sarsaparilla  one  pound,
raspings  of  guaiac  wood  six  ounces,  aniseed  and  bruised  liquorice  root,
of  each  two  ounces,  mezereon  root-bark  one  ounce,  molasses  one  pound,
and  half  a  dozen  bruised  cloves  ;  pour  upon  these  articles  two  gallons  of
boiling  water,  and  shake  the  vessel  three  times  a  day.  As  soon  as  fer-
mentation has  well  begun,  it  may  be  taken  in  doses  of  four  fluidounces
two  or  three  times  a  day.  At  the  present  day,  sarsaparilla  is  but  little
used  by  Eclectics  ;  the  Stillinyia  Sylvatica  being  found  greatly  superior  to
it  in  medicinal  efficacy,  is  employed  in  preference.  Dose  of  sarsaparilla
in  powder,  thirty  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day  ;  of  the  infusion  or
6yrup,  four  fluidounces.

Off.  Prep.  —  Decoctum  Sarsaparillae;  Extractum  Sarsaparillae  Flui-
dum  ;  Infusum  Sarsaparillae ;  Syrupus  Sarsaparillae  Compositus.


SODIUM.

Sodium.

History.  —  Sodium  was  discovered  by  Sir  H.  Davy  in  1807,  while
decomposing  soda  by  means  of  galvanism.  It  was  subsequently  obtained
in  large  quantities  by  Gay-Lussac  and  Thenard  by  means  of  iron  turn-
ings heated  to  whiteness  ;  these  coming  in  contact,  the  iron  became
oxidized,  and  sodium  was  liberated.  The  process  of  Schcedler  is  the
most  economical,  as  well  as  the  most  generally  employed  at  the  present
day  for  procuring  it — it  is  as  follows :  the  commercial  acetate  of  soda,  is
converted  by  ignition  into  carbonate  and  charcoal,  which  is  heated  in  an
iron-mercury  bottle  to  whiteness,  having  had  an  additional  portion  of
charcoal  mixed  with  it ;  the  process  is  similar  to  that  for  obtaining  potas-
sium, which  see.  Sodium  is  the  metallic  radical  of  the  alkali  soda.  It  is
a  soft,  sectile,  silver-white  metal,  having  a  very  high  luster,  but  becom-
ing quickly  tarnished  and  oxidized  when  exposed  to  the  air,  from  which
it  rapidly  absorbs  oxygen,  and  must  therefore  be  kept  under  naphtha.  Its
specific  gravity  is  0.97,  it  melts  at  200°,  its  equivalent  number  is  23.3,
and  symbol  Na.  It  fuses  into  a  globule,  when  thrown  upon  cold  water,
and  rapidly  traverses  the  surface  in  all  directions,  liberating  hydrogen,
and  generating  a  solution  of  soda,  thus  instantly  decomposing  the  water.
When  exposed  to  the  air,  sodium  forms  the  protoxide,  or  the  alkali  soda,
which  is  the  only  important  oxide,  on  account  of  its  numerous  salts.

Sodium  constitutes  two-fifths  of  all  the  sea-salt  existing  in  salt  water,
in  the  water  of  springs,  rivers,  and  lakes  in  almost  all  soils,  and  in  the
form  of  rock-salt. Sea-salt  is  a  compound  of  sodium  with  chlorine,


Materia Medica.

Na.  CI.  It  is  also  contained  in  many  minerals,  sea-plants,  and  in  most
animal  fluids.  Sodium  and  the  salts  of  the  protoxide  burn  with  a  more
or  less  rich  yellow-colored  flame.

The  medicinal  salts  of  soda  are  chloride  of  sodium,  solutions  of  soda
and  chlorinated  soda,  the  acetate,  borate,  carbonate,  bicarbonate,  phos-
phate, sulphate  and  valerianate  of  soda,  and  the  tartrate  of  potassa  and
second  part  of  this  work.

SOD^E  AOETAS.
Acetate  of  Soda.

History. — Acetate  of  Soda,  formerly  called  Crystallized  Foliated  Earth
of  Tartar,  was  first  obtained  in  1767  by  Meyer.  At  present,  it  is  pre-
pared on  a  large  scale  by  the  manufacturer  of  pyroligneous  acid,  for  the
purpose  of  obtaining  acetic  acid  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid.  The
impure  pyroligneous  acid  is  neutralized  with  lime,  forming  an  acetate  of
lime ;  this  is  treated  with  a  strong  solution  of  sulphate  of  soda,  which  by
double  decomposition  produces  a  deposit  of  sulphate  of  lime,  and  acetate
of  soda  in  solution,  which  last  is  filtered  and  crystallized  ;  the  crystals
may  be  further  purified  by  melting  and  re-crystallizing  them.  It  may
also  be  obtained  by  the  following  process  of  the  Dublin  College  :  Take
of  Crystallized  Carbonate  of  Soda  of  commerce  one  pound  (avoirdupois),
or  a  sufficient  quantity ;  Acetic  Acid  of  commerce,  sp.  gr.  1.044,  one
pint  (Imperial  measure).  To  the  Acid,  placed  in  a  porcelain  capsule,
add  by  degrees  the  Carbonate  of  Soda,  and,  taking  care  that  there  shall
be  a  slight  excess  of  Acid,  evaporate  the  resulting  solution  until  a  pellicle
begins  to  form  on  its  surface,  and  set  it  by  to  crystallize.  The  crystals,
when  drained  of  the  mother  liquor,  and  dried  by  a  short  exposure  to  air
on  a  porous  brick,  should  be  inclosed  in  a  well-closed  bottle.

Acetate  of  Soda  is  a  white  salt,  in  amorphous  foliated  masses  of  inter-
laced crystals,  or  crystallized  in  long  striated  needles  and  oblique  rhom-
bic prisms  variously  modified.  It  is  permanent  in  ordinary  air,  but
slowly  effloresces  in  a  dry  atmosphere,  losing  about  forty  per  cent,  of  its
weight;  its  taste  is  cooling,  saline,  bitterish,  but  not  disagreeable.  It
requires  about  three  parts  of  temperate  water  to  dissolve  it,  and  about
twenty-four  parts  of  alcohol.  It  dissolves  in  less  than  its  own  weight  of
water  at  212°.  A  temperature  of  550°,  cautiously  managed,  drives  off
its  water  of  crystallization,  without  the  loss  of  any  acid  ;  but  at  600°  the
acetic  acid  is  decomposed,  and  a  mixture  of  carbonate  of  soda  and  char-
coal is  left.  Sulphuric  acid  decomposes  it,  setting  free  the  acetic  acid,
which  may  be  known  by  its  peculiar  acetous  odor,  and  forming  a  sulphate
of  soda.  A  solution  of  acetate  of  soda  is  not  acted  on  by  chloride  of
platinum,  which  will  serve  to  distinguish  it  from  a  salt  of  potassa.  Ace-
tate of  soda  should  be  perfectly  neutral  to  test-paper.  It  consists  of  one
equivalent  of  acid  51.48,  one  of  soda  31.3,  and  six  of  water  54=136.78.


Sod^e  Boras.  887

Properties  and  Uses. — Acetate  of  soda  is  a  mild  diuretic,  and  possesses
similar  properties  with  the  acetate  of  potassa.  As  a  diuretic,  its  dose  is
from  a  scruple  to  two  drachms.


SOD^E  BORAS.

Borate  of  Soda. Borax.

History. — Borax  exists  in  a  native  state  in  several  parts  of  the  world,
but  more  abundantly  in  the  water  of  various  lakes  of  Persia  and  Thibet,
on  the  margins  of  which  it  is  left  in  impure  crystals  during  the  dry
season,  and  is  gathered  in  lumps,  called  Tincal  or  Crude  Borax.  It  is
also  met  with  in  the  mines  of  Potosi;  and  is  largely  manufactured  by
the  direct  combination  of  boracic  acid  with  soda.  The  crude  borax  or
tincal  comes  from  Thibet  and  various  parts  of  Asia  by  the  way  of  Cal-
cutta, of  which  there  are  three  varieties,  viz :  Indian  Tincal,  which  is
met  with  in  small  crystals;  Bengal  or  Chandenagor  Tincal,  which  is  in
large,  well-defined,  hexeedral  prismatic  crystals;  and  Chinese  Tincal,
which  is  imported  in  crusts  and  masses,  and  is  partially  refined.  The
tincal  met  with  in  commerce  is  in  crystalline  masses,  of  a  grayish,
greenish,  or  yellowish  color,  opake,  of  a  waxy  luster,  covered  either
with  an  argillaceous,  or  soapy  substance,  of  a  soapy  odor,  and  greasy
to  the  touch.  Before  being  employed  in  medicine  or  in  the  arts,  the
various  kinds  of  tincal  require  purifying.

The  mode  of  purifying  crude  borax  was  for  many  years  known  only
to  the  Dutch  and  Venetians,  who  contrived  to  keep  the  process  a  secret;
but  in  1818  Robiquet  and  Marchand  made  known  a  process  which  is
now  generally  adopted  by  refiners.  It  consists  in  placing  the  tincal  in  a
large  wooden  vessel,  covering  it  with  water  to  the  depth  of  four  or  five
inches,  and  allowing  it  to  remain  thus,  with  occasional  agitation,  for  six
or  seven  hours ;  slaked  lime  is  now  added  in  the  proportion  of  one  part
to  four  hundred  of  tincal,  this  is  thoroughly  mixed  with  the  impure  salt,
and  is  then  allowed  to  remain  for  twenty-four  hours.  The  lime  forms
with  the  soapy  matter  an  insoluble  calcareous  soap,  and  at  the  same
time  removes  sulphate  of  soda,  and  chloride  of  sodium.  The  crude
borax  thus  acted  upon,  is  crumbled  between  the  hands,  and  placed  upon
a  sieve  to  drain  ;  after  the  draining,  it  is  dissolved  in  two  and  a  half
times  its  weight  of  water,  by  the  aid  of  heat,  and  in  order  to  separate  any
remains  of  the  soapy  matter,  about  one-fiftieth  of  its  weight  of  chloride
of  calcium  is  added  to  the  solution,  after  which  it  is  strained.  The  solu-
tion is  then  concentrated  by  evaporation,  and  run  into  wooden  vessels
of  an  inverted  quadrangular  pyramidal  shape,  which  are  lined  with  lead,
and  by  allowing  it  to  cool  very  slowly,  distinct  crystals  of  refined  Borax
are  obtained ;  if  the  cooling  takes  place  rapidly,  crystalline  crusts  only
will  be  furnished.


Materia  Medica.

At  the  present  day,  large  quantities  of  borax  are  made  artificially  by
the  combination  of  boracic  acid  with  soda.  Boracic  acid  is  obtained  in
great  abundance  from  certain  lagoons  and  hot  springs  in  Tuscany,  which
are  stated  to  furnish  about  three  millions  of  pounds  annually.  It  is
impure  when  first  obtained,  containing  in  100  parts  76.5  crystallized
boracic  acid,  8.5  sulphate  of  ammonia,  2.6  sulphate  of  magnesia,  5.0
sulphate  of  lime,  1.2  silica,  1.3  sulphuric  acid,  6.6  water,  beside  various
other  impurities.  Borax  is  prepared  by  saturating  a  solution  of  carbo-
nate of  soda  with  boracic  acid,  then  evaporating  and  crystallizing,  or
by  saturating  caustic  soda  with  boracic  acid ;  the  impurities  existing  in
the  acid  are  removed,  after  the  biborate  has  been  formed,  by  various
processes.  Borax  crystallizes  in  large,  oblique,  rhombic  prisms,  or  in
flattened,  six  or  eight-sided  prisms,  usually  terminated  by  two  or  four
converging  planes  ;  it  is  white,  translucent,  shining,  inodorous,  and  pos-
sessed of  a  peculiar  sweetish,  slightly  saline  and  somewhat  alkaline
taste.  It  has  an  alkaline  reaction.  It  slowly  effloresces  when  exposed
to  the  air,  its  surface  becoming  covered  with  a  white  powder.  It  dis-
solves in  twelve  parts  of  cold,  and  two  of  boiling  water;  sulphuric  acid
added  to  a  hot  concentrated  solution,  causes  a  precipitate  of  white,
pearly,  scaly  crystals  of  boracic  acid,  which,  added  to  alcohol,  impart  a
green  color  to  its  flame  while  burning.  The  sulphate  of  soda  remains
in  solution.  At  a  moderate  heat,  borax  fuses  in  its  water  of  crystalliza-
tion, swells  considerably,  and  ultimately  becomes  an  anhydrous  salt,
having  lost  about  half  its  weight.  Above  a  red  heat  it  fuses  again  into
a  liquid,  which  on  cooling,  concretes  into  a  solid,  transparent  mass,
called  Glass  of  Borax,  which  is  much  used  as  a  flux  in  assays  with  the
blowpipe.  When  two  parts  of  borax,  and  six  parts  of  bitartrate  of
potassa,  are  boiled  for  five  minutes,  in  sixteen  parts  of  water,  the
solution  filtered  when  cool,  and  then  evaporated,  a  gummy  mass  is
obtained,  called  Soluble  Cream  of  Tartar;  this  is  soluble  in  its  own
weight  of  cold,  and  half  its  weight  of  boiling  water.  Boracic  acid
renders  the  bitartrate  of  potassa  still  more  soluble  in  water,  than  borax;
four  parts  of  the  bitartrate  and  one  of  acid,  boiled  in  twenty-four  parts
of  water,  and  the  solution  evaporated,  will  likewise  form  soluble  cream
of  tartar,  the  exact  character  of  which  is  not  satisfactorily  known.
Boracic  acid  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  boron  10.9,  and  three  of
oxygen  24=34.9  (B03).  Borax  consists  of  two  equivalents  of  boracic
acid  69.8,  one  of  soda  31.3,  and  ten  of  water  90=191.1  (2B03  +NaO
+  10Aq).  The  boracic  acid  is  so  feeble  an  acid  that  even  the  two
equivalents  of  it  in  borax  do  not  fully  neutralize  the  soda,  so  that  borax
is  an  alkaline  salt.  A  variety  of  borax  occurs  containing  only  five
equivalents  of  water;  it  crystallizes  in  octahedrons,  is  harder  than  com-
mon borax,  and  does  not,  effloresce.  It  may  be  obtained  by  crystalliz-
ing a  boiling  solution  of  borax,  at  a  temperature  between  132°  and  174Q.
Borax  is  not  subject  to  adulteration.


Sod^e  Carbonas.  889

Properties  and  Uses. — The  medicinal  actions  of  borax  are  but  imper-
fectly known.  It  is  supposed  to  be  a  diuretic,  refrigerant,  antilithic,
emmenagogue,  and  aphrodisiac.  It  lias  been  found  an  excellent  remedy
in  nephritic  and  calculous  complaints,  depending  upon  an  excess  of  uric
or  lithic  acid;  the  dose  is  from  thirty  to  forty  grains.  It  is  rarely  used  as
a  parturient  agent,  yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  exerts  an  action  on  the
uterus.  It  has  been  successfully  used  in  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,
and  to  facilitate  parturition,  or  favor  the  expulsion  of  the  placenta.  In
such  instances  it  has  been  used  alone,  or  combined  with  other  agents
as  ergot,  blue  cohosh,  cinnamon,  etc.  Ten  grains  given  for  a  dose,  and
repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day  for  several  days,  have  produced  abor-
tion, attended  with  pains  all  over  the  system,  and  excessive  debility  of
the  joints,  which  remained  for  several  months  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.
It  is  an  aphrodisiac,  and  will  excite  the  venereal  appetite  when  taken
internally  ;  but  its  aphrodisiac  effects  are  said  to  be  more  marked  when
a  solution  of  it  is  injected  into  the  rectum,  and  retained  there  an  hour
or  two.  A  solution  of  ten  or  fifteen  grains  to  the  fluidounce  of  water,
injected,  will,  in  two  or  three  hours,  produce  a  powerful  venereal  excite-
ment. And  if  the  strength  of  the  solution  be  doubled,  it  will  cause
powerful  erections,  and  several  copious  seminal  emissions.

It  is  in  extensive  use  as  an  external  application  in  aphthous  and  inflam-
matory affections  of  the  mouth  and  throat,  and  in  scaly  cutaneous
diseases.  A  solution  of  one  drachm  in  five  fluidounces  of  water,  with  a
little  sugar  or  honey,  forms  one  of  the  best  applications  for  use  as  a  gargle
in  the  early  stage  of  mercurial  salivation,  and  also  in  all  varieties  of
aphthous  ulceration  of  the  mouth  and  throat.  One  drachm  of  borax
dissolved  in  two  fluidounces  of  distilled  vinegar,  is  said  to  be  an  excel-
lent lotion  for  ringworm  of  the  scalp.  In  liver  spots,  (pityriasis  versi-
color), it  has  also  been  found  beneficial,  and  in  pruritus  vulva,  combined
with  morphia.  Combined  with  sugar  it  forms  an.  excellent  collyrium,
and  enters  into  several  cooling  or  refrigerant  lotions.  The  dose  of
borax  is  from  ten  to  thirty  grains,  dissolved  in  water,  or  in  infusion  of
elm  or  flaxseed.

Off.  Prep. — Lotio  Boracis  ;  Lotio  Boracis  cum  Morphise.


SOD^E CARBONAS.
Carbonate  of  Soda.

History. — Carbonate  of  Soda  exists  in  a  native  state  in  various  parts
of  the  world  in  mineral  waters,  lakes,  and  springs,  or  in  the  surface  of
the  soil,  which  frequently  exhibits  a  saline  efflorescence.  It  sometimes
occurs  as  a  mineral  in  the  form  of  sesquicarbonate,  and  is  found  abun-
dantly in  the  ashes  of  marine  and  salt-marsh  plants.  Thus,  it  is  found
in  Fiance  in  the  waters  of  Vichy  and  of  Vals,  in  Hungary  in  the  waters
of  Bilin,  and  in  Iceland  in  the  Geyser  springs;  as  a  mineral,  it  is  found


S90  Materia  Medica.

in  Hungary,  Egypt,  South  America,  and  in  Northern  Africa.  The  prin-
cipal part  of  the  commercial  salt  is,  however,  prepared  artificially,  being
much  purer  than  that  otherwise  obtained.

The  ashes  of  marine  plants  furnish  an  impure  soda,  which  is  called
Barilla,  or  Kelp.  Barilla  is  obtained  from  a  variety  of  plants,  chiefly
of  the  genera  Salicomia,  Sulsola,  and  Chenopodium.  When  ripe,  these
vegetables  are  cut  down,  dried,  and  burnt.  The  ashes  contain  from
twenty-five  to  forty  per  cent,  of  carbonate  of  soda,  and  when  of  good
quality,  are  in  hard,  dry,  porous,  sonorous,  grayish-blue  masses,  which
upon  exposure  to  the  air  become  covered  with  a  saline  efflorescence.
Barilla  is  prepared  chiefly  in  Spain  and  Sicily.  Kelp  is  procured  from
various  seaweeds,  principally  the  Algce  and  Fuci.  The  plants  are
allowed  to  ferment  in  heaps,  then  dried,  and  burnt.  A  large  solid  mass
is  formed,  which  is  broken  into  small  fragments.  As  found  in  com-
merce, kelp  is  in  hard,  vesicular,  dark-gray,  bluish,  or  greenish  masses,
having  a  sulphurous  odor,  and  a  caustic  acrid  taste.  It  contains  from
five  to  eight  per  cent,  only  of  carbonate  of  soda,  and  was  formerly
abundantly  manufactured  in  Great  Britain,  and  especially  in  the  Orkney
and  Hebrides  islands.

The  artificial  salt  is  prepared  by  decomposing  the  sulphate  of  soda;
which  salt  is  more  commonly  made  by  converting  common  salt  (chloride
of  sodium)  into  the  sulphate,  by  means  of  sulphuric  acid.  The  sulphate
being  thoroughly  dried  is  intimately  mixed  with  its  weight  of  limestone-
powder,  or  chalk,  and  half  its  weight  of  powdered  pit-coal;  the  whole
mixture  is  then  subjected  to  a  strong  heat  in  a  reverberatory  furnace,
and  frequently  turned  over,  till  flames  cease  to  be  emitted,  and  a  pasty,
black  mass  is  obtained  called  Black  Ash,  Black  Soda-ash,  Black  Balls,  or
British  Barilla.  When  properly  prepared  this  contains  soda  chiefly  in
the  caustic  state,  and  equivalent  to  about  55  per  cent,  of  the  dry  car-
bonate. When  this  is  lixiviated  and  evaporated  to  perfect  dryness,  the
soda  becomes  partly  carbonated,  and  a  white  or  gray  compact  substance
is  produced,  which  is  called  Soda-ash  or  White  Soda-ash.  The  carbonate
of  soda  is  obtained  by  calcining  this  soda-ash  in  a  reverberatory  furnace,
with  its  weight  of  sawdust  or  coal-dust,  the  temperature  being  maintained
between  650°  and  700°,  till  blue  flames  cease  to  issue;  the  sulphur  is
thus  burnt  all  away,  and  all  the  soda  becomes  carbonated.  The  result-
ing mass  is  then  lixi'viated,  concentrated  till  a  pellicle  forms  on  its
surface,  and  then  poured  into  tanks  to  crystallize.  This  mode  of  manu-
facturing carbonate  of  soda,  is  pursued  on  an  immense  scale  in  Great
Britain,  especially  at  Liverpool  and  Glasgow.

Carbonate  of  soda crystallizes  in  rhombic  octahedres, or  in  large

oblique  rhombic  prisms,  or  forms  derived  from  the  latter. These  are

colorless,  transparent,  alkaline,  and  disagreeable  to  the  taste,  speedily

efflorescent  in  the  air,  soluble  in  twice  their  weight  of  cold  water,  inso-

uble  in  alcohol,  and  having  an  alkaline  reaction. At  a  moderate  heat


Sod^;  Carbonas.  891

they  lose  their  water  of  crystallization;  if  it  be  increased,  they  become
converted  into  a  white,  opake,  anhydrous  carbonate.  The  anhydrous
salt  is  fused  at  a  full  red-heat.  Carbonate  of  soda  may  be  known  from
the  carbonate  of  potassa  by  its  crystalline  appearance  and  disposition
to  effloresce  —  from  bicarbonate  of  potassa  by  its  efflorescence  —  from
bicarbonate  of  soda,  by  that  being  never  distinctly  crystalline.  In  solu-
tion, it  may  be  discriminated  from  carbonate  of  potassa,  b}?  chloride  of
platinum,  an  excess  of  tartaric  acid,  or  perchloric  acid,  occasioning  no
precipitate — and  from  bicarbonate  of  soda  by  giving  a  white  precipitate
with  sulphate  of  magnesia,  and  a  reddish-brown  one  with  corrosive  sub-
limate. It  is  incompatible  with  acids,  acidulous  salts,  lime-water,  muriate
of  ammonia,  and  earthy  and  metallic  salts.  It  consists  of  one  equivalent
of  soda  31.3,  one  of  carbonic  acid  22.12,  and  ten  of  water  90  =  143.42.
(Na  O  +  CO2-I-  10  Aq.)  The  quantity  of  water  may,  however,  vary
in  its  proportion,  owing  to  the  degree  of  efflorescence  of  the  salt.

Sulphate  of  soda  and  chloride  of  sodium  are  the  most  common  impu-
rities met  with  ;  these  may  be  detected  by  converting  the  carbonate  into
a  nitrate,  and  then  testing  with  chloride  of  barium,  and  nitrate  of  silver.
When  improperly  prepared  the  salt  is  apt  to  contain  some  sulphuret  of
sodium,  which  may  be  known  by  the  odor  of  sulphureted  hydrogen  which
is  emitted  on  dissolving  it  in  water.  Good  carbonate  of  soda  should  be
free  from  these  impurities,  though  common  salt  is  frequently  present.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses  carbonate  of  soda  is  corrosive
and  irritant;  in  medicinal  ones,  it  is  antacid,  antilithic,  and  resolvent.
When  an  overdose  is  taken,  the  best  antidotes  are  fixed  oils,  acetic  acid,
lemon-juice,  or  cream  of  tartar.  It  has  been  used  in  diseases  attended
with  acidity  of  stomach,  especially  gout,  uric  acid,  gravel,  dyspepsia,
sick-headache,  etc.  It  is  more  easily  taken,  and  is  less  acrid  and
disagreeable  than  the  carbonate  of  potassa.  As  with  all  the  alkaline
carbonates,  if  too  long  employed,  it  may  bring  on  phosphatic  gravel
through  the  alkalinity  of  the  urine;  on  this  account,  the  bicarbonates
dissolved  in  carbonic  acid-water  and  taken,  are  preferable,  as  the
excess  of  carbonic  acid  tends  to  keep  the  phosphates  in  solution.  It
has  been  recommended  in  pertussis,  scrofula,  and  bronchocele,  and  as
an  internal  and  external  agent  in  scaly  and  papular  cutaneous  diseases.
In  these  latter  affections,  a  lotion  may  be  made  by  dissolving  two  or
three  drachms  of  the  carbonate  in  a  pint  of  water;  or  a  bath  may  be
employed,  holding  from  eight  to  sixteen  ounces  in  solution  in  the  neces-
sary quantity  of  water ;  or  an  ointment  may  be  used,  composed  of  from
eight  to  sixty  grains  to  the  ounce  of  lard.  The  dose  of  carbonate  of  soda
is  from  ten  to  thirty  grains  in  solution.

Off.  Prep. — Ferri  Carbonas  Saccharatum  ;  Ferri  Subcarbonas  ;  Liquor
Sodae  Chlorinatae ;  Magnesise  Carbonas;  Pilulae  Ferri  Caibonatis;  Sodse
Acetas;  Sodae  Bicarbonas;  Sodas  Carbonas  Exsiccatus;  Sodee  et  Potassa)
Tartras;  Sodse  Phosphas;  Zinci  Carbonas  Preecipitatus.


892  Materia  Medica.

SODJE  SULPHAS.

Sulphate  of  Soda.

History. — Sulphate  of  Soda,  also  known  as  Glauber's  Sail,  from  its  dis-
coverer in  1658,  and  Vitriolated  Soda,  exists  more  or  less  abundantly  in
various  mineral  springs,  in  sea- water,  and  in  the  form  of  mineral  com-
bined with  sulphate  of  lime.  It  is  found  in  the  mineral  springs  of  Carls-
bad, Cheltenham,  Sulphur  springs  of  Virginia,  Saratoga  Pavilion  spring,
Geyser  springs,  and  Paipa  among  the  Andes,  in  the  latter  of  which,  it
is  so  abundant,  that  it  forms  crystals  upon  the  soil  over  which  the  water
is  thrown.  It  is  likewise  prepared  artificially  in  great  quantity  in  the
processes  for  procuring  muriatic  acid  and  chlorine,  and  in  obtaining
muriate  of  ammonia  from  common  salt  and  sulphate  of  ammonia.  In
some  of  the  New  England  States,  it  is  procured  in  the  winter  season
from  sea-water.

The  Edinburgh  Pharmacopoeia  gives  the  following  formula  for  prepar-
ing it :  Dissolve  two  pounds  of  the  salt  which  remains  after  the  distillation
of  pure  muriatic  acid  (which  is  a  supersulphate  of  soda),  in  three  pints,
Imperial  measure,  of  boiling  water;  then  add  white  marble  in  powder
so  long  as  effervescence  takes  place,  or  to  saturate  the  excess  of  acid,
boil  the  liquid,  and  when  neutral,  filter  it;  wash  the  insoluble  matter
(sulphate  of  lime)  with  boiling  water,  and  add  the  washings  to  the
original  liquid  ;  concentrate  till  a  pellicle  begins  to  form,  and  then  set  it
aside  to  crystallize.  Thomas,  Dellisse,  and  Boucard  have  proposed  a
cheap  process  and  which  avoids  the  productions  of  muriatic  acid  vapors;
it  is  by  double  decomposition  between  sulphate  of  iron,  and  chloride  of
sodium.

Sulphate  of  soda  crystallizes  in  large  oblique  rhombic  prisms,  often
truncated  on  their  acute  edges  so  as  to  form  six-sided  prisms,  and  termi-
nated by  two,  four,  or  six  converging  planes  ;  when  hastily  crystallized,
the  crystals  are  small  and  acicular.  Its  crystalline  form  and  general
appearance  resemble  those  of  the  sulphates  of  magnesia  and  zinc.  It
is  colorless  and  transparent,  possessing  a  cooling,  bitter,  saline,  nauseous
taste,  and  effloresces  in  the  air,  its  surface  becoming  covered  with  an
opake  white  powder.  It  is  soluble  in  three  times  its  weight  of  cold,  and
in  its  own  weight  of  boiling  water,  and  is  insoluble  in  alcohol.  Exposed
to  heat  it  fuses  in  its  water  of  crystallization,  which  is  expelled  by
an  elevated  heat,  with  the  exception  of  one  equivalent  of  water;  this
is  removed,  however,  by  a  low  red-heat,  and  at  a  full  red-heat,  the  salt
fuses  again,  losing  55£  per  cent,  of  its  weight.  It  is  not  subject  to  adul-
teration, though  it  occasionally  contains  an  excess  of  alkali  or  acid,
which  may  be  ascertained  by  turmeric  or  litmus  paper.  Salt  may  be
detected  by  sulphate  of  silver;  iron  by  tincture  of  galls,  or  ferrocyanu-
ret  of  potassium.  Sulphate  of  soda  is  incompatible  with  the  salts  of  lime,
baryta,  and  lead, carbonate of  potassa,  and nitrate  of  silver. It is


Sodii  Chloeidum.  893

composed  of  one  equivalent  of  soda  31.3,  one  of  sulphuric  acid  40,  and
ten  of  water  90=161.3  (Na  0  +  SOs  -f  10  HO).

Properties  and  Uses. — Sulphate  of  soda  is  cathartic,  aperient,  and
diuretic,  but  on  account  of  its  disagreeable  taste,  it  has  gradually  been
displaced  by  the  sulphate  of  magnesia.  As  a  cathartic  the  dose  is  from
four  drachms  to  an  ounce,  dissolved  in  eight  or  ten  ounces  of  water ;
as  an  aperient  and  diuretic  the  doses  must  be  smaller,  and  largely  diluted
with  water.  As  the  salt  by  efflorescence  loses  about  half  its  weight  of
water,  when  the  effloresced  article  is  used,  the  dose  will  be  only  one
half  of  the  above  quantities.  A  few  drops  of  sulphuric  acid,  or  a  little
lemon-juice,  or  cream  of  tartar,  added  to  the  solution,  will  lessen  its
nauseous  and  bitter  taste.


SODII  CHLORIDUM.
Chloride  of  Sodium.

History. — Chloride  of  Sodium  (Sodce  Murias,  Muriate  of  Soda,  Com
mon  salt),  exists  abundantly  in  nature  either  in  solution,  or  in  the  solid
state.  In  the  state  of  solution  it  is  found  in  many  springs,  lakes,  and  in
sea-water,  which  contains  about  2.7  per  cent,  of  it,  and  from  which  it  is
obtained  either  by  spontaneous  evaporation  in  warm  countries,  consti-
tuting the  bay-salt  of  commerce,  which  is  in  large  grains  approaching  the
cuboidal  form,  or,  by  concentrating  the  sea-water  with  the  aid  of  heat,
constituting  the  sea-salt  of  commerce,  which  is  in  small,  white,  irregular
grains,  tending  to  the  cubic  form.  In  the  evaporation  of  sea  water,  sul-
phate of  lime  is  deposited  in  the  early  part  of  the  process,  and  after  the
crystallization  of  the  chloride  of  sodium,  a  large  proportion  of  magnesian
salts  remain  in  the  mother-water.  All  salt  waters  have  the  salt  obtained
by  evaporation  in  large  iron  boilers,  or  by  spontaneous  evaporation,
depending  on  the  amount  of  salt  contained  in  the  water,  and  the  tem-
perature of  the  climate.  In  the  solid  state,  salt  is  found  in  various  parts
of  the  world,  forming  extensive  beds,  and  even  entire  mountains,  from
which  it  is  removed  in  blocks  or  large  masses  by  mining  operations  ;  in
this  state  it  is  called  Rock  Salt,  Fossil  Suit,  Gem  Salt,  etc.  It  is  either
transparent  or  translucent,  exhibiting  various  colors,  as  red,  yellow,  blue,
brown,  etc.,  owing  probably  to  the  presence  of  manganese  and  iron,  and
from  which  it  may  be  purified  by  solution,  and  crystallization.  In  the
United  States  a  great  amount  of  salt  is  made  at  Salina,  Montezuma,
Galena,  on  the  Kanawha,  etc.,  from  saline  springs  which  either  flow
naturally,  or  are  produced  artificially  by  sinking  shafts  to  various  depths
in  places  where  salt  is  known  to  exist.  Although  there  are  several
varieties  of  salt  recognized  in  commerce,  the  essential  difference  between
them  is  in  the  size  and  density  of  the  grains,  rather  than  in  a  differenco
of  composition.

Chloride  of  sodium  by  slow  evaporation  crystallizes  in  transparent,
colorless,  and  regular  cubes,  but  by  hasty  evaporation  it  forms  hollow


894  Materia Medica.

quadrangular  pyramids.  It  is  permanent  in  the  air,  but  becomes  moist
on  the  surface  in  a  damp  atmosphere,  or  when  chloride  of  magnesium  is
present.  It  is  sparingly  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  dissolves  in  two  and
two-third  parts  of  cold  water ;  boiling  increases  its  solubility  but  very
slightly.  Heat  causes  it  to  decrepitate  from  the  presence  of  water
inclosed  in  the  crystals  ;  a  red  heat  fuses,  and  a  white  heat  volatilizes  it
in  white  fumes  without  decomposition.  It  communicates  a  bright  yellow
hue  to  the  flame  of  spirit.  Nitrate  of  silver  added  to  its  solution  occa-
sions a  curdy  white  precipitate  of  muriate  of  silver,  soluble  in  ammonia.
It  does  not  yield  a  yellow  precipitate  with  chloride  of  platinum,  or  a
crystalline  deposit  with  tartaric  acid,  as  is  the  case  with  chloride  of
potassa.  It  is  very  apt  to  contain  sulphates  of  lime  and  magnesia,  and
chlorides  of  magnesium  and  calcium.  Pure  chloride  of  sodium  is  not
precipitated  by  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium,  carbonate  of  soda,  or  chlo-
ride of  barium.  It  is  incompatible  with  nitric,  sulphuric,  and  several
other  acids,  carbonate  of  potassa,  nitrate  of  silver,  and  protoxide  of
mercury.  It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  chlorine  35.42,  and  one
of  sodium  23.3=58.72,  Na+Cl.

Properties  and  Uses. — Chloride  of  sodium  in  large  doses  is  emetic  and
cathartic  ;  in  small  ones,  tonic,  alterative,  and  anthelmintic.  It  is  useful
in  all  chronic  diseases  characterized  by  a  pale  color  of  the  tongue  with  a
white  coat  or  fur.  In  teaspoonful  doses,  taken  dry,  it  often  checks
hemoptysis,  and  used  moderately  it  promotes  digestion,  removes  stru-
mous diseases,  cures  seme  forms  of  dyspepsia,  and  gives  tone  to  the
digestive  organs  of  children,  and  corrects  the  disposition  to  generate
worms.  It  proves  a  salutary  stimulus  even  in  health  when  taken  in  very
small  quantity,  but  an  undue  amount  of  it  used  daily,  does,  undoubtedly,
in  many  persons  dispose  to  plethora  and  corpulency.  In  spasms  of  an
epileptic  or  apoplectic  character,  the  effects  of  intemperance,  salt  and
mustard,  a  teaspoonful  or  two  of  each,  given  in  warm  water,  every  ten
or  fifteen  minutes,  until  free  emesis  is  j)roduced,  will  be  found  the  most
efficient  emetic.  In  these  cases,  counter-irritation  may  be  produced  by
bastinadoing  the  feet,  and  after  the  vomiting,  the  patient  may  drink
freely  of  good  fresh  milk.  During  the  cholera  of  1849-50-51,  in  Cin-
cinnati, much  benefit  was  derived  from  the  following  mixture:  Black
Pepper,  in  powder,  fine  Table  Salt,  of  each,  one  teaspoonful  ;  Vinegar,
five  teaspoonfuls  ;  Hot  Water,  half  a  tumblerful.  Dose,  a  tablespoonful
every  five,  ten,  or  fifteen  minutes,  as  circumstances  required.  It  speedily
checked  vomiting,  abated  the  watery  discharges,  and  removed  the
cramps.  It  succeeded  in  many  cases,  where  every  other  means  had
failed.  Externally,  applied  in  solution,  salt  is  useful  as  a  fomentation  in
bruises  or  sprains,  as  a  tonic  and  excitant  application  in  depraved  condi-
tions of  the  system,  as  a  collyrium  in  some  ophthalmic  diseases,  and  is
frequently  used  as  an  ingredient  in  stimulating  enemata.  A  pound  of
salt  to  four  gallons  of  water  forms  a  suitable  salt-water  bath,  acting  as  a


Solanum  Dulcamara.  $95

tonic  and  excitant  in  debilitated  and  strumous  habits.  The  dose  of  salt
as  a  tonic  and  alterative,  is  from  ten  to  sixty  grains.  It  has  recently
been  recommended  as  a  remedy  in  phthisis  and  intermittent  fever.  The
entire  absence  of  salt  in  the  food,  gives  rise  to  a  cachectic  condition,  and
other  morbid  states,  with  the  formation  of  an  abundance  of  intestinal
worms.

Off.  Prep. — Acidum  Muriaticum  Purum  ;  Liquor  Sodae  Chlorinatae  ;
Sodce  Murias  Purum.


SOLANUM  DULCAMARA.

Bittersweet.
Nat.  Ord. — Solanaceas. Sex.  Si/st. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT AND TWIGS.

Description.  —  Bittersweet  or  Woody  Nightshade,  is  a  woody  vine,
having  a  woody  root,  with  a  shrubby,  flexuous,  thornless  and  branching
stem,  several  feet  in  length,  and  having  a  grayish-green  bark  on  the  stem
and  large  branches.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  acute,  mostly  smooth,
though  sometimes  pubescent,  veined,  of  a  dull-green  color,  and  petiolate  ;
the  lower  ones  are  ovate  or  cordate  ;  the  upper,  halbert-shaped,  or  with
two  ear-like  lobes  at  the  base,  sometimes  only  one  side;  most  of  them
are  entire.  The  flowers  are  purple,  and  are  disposed  in  branched  cymose
racemes,  opposite  the  leaves  or  terminal,  drooping,  divaricate,  and  on
alternately  subdivided  peduncles.  Bracts  minute.  The  calyx  is  very
small,  acute,  purplish,  and  divided  into  five  persistent  segments.  The
corolla  is  rotate,  and  consists  of  five  purple  reflexed  segments,  which  are
acute,  ovate,  with  two  roundish,  shining  greenish  spots  at  the  base  of
each.  The  filaments  are  very  short;  the  anthers  erect,  yellow,  some-
what connected  into  a  conical  tube.  Ovary  roundish,  bearing  a  filiform
style,  longer  than  the  anthers,  with  a  simple,  obtuse  stigma.  The  fruit
is  a  scarlet,  oval,  juicy  berry,  containing  several  whitish,  plano-convex
seeds.

History. — Bittersweet,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Violet-bloom,  and
Scarlet-berry,  is  common  to  both  Europe  and  this  country,  growing  in
shady,  fertile  situations,  especially  where  there  is  some  moisture,  and
flowering  from  June  to  August.  Its  berries  are  ripened  in  autumn,  and
remain  on  the  vine  during  most  of  the  winter.  There  are  several  varie-
ties of  it,  founded  on  the  form  of  the  leaves,  and  their  smoothness  or
pubescence.  The  officinal  portion  are  the  small  stems  or  twigs,  though
the  whole  plant  is  medicinal.  The  berries,  when  eaten,  have  certainly
produced  serious  consequences,  though  considered  by  many  to  be  innox-
ious. The  best  time  for  gathering  the  twigs  is  in  autumn,  after  the
leaves  have  fallen  ;  those  plants  growing  in  high  and  dry  situations  are
eaid  to  be  the  best.


896  Materia  Medica.

When  dried,  the  twigs  are  of  various  lengths,  light,  hollow,  cylin-
drical, about  as  thick  as  a  goosequill,  wninkled.  and  of  a  grayish-ash
color  externally,  and  consisting  of  a  thin  bark,  an  interior  woody  portion,
and  a  central  pith.  When  fresh,  they  emit  on  being  bruised,  a  peculiar,
nauseous  odor,  and  have  a  taste  at  first  bitter,  followed  by  some  sweet-
ness, and  which  has  given  origin  to  the  name  of  the  plant;  when  dried
they  are  inodorous,  but  of  the  same  taste  with  the  fresh  twigs.  They
impart  their  virtues  to  boiling  water,  and  diluted  alcohol ;  but  long
boiling  destroys  their  activity.  They  are  found  to  contain  a  sweetish,
bitter  extract,  named  Dulcamarin  or  Picroglycion  ;  a  narcotic  alkaloid,
named  Solania  ;  beside  gum,  gluten,  and  other  unimportant  ingredients.
Its  active  principle  is,  probably,  the  solania.

Several  other  species  of  Solanum  have  been  employed  medicinally.
The  Solanum  Tuberosum  or  Common  Potato  is  said  to  possess  narcotic
properties.  An  extract  prepared  from  the  leaves  has  been  given  in
doses  of  from  half  a  grain  to  two  grains  in  cough  and  spasmodic  affec-
tions with  advantage  ;  the  stem  and  unripe  berries  have  also  been  em-
ployed. The  extract  has  also  been  of  service  in  chronic  rheumatism
and  painful  affections  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.  The  potato  itself,  has
been  eaten  in  a  raw  state,  either  with  or  without  vinegar,  in  cases  of
scurvy,  and  with  good  effect ;  occasionally  it  produced  narcotic  symp-
toms, with  a  slight  action  on  the  bowels.  Some  practitioners  have,  how-
ever, employed  it  in  the  above-named  forms,  without  producing  any
sensible  effect.  Probably,  cultivation,  soil,  climate,  season,  etc.,  exert
some  influence  upon  the  properties  of  the  plant.  Dr.  J.  Otto  found  So-
lania in  the  germs  of  the  potato.  The  stalks  of  potato  furnish  a  large
quantity  of  potassa.  If  the  stalks  are  cut  while  the  plant  is  in  flower,
and  the  juice  obtained  by  bruising  and  pressing,  a  bright  yellow  dye
will  be  obtained.

Solanum  Lycopersicon,  (Zy coper sicon  Esculentum,)  or  Tomato,  is  a
native  of  South  America.  The  fruit  contains  a  peculiar  acid,  and  a
brown,  tarry,  odorous,  resinous  matter,  with  some  indications  of  the
presence  of  an  alkaloid.  It  forms  a  very  healthy  article  of  food,  and
exerts  a  marked  influence  on  the  biliary  functions.  The  leaves  have  a
nauseous,  narcotic  odor,  and  contain  an  alkaloid  very  analogous  to  Sola-
nia, a  peculiar  oil,  and  animal-extractive.  Nearly  all  of  the  Solanums
are  possessed  of  nutritive  or  medicinal  properties.

Solania  may  be  best  obtained  from  the  potato.  In  the  beginning  of
June,  collect  the  sprouts,  and  press  them  down  in  a  suitable  vessel,  by
means  of  pebbles.  Then  cover  them  with  water  acidulated  with  sulphu-
ric acid,  so  as  to  have  a  strongly  acid  reaction  during  the  maceration,
and  allow  them  to  macerate  for  twelve  or  eighteen  hours.  Then  express
by  hand,  and  the  liquor,  with  the  addition  of  fresh  portions  of  sulphuric
acid,  is  to  be  added  twice  successively,  as  at  first,  to  fresh  portions  of
sprouts,  and  in  like  manner  separated  by  expression. After  standing  for


Solanum Dulcamara.  897

some  days,  it  must  be  filtered,  and  treated  with  powdered  hydrate  of
lime  in  slight  excess.  The  precipitate  which  forms,  is  to  be  separated
by  straining,  dried  in  a  warm  air,  and  boiled  several  times  in  alcohol.
The  alcoholic  solution,  being  filtered  while  hot,  will  upon  cooling  deposit
the  solania  in  flocculent  crystals.  An  additional  quantity  of  the  alka-
loid may  be  obtained  by  evaporating  the  mother  liquor  to  one-fourth  its
volume,  and  then  allowing  it  to  cool.  The  whole  residuary  liquor  will
assume  a  gelatinous  consistence,  and,  upon  being  dried,  will  leave  the
solania  in  the  form  of  a  translucent,  horny,  amorphous  mass.  Solania
may  be  obtained  impure  from  S.  Dulcamara  or  S.  Nigrum,  by  precipi-
tating the  expressed  juice  of  the  plant  with  ammonia,  and  then  purifying
by  repeated  solution  in  alcohol,  and  decolorizing  with  animal  charcoal.
When  pure,  solania  is  in  the  form  of  a  white,  opake  powder,  or  of  deli-
cate acicular  crystals,  permanent  in  the  air,  inodorous,  of  a  bitter  taste,
fusible  at  a  little  above  212°  F.,  scarcely  soluble  in  water,  soluble  in
alcohol  or  ether,  and  neutralizing  acids  without  forming  crystallizable
salts.  Its  solution  becomes  deep-brown  or  brownish-yellow  on  the  addi-
tion of  iodine  ;  and  sulphuric  acid  causes  it  to  become  at  first  reddish-
yellow,  then  purplish-violet,  then  brown,  and  finally  colorless,  with  a
brown  pulverulent  precipitate.  Solania  has  not  been  used  in  medicine  ;
two  grains  administered  to  a  rabbit,  produced  symptoms  of  coma  and
paralysis,  followed  by  death  ;  somewhat  larger  doses  caused  vomiting  in
dogs  and  cats,  succeeded  by  drowsiness.

Picroglycion  may  be  obtained  by  treating  the  watery  extract  of  S.
Dulcamara  with  alcohol,  evaporating  the  tincture,  dissolving  the  residue
in  water,  precipitating  the  solution  with  subacetate  of  lead,  decomposing
the  excess  of  this  salt  by  sulphureted  hydrogen,  then  evaporating  the
liquor  to  dryness,  and  treating  the  residue  with  acetic  ether.  Upon
spontaneous  evaporation  the  principle  is  obtained  in  the  form  of  small
isolated  crystals.

Properties  and  Uses. — Solanum  Dulcamara  is  feebly  narcotic,  diuretic,
alterative,  diaphoretic,  and  discutient.  It  has  been  chiefly  used  in  syrup
or  decoction  in  cutaneous  diseases,  syphilitic  diseases,  rheumatic  and
cachectic  affections,  ill-conditioned  ulcers,  scrofula,  indurations  from
milk,  leucorrhea,  jaundice,  and  obstructed  menstruation.  It  is  of  more
benefit  in  scaly  cutaneous  diseases,  than  others,  as  in  lepra,  psoriasis,
and  pityriasis,  and  especially  when  combined  with  guaiacum,  and  yellow
dock  root.  When  taken  in  large  doses  it  produces  nausea,  vomiting,
faintness,  vertigo,  and  spasmodic  action  of  the  muscles.  With  many
persons,  the  face  and  hands  become  purplish,  and  the  circulation
depressed  while  under  its  influence.  It  is  said  to  be  antaphrodisiac,  and
has  proved  useful  in  mania  in  which  the  venereal  functions  were  strongly
excited.  Equal  parts  of  the  twigs,  yellow  dock  root,  and  stillingia,
made  into  a  syrup,  form  a  valuable  preparation  for  scrofulous  affections,
57


898  Materia  Medica.

as  well  as  syphilitic.  Externally,  in  the  form  of  ointment,  it  is  employed
as  a  discutient  to  painful  tumors,  also  as  an  application  to  some  forms  of
cutaneous  disease,  ulcers,  and  erysipelatous  affections.  Dose  of  the
decoction  or  syrup,  one  or  two  fluidounces ;  of  the  extract,  from  two  to
five  grains  ;  of  the  powdered  leaves,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains.
Off.  Prep- — Decoctum  Solani.


SOLANUM  NIGRUM.

Garden  Nightshade.

Nat.  Ord. — Solanacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — Solanum  Nigrum  is  a  fetid  narcotic,  bushy  herb,  with  a
fibrous  root,  and  an  erect,  branching,  angular,  herbaceous,  thornless
stem,  one  or  two  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  undivided,  ovate,  toothed
and  waved,  smooth,  lengthened  out  at  the  base,  and  almost  always  with
the  lamina  perforated  and  the  margin  erose  as  if  gnawed  by  insects.
Umbels  from  the  intermediate  spaces  between  the  leaves,  solitary,  pedun-
cled,  simple,  downy,  and  nodding.  Flowers  white  or  pale-violet,  with  a
musky  scent ;  anthers  yellow.  Berries  globose,  black,  about  the  size  of
peas.

History. — The  Garden  or  Deadly  Xiyhtshade,  is  found  growing  along
old  Avails,  fences,  and  in  gardens,  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,
flowering  in  July  and  August.  There  are  several  varieties  of  this  spe-
cies, of  which  the  Solanum  Virginianum  is  the  most  abundant  in  this
country.  It  has  an  erect,  prickly  stem  ;  pinnatifid  leaves,  prickly  on  both
sides  ;  divisions  sinuate,  obtuse  ;  margin  ciliate  ;  calyx  prickly,  and
fiowers  blue,  or  whitish.  The  leaves  are  the  parts  employed,  and  yield
their  properties  to  water,  alcohol,  or  fixed  oils.

Properties  and  Uses. — Solanum  Nigrum  is  a  narcotic  and  sedative,
producing,  when  given  in  large  doses,  nausea,  and  giddiness.  One  to
three  grains  of  the  leaves  infused  in  water,  will,  it  is  said,  produce  a
copious  perspiration,  and  often  purge  on  the  next  day.  They  have  been
used  in  cancerous,  scrofulous  and  scorbutic  diseases,  being  given  inter-
nally, and  at  the  same  time,  applied  to  the  affected  parts  in  the  form  of
poultice  or  ointment.  Solania  exists  in  it  more  abundantly  than  in  the
S.  Dulcamara,  to  which  it  is  somewhat  analogous  in  medicinal  proper-
ties, with  more  active  and  energetic  narcotic  virtues.  The  berries  are
poisonous,  causing  torpor,  burning  in  the  stomach,  fever,  nausea,  stupor,
and  insensibility  ;  though  this  is  denied  by  M.  Dunal  of  Montpelier.
The  plant  is  used  by  Eclectics  in  the  form  of  ointment  only,  as  a
discutient.

Off.  Prep. — Unguentum  Stramonii  Compositum.


Solidago  Odoba.  899

SOLIDAGO  ODORA.

Sweet-scented  Goldenrod.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceae. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  known  as  Fragrant-leaved  Goldenrod,
and  Sweet  Goldenrod ;  it  has  a  perennial,  woody,  much  branched  and
creeping  root,  and  a  slender,  round,  yellowish-green  stem,  smooth  or
slightly  pubescent  below,  pubescent  at  top,  often  reclined,  and  two  or
three  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  closely  sessile,  linear-lanceolate,
broad  at  base,  entire,  acute,  rough  at  the  margin  but  otherwise  smooth,
with  a  prominent  midrib,  and  covered  with  small  pellucid  dots.  The
flowers  are  of  a  deep  golden-yellow  color,  and  are  arranged  in  a  termi-
nal, compound,  and  usually  secund-paniculate  raceme,  the  branches  of
which  are  very  slender,  rigid,  and  spread  almost  horizontally,  are  each
accompanied  by  a  small  leaf,  and  support  the  flowers  on  downy  pedicels,
which  put  forth  from  the  upper  side  of  the  peduncle,  and  have  small,
linear,  subulate  bracts  at  their  base.  Scales  of  the  involucre  oblong,
acute,  smooth,  or  slightly  pubescent,  the  lower  ones  shorter,  and  closely
imbricating  the  rest.  Florets  of  the  ray  few,  with  oblong,  obtuse,  yellow
ligules  ;  those  of  the  disk  funnel-shaped,  with  acute  segments.  Pappus
shorter  than  the  florets  of  the  disk.  (The  leaves  of  this  plant  are  from
an  inch  and  a  half  to  three  inches  long  by  from  three  to  five  lines  broad,
with  a  strong,  yellowish  midvein,  but  no  veinlets.)

History. — This  is  one  of  an  extensive  genus  of  herbaceous  perennials,
most  of  the  species  of  which  are  natives  of  North  America ;  their  general
character  is  that  of  mild  astringency,  combined  in  a  few  species  with
some  aromatic  stimulating  qualities.  The  S.  Odora  is  a  native  of  most
parts  of  the  United  States,  growing  in  dry  or  sandy  soil,  and  flowering
from  July  to  October.  The  leaves  are  the  officinal  portion,  they  have  a
fragrant  odor,  partaking  of  anise  and  sassafras,  more  perceptible  on
bruising  them,  and  a  warm,  aromatic,  agreeable  taste,  which  properties
depend  on  a  pale-greenish-yellow  volatile  oil,  lighter  than  water,  and
whiclrmaybe  obtained  by  distillation  with  water.  When  properly  dried
the  leaves  form  an  excellent  substitute  for  tea.  They  impart  their  vir-
tues to  alcohol,  or  boiling  water  in  infusion  ;  but  boiling  injures  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sweet  scented  Goldenrod  is  moderately  stimu-
lant, aromatic,  and  carminative;  and  in  warm  infusion,  diaphoretic.  It
may  be  given  to  allay  flatulence,  nausea,  and  to  cover  the  taste,  or  cor-
rect the  operation  of  unpleasant  or  irritating  medicines.  The  oil  is  car-
minative and  diuretic  :  and  its  tincture,  or.  essence,  has  been  used  as  a
diuretic  in  suppression  of  urine  among  infants,  and  as  an  external  appli-
cation in  headache.  Its  essence  is  useful  in  flatulency,  to  arrest  vomit-
ing and  spasmodic  pains  in  the  stomach,  and  to  disguise  the  taste  of


900  Materia  Medica.

nauseous  medicines.  The  flowers  are  said  to  be  aperient,  tonic,  astrin-
gent, and  diuretic,  and  have  been  found  beneficial  in  gravel,  urinary
obstructions,  ulceration  of  the  bladder,  and  in  the  early  stage  of  dropsy ;
taken  in  infusion.


SOLIDAGO  RIGIDA.

Hardleaf  Goldenrod.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE LEAVES AND BLOSSOMS.

Description. — This  plant  is  also  termed  Rigid  Goldenrod;  it  has  a  sim-
ple stem,  corymbose  above,  terete,  round,  striate,  rough,  minutely  hairy,
very  leafy,  and  from  three  to  five  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  from
one  to  four  inches  long,  ovate-oblong,  rough,  with  minute,  rigid  hairs ;
the  upper  ones  being  entire,  veiny,  thick  and  rigid ;  the  lower  closely
sessile,  by  a  broad  base,  slightly  serrate ;  the  radical  ones  lanceolate,
acuminate,  nerved,  petiolate,  sometimes  near  a  foot  long,  and  about
two  or  two  and  a  half  inches  broad.  The  Jlowers  are  all  3^ellow,  and
arranged  in  a  terminal,  compound,  close,  compact,  paniculate-raceme.
Heads  very  large,  about  thirty-four  flowered ;  rays  twice  the  length  of
the  obtuse  involucre,  deep-yellow,  from  seven  to  ten,  and  about  three
lines  by  one.  Scales  of  the  involucre  round-obtuse,  nerved,  membra-
naceous at  the  edges.

History. — This  is  a  tall  species  growing  in  dry  fields  and  rocky  woods
throughout  the  United  States,  and  is  abundant  in  the  Western  prairies,
flowering  in  August  and  September.  It  is  the  styptic  plant  of  old  Dr.
Bone,  of  New  Jersey,  who  is  said  to  have  suppressed  hemorrhages  from
large  blood-vessels,  by  applying  it  locally,  in  the  powdered  state  ;  a  pro-
perty likewise  attributed  to  the  Solidago  Virgaurca  or  European  Golden-
rod, found  in  this  country  and  Europe.  The  leaves  and  blossoms  of  S.
Bigida  are  the  parts  employed ;  they  have  an  astringent  taste,  and  yield
their  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Hardleaf  Goldenrod  is  tonic,  astringent,  and
styptic.  In  powder  or  infusion,  it  is  beneficial  in  all  external  hemor-
rhages, epistaxis,  hemotypsis,  hematemesis,  and  hemorrhage  from  the
bowels.  Applied  with  excellent  effect  in  form  of  poultice,  to  old  ulcers.
The  oil  is  diuretic. The  plant  deserves  further  investigation.


SPIGELIA  MARILANDICA.
Pinkroot.

Nat. Ord.  —  Rubiacese  ; Suborder, Spigelieae. Sex. Syst.  —  Pentandria
Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Botanists  vary  in  their  arrangement  of  this  plant;  beside
the  above  given  order  and  suborder,  we  find  it  classed  in  the  natural


Spigelia  Marilandica.  901

order  Gentianacece,  also  Spigeliacece,  and  again  Loganiacece.  It  is  usually
known  as  the  Carolina  Pink,  or  Worm-grass.  It  is  a  herbaceous,  indi-
genous plant,  with  a  perennial,  very  fibrous,  yellow  root,  which  sends
up  several  erect,  simple,  nearly  smooth,  four-angled  stems,  of  a  purplish
color,  and  from  six  to  twenty  inches  high.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  ses-
sile, ovate-lanceolate,  acute  or  acuminate,  entire,  and  smooth,  with  the
margin  and  veins  roughish-hairy  ;  they  are  three  or  four  inches  long  by
an  inch  and  a  half,  or  two  inches  and  a  half  broad,  and  the  stipules  are
scarcely  perceptible.  The  flowers  are  few  in  number,  are  arranged  in
a  terminal,  secund  spike,  and  supported  on  short  pedicels ;  they  are
somewhat  club-shaped,  scarlet  externally,  yellow  internally,  and  from
an  inch  and  a  half  to  two  inches  in  length.  The  calyx  is  persistent,  with
five  long,  linear,  subulate,  finely  serrulate  divisions,  which  are  refiexed
in  the  ripe  fruit.  The  corolla  is  funnel-shaped,  four  times  as  long  as  the
calyx,  the  tube  inflated  in  the  middle  and  angular  at  top,  and  divided
into  five  acute,  spreading  segments,  the  edges  of  which  are  slightly
tinged  with  green.  The  stamens  are  short,  inserted  into  the  mouth
of  the  corolla  between  the  segments ;  anthers  oblong,  heart-shaped,
exserted.  Ovary  small,  superior,  ovate ;  style  about  the  length  of  the
corolla,  jointed  near  its  base,  and  terminating  in  a  linear,  fusiform,
fringed  stigma,  projecting  considerably  beyond  the  corolla.  The  cap-
sule is  double,  consisting  of  two  cohering,  one-celled,  globular  carpels
attached  to  a  common  receptacle,  and  containing  numerous,  small,  angu-
lar seeds.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  United  States,  growing  in  dry
rich  soils,  and  on  the  borders  of  woods,  seldom  found  north  of  the  Poto-
mac, and  flowering  from  May  to  July.  There  are  several  varieties,  both
as  regards  the  form  of  the  leaves  and  the  color  of  the  flowers.  It  was
known  to  the  natives  as  a  vermifuge,  and  was  in  use  among  the  early
colonists  in  the  Southern  States  a  long  time  before  it  became  known  to
the  profession,  to  whom  it  was  introduced  by  Drs.  Garden,  Lining,  and
Chalmers,  of  South  Carolina.  As  received  at  present,  spigelia  is  in
bales  or  casks,  consisting  almost  exclusively  of  the  root,  without  the  stem
or  leaves;  that  contained  in  casks  is  less  liable  to  become  damp  and
moldy,  and  is  consequently  preferred  to  that  in  bales.  The  officinal  part
is  the  root ;  this  consists  of  numerous,  slender,  branching,  crooked,
wrinkled  fibers,  from  three  to  six  inches  long,  forming  a  dense  bunch,
and  arising  from  a  short  rhizome,  which  exhibits  traces  of  the  stems  of
former  years.  Externally  it  is  brown  or  yellowish-brown,  of  a  feeble,
peculiar  odor,  and  a  sweetish,  slightly  bitter,  not  very  unpleasant  taste.
Boiling  water  extracts  its  medicinal  qualities.  Analysis  has  detected  in
it  fixed  and  volatile  oil,  a  small  quantity  of  resin,  a  brown-colored  extrac-
tive of  a  bitter  and  nauseous  taste,  on  which  the  vermifuge  power  proba-
bly depends,  a  mucilaginous  saccharine  matter,  albumen,  gallic  acid,
some  salts,  etc. A  long,  slender,  crooked,  yellowish  root,  thickly  set


902  Materia  Medica.

with  short  capillary  fibers,  and  much  smaller  and  lighter  colored  than
the  pinkroot,  will  sometimes  be  found  mixed  with  it;  these  are  the
roots,  chiefly,  of  a  small  vine  which  attaches  itself  to  the  stem  of  the
spigelia,  and  should  be  separated  before  using  the  medicine.  Age  im-
pairs the  activity  of  pinkroot.  The  leaves  and  stalks  of  spigelia  should
always  be  rejected.

Properties  and  Uses. — Pinkroot  is  an  active  and  certain  anthelmintic,
especially  for  children.  In  large  doses,  it  is  apt  to  purge,  and  likewise
produce  symptoms  of  narcotism,  exciting  the  circulation,  determining
the  blood  to  the  brain,  giving  rise  to  vertigo,  dimness  of  vision,  dilated
pupils,  spasms  of  the  facial  muscles,  and  sometimes  even  causing  con-
vulsions. Spasmodic  movements  of  the  eyelids  are  among  its  most
common  attendants.  These  narcotic  effects  are  less  liable  to  occur  when
the  medicine  purges,  and  are  entirely  obviated  by  combining  it  with
cathartics.  Dose,  of  the  powder,  for  a  child  three  years  old,  from  ten
to  twenty  grains,  or  a  fluidounce  or  two  of  a  strong  infusion,  to  be  given
at  bed-time,  followed  in  the  morning  by  a  cathartic.  It  is  also  useful  in
those  conditions  of  the  system,  caused  by  worms,  which  resemble  infantile
remittent  and  other  febrile  diseases,  and  hydrocephalus.  A  well  known
worm  tea  is  composed  of  pinkroot  half  an  ounce ;  senna  two  drachms ;
savin  half  a  drachm ;  manna  two  drachms.  Mix,  and  infuse  in  a  pint
of  water;  dose  one  or  two  fluidounces.  Dose  of  powdered  pinkroot  for
an  adult,  one  or  two  drachms  twice  a  day  for  several  successive  days,
and  then  followed  by  a  cathartic.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Spigelise  et  Sennee  Fluidum;  Infusum  Spi-
gelise.


SPIRAEA  TOMENTOSA.
Hardhack.

Nat. Ord. — Kosaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Icosandria  Pentagynia.

THE  WHOLE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant,  known  also  by  the  names  of  Meadow-sweet,
White-leaf,  and  Steeple-bush,  is  a  small  shrub,  from  two  to  four  feet  in
hight,  with  many,  simple,  erect,  round,  downy,  hard,  brittle  and  pur-
plish stems,  furnished  with  alternate  leaves,  crowded  on  very  short  peti-
oles. The  leaves  are  from  an  inch  and  a  half  to  two  inches  long,  and
about  half  as  wide,  ovate-lanceolate,  or  oblong,  unequally  serrate,  some-
what acute  at  both  ends,  smoothish  and  dark-green,  or  brownish  above,
and  covered  with  a  rusty  white,  dense  tomentum  beneath.  The  flowers
are  small,  very  numerous,  subsessile,  beautifully  red  or  purple,  and  are
disposed  in  very  short,  dense,  slender,  compound,  terminal  spikes  or
racemes.  The  calyx  is  campanulate,  with  five  acute  segments.  The
petals  are  five,  round. The  stamens  are  numerous,  exserted  and  con-


Spirit  Vapor-Bath.  903

spicuous.  Styles  five ;  carpels  five,  tomentose  and  spreading ;  seeds  sub-
ulate at  each  end.

History. — This  is  a  beautiful  shrub,  common  in  low  grounds  and  mea-
dows, in  most  parts  of  the  United  States,  and  flowering  in  July  and
August.  The  whole  plant  is  officinal.  As  found  in  the  shops,  it  is  in
packages  of  various  sizes,  containing  a  mixture  of  leaves  and  flowers,  and
frequently  the  bark.  Its  odor  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  black  tea,
and  its  taste  bitter  and  exceedingly  astringent.  Water  extracts  its
medicinal  virtues.  It  has  not  been  analyzed  thoroughly,  but  is  known
to  contain  bitter  extractive,  tannic  and  gallic  acids.  The  fruit  is  per-
sistent, remaining  through  the  winter,  and  furnishing  food  for  the  snow-
bird.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Hardhack  is  tonic  and  astringent ;  useful  in
diarrhea,  cholera  infantum,  and  other  complaints  in  which  astringents
are  indicated,  and  is  less  apt  to  disagree  with  the  stomach  than  most
other  astringents.  As  a  tonic,  it  may  be  used  in  cases  of  debility,  with
want  of  appetite.  The  best  form  of  administration  is  an  extract,  made
by  displacement,  and  evaporation  in  a  water-bath,  which  affords  a  beau-
tiful article,  of  an  agreeable  odor,  and  astringent,  bitter  taste,  that  is
fully  equal  to  catechu,  and  might  replace  it  in  all  cases  where  that
medicine  is  required  ;  the  dose  is  from  two  to  ten  grains.  Dose  of  the
decoction,  one  or  two  fluidounces.


SPIRIT  VAPOR-BATH.

History  and  Uses. — A  spirit  vapor-bath  exerts  a  most  powerful,  yet
beneficial  influence  upon  the  whole  system,  aiding  very  materially  our
endeavors  to  remove  disease.  This  highly  valuable  mode  of  producing
activity  of  the  cutaneous  vessels  has  long  been  practiced  in  many
sections  of  the  country  as  a  domestic  remedial  agent,  and  was  first  intro-
duced to  the  notice  of  the  medical  profession  by  myself,  about  eighteen
years  ago,  since  which  it  is  in  much  use  among  physicians.  The
advantages  to  be  derived  from  this  method  of  producing  perspiration
are  very  great,  and  it  is  not  followed  with  any  of  those  injurious  conse-
quences which  often  attend  the  internal  administration  of  a  sudorific.

It  is  to  be  given  as  follows :  The  patient  is  undressed,  ready  for
getting  into  bed,  having  removed  the  shirt  and  underclothing  worn
through  the  day,  and  put  on  a  night  shirt  or  other  clothing  to  be  worn
only  while  sweating,  and  during  the  night,  if  the  bath  is  taken  at  bed-
time. He  is  then  seated  on  a  high  Windsor,  or  wooden  bottomed  chair,
or  instead  thereof,  a  bench  or  board  may  be  placed  on  a  common  open
bottomed  chair,  care  being  taken  that  the  bottom  is  so  covered  that  the
flame  will  not  burn  him.  After  seating  himself,  a  large  blanket  or
coverlid  is  thrown  around  him  from  behind,  covering  the  back  part  of
his  head  and  body,  as  well  as  the  chair,  and  another  must  be  passed


904  Materia Medica.

around  him  in  front,  which  last  is  to  be  pinned  at  the  neck,  loosely,  so
that  he  can  raise  it  and  cover  his  face,  or  remove  it  down  from  his  face,
from  time  to  time,  as  occasion  requires,  during  the  operation  of  the  bath.
The  blankets  must  reach  down  to  the  floor,  and  cover  each  other  at  the
sides,  so  as  to  retain  the  vapor,  and  prevent  it  from  passing  off.

This  having  been  done,  a  saucer  or  tin  vessel,  into  which  is  put  one
or  two  tablespoonfuls  of  whisky,  brandy,  spirits,  alcohol,  or  any  liquor
that  will  burn,  is  then  placed  upon  the  floor,  directly  under  the  center
of  the  bottom  of  the  chair,  raising  a  part  of  the  blanket  from  behind  to
place  it  there ;  then  light  a  piece  of  paper,  apply  the  flame  to  the  liquor,
and  as  soon  as  it  kindles,  let  down  the  part  of  the  blanket  which  has
been  raised,  and  allow  the  liquor  to  burn  till  it  is  consumed,  watching  it
from  time  to  time  to  see  that  the  blankets  are  not  burned.  As  soon  as
consumed,  put  more  liquor  into  the  saucer,  about  as  much  as  before,
and  again  set  it  on  fire  ;  being  very  careful  to  pour  no  liquor  into  the
saucer  while  the  flame  exists,  as  there  would  be  danger  of  burning  the
patient,  blankets,  and  perhaps  the  house.  Continue  this  until  the  patient
sweats  or  perspires  freely,  which  in  a  majority  of  cases  will  be  in  five  or
ten  minutes.

If,  during  the  operation,  the  patient  feels  faint  or  thirsty,  cold  water
must  be  sprinkled  or  dashed  in  his  face,  or  he  may  drink  one  or  two
swallows  of  it;  and  in  some  cases,  the  head  may  be  bathed  with  cold  water.

As  soon  as  free  perspiration  is  produced,  wrap  the  blankets  around
him,  place  him  in  bed,  and  cover  him  up  warm,  giving  him  about  a  pint  of
either  good  store  tea,  ginger,  or  some  herb  tea  to  drink,  as  warm  as  he
can  take  it.  After  two  or  three  hours,  remove  the  covering,  piece  by
piece,  at  intervals  of  twenty  or  twenty-five  minutes  between  each,  that
he  may  gradually  cease  perspiring.

There  is  no  danger  of  taking  cold  after  this  spirit  vapor-bath,  if  the
patient  uses  ordinary  precaution  ;  and  if  his  disease  will  allow,  he  can
attend  to  his  business  on  the  next  day  the  same  as  usual.  In  fact,  the
whole  is  a  very  easy,  safe,  agreeable  and  beneficial  operation  ;  much
more  so  than  a  mere  reading  of  the  above  explanation  would  lead  one
to  suppose.

Chairs  are  now  manufactured  expressly  for  this  purpose.

This  kind  of  bath  is  peculiar  to  Eclectics,  and  is  highly  beneficial  in
colds,  pleurisy,  and  all  febrile  and  inflammatory  attacks,  diarrhea,
dysentery,  sluggishness  of  cutaneous  vessels,  and  in  all  chronic  disease
where  there  is  an  abnormal  condition  of  the  skin.  In  acute  diseases,  it
may  be  repeated  once  a  day,  if  required  ;  in  chronic  diseases,  once  or
twice  a  week,  or  once  in  a  fortnight,  according  to  indications.

Where  it  can  be  done,  it  is  always  preferable  to  bathe  the  patient
with  an  alkaline  wash,  both  before  and  after  this  vapor-bath.


Spieitus  Ptroxilicus  —  Shell-lac  Splints.  905

SPIRITUS  PYROXILICUS.

Pyroxylic  Spirit.

History. — This  substance  was  discovered  in  1812  by  P.  Taylor,  since
which  it  has  been  examined  by  various  chemists  ;  it  has  been  called,
Pyroligneous  Ether,  Wood-Xaphtha,  Wood  Spirit,  Wood  Alcohol,  Pyroxy-
lic Alcohol,  Methylic  Alcohol,  Hydrated  Oxide  of  Methyle,  etc.

When  wood  is  subjected  to  destructive  distillation,  there  is  formed,
beside  acetic  acid,  tar,  and  other  products,  about  one  per  cent,  of  an
inflammable,  volatile  liquid,  which  when  separated  and  purified,  consti-
tutes pyroxylic  acid.  Pure  anhydrous  pyroxylic  spirit  is  a  mobile,
colorless  liquid,  having  a  hot  and  pungent  taste,  and  an  aromatic  odor,
similar  to  that  of  acetic  ether ;  it  readily  combines  with  water,  alcohol,
or  ether,  without  disturbing  its  transparency.  It  burns  like  alcohol,  the
flame,  however,  being  less  luminous,  and  resembles  it  as  a  solvent,  as
all  bodies  that  are  soluble  in  alcohol  are  likewise  soluble  in  pyroxylic
spirit.  Its  specific  gravity  as  a  liquid  is  0.798  ;  as  a  vapor  1.042.  At
140°  it  boils,  and  its  vapor  causes  concussions  which  render  its  distilla-
tion difficult,  but  which  may  be  prevented  by  placing  in  the  bottom  of
the  vessel,  a  layer  of  mercury.  It  is  sometimes  confounded  with  pyro-
acetic  spirit,  which  may  be  distinguished  by  adding  a  few  drops  of  a
saturated  solution  of  chloride  of  calcium,  which  dissolves  in  the  pyro-
xylic spirit,  but  has  no  action  on  the  latter,  separating  from  it  after
agitation.  The  liquid  examined  must  be  sufficiently  pure  not  to  separate
into  two  layers,  nor  to  become  milky  on  the  addition  of  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Used  to  palliate  consumptive  cough,  and  lessen
the  febrile  excitement  attending  phthisis.  It  appears  to  act  as  a  nar-
cotic, sedative,  and  anti-emetic.  It  arrests  or  greatly  mitigates  chronic
vomiting,  whether  dependent  on  functional  or  organic  diseases  ;  and  is
reputed  efficacious  in  diarrhea  and  dysentery.  Recommended  by  Dr.
John  Hastings  in  consumption,  but  is  inefficient  as  a  curative  agent.
Dose,  ten  to  forty  drops,  three  times  a  day;  sufficiently  diluted  with
water.  A  crude  pyroxilic  spirit  of  sp.  gr.  0.846  to  0.890,  is  used  by
chemists  to  burn  in  lamps  as  a  substitute  for  alcohol ;  and  by  hatters  and
varnish  makers  for  dissolving  resinous  substances.


SHELL-LAC  SPLINTS.
Preparation. — Take  of  finely  pulverized  shell-lac  one  pound,  alcohol,
90  per  cent,  one  quart ;  mix,  and  expose  it  to  a  moderate  heat  in  a
loosely  stopped  bottle,  for  forty-eight  hours,  when  the  shell-lac  will  be
dissolved.  With  this  solution  saturate  woolen  cloth,  and  allow  it  to
dry.  To  apply  and  fit  the  cloth  to  any  part,  cut  it  into  the  proper  shape,
and  then  hold  it  near  a  fire  or  hot  stove,  or  dip  it  into  boiling  water,
when  it  will  become  soft  and  pliable. As  soon  as  it  has  cooled  so  as


906  Materia  Medica.

not  to  burn  the  patient,  apply  it  to  the  part,  and  by  holding  it  for  a  few
minutes,  or  by  the  application  of  the  bandage  while  it  is  yet  pliable,  it
will  assume  any  form  desired,  and  on  cooling,  it  becomes  hard,  and
remains  exactly  as  at  first  placed.  If  it  is  desirable  to  strengthen  the
splint,  take  two  pieces  of  the  saturated  cloth,  spread  one  side  of  each
with  a  thick  coat  of  the  solution,  by  means  of  a  common  paint-brush,
allow  the  alcohol  to  evaporate,  and  then,  placing  these  two  coated  sides
together,  press  them  with  a  hot  flat-iron,  until  they  have  become  per-
fectly cemented.  This  operation  may  be  repeated  several  times,  if  it  is
necessary  to  increase  the  strength  of  the  cloth,  or  splint.


SPONGIA.

Sponge.

History.. — Sponge  is  a  flexible,  fixed,  torpid,  polymorphous  animal,
composed  either  of  reticulate  fibers,  or  masses  of  small  spires  interwoven
together,  and  clothed  with  a  gelatinous  flesh,  full  of  small  mouths  on  its
surface,  by  which  it  absorbs  and  ejects  water.  They  inhabit  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  where  they  are  fixed  to  rocks,  or  other  solid  bodies,  and  are
most  abundant  within  the  tropics.  The  coarser  kind  are  imported  from
the  Bahamas  ;  but  the  finest  and  best  sponges  are  brought  from  the
Mediterranean.

Sponge,  as  in  the  shops,  is  in  yellowish-brown  masses,  of  various
shape  and  size,  light,  porous,  elastic,  and  composed  of  fine,  flexible,
tenacious  fibers,  interwoven  in  the  form  of  cells  or  meshes.  It  usually
contains  numerous  minute  fragments  of  coral,  stone,  or  small  shells,
from  which  it  must  be  freed  before  it  can  be  used  for  ordinary  purposes.
Sponge  is  prepared  by  macerating  it  for  several  days  in  cold  water,
beating  it,  in  order  to  break  up  the  concretions  which  it  contains,  and
dissolving  what  cannot  thus  be  separated  of  the  calcareous  matter  by
muriatic  acid,  diluted  with  thirty  parts  of  water.  By  this  process  it  is
rendered  perfectly  soft  and  fit  for  surgical  use ;  and  when  intended  for
surgical  purposes,  the  softest,  finest,  and  most  elastic  sponges  should  be
selected.  For  forming  burnt  sponge,  the  coarser  will  answer  equally  well.
Sponge  contains  gelatin,  coagulated  albumen,  iodine,  common  salt,  sul-
phur, phosphorus,  carbonate  of  lime,  magnesia,  silica,  iron,  bromine,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  In  consequence  of  its  softness,  porosity,  and
property  of  imbibing  liquids,  sponge  is  very  useful  in  surgical  opera-
tions. It  may  likewise  be  advantageously  applied  over  certain  ulcers,
the  irritating  sanies  from  which  it  removes  by  absorption.  Compressed
upon  a  bleeding  vessel,  it  is  useful  for  promoting  the  coagulation  of  blood
in  epistaxis  and  external  hemorrhages.  Dipped  in  wax,  and  flattened,
and  then  cut  into  the  size  and  form  required,  it  forms  the  sponge  tent,
useful  for  dilating  sinuses.  It  has  likowise  been  used  for  producing  pre-
mature delivery,  by  introducing  a  piece  of  sponge  into  the  mouth  of  the


Spongia  Usta  —  Staphylea  Trifolia.  907

uterus,  and  allowing  it  to  remain  there  for  a  time,  and  then  changing  it,
until  by  its  swelling,  and  the  irritation  it  produces,  uterine  contractions
are  caused.


SPONGIA  USTA.
Burnt  Sponge.

Preparation. — Take  of  sponge  a  convenient  quantity,  cut  it  into  pieces,
and  beat  it,  that  any  extraneous  matters  may  be  separated,  then  burn  it
in  a  close  iron  vessel  until  it  becomes  black  and  friable,  lastly  rub  it  into
very  fine  powder.

History. — In  1000  parts  of  sponge,  343.848  were  dissipated  by  calci-
nation ;  the  remainder  consisted  of  327.0  parts  of  carbon  and  insoluble
matters,  112.08  of  chloride  of  sodium,  16.43  of  sulphate  of  lime,
21.422  of  iodide  of  sodium,  7.57  of  bromide  of  magnesium,  103.2  of
carbonate  of  lime,  35.0  of  phosphate  of  lime,  4.73  of  magnesia,  and
28.72  of  oxide  of  iron.  The  efficacy  of  burnt  sponge  depends  princi-
pally upon  the  presence  of  iodine,  and  should  always  be  used  when  of
recent  calcination,  as  it  becomes  impaired  rapidly  in  consequence  of  the
volatilization  of  the  iodine.

Properties  and  Uses. — Said  to  be  alterative  and  antiscrofulous.  Used
in  goitre,  scrofulous  tumors,  and  obstinate  cutaneous  eruptions.  Dose,
from  one  to  three  drachms,  mixed  with  syrup  or  honey,  in  the  form  of
an  electuary.  A  pill,  which  has  acquired  some  considerable  reputation
in  the  cure  of  scrofula,  is  made  as  follows:  Take  of  iodine  fifty  grains;
sulphate  of  morphia  ten  grains ;  burnt  sponge  one  hundred  grains.
Triturate  these  well  together,  and  into  a  fine  powder,  and  then  form  the
mixture  into  a  pill  mass,  by  the  addition  of  molasses  or  other  compatible
medium,  and  divide  into  one  hundred  pills.  To  be  kept  in  a  dry  place.
Dose,  two  or  three  pills  daily.


STAPHYLEA TRIFOLIA.

Bladder-nut.

Nat.  Ord. — Celastraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Trigynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  a  handsome  shrub,  from  six  to  ten  feet  in  bight,
with  greenish,  striped  branches.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  ternate ;  the
leaflets  oval-acuminate,  serrate,  pale  beneath,  with  scattered  hairs.  The
Jlowers  are  white,  or  yellowish-white,  half  an  inch  long,  and  in  a  short,
pendulous  raceme,  terminating  the  branchlets.  The  calyx  is  composed
of  five,  colored,  persistent  sepals ;  the  petals  are  five,  ciliate  below ;  the
fruit  is  ovate.  When  in  flower,  if  the  germ  be  cut  transversely  and
examined,  it  will  appear  two  or  three-celled,  and  will  contain  the  rudi-
ments of  fifteen  or  twenty  seeds ;  but  when  the  fruit  is  ripe,  it  consists


908  Materia Medica.

of  two  or  three  inflated,  adnate,  submembranous  capsules,  which  are
three-sided,  three-parted  at  top,  three-celled,  and  contain  several  hard,
small  nuts  or  seeds,  with  a  bony,  smooth,  and  polished  testa.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  the  United  States,  growing  in  moist
woods  and  thickets,  and  flowering  in  May.  By  some  it  has  been  erro-
neously called  Swamp- Dogwood.  The  bark  of  the  root  is  the  officinal
part,  and  has  a  pleasant,  bitter  taste.  It  yields  its  properties  to  water.
No  analysis  has  yet  been  made  of  this  new  Eclectic  medical  agent.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Practitioners  must  be  careful  to  distinguish
this  bark  from  that  of  the  Ptelea  Trifoliata,  with  which  it  is  frequently
confounded,  although  there  is  but  little  resemblance  between  them;  the
Staphylea  being  a  thin,  hard  bark,  free  from  any  oily  taste  or  smell.
Prof.  I.  G.  Jones  states  that  this  bark  is  a  pure,  unirritating  tonic,  having
rather  a  soothing  influence  when  applied  to  irritated  mucous  membranes.
He  has  employed  it  advantageously  in  convalescence  after  fevers,  and
in  debility  connected  with  gastro-enteric  irritation.  It  promotes  the
appetite,  enables  the  stomach  to  endure  suitable  nourishment,  favors  the
early  re-establishment  of  digestion,  and  will  be  tolerated  by  the  stomach,
when  other  tonics  are  rejected.  He  employs  it  in  cold  infusion,  of  which
half  a  fluidounce  may  be  given  every  two,  three,  or  four  hours,  accord-
ing to  circumstances.  It  is  also  said  to  cure  intermittent  fever,  and  is
considered  by  some  to  be  equal  to  quinia.  An  extract  may  be  made  of
the  bark  of  the  root,  and  will  be  found  valuable  as  a  tonic ;  the  dose
of  which  is  from  three  to  five  grains.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Staphyleae.


STATICE CAROLINIANA.

Marsh  Rosemary.
Nat.  Ord. — Plumbaginacete. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Pentagynia.

THE ROOT.

Description.  —  By  some  botanists  this  plant  is  considered  as  a  mere
variety  of  the  Statice  Limonium  of  Europe,  but  the  difference  consists
in  the  American  plant  having  flat-margined  and  cuneiform  leaves,  while
in  the  European  species  the  leaves  are  oblong  with  undulated  margins,
and  the  flowers  much  larger.  Statice  Caroliniana  is  also  known  by  the
names  of  Sea-Lavender,  Ink-root,  etc. ;  it  is  an  indigenous  maritime
plant,  witli  a  perennial,  large,  fleshy,  fusiform  or  branched  root,  of  a
brownish  color,  which  sends  up  annually  a  scape  and  leaves.  The
leaves  are  all  radical,  petiolate,  erect,  smooth,  mucronate,  entire,  and
veinless.  The  scape  is  round,  smooth,  terete,  from  six  to  eighteen  inches
in  hight ;  paniculate  above,  divisions  alternate,  bearing  unilateral  spikes
of  small,  bluish-purple,  somewhat  sessile  flowers,  each  with  two  scaly
mucronate  bracts. The  calyx  is  funnel-shaped,  five-toothed,  five-angled,


Stellaria  Media.  909

the  angles  ciliate;  corolla  deeply  five-cleft,  divisions  spatulate,  obtuse,
longer  than  the  calyx.  Stamens  five,  inserted  on  the  claws  of  the
corolla ;  anthers  heart-shaped.  Ovary  superior,  small,  and  obovate,
supporting  five  styles  shorter  than  the  stamens.  Fruit  or  seed  oblono-,
invested  with  the  persistent  calyx.

History. — Marsh  rosemary  is  found  along  the  seacoast  in  marshy  situ-
ations from  Maine  to  Florida,  flowering  from  August  to  October.  The
officinal  part  is  the  root,  which  is  large,  fusiform  or  branched,  heavy,
fleshy,  and  of  a  reddish  or  purplish-brown  color;  it  is  inodorous,  but
has  a  saltish,  extremely  bitter  and  astringent  taste.  It  imparts  its  vir-
tues to  alcohol,  and  more  readily  to  boiling  water.  Mr.  E.  Parrish
found  it  to  contain  about  12  per  cent,  of  tannic  acid,  some  gum,  extrac-
tive, albumen,  resin,  volatile  oil,  caoutchouc,  lignin,  coloring  matter,
and  various  salts.

Properties  and  Uses. — Marsh  Rosemary  is  a  powerful  astringent,  and
in  some  sections  of  the  country  is  very  much  used  in  diseases  of  the
bowels,  in  the  form  of  infusion  or  decoction.  It  has  proved  efficacious
in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  etc.,  in  which  diseases  it  is  only  suited  to  the
latter  stages,  where  a  tonic  and  astringent  action  is  required.  The  infu-
sion, employed  as  a  gargle  in  affections  of  the  throat,  scarlatina  anginosa,
and  as  a  wash  in  aphthous  and  ulcerated  sore-mouth,  has  been  very
highly  recommended.  Externally,  the  powdered  root  may  be  applied
to  old  ulcers,  or  made  into  an  ointment,  as  a  soothing  application  for
piles.  The  decoction  is  likewise  very  useful  as  an  injection  in  chronic
gonorrhea,  gleet,  leucorrhea,  prolapsus  ani  and  uteri,  and  in  some
ophthalmic  affections.  It  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  astringents
are  indicated.

The  Statice  Limonium,  of  Europe,  is  possessed  of  the  same  powers,
but  in  a  less  degree.  The  infusion  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  half
a  fluidounce  to  two  fluidounces,  every  two,  three,  or  four  hours.


STELLARIA  MEDIA.

Chickweed.

Nat.  Ord. — Caryophyllacere. Bex.  Syst. — Decandria  Trigynia.

THE PLANT.

Description. — This  plant  is  the  Alsine  Media  of  Linnaeus  ;  it  is  an  annual
or  biennial  weed,  from  six  to  fifteen  inches  in  length,  with  prostrate,
branched,  brittle,  round,  jointed,  and  leafy  stems,  distinguished  by  the
alternate,  lateral,  hairy  lines,  extending  from  joint  to  joint.  The  leaves
are  ovate,  ovate-cordate,  and  glabrous,  the  lower  on  hairy  petioles.  The
jlowers  are  small  and  white,  in  forked  cymes  ;  petals  two-parted,  shorter
than  the  calyx. Stamens  varying,  three,  five,  or  ten.

History.  —  This  is  a  common  plant  throughout  the  United  States,
growing  in  fields  and  around  dwellings,  in  moist,  shady  places,  probably


910  Materia  Medica.

introduced  from  Europe  ;  it  flowers  from  the  beginning  of  spring  to  the
end  of  autumn.  The  seeds  are  eaten  by  poultry  and  birds.  The  whole
herb  is  used,  when  recent.

Properties  and  Uses. — Chickweed  appears  to  be  a  cooling  demulcent.
I  have  seen  the  fresh  leaves  bruised  and  applied  as  a  poultice  to  indo-
lent, intractable  ulcers  on  the  leg,  of  many  years  standing,  with  the  most
decided  and  immediately  beneficial  results  ;  to  be  changed  two  or  three
times  a  day.  In  acute  ophthalmia,  the  bruised  leaves  will  likewise  be
found  a  valuable  application.  An  ointment  made  by  bruising  the  recent
leaves  in  fresh  lard,  may  be  used  as  a  cooling  application  to  erysipela-
tous and  other  forms  of  ulceration,  as  well  as  in  many  forms  of  cutaneous
disease.


STILLINGIA  SYLVATICA.

Queen's  Root.

Nat.  Ord. — Euphorbiacese. Sex.  Si/st. — Moncecia  Monadelphia.

THE ROOT.

Desertion. — This  plant  is  also  known  by  the  name  of  Queen's  De-
light, Yaw-root,  and  Silver-leaf ;  it  is  an  indigenous  perennial,  with
herbaceous  stems  two  or  three  feet  high.  The  leaves  are  alternate,
sessile,  oblong  or  lanceolate-oblong,  obtuse,  serrulate,  tapering  at  the
base,  and  accompanied  with  stipules.  The  male  and  female  flowers  are
distinct  upon  the  same  plant ;  they  are  yellow,  and  arranged  in  the  form
of  a  spike,  of  which  the  upper  part  is  occupied  by  the  male,  and  the
lower  by  the  female  flowers.  The  male  florets  are  scarcely  longer  than
the  bracteal  scales.

History. — This  plant  is  found  growing  in  pine-barrens  and  sandy  soils
from  Virginia  to  Florida,  and  in  Mississippi  and  Louisiana,  flowering
from  April  to  July.  When  wounded,  the  plant  emits  a  milky  juice.
The  root,  which  is  the  officinal  portion,  is  large,  thick,  and  woody,  in  long
cylindrical  pieces,  from  one-third  of  an  inch  to  more  than  an  inch  thick,
wrinkled  when  dried,  externally  of  a  dirty  yellowish-brown  color,  and
exhibiting,  when  cut  across,  an  interior  soft,  yellowish,  ligneous  portion,
surrounded  by  a  pinkish-colored  bark.  It  has  a  slight,  peculiar,  some-
what oleaginous  odor,  which  is  strong  and  acrimonious  in  the  recent
root,  and  the  taste  is  bitterish  and  pungent,  leaving  an  impression  of
disagreeable  acrimony  in  the  mouth  and  fauces.  It  imparts  its  virtues
to  water  or  alcohol,  and  deteriorates  in  activity  by  age.  Its  properties
appear  to  be  owing  to  a  very  acrid  oil.  It  also  contains  resin,  woody
fiber,  coloring  matter,  extractive,  etc.

The  Oil  of  Stillingia,  so  called  by  its  manufacturers,  is  more  properly
an  alcoholic  fluid  extract;  it  is  composed  of  about  forty  per  cent,  of  oil,
with  the  remainder  consisting  of  extractive,  resin,  etc. It  is  prepared


Stillingia  Stlvatica.  911

by  adding  alcohol  95  per  cent,  to  the  recent  root  of  Stillhjgia,  and
making  a  saturated  tincture  ;  then  distil  off  the  alcohol.  The  residue  is
the  preparation  sold  and  used  as  the  oil  of  Stillingia.  Upon  standing
for  a  leno-th  of  time,  a  flocculent  deposit  takes  place,  of  a  reddish-brown
character.  A  similar  preparation  is  made  with  ether  by  displacement
and  evaporation  ;  it  forms  a  more  consistent  liquid,  probably  holding
more  fixed  oil.  The  above  oil  or  alcoholic  fluid  extract  of  Stillingia,  is
of  a  dark  brownish-red  color,  of  a  strong,  peculiar,  not  unpleasant  odor,
and  of  a  faint  taste  at  first,  but  in  a  short  time  followed  by  exceeding
pungency  and  acridity,  very  persistent  in  its  character,  and  which  is
especially  felt  in  the  throat  and  fauces,  being  accompanied  with  a  very
unpleasant  sensation  in  the  stomach,  if  swallowed.  The  recent  root
affords  a  larger  quantity  of  oil,  than  when  old,  probably,  because  the  oil
becomes  oxidized  and  changed  to  resin  by  age,  and  is  no  longer  soluble
in  ether,  although  the  real  active  principle  of  the  article  is  but  little  im-
paired. I  have  seen  a  preparation,  called  Stillingin,  purporting  to  have
been  prepared  by  the  Franklin  Pharmaceutical  Institute  of  the  City  of
New  York,  sold  for  one  dollar  per  ounce.  It  was,  undoubtedly,  the
above  oil,  triturated  with  sugar  or  sugar  of  milk,  and  the  whole  cost  of
which  would  not  exceed  twenty  cents.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stillingia  in  large  doses  is  emetic  and  cathartic,
producing  in  many  instances,  a  peculiar,  disagreeable  burning  sensation
in  the  stomach,  or  some  portion  of  the  alimentary  canal,  accompanied
with  more  or  less  prostration  of  the  system.  In  small  doses  it  is  an
alterative,  exerting  an  influence  over  all  the  secretions  which  is  unsur-
passed by  any  other  known  alteratives.  It  is  an  Eclectic  remedy  of
much  importance  and  value,  and  is  extensively  used  in  all  the  various
forms  of  primary  and  secondary  syphilitic  affections,  in  which  it  appears
to  have  almost  a  specific  action,  also  in  scrofulous,  hepatic,  and  cutaneous
diseases,  in  which  its  administration  is  followed  by  the  most  successful
results.  In  the  form  of  fluid  extract,  combined  with  oils  of  anise  or
caraway  it  has  been  found  very  beneficial  in  chronic  laryngeal  and  bron-
chial affections,  and  in  leucorrhea.  Small  pieces  of  the  recent  root,
chewed  occasionally  through  the  day,  have  effectually  and  permanently
cured  laryngitis  and  bronchitis.  The  oil  is  entirely  too  acrid  for  internal
use,  unless  it  be  well  incorporated  with  some  mucilaginous  or  saccharine
substance;  and,  for  internal  use,  the  fluid  extract,  or  syrup,  will  be
found  sufficiently  energetic  and  efficacious.  But  as  an  external  stimu-
lating application,  the  oil  will  be  found  very  valuable  in  many  instances.
One  drop  of  it  placed  upon  the  tongue,  and  repeated  three  or  four  times
a  day,  is  reputed  to  have  proved  successful  in  cases  of  severe  croup.
The  dried  root  is  inert  or  nearly  so,  hence. its  powder  is  of  no  utility
Dose  of  the  tincture,  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm  ;  of  the
decoction,  one  or  two  fluidounccs.  This  article  is  reputed  to  have
formed  an  ingredient  of  Swaim's  Panacea  ;  such  is  not  the  case.


912  Materia Medica.

Off.  Prep.  —  Extractum  Stillingise  Hydro-alcoholicum  ;  Extractum
Stillingise  Fluidum  ;  Linimentum  Stillingise  Compositum  ;  Pilulse  Phy-
tolaccse  Compositse ;  Syrupus  Stillingise  ;  Syrupus  Stillingise  Compositus  ;
Tinctura  Stillingise.

STRYCHNOS  NUX  VOMICA.

Nux  Vomica.

Jtfat. Ord. — Apocynacese. Sex. Syst. —  Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE SEEDS.

Description.  —  This  is  a  middle-sized  tree,  with  a  short,  crooked,
thickish  trunk,  irregularly  branched,  and  covered  with  a  smooth,  ash-
colored  bark ;  the  young  shoots  are  deep  green,  and  highly  polished.
The  wood  is  white,  hard,  close-grained,  and  bitter.  The  leaves  are
opposite,  on  short  petioles,  oval,  shining,  smooth  on  both  sides,  entire,
from  an  inch  and  a  half  to  four  inches  in  length,  from  one  to  three  inches
broad,  and  from  three  to  five-nerved.  The  flowers  are  small,  greenish-
white,  funnel-shaped,  and  are  collected  into  small  terminal  cymes,  with
a  disagreeable  odor.  The  calyx  is  five-toothed  ;  the  corolla  is  also  five-
parted.  Filaments  scarcely  any  or  exceedingly  short,  inserted  over  the
bottom  of  the  divisions  of  the  corolla ;  anthers  oblong,  half  within  the
tube,  and  half  without.  The  ovary  is  superior,  roundish,  two-celled,
with  many  ovules  in  each  cell,  attached  to  the  thickened  center  of  the
partition.  Style  as  long  as  the  tube  of  the  corolla  ;  stigma  capitate.  The
fruit  is  a  berry,  round,  about  the  size  of  a  large  apple,  and  covered  with
a  smooth,  hard  rind,  of  a  rich  orange  color  when  ripe,  and  filled  with  a
white,  soft,  gelatinous  pulp,  in  which  are  five  seeds  ;  these  are  flat,
round,  with  a  prominence  in  the  center,  of  a  grayish  color  externally  and
covered  with  a  woolly  substance,  but  internally  hard  and  tough  like  horn.

History. — The  Nux  Vomica  tree  is  a  native  of  the  East  Indies,  abound-
ing particularly  on  the  Malabar  and  Coromandel  coasts.  The  wood  is
exceedingly  bitter,  especially  that  of  the  root,  which  is  said  to  cure  inter-
mittent fevers,  and  the  bites  of  venomous  snakes.  The  pulp  of  the
fruit  is  greedily  eaten  by  various  birds.  The  Lignum  Colubrinum  or
Snake-wood,  which  is  generally  referred  to  the  Strychnos  Colubrina,  is
frequently  nothing  else  than  the  nux-vomica  wood.  The  bark  contains
a  large  proportion  of  brucia,  and  some  strychnia,  and  is  said  to  be  iden-
tical with  the  False  Angustura  Bark.  The  officinal  part  of  the  plant  is
the  seeds.

Nux  Vomica  seeds  are  circular,  about  nine  lines  in  diameter,  and  two
in  thickness,  flat  and  slightly  concave  on  one  side  and  convex  on  the
other,  umbilicated  at  one  surface,  and  everywhere  beset  with  fine  short
ash-colored,  or  yellowish-gray  satiny  hairs,  attached  to  a  thin,  fragile
coating,  which  closely  invests  the  kernel.  This  internal  nucleus  or  ker-
nel  is  whitish and  translucent,  occasionally  dark-colored  and  opake,


Strtchnos  Nux  Vomica.  913

almost  homy,  exceedingly  tough,  very  difficult  to  pulverize,  and  of  an
intensely  bitter  taste.  To  powder  them,  the  method  recommended  is  to
soften  them  well  with  steam,  then  slice  them,  and  dry  them  ;  after  which
they  are  ground  to  powder.  The  powder  has  a  grayish-yellow  color,  a
faint,  sweet  odor,  and  an  intense,  durable,  bitter  taste.  Water  or  proof
spirit  dissolves  its  active  ingredients,  but  rectified  alcohol  acts  with  the
most  energy.  Ether  takes  up  a  concrete  oil  and  some  wax.  Nitric  acid
renders  the  powder  orange-red.  The  aqueous  decoction  is  of  a  pale
grayish-yellow  color,  and  intensely  bitter,  and  becomes  orange-yellow  on
the  addition  of  nitric  acid,  and  emerald-green  by  sesquioxide  of  iron.
Nux  Vomica  consists  of  strychnia,  and  brucia,  united  with  a  peculiar
acid  named  Igasuric  Acid,  concrete  oil,  wax,  yellow  coloring  matter,
soluble  gum,  starch,  and  lignin.  Strychnia  was  discovered  in  1818  by
Pelletier  and  Caventou,  who  found  it  in  greater  proportion  in  the  bean
of  St.  Ignatius  than  in  the  nux  vomica.  For  an  account  of  its  prepara-
tion and  properties,  as  well  as  of  Brucia,  see  article  Strychnia,  in  the
second  part  of  this  work.

Properties  and  Uses. — Nux  Vomica  is  a  powerful  poison,  exerting  its
influence  principally  on  the  cerebral  system.  In  poisonous  doses  it  pro-
duces violent  tetanic  convulsions  without  impairing  the  functions  of  the
brain,  asphyxia  and  death.  When  given  in  doses  sufficiently  large  to
influence  the  system,  a  sensation  of  weight  and  weakness  is  experienced,
with  tremblings  in  the  limbs,  and  some  rigidity  on  attempting  motion.
Sometimes  there  are  sudden  starts  or  shocks,  more  or  less  frequent  and
violent,  with  a  tendency  to  permanent  involuntary  contraction  or  rigid-
ity of  the  muscles.  Even  in  small  doses,  it  will  occasionally  create  a
sense  of  heat  in  the  stomach,  constriction  of  the  throat,  chest,  and  abdo-
men, and  retention  of  urine;  sometimes  vertigo,  pain  in  the  head,  con-
tracted pupil,  and  dimness  of  vision  are  produced  ;  and,  more  especially
with  the  corpulent  and  apoplectic,  there  will  be  formication,  and  tingling
upon  the  surface,  with  more  or  less  perspiration,  slight  involuntary
spasms  of  the  muscles,  and  a  very  disagreeable,  dreamy  or  vague  con-
dition of  the  brain.  The  pulse  may  or  may  not  be  increased  in  fre-
quency. Chloroform  is  said  to  be  beneficial  in  poisoning  by  nux-vomica.
In  small  doses  it  is  tonic,  and  increases  the  action  of  the  various  excretory
organs.

Nux  Vomica  is  employed  principally  in  the  treatment  of  paralysis,
especially  when  it  is  of  some  standing,  and  where  no  hypersemic  or
hemorrhagic  condition  of  the  nervous  centers  exist ;  it  is  generally  inap-
plicable to  the  recent  forms,  until  the  removal  of  the  primary  affection
by  antiphlogistic  means.  Its  use  is  limited  to  cases  in  which  inflam-
matory action  or  congestion  has  been  removed.  It  is  said  to  be  more
beneficial  in  general  palsy  and  paraplegia  than  in  hemiplegia,  and  has
also  been  found  of  benefit  in  local  palsies,  as  of  the  bladder,  likewise  in
amaurosis,  spermatorrhea  and  impotence.  It  has  also  been  beneficially
58


914:  Materia  Medica.

emplo3red  in  neuralgia,  chorea,  and  obstinate  constipation.  A  small
quantity  added  to  cathartics,  increases  their  energy.  Dysmenorrhea,
dyspepsia,  dysentery,  rheumatism,  hysteria,  mania,  worms,  intermittent
fever,  eneuresis,  chronic  splenitis,  etc.,  have  been  successfully  treated
by  the  use  of  this  agent.  Nux  vomica  and  its  alkaloids  should  always
be  given  with  great  care,  the  physician  closely  observing  its  effects.  The
dose  of  powdered  nux  vomica  is  five  grains  three  or  four  times  a  day,
and  gradually  increased  to  ten,  or  until  its  effects  are  experienced.  The
alcoholic  extract  is  the  best  form  of  administration  and  may  be  given  in
doses  of  from  one-fifteenth  to  one-twentieth  of  a  grain  as  a  tonic  ;  and  in
paralytic  affections  from  half  a  grain  to  two  grains  in  the  form  of  pill,
and,  as  with  the  powder,  gradually  increased.  The  saturated  tincture
may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  five  to  thirty  drops,  likewise  gradually
increased.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Nucis  Vomicae  ;  Pilulae  Copaibee  Composite  ;
Strychnia  ;  Tinctura  Nucis  Vomicae.


STYRAX  OFFICINALE.

Storax.
flint.  Ord. — Styracea?. Sex.  Syst. — Decandria  Monogynia.

THE CONCRETE JUICE.

Description.  —  This  is  a  tree  from  fifteen  to  twenty-five  feet  in  hight,
with  irregular,  round  branches  which  are  tomentose  when  young.  The
leaves  are  alternate,  petiolate,  entire,  elliptical,  deciduous,  somewhat
pointed,  bright-green  and  smooth  above,  whitish  with  soft  down  beneath,
and  about  two  inches  in  length,  by  one  and  a  half  in  breadth.  The
flowers  are  white,  and  in  clusters  of  three  or  four,  at  the  ends  of  the
young  lateral  shoots,  with  angular  pedicels.  The  calyx  is  hoary,  almost
hemispherical,  rather  angular  at  the  base,  with  five  or  seven  very  short
marginal  teeth ;  corolla  white,  externally  downy,  somewhat  funnel-
shaped,  and  divided  into  from  five  to  seven  deep,  elliptical,  obtuse,
spreading  segments.  The  stamens  are  ten,  placed  in  a  ring ;  the  fila-
ments subulate,  and  inserted  into  the  corolla,  with  yellow,  erect,  oblong
anthers.  The  ovary  is  ovate,  with  a  slender  style  and  simple  stigma.
The  fruit  is  a  downy  drupe  of  a  globose  form,  containing  one  or  two
angular  nuts,  which  are  concave  on  one  side  and  convex  on  the  other.

History.  —  Storax  is  a  native  of  Syria,  Arabia,  and  other  parts  of  the
Levant,  and  has  been  naturalized  in  some  of  the  Southern  parts  of
Europe.  The  European  tree  does  not  yield  any  of  the  balsam,  which
has  led  some  botanists  to  doubt  whether  the  officinal  storax  is  obtained
froifi  it  at  all.  The  mode  of  collecting  it  in  Syria,  whether  by  incisions
or  by  decoction,  is  not  positively  known,  as  the  natives  make  a  mystery
of  their  proceedings. There  are  several  kinds  of  storax  in  commerce  ;


Styrax  Officinale.  915

the  purest  is  the  storax  in  grains,  which  are  about  the  size  of  a  pea,
opake,  soft,  adhesive,  capable  of  uniting  so  as  to  form  a  mass,  and  of  a
whitish,  yellowish-white,  or  reddish-white  color.  Another  variety,  in
dry  and  brittle,  amygdaloidal  masses,  formed  of  yellowish  agglutinated
tears,  with  a  brown  or  reddish  matter  between  them,  and  wrapped  in
the  leaves  of  a  kind  of  reed,  is  called  storax  amygdaloide.  Both  of  the
above  varieties  are  free  from  impurities,  and  have  a  pleasant  vanilla  odor;
they  are  rarely  seen  in  our  markets.  The  common  storax  of  the  shops
occurs  in  brittle,  brown  or  reddish-brown  masses,  several  pounds  in
weight,  of  various  shapes,  somewhat  tenacious,  and  softening  under  the
teeth;  it  has  an  agreeable  odor  like  vanilla  or  balsam  of  Peru,  and
apparently  consists  of  sawdust  cemented  by  a  balsamic  or  resinous  sub-
stance. When  exposed  to  the  air  it  acquires  upon  its  surface,  a  whitish
efflorescent  film  of  benzoic  acid.  The  cakes  or  masses  may  be  easily
crushed  to  a  coarse  powder,  in  which  state  it  is  usually  sold  in  the  shops.
When  good,  it  yields  a  brown  resinous  fluid,  with  the  odor  of  storax,
when  compressed  between  hot  plates.  In  consequence  of  its  impurities,
it  should  be  purified  by  solution  in  alcohol,  strained  and  then  the  alcohol
distilled  off  by  moderate  heat,  until  the  storax  acquires  the  proper  con-
sistence. The  storax  of  commerce  consists  of  a  trace  of  volatile  oil,  a
little  gum,  some  extractive  matter,  much  woody  fiber,  with  from  33  to
54  per  cent,  of  resin,  and  from  1  to  2.6  per  cent,  of  benzoic  acid.

Liquid  Storax  is  another  variety,  and  which  is  the  most  commonly
employed;  it  is  a  semifluid  adhesive  substance,  of  a  slightly  greenish-
gray  color,  the  surface  of  which  becomes  brown  or  blackish  upon  expo-
sure to  the  atmosphere,  and  of  an  odor  somewhat  similar  to  balsam  of
Peru,  but  less  agreeable.  Its  source  is  not  accurately  known.  Landerer
says  that  liquid  storax  is  obtained  from  a  plant  growing  in  the  islands
and  on  the  mainland  of  Greece,  which  is  inodorous,  and  yields  no
balsam,  except  that  inhabiting  the  islands  of  Cos  and  Rhodes,  which  in
the  flowering  season  exhales  a  rich  vanilla  odor,  and  yields  liquid  storax
from  its  bark  and  young  twigs.  These  are  formed  into  balls,  and  are
subjected  to  pressure  in  a  heated  press,  when  a  gray  oily  matter  is
obtained,  which  is  exported  pure,  or  made  into  cakes  with  finely  pow-
dered olibanum.

Storax  has  an  aromatic  and  fragrant  odor  and  taste,  and  yields  its
active  properties  to  alcohol  or  ether ;  water  becomes  yellow  and  milky
with  it,  acquiring  its  odor.  A  moderate  heat  fuses  it,  and  a  higher
temperature  inflames  it,  burning  with  a  white  flame,  and  leaving  a  light
spongy  carbonaceous  residue.  Four  hundred  and  eighty  grains  of  the
commercial  article,  have  yielded  three  hundred  and  sixty  of  alcoholic
extract.  As  it  yields  benzoic  or  cinnamic  acid  by  distillation,  it  ranks
as  a  balsam.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Storax  is  a  stimulant,  acting  more  especially
upon  mucous  tissues,  as  do  nearly  all  balsams. It  has  been  found  bene-


916  Materia  Medica.

ficial  as  an  expectorant  in  cough,  chronic  catarrh,  asthma,  bronchitis,
and  other  pulmonary  affections;  also  in  gonorrhea,  leucorrhea,  and
gleet,  in  which  it  is  as  effectual  and  more  pleasant  than  copaiba.  Com-
bined with  tallow  or  lard,  it  forms  a  valuable  application  in  many  forma
of  cutaneous  disease,  especially  those  common  to  children,  as  ringworm,
tinea,  ringworm  of  the  scalp,  etc.  It  is  much  used,  on  account  of  its
fragrance,  for  compounding  ointments  and  pills,  and  is  an  excellent
addition  to  opium  in  the  form  of  pill,  when  it  is  necessary  to  conceal  the
taste  and  smell  of  this  narcotic  ;  three  or  four  grains  of  storax  may  be
combined  with  one  grain  of  opium  for  this  purpose.  The  dose  of  storax
is  from  ten  to  twenty  grains,  gradually  increased.


SUCCINUM.

Amber.
History. — The  origin  of  Amber  is  very  uncertain ;  it  is  believed  to  be
a  fossil  resin,  the  produce  of  an  extinct  plant.  It  may  be  derived  from
some  resin  formerly  liquid  or  soft;  or  possibly  from  the  slow  oxidation
of  a  fatty  matter,  as  we  see  succinic  acid  formed  from  fats  by  oxidation.
It  is  found  chiefly  in  Prussia,  either  on  the  sea-shore  or  in  the  alluvial
formations  along  the  coast;  it  is  likewise  found  in  Sicily,  and  in  this
country  in  New  Jersey  and  Maryland.  It  is  a  brittle  solid,  generally  in
small  irregular  masses,  permanent  in  the  air,  having  a  homogeneous
texture  and  vitreous  fracture,  and  susceptible  of  a  fine  polish.  Its  color
is  either  light  or  deep  yellow,  and  occasionally  reddish,  or  even  deep
brown.  It  has  no  taste,  and  is  inodorous,  unless  heated,  when  it  exhales
a  peculiar,  aromatic,  not  unpleasant  smell.  It  is  usually  translucent,
though  occasionally  transparent  or  opake,  and  is  found  chiefly  associated
with  lignite,  sometimes  iron  pyrites,  and  frequently  contains  insects  and
fragments  of  vegetables  imbedded  in  it.  By  friction  it  becomes  nega-
tively electric.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1.07.  It  is  for  the  most  part
insoluble  in  all  menstrua.  Heated  in  the  open  air  it  softens;  at  548°  it
melts,  swells,  and  burns  with  a  yellow  flame,  leaving  a  small  portion  of
ashes.  Subjected  to  distillation  in  a  retort  furnished  with  a  tubulated
receiver,  it  yields  first  a  yellow  acid  liquor,  which  is  a  solution  of  impure
succinic  acid ;  and  afterward  a  thin  yellowish  oil,  with  a  yellow  waxy
substance,  which  is  deposited  in  the  neck  of  the  retort  and  the  upper
part  of  the  receiver.  The  oil  obtained  is  called  the  Oil  of  Amber,  Oleum
Succini.  The  waxy  matter,  exhausted  by  cold  ether  of  the  portion  solu-
ble in  that  menstruum,  is  reduced  to  a  yellow  micaceous  substance  iden-
tical with  Chryscne,  and  from  which  a  white  crystalline  body  may  be
separated  by  boiling  alcohol,  identical  with  the  solid  carbo-hydrogen
Idrialine,  and  called  by  its  discoverers  Succistercne.  Both  have  the
same  composition,  and  color  sulphuric  acid  intensely  blue,  forming  a
coupled  acid. Chrysene  is  insoluble  in  most  liquids,  melts  at  455° and


Sulphur.  917

is  likewise  a  carbo-hydrogen.  As  the  distillation  of  amber  proceeds,  a
large  quantity  of  combustible  gas  is  given  off,  which  must  be  allowed  to
escape  from  the  tubulure  of  the  receiver.  As  the  heat  continues,  the
oil  gradually  deepens  in  color,  until  it  finally  becomes  black  and  of  the
consistence  of  pitch.  Amber  repeatedly  distilled  from  nitric  acid,  yields
an  acid  liquor,  from  which,  after  it  has  been  neutralized  by  caustic
potassa,  ether  separates  pure  camphor.  Camphor  may  likewise  be
obtained  by  distilling  to  dryness  powdered  amber  with  an  extremely  con-
centrated solution  of  caustic  potassa.  When  the  acid  crystals  form,
when  amber  is  subjected  to  distillation,  they  may  be  obtained  by  com-
pressing them  in  bibulous  paper,  and  subliming  them  a  second  time ;
these  crystals  of  succinic  acid  were  formerly  called  Salt  of  Amber,  and
were  much  esteemed  as  a  diuretic.

Amber  consists  of  a  small  quantity  of  fragrant  volatile  oil;  a  yellow
resin,  intimately  united  with  a  volatile  oil,  very  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,
or  the  alkalies,  easily  fusible,  and  resembling  ordinary  resins ;  another
resin,  also  combined  with  volatile  oil,  soluble  in  ether  or  the  alkalies,
sparingly  soluble  in  cold,  but  more  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol ;  succinic
acid ;  a  bituminous  principle,  having  some  analogy  to  the  lac-resin  of
John,  insoluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  or  the  alkalies,  and  constituting  more
than  four-fifths  of  the  amber;  also  a  strongly  odorous,  bright-yellow
substance,  which  hardens  by  time.  Its  elementary  composition  is,  car-
bon 80.59,  hydrogen  7.31,  oxygen  6.73,  ashes  (silica,  lime,  and  alu-
mina) 3.27=97.90.

Properties  and  Uses. — Amber  is  not  used  as  a  medicine  in  the  present
day,  being  employed  only  in  pharmacy  and  the  arts.  It  is  used  to  prepare
succinic  acid  and  oil  of  amber.  In  the  arts  it  is  made  into  ornaments,
and  prepared  in  making  varnishes,  for  which  latter  purpose  it  is  first  sub-
jected to  the  process  of  roasting,  whereby  it  is  rendered  soluble  in  a
mixture  of  linseed  oil  and  oil  of  turpentine,  forming  amber-varnish.
Off.  Prep. — Oleum  Succini ;  Oleum  Succini  Rectificatum.


SULPHUR.

Sulphur.

SULPHUR SUBLIMATUM.

Sublimed  Sulphur. Flowers  of  Sulphur.

SULPHUR  LOTUM.

Washed  Sulphur.

History.  —  Sulphur  is  an  abundant  natural  production,  occurring
principally  in  volcanic  districts,  especially  in  Sicily,  where  it  may  be
obtained  in  a  state  of  purity,  and  often  crystallized.  It  is  also  very  gene-
rally disseminated  throughout  the  mineral  kingdom  in  combination  with
gypsum,  heavy-spar,  and  many  other  minerals,  with  oxygen  as  sulphuric


918  Materia Medica.

acid,  with  hydrogen  as  sulphureted  hydrogen,  with  mineral  waters,
and  with  the  metals,  especially  lead,  iron,  copper,  quicksilver,  etc.,  form-
ing with  them  compounds  called  sulphurets  or  sulphides.  It  is  almost
always  present  in  minute  quantity  in  animal  and  vegetable  matter,
especially  in  mustard  and  other  cruciform  plants ;  indeed  it  is  an  essen-
tial ingredient  of  vegetable  and  animal  fibrine,  albumen,  and  caseine,
and  as  such  is  indispensable  to  vegetation  and  to  animal  life.  When
found  in  a  native  state,  it  is  in  masses,  translucent  or  opake,  or  in  the
powdery  form,  mixed  with  various  earthy  impurities.

For  supplying  the  wants  of  medicine  and  the  arts,  sulphur  is  obtained
from  two  sources ;  one,  imported  from  Sicily,  and  known  as  Native  or
Volcanic  Sulphur,  the  other,  prepared  from  the  sulphurets  of  iron  or
copper,  and  known  as  Pyritic  Sulphur,  which  is  seldom  employed  in
medicine.  Volcanic  sulphur  occurs  in  masses  or  crystals ;  the  crystal-
lized variety  presents  the  form  of  very  acute  rhombic  octaedres,  bright
sulphur-yellow  in  color,  and  exceedingly  pure.  The  massive  sulphur,
has  a  grayish -yellow  tint,  rather  less  brittle  and  less  lustrous  than  the
preceding,  with  many  grayish  or  bluish  spots  or  streaks,  arising  from
mineral  impurities.  From  the  volcanic  sulphur,  pure  sulphur  is  pre-
pared by  distillation.  Crude  sulphur  is  prepared  by  distillation  of  sul-
phur from  the  sulphur  earths ;  this,  when  purified  by  being  again  melted,
allowing  the  impurities  to  settle,  and  then  pouring  the  purer  sulphur
into  cylindrical  molds  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  forms  the  Roll  Sulphur
or  Cane  Brimstone  of  commerce  ;  and  the  residue  of  this  process,  ground
to  powder,  being  a  very  impure  sulphur,  of  a  gray  color,  is  known  by
the  name  of  Sulphur  Vivum  or  Horse  Brimstone.  Roll  sulphur  is  now
made  by  subliming  the  sulphur  in  iron  vessels,  fusing  the  product,  and
casting  it  into  cylindrical  molds.

The  best  mode  of  purification  is  to  sublime  the  sulphur,  pass  the  sub-
limed vapor  into  a  close  chamber  of  considerable  size,  where  it  condenses
in  fine  impalpable  powder,  consisting  of  minute  globules  between  a
thirtieth  and  a  two-hundredth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  unless  they  have
been  exposed  to  light  or  agitation,  when  they  are  apt  to  present  a  crys-
talline structure.  This  is  called  Flowers  of  Sulphur  or  Sublimed  Sul-
phur. Washed  Sulphur  is  the  sublimed  sulphur  thoroughly  washed
with  water  to  free  it  from  the  acidity  which  is  apt  to  be  present,  in  con-
sequence of  the  combustion  some  of  it  undergoes  in  the  act  of  subliming,
thereby  giving  rise  to  sulphuric  acid.  When  properly  washed,  it  under-
goes no  change  by  exposure  to  the  atmosphere.

Crude  sulphur  is  imported  to  this  country  principally  from  Sicily  and
the  ports  of  Italy.  Roll  sulphur  and  the  flowers  of  sulphur  generally
come  from  Marseilles.  Sulphur  is  an  elementary,  non-metallic,  brittle
solid,  of  a  pale-yellow  color,  permanent  in  the  air,  and  exhibiting  a
crystalline  texture  and  shining  fracture,  with  a  perceptible  smell  when
rubbed,  and  a  faint  peculiar  taste. It  is  a  bad  conductor  of  heat,  and


Sulphur.  919

becomes  negatively  electric  by  friction.  When  pure  its  specific  gravity
is  1.99 ;  when  impure  it  may  be  as  high  as  2.35.  Its  equivalent  number
is  16,  and  its  symbol  S.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  but  soluble  in  petro-
leum, alkaline  solutions,  the  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  and  when  finely
powdered  in  alcohol  or  ether.  It  begins  to  volatilize  at  about  180°,
giving  off  its  peculiar  odor,  and  when  heated  to  between  224°  and  230°,
it  passes  into  a  state  of  fusion  ;  about  400°,  or  a  little  higher,  the  melted
mass  becomes  thicker  and  brownish ;  and  if  kept  for  some  time  at  this
temperature,  or  suddenly  cooled  by  being  poured  into  cold  water,  it
forms  for  a  short  while  afterward  a  soft,  tough  mass,  called  Amorphous
Soft  Sulphur,  which  is  capable  of  receiving  and  retaining  delicate  im-
pressions of  seals,  coins,  and  the  like.  At  650°  it  sublimes  unchanged,
if  oxygen  be  excluded ;  in  open  vessels,  sulphur,  when  inflamed,  burns
with  a  lambent  blue  flame,  combining  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  and
giving  rise  to  highly  suffocating  vapors  of  sulphurous  acid  gas.  As  a
chemical,  sulphur  is  exceedingly  important,  its  combinations  being
numerous,  and  among  the  most  powerful  agents  of  chemistry.

Sulphur,  from  carelessness  in  its  purification,  may  contain  sulphuric
acid,  from  which  it  should  always  be  freed ;  this  may  be  detected  by
agitating  some  of  the  sulphur  in  water,  and  testing  the  water  with  litmus
paper.  It  is  sometimes  adulterated  with  arsenic,  which  may  be  detected
by  converting  the  sulphur  and  arsenic  into  sulphuric  and  arsenic  acids,
through  the  action  of  nitric  acid  and  heat,  neutralizing  the  acids  by  car-
bonate of  soda,  adding  muriatic  acid  in  excess,  and  transmitting  sulphu-
reted  hydrogen  for  some  minutes ;  upon  which  yellow  sulphuret  of
arsenic will  fall  down.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sulphur  is  a  stimulant,  laxative,  diaphoretic,
alterative,  and  in  regard  to  scabies,  it  is  considered  a  specific.  It  is  used
in  hemorrhoids,  diseases  of  the  bladder,  and  in  pregnancy,  as  a  mild
cathartic,  either  alone,  combined  with  cream  of  tartar,  or  with  some
other  saline  purgative.  It  is  given  alone  in  one  or  two  drachm  doses,
in  milk  or  molasses;  or  thirty  grains  of  sulphur  combined  with  two
drachms  of  bitartrate  of  potassa.  One  serious  objection  to  its  use
is,  that  it  renders  the  stools,  and  even  the  insensible  transpiration,  insup-
portably  fetid ;  which  arises  from  its  being  converted  within  the  body
into  sulphureted  hydrogen ;  if  the  sulphur  contains  acid,  its  operation
will  be  attended  with  more  or  less  griping.  The  soda  of  the  bile  is  sup-
posed to  render  the  sulphur  soluble.  In  chronic  catarrh,  chronic  rheu-
matism, cutaneous  diseases,  and  in  the  chronic  stage  of  pertussis,  it  may
be  administered  two  or  three  times  a  day,  in  doses  of  twenty  or  thirty
grains.

Externally,  sulphur  is  used  in  various  cutaneous  diseases  of  the  vesi-
cular, scaly,  or  papular  kind.  Sulphur-baths  are  likewise  found  bene-
ficial in  scrofula,  chronic  palsy,  chronic  rheumatism,  scabies,  and  all
kinds  of  scaly  cutaneous  disorders;  the  sulphurous  acid  gas  is  applied


920  Materia  Medica.

to  the  body,  the  head  being  protected.  The  effects  occasioned  are
warmth,  redness,  and  pricking  of  the  integuments,  followed  by  consid-
erable sweating  and  excitement  of  the  circulation.  If  the  gas  should  be
inhaled,  it  will  prove  powerfully  irritating  to  the  glottis,  and  altogether
irrespirable,  even  when  diluted  with  atmospheric  air.  The  effects  of  sul-
phur, and  of  sulphurous  acid  in  cutaneous  diseases  and  rheumatism  may
be  obtained  by  using  the  sulphuret  of  potassa  in  the  form  of  bath,  say
two  or  three  ounces  to  one  hundred  pounds  of  water.

Off.  Prep. —  Confectio  Sennae  Composita;  Ferri  Sulphuretum  ;  Po-
tassee  Sulphas  cum  Sulphure ;  Potassii  Sulphuretum;  Sulphur  Preecipi-
tatum;  Unguentum  Sulphuris;  Unguentum  Sulphuris  Compositum;  Vinum
Cinchonee  Compositum.

SYMPHYTUM OFFICINALE.

Comfrey.
Nat. Ord. — Boraginacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. —  Comfrey  has  an  oblong,  fleshy,  perennial  root,  black
externally,  and  a  pilose,  herbaceous  stem,  three  or  four  feet  high,  branch-
ing above,  and  winged  by  the  decurrent  bases  of  the  pointed,  wavy,
rough-edged  leaves;  the  lower  leaves  and  radical  are  ovate-lanceolate,
tapering  into  a  petiole  ;  the  upper  and  floral  lanceolate.  The  flowers  are
white  or  of  a  rose  color,  and  disposed  in  terminal,  revolute  racemes.
The  calyx  is  five-parted,  with  lanceolate,  acuminate  sepals ;  the  corolla
tubular-campanulate ;  limb  with  five  recurved  teeth.  Stamens  five,
included;  anthers  elongated.  Style  filiform.  Millets  smooth,  ovate,
fixed  by  a  large  excavated  (perforate)  base.  The  whole  plant  is  rough
with  dense  hairs.

History . — This  is  a  European  plant,. much  cultivated  in  our  gardens
for  medical  uses,  and  flowering;  through  the  summer.  The  root  is  the
officinal  part;  it  is  spindle-shaped,  branched,  sometimes  more  than  an
inch  thick  and  a  foot  long,  externally  smooth  and  blackish,  internally
white,  fleshy,  and  juicy,  containing  much  mucilage.  When  dried  it
becomes  wrinkled,  of  a  firm,  horny  consistence,  and  of  a  dark  color
within.  It  is  nearly  inodorous,  and  has  a  mucilaginous,  feebly  astrin-
gent taste.  It  contains  a  small  quantity  of  tannin,  and  a  great  abundance
of  mucilage,  which  it  yields  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plant  is  demulcent  and  slightly  astringent.
With  other  mucilaginous  agents,  it  is  considered  inert  or  of  but  little
medical  importance  by  many  writers ;  but  this  is  an  erroneous  view,  the
result  of  deficient  investigation.  All  mucilaginous  agents  exert  an  influ-
ence on  mucous  tissues,  hence  the  cure  of  many  pulmonary  and  other
affections,  in  which  these  tissues  have  been  chiefly  implicated,  by  their


Symplocarpus  Fcetidus.  921

internal  use.  Physicians  must  not  expect  a  serous  disease  to  yield  to
remedies  which  act  on  mucous  membranes  only  ;  and  to  determine  the
true  value  of  a  medical  agent,  they  must  first  ascertain  the  true  charac-
ter of  the  affection,  as  well  as  of  the  tissues  involved.  Again,  mucila-
ginous agents  are  always  beneficial  in  scrofulous  and  anaemic  habits.
Comfrey  root  is  very  useful  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  coughs,  hemoptysis,
other  pulmonary  affections,  leucorrhea,  and  female  debility  ;  these  being
principally  mucous  affections.  It  may  be  boiled  in  water,  wine,  or  made
into  a  syrup,  and  taken  in  doses  of  from  one  to  four  fluidounces  of  the
preparation,  two  or  three  times  a  day.  Externally,  the  fresh  root,  bruised,
forms  an  excellent  application  to  bruises,  ruptures,  fresh  wounds,  sore
breasts,  ulcers,  white  swellings,  etc.

Off.  Prep.  —  Syrupus  Aralise  Compositus ;  Vinum  Symphytii  Com-
positum.


SYMPLO  CARPUS  FCETIDUS.

Skunk  Cabbage.

Nat.  Orel. — Aracese. Sex.  Syst. — Tetrandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT AND SEEDS.

Description.  —  This  plant  has  been  a  difficult  one  for  Botanists  to
arrange  ;  thus  Willdenow  attached  it  to  the  genus  Dracontium ;  Michaux
and  Pursh  to  that  of  Pothos,  and  Bigelow  to  Ictodes.  Nuttall  calls  it
Symplocarpus,  which  is  adopted  by  many  botanists,  and  which  we  deem
it  best  to  retain.  It  is  a  very  curious  plant,  having  a  large,  abrupt,
perennial  root  or  tuber,  with  numerous  verticillate,  fleshy  fibers,  which
penetrate  to  the  depth  of  two  or  more  feet.  The  spatke  appears  before
the  leaves,  and  is  ovoid,  roundish,  cucullate,  turgid,  various  in  width,
spotted  and  sometimes  nearly  covered  with  brownish-purple  blotches,
varied  with  red,  yellow,  and  green,  the  top  acuminate  and  incurved,
the  edges  folded  inward,  auriculate  at  base,  and  at  length  coalescing.
Within  the  spathe,  the  flowers,  which  resemble  it  in  color,  are  placed  in
great  numbers  upon  a  globose,  pedunculate,  simple  spadix,  for  which  they
form  a  compact  covering.  The  flowers  are  tesselately  imbricate,  adnate.
The  calyx  is  composed  of  four  fleshy,  cuneate,  truncate  sepals,  the  top
and  edges  inflected,  at  length  becoming  very  thick.  Corolla  none.  Sta-
mens four,  opposite  the  sepals,  with  subulate  fllaments,  equal  in  length
to  the  calyx,  and  oblong,  exserted,  two-celled  anthers.  The  style  is  four-
sided,  tapering ;  stigma  minute,  pubescent ;  ovary  roundish,  concealed
within  the  spadix.  After  the  spathe  decays,  the  spadix  continues  to
grow,  and  with  it  every  part  of  the  flowers  except  the  anthers.  When
the  fruit  is  ripe,  the  spadix  has  attained  many  times  its  original  dimen-
sions, while  the  calyx,  filaments  and  style  are  larger,  very  prominent  and
separated  from  each  other. Within  the  spadix,  at  the  base  of  each  style,


922  Materia  Medica.

is  a  naked,  round,  fleshy  seed,  as  large  as  a  pea,  white,  tinged  with
green  and  purple,  invested  with  a  separate  membranous  coat,  and  with  a
prominent  embryo  situated  in  a  depression  at  top,  and  umbilicately
attached  to  a  large,  solid  perisperm.  Sometime  after  the  flowers,  numer-
ous, large,  crowded  leaves  appear,  which  are  oblong,  cordate,  acute,
smooth,  with  numerous  fleshy  veins  of  a  pale  color,  on  long,  channeled
petioles,  furnished  with  large  oblong  sheaths,  bright-green,  and  often
twenty  inches  long  by  twelve  broad.

History. — This  is  an  indigenous  plant,  growing  abundantly  in  various
parts  of  the  United  States,  in  moist  situations,  flowering  in  March  and
April,  and  maturing  its  fruit  in  August.  The  whole  plant,  especially
when  bruised,  emits  a  very  disagreeable  alliaceous  odor,  which  has  given
rise  to  the  several  names,  Skunk-weed,  Skunk-cabbage,  Polecat-weed,
and  Meadow-cabbage.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  and  should  be  col-
lected in  autumn  or  early  in  spring,  and  dried  with  care.  It  has  a  disa-
greeable, fetid  odor,  and  an  acrid  taste.  When  properly  dried  and
whole,  it  is  cylindrical,  or  in  the  shape  of  a  truncated  cone,  two  or  three
inches  long,  by  about  an  inch  in  thickness,  dark-brown  externally,  and
very  rough  from  the  insertion  of  radicles,  internally  white  and  amyla-
ceous. When  in  transverse  slices,  they  are  of  various  lengths,  about  as
thick  as  a  quill,  very  much  flattened  and  wrinkled,  white  within,  and
covered  by  a  yellowish  reddish-brown  epidermis,  considerably  lighter
colored  than  the  body  of  the  root.  Drying  lessens  the  odor,  as  well  as
the  acrimony  of  the  plant,  and  age  and  exposure  dissipate  them  entirely,
consequently  the  root  should  be  renewed  annually.  The  seeds  are  fre-
quently used  and  preferred,  as  being  more  energetic  than  the  root;  they
have  an  exceedingly  acrid  taste,  and  emit  the  peculiar  odor  of  the  plant,
only  when  bruised.  They  preserve  their  virtues  longer  than  the  root.
The  properties  of  this  plant  chiefly  depend  upon  a  volatile  principle,
which  is  materially  diminished  by  drying,  and  is  entirely  dissipated  by
heat.  Alcohol  or  water  extracts  its  virtues,  and  the  aqueous  infusion
should  be  made  by  displacement.  The  roots  and  seeds  contain  volatile
fatty  matter,  volatile  oil,  fixed  oil,  of  which  the  seeds  yield  twenty  per
cent.,  starch,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses,  Skunk-cabbage  will  occasion
nausea,  vomiting,  headache,  vertigo,  and  dimness  of  sight.  In  medici-
nal doses,  it  is  stimulant,  antispasmodic,  expectorant,  and  slightly
narcotic.  It  has  been  successfully  used  in  asthma,  hooping-cough,
nervous  irritability,  hysteria,  epilepsy,  and  convulsions  attending  preg-
nancy and  parturition  ;  likewise  in  chronic  catarrh,  pulmonary,  and
bronchial  affections.  The  powdered  root  or  seed  may  be  given  in  doses
of  from  ten  to  forty  grains,  three  times  a  day  ;  but  the  most  eligible
mode  of  administration  is  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  fresh  root,  of  which
one  or  two  fluidrachms  may  be  given  for  a  dose.


Tamarindus  Indica.  923

Off.  Prep.  —  Pulvis  Lobeliae  Compositus  ;  Pulvis  Asclepise  Compo-
situs  ;  Tinctura  Symplocarpi ;  Tinctura  Lobelise  Composita;  Tinctura
Lobeliae  et  Capsici ;  Tinctura  Sanguinariee  Composita  ;  Tinctura  Sangui-
nariae  Acetata ;  Tinctura  Viburnii  Composita.


TAMARINDUS  INDICA.

Tamarind.

Nat. Ord. — Fabaceas. Sex.  St/st. — Monadelphia  Triandria.

THE PRESERVED FRUIT.

Description.  —  Tbis  is  a  large  tree,  with  numerous  spreading  branches,
and  an  erect,  thick  trunk,  covered  with  a  rough,  ash-colored  bark.  The
leaves  are  alternate  and  pinnate,  consisting  of  many  pairs  of  opposite
leaflets,  which  are  subsessile,  entire,  obtuse,  elliptic-oblong,  unequal  at
the  base,  about  six  lines  long  by  two  broad,  smooth  on  both  sides,  and
of  a  yellowish-green  color  ;  the  p>etioles  are  from  four  to  six  inches  long,
and  channeled ;  stipules  small,  deciduous.  The  leaflets  close  in  the
evening,  or  in  cold,  moist  weather,  like  those  of  the  sensitive  plant.  The
flowers  are  in  simple,  lateral  and  terminal  racemes ;  the  calyx  is  four-
leaved,  cruciate,  expanding,  deciduous,  somewhat  tubular  at  base,  bila-
biate, the  upper-lip  tri-partite,  the  lower  broad,  two-toothed.  The
corolla  is  somewhat  papilionaceous,  erect,  unilateral,  the  length  of  the
calyx.  The  vexillum  or  middle  petal  is  oblong,  its  margins  involute  and
curled;  wings  oval,  margins  curled;  all  three  are  beautifully  variegated
with  red  and  yellow ;  Keel  two  short  subulate  processes  under  the
stamens.  The  stamens  are  ten,  of  which  seven  are  very  short  and  sterile,
and  three  long,  purplish,  curved,  united  at  base,  bearing  large,  ovate,
incumbent  anthers.  The  ovary  is  oblong,  compressed,  incurved,  and
supports  a  subulate  style  with  an  obtuse  stigma.  The  legume  is  oblong,
compressed,  one-celled,  two  to  twelve  seeded,  filled  with  a  firm,  acid
pulp,  covered  with  a  hard,  scabrous  bark,  which  never  separates  into
valves  ;  under  the  bark  run  three  fibers,  one  down  the  upper  concave
margin,  and  the  other  two  at  equal  distances  from  the  inferior  or  convex
edge.  Seeds  from  six  to  twelve,  somewhat  trapeziform,  compressed,
covered  with  a  smooth,  hard,  brown  shell,  and  inserted  into  the  convex
side  of  the  pericarp.

History. — The  Tamarind  tree  grows  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,
Egypt  and  Arabia.  The  fruit  is  the  officinal  portion  ;  in  the  recent  state
they  have  an  agreeable,  sour  taste,  without  any  mixture  of  sweetness.
As  usually  obtained,  they  are  in  the  preserved  state,  made  by  placing
the  pods  previously  deprived  of  their  shell,  in  layers  in  a  cask,  and  then
pouring  boiling  syrup  over  them  ;  thus  prepared,  they  form  a  dark-
colored  adhesive  mass,  consisting  of  syrup  mixed  with  the  pulp,  mem-
branes, strings  and  seeds  of  the  pod,  and  of  a  sweet  acidulous  taste.


924  Materia Medica.

The  seeds  should  be  hard,  clean,  and  not  swollen,  the  strings  tough  and
entire,  and  the  odor  without  mustiness.  The  presence  of  copper  may
be  ascertained  by  the  reddish  coat  imparted  to  the  blade  of  a  knife  which
has  been  immersed  in  the  tamarinds.  According  to  an  old  analysis  by
Vauquelin,  they  contain  a  little  sugar,  pectic  acid,  and  parenchymatous
fiber,  with  9.4  per  cent,  of  citric  acid,  1.5  of  tartaric  acid,  0.5  of  malic
acid,  and  3.25  of  bitartrate  of  potassa.  It  readily  parts  with  its  proper-
ties to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tamarinds  are  laxative  and  refrigerant,  and
infused  in  water  form  a  grateful  drink  in  febrile  diseases.  During  con-
valescence, the  addition  of  the  pulp  to  the  patient's  diet,  is  not  only
agreeable,  but  tends  to  keep  the  bowels  in  a  soluble  condition.  A  con-
venient cooling  laxative  is  Tamarind-whey,  made  by  boiling  an  ounce  of
the  pulp  in  a  pint  of  milk,  and  straining  the  product.  Combined  with
senna,  or  resinous  cathartics  it  is  said  to  weaken  their  purgative  power.
Dose,  from  a  drachm  to  two  ounces.


TANACETUM  VULGARE.

Tansy.

Nat.  Ord. — Asteraceas. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE HERB.

Description. — Tansy  has  a  perennial,  moderately  creeping  root,  and  an
erect,  herbaceous,  obscurely  hexagonal,  leafy,  solid,  striated,  smooth
stem,,  two  or  three  feet  in  hight,  and  branched  above  into  a  handsome
corymb  of  flowers.  The  leaves  are  smoothish,  dark-green,  doubly  and
deeply  pinnatifid ;  the  segments  are  oblong-lanceolate,  pinnatifid  and
incisely  serrate  ;  the  margined  petiole  cut-toothed.  The  flowers  are
golden  yellow,  and  arranged  in  dense,  terminal,  many-headed,  fastigiate
corymbs  ;  each  flower  is  composed  of  numerous  florets,  of  which  those
constituting  the  disk  are  perfect  and  five-cleft,  those  of  the  terete  rays,
very  few,  pistillate,  and  trifid.  Scales  of  the  involucre  scarious  at  the
apex,  small,  obtuse,  imbricated.  The  pappus  short,  equal,  membranous,
five-lobed ;  achenia  with  a  quadrangular  entire  crown.  There  is  a
variety  called  Double  Tansy,  Tanacetum  Crispum,  with  crisped  and  dense
leaves.

History. — Tansy  is  a  native  of  Europe,  extensively  cultivated  in  the
gardens  of  this  country,  and  likewise  found  growing  wild  in  the  roads
and  old  fields,  flowering  from  July  to  September.  The  whole  herb  is
officinal ;  it  has  a  strong,  peculiar,  and  fragrant  odor,  but  which  is  dis-
agreeable to  some,  and  a  warm,  aromatic,  bitter,  and  somewhat  acrid
taste.  Its  odor  is  much  diminished  by  drying.  It  imparts  these  proper-
ties to  alcohol,  or  boiling  water  in  infusion,  and  which  depend  on  bitter
extractive,  and  a  greenish-yellow  volatile  oil  which  has  the  flavor  of  the


Taraxacum  Dens-Leonis.  925

plant,  is  lighter  than  water,  and  deposits  camphor  upon  standing-.  Ac-
cording to  analysis,  the  leaves  contain  volatile  oil,  in  greater  proportion
than  in  the  seeds,  fixed  oil,  wax  or  stearin,  chlorophylle,  yellow  resin,
yellow-coloring  matter,  tannic  and  gallic  acids,  bitter  extractive,  in  less
proportion  than  in  the  seeds,  gum,  lignin,  and  a  pecxiliar  acid  called
tanacetic,  which  precipitates  lime,  baryta,  oxides  of  lead,  and  copper.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tansy  is  tonic,  emmenagogue  and  diaphoretic.
In  small  doses,  the  cold  infusion  will  be  found  useful  in  convalescence
from  exhausting  diseases,  in  dyspepsia  with  troublesome  flatulence,
hysteria,  jaundice,  and  worms.  A  warm  infusion  is  diaphoretic  and
emmenagogue,  and  has  been  found  beneficial  in  intermittent  fever,
suppressed  menstruation,  tardy  labor-pains,  and  as  a  preventive  of  the
paroxysms  of  gout.  The  seeds  are  reputed  the  most  effectual  as  a
vermifuge.  The  oil  is  likewise  used  as  an  anthelmintic,  and  as  an  abor-
tive ;  but  for  this  last  purpose  it  is  highly  dangerous.  Tansy  is  much
employed  in  the  form  of  fomentation  to  swellings  and  tumors,  local
inflammations,  etc.,  and  applied  to  the  bowels  in  amenorrhea,  and  painful
dysmenorrhea.  The  vinous  infusion  is  said  to  be  beneficial  in  stran-
gury, and  other  urinary  obstructions,  and  in  debility  of  the  kidneys.
The  dose  of  the  powder  is  from  thirty  to  sixty  grains,  two  or  three  times
a  day  ;  of  the  infusion,  from  one  to  four  fluidounces ;  of  the  tincture,
one  or  two  fluidrachms  ;  of  the  oil,  from  two  to  ten  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Infusum  Tanaceti ;  Tinctura  Laricis  Composita.


TARAXACUM DENS-LEONIS.

Dandelion.

Nat. Ord. — Asteracese. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  iEqualis.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  placed  in  the  Natural  Order  Cichoracece  by
Lindley,  and  is  the  Leonlodon  Taraxacum  of  Linnaeus.  It  is  a  herba-
ceous plant,  with  a  perennial,  fusiform,  fleshy,  whitish,  milky  root,
covered  with  a  brown  epidermis.  The  leaves  are  radical,  sessile,  nume-
rous, runcinatc,  toothed,  smooth,  of  a  fine  green  color,  and  spreading.
The  scape  or  flower-stem  rises  from  the  midst  of  the  leaves,  six  inches  or
more  in  bight;  it  is  erect,  round,  naked,  smooth,  brittle,  fistulous,  and
terminated  by  a  single  head  of  flowers  of  a  golden-yellow  color,  which
expand  in  fine  weather  and  in  the  morning  only,  and  close  in  the  even-
ing; the  heads  are  about  an  inch  and  a  half  wide.  The  involucre  is
imbricated,  oblong,  and  double ;  the  exterior  scales  being  linear-oblong,
appressed,  spreading,  and  reflexed  ;  the  inner  are  in  a  single  series,
larger  and  erect.  The  florets  are  numerous,  equal,  ligulate,  truncated,
and  five-toothed.  The  stamens  have  capillary  filaments  with  conjoined
anthers. The  ovary  is  obovate,  crowned  with  a  slender,  cylindrical  style,


926  Materia  Medica.

with  two  revolute  stigmas.  The  receptacle  is  convex,  naked,  and  punc-
tate. The  achcnia  are  solitary,  oblong,  and  supporting  a  simple,  radiated
pappus  on  a  long  pedicel.  After  blossoming  the  inner  involucre  closes
for  a  time,  the  slender  beak  elongates  and  raises  up  the  pappus  while
the  fruit  is  forming,  the  whole  involucre  is  then  reflexed,  exposing  to  the
wind  the  naked  fruits  with  the  pappus  displayed  in  an  open  globular
head  nearly  two  inches  in  diameter.

History. This  plant  grows  spontaneously  in  most  parts  of  the  globe,

in  fields,  grass-plats,  and  along  roadsides,  flowering  from  the  commence-
ment of  spring  to  late  in  the  autumn.  There  are  several  species  named
by  Botanists,  but  which  appear  to  be  mere  varieties  of  this  one,  and
which  possess  the  same  physical  characters.  The  young  leaves  are
much  used  as  a  salad  or  greens.  The  whole  plant  abounds  in  a  milky,
bitter  juice,  whose  sensible  qualities  are  said  to  be  greater  just  before
inflorescence.  The  root  is  the  officinal  part,  and  yields  its  properties  to
boiling  water ;  it  should  be  collected  in  the  months  of  July,  August,  and
September.  When  recent,  it  is  several  inches  in  length,  from  a  quarter
of  an  inch  to  three-quarters  of  an  inch  thick,  round,  tapering,  some-
what branched,  brownish,  or  brownish-yellow  externally,  whitish  inter-
nally, with  a  yellowish  ligneous  cord  running  through  its  center,  and
abounding  in  a  milky  juice.  On  drying,  it  loses  more  than  half  its
weight,  and  becomes  shrunk,  wrinkled  longitudinally,  brittle,  with  a
shining,  somewhat  resinous  fracture.  It  is  inodorous,  with  a  sweetish,
herbaceous,  mucilaginous,  bitter  taste.  The  milky  juice  has  been  found
on  analysis  to  contain  gum,  bitter  extractive,  gluten,  caoutchouc,  saline
matters,  a  trace  of  resin,  and  a  free  acid ;  beside  which,  the  root  contains
starch  and  saccharine  matter.  When  changed  by  exposure,  mannite
has  been  obtained.  M.  Pollex  has  obtained  Taraxacin  by  boiling  the
milky  juice  of  the  root  in  distilled  water,  which  removes  albumen  and
resin;  filter  the  liquid,  concentrate,  and  allow  it  to  evaporate  sponta-
neously in  a  warm  place.  The  taraxacin  forms  in  crystals,  and  may  be
purified  by  repeated  solution  and  crystallization  in  alcohol  or  water.  It
is  in  stellated  and  dendritic  masses,  bitter,  and  somewhat  acrid,  neutral,
fusible,  permanent,  very  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  or  boiling  water,
sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water.  Too  long  boiling,  impairs  the  virtues
of  Dandelion  root,  and  which  should  always  be  used  while  recent.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Dandelion  root  when  dried  exerts  but  little
therapeutic  influence  upon  the  system ;  but  in  its  recent  state  it  is
slightly  tonic,  diuretic,  aperient,  and  alterative.  It  is  supposed  to  act
especially  upon  the  liver,  proving  effectual  in  torpor  and  chronic  engorge-
ments of  that  organ,  as  well  as  of  the  spleen.  It  is  also  reputed  useful
in  dropsical  affections  depending  on  an  abnormal  condition  of  the  abdo-
minal organs,  in  uterine  obstructions,  cutaneous  affections,  and  in  derange-
ments of  the  hepatic  and  digestive  systems. Its  diuretic  and  aperient


Tela  Arane^e  —  Thea  Chinensis.  927

effect  is  augmented  by  the  addition  of  bitartrate  of  potassa.  As  far  as
my  own  experience  with  this  article  goes,  I  think  its  virtues  have  been
overrated.  The  existence  of  an  irritable  condition  of  the  stomach  or
bowels,  or  acute  inflammation  contra-indicate  its  employment.  Dose  of
the  decoction  one  or  two  ounces ;  of  the  extract  from  five  to  thirty  grains.

Off.  Prep.  —  Decoctum  Taraxaci;  Extractum  Taraxaci;  Extractum
Taraxaci  Fluidum ;  Pilulse  Taraxaci  Compositae.


TELA  ARANE^E.
Cobweb. Spidersweb.

History.  —  The  medicinal  species  of  spider  from  which  the  web  is
obtained  is  the  Tegeneria  Medicinalis  of  this  country,  which  are  found  in
cellars,  barns,  and  other  dark  places ;  they  are  of  a  brown  or  blackish
color.  The  web  of  the  field-spider  is  said  to  be  of  no  account,  medici-
nally, while  that  of  the  house-spider  is  reputed  to  possess  extraordinary
virtues.  There  are  various  opinions  among  medical  men  as  to  the
modus  operandi  of  cobweb,  some  attributing  it  entirely  to  the  control  of
the  imagination,  while  others  view  it  in  a  different  light,  and  entertain
favorable  opinions  of  it  as  a  powerful  therapeutical  agent.

Properties  and  Uses. — Febrifuge,  sedative,  and  antispasmodic.  Said
to  have  been  found  useful  in  the  cure  of  intermittents  when  all  other
agents  have  failed ;  also  recommended  in  various  nervous  and  spasmo-
dic diseases,  for  the  purpose  of  controlling  and  tranquilizing  irregular
nervous  action,  exhilarating  the  spirits,  and  disposing  to  sleep,  without
any  narcotic  action  on  the  brain,  as  in  periodical  headache,  hysteria,
asthma,  chorea,  hectic  fever,  and  nervous  irritations  attended  with  mor-
bid vigilance  and  irregular  muscular  action.  Dose,  is  five  or  six  grains,
every  three  or  four  hours,  in  the  form  of  pill.  Externally,  it  is  asserted
to  have  been  advantageously  employed  as  a  styptic  in  wounds,  and  a
healing  application  in  superficial  ulcers.

The  small  silver-headed  spider,  given  in  a  dough-pill,  is  said  to  be  a
prompt  and  efficacious  cure  for  ague.


THEA CHINENSIS.

Tea.

Nat. Ord. — Ternstromiacea3. Sex.  Syst. — Monadelphia  Polyandria.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — The  Tea-plant  is  a  shrub  or  small  tree,  which  in  a  state
of  nature  may  attain  a  hight  of  twenty-five  or  thirty  feet,  but  which,
when  cultivated,  seldom  exceeds  six  or  seven.  The  leaves  are  alternate,
with  short  petioles,  very  smooth,  ovate-oblong,  somewhat  acuminate,


928  Materia Medica.

stiff,  coriaceous,  slightly  dentate,  green,  shining,  and  marked  with  one
rib  and  many  transverse  veins.  They  are  two  or  three  inches  long,  and
from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  broad.  The  flowers  are  white,  axillary,
and  single,  or  supported  two  or  three  together  on  short,  glabrous  pedun-
cles. The  calyx  is  persistent,  short,  green,  with  five  ovate,  rounded,
obtuse  divisions.  The  corolla  is  much  larger  than  the  calyx,  and  con-
sists of  from  four  to  nine  large,  unequal,  rounded,  very  concave  petals.
The  stamens  are  very  numerous,  rather  shorter  than  the  corolla,  with
subulate  white  filaments,  bearing  rounded,  reniform,  yellow  anthers,
opening  at  the  sides.  The  ovary  is  ovate,  downy,  surrounded  by  a
fleshy  ring  at  base,  three-celled,  each  cell  containing  two  ovules.  The
styles  are  three,  free  above,  with  obtuse  stigmas.  The  fruit  is  a  three-
celled  capsule,  each  cell  containing  one,  sometimes  two  seeds.

Several  species  have  been  named  by  Botanists,  but  at  present,  it  is
varieties  in  which  there  exists  a  uniformity  of  character.  There  may
be  other  species,  but  it  is  not  positively  determined.  Either  of  the
green  tea  according  to  the  mode  of  manufacture.  These  varieties  differ
thus :  Thea  Viridis.  Leaves  ellipto-lanceolate,  acuminate,  emarginate,
and  undulate  ;  flowers  axillary,  solitary ;  this  variety  furnishes  the  green
tea  principally.  Thea  Bohea.  Leaves  smaller  and  flatter,  darker-green,
coriaceous,  terminating  gradually  in  a  point,  not  acuminate  or  emargin-
ate;  flowers  axillary,  aggregated;  this  affords  the  black  tea.

History. — The  Tea  plant  is  a  native  of  China  and  Japan.  It  is  an  ever-
green shrub  from  four  to  eight  feet  high,  and  in  favorable  situations
even  to  thirty  feet.  It  is  divided  into  the  green  and  black  teas.  The
green  tea  is  characterized  by  a  dark-green  color,  sometimes  inclining
more  or  less  to  blue  or  brown.  It  has  a  peculiar,  refreshing,  somewhat
aromatic  odor,  and  an  astringent,  slightly  pungent,  and  agreeably  bitter-
ish taste.  Its  infusion  is  of  a  pale  greenish-yellow  color,  with  the  taste
and  odor  of  the  leaves.  Green  tea  contains  gallic  acid,  tannic  acid,  gum,
gluten,  lignin,  bitter  extractive,  and  volatile  matter.  Black  tea  is  distin-
guished by  a  dark  brown  color ;  usually  less  firmly  rolled  and  lighter
than  the  green.  Its  odor  is  fainter,  and  of  a  somewhat  different  charac-
ter, though  still  fragrant.  Its  taste  is  astringent  and  bitterish;  less
pungent  and  less  agreeable  than  the  green.  It  contains  tannic  acid,  gum,
gluten,  lignin,  and  volatile  matter.

Properties  and  Uses. — Gently  excitant,  astringent  and  stimulant,  and
the  finer  varieties  exert  a  decided  influence  over  the  nervous  system,
evinced  by  the  feeling  of  comfort,  and  even  exhilaration  which  it  pro-
duces, and  the  unnatural  wakefulness  to  which  it  sometimes  gives  rise.
In  moderation,  the  infusion  is  a  grateful  and  harmless  beverage,  but
long  continued,  or  in  excessive  quantity,  it  induces  unpleasant,  nervous


Thuja  Occidentalis.  929

and  dyspeptic  symptoms.  Black  tea,  on  this  account,  is  preferable  to
green.  Green  tea  may  be  used  in  diarrhea,  in  debility  after  an  emetic,
cathartic,  or  sudorific,  and  as  a  grateful  stimulant  and  diaphoretic  in
colds  and  some  fevers.  Externally,  the  infusion  has  been  used  with
advantage  as  a  collyrium.

Off.  Prep. — Lotio  Hydrastis  Composita.


THUJA  OCCIDENTALIS.

Arbor  Vitae.

Nat.  Ord. — Pinacese. Sex.  Syst. — Moncecia  Monadelphia.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  tree,  also  called  False  White  Cedar,  from  its  resem-
blance to  the  white  cedar,  (  Cupressus  Thyoides),  is  indigenous  to  this
country,  and  attains  the  hight  of  from  thirty  to  fifty  feet.  The  trunk  is
crooked,  rapidly  diminishing  in  size  upward,  throwing  out  recurved
branches  from  base  to  summit ;  the  branches  ancipital,  flat  and  broad.
The  wood  is  very  light  and  soft,  but  exceedingly  durable.  The  leaves
are  evergreen,  rhomboid-ovate,  with  a  gland  on  the  back,  squamose,
appressed,  imbricated  in  four  rows.  Cones  terminal,  oblong,  nodding;
scales  pointless,  one-seeded ;  seeds  broadly  winged.

History. — This  evergreen  tree  grows  wild  in  various  parts  of  the  United
States  from  Canada  to  Carolina,  on  the  rocky  borders  of  streams  and
lakes,  and  in  swamps,  flowering  in  May.  It  abounds  especially  in  Canada
and  the  Northern  States ;  it  is  said  to  attain  only  the  hight  of  thirty-six
feet,  and  fourteen  inches  diameter  when  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  old.
The  leaves  and  twigs  are  the  parts  used ;  they  have  an  agreeable  bal-
samic odor,  and  a  strong,  balsamic,  camphorous  and  bitter  taste.  A
yellowish-green  volatile  oil  may  be  obtained  from  them  by  distillation.
Water  or  alcohol  extracts  their  virtues.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  decoction  of  the  leaves  has  been  a  popular
remedy  in  intermittent  fever,  remittent  fever,  rheumatism,  cough,  scurvy,
etc.  Made  into  an  ointment  with  lard  or  other  animal  fat,  the  fresh
leaves  are  useful  as  a  local  application  in  rheumatic  and  neuralgic  affec-
tions ;  a  poultice  of  the  cones  and  powdered  Podophyllum  in  milk,  will,  it
is  asserted,  remove  the  worst  rheumatic  pains.  The  oil  has  been  success-
fully employed  as  a  vermifuge.  The  expressed  juice  or  tincture  of  the
leaves  is  highly  recommended  as  an  application  to  condylomata,  remov-
ing these  growths  in  from  three  to  four  weeks.  The  tincture  to  be
made  by  bruising  an  ounce  of  the  fresh  leaves,  and  macerating  it  for
several  days  in  half  a  pint  of  alcohol.  The  condylomata  should  be  kept
constantly  moistened  with  the  tincture  by  means  of  lint  dipped  in  it.
By  some  it  is  said  to  act  as  a  powerful  excitant,  others  again  deny  this.
69


930  Materia  Medica.

THYMUS  VULGARIS.

Thyme.

Nat.  Ord.— Lamiaceas. Sex.  Syst.— Didynamia  Gymnospcrmia.

THE HERB.

Description. — Thyme  is  a  small  undershrub,  with  erect,  suflruticose,
numerous,  branched  stems,  procumbent  at  base,  and  from  six  to  ten
inches  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  oblong-ovate  and  lanceolate,  numerous,
revolute  at  the  sides.  The  flowers  are  bluish-purple,  small,  and  in  ter-
minal, leafy,  whorled  spikes.

The  Thymus  Serpyllus,  Wild  Thyme  or  Mother  of  Thyme,  with  a
decumbent  stem,  flat,  entire,  elliptical,  punctate,  obtuse,  and  petiolate
leaves,  ciliate  at  base,  and  purple,  spotted,  capitate  flowers,  has  similar
virtues  to  the  above.

History. — These  two  plants  are  natives  of  Europe,  introduced  into  this
country,  and  extensively  cultivated  in  gardens  as  culinary  plants,  espe-
cially the  T.  Vulgaris;  they  blossom  during  the  summer.  The  whole
herb  is  the  part  used  ;  it  should  be  collected  when  in  flower,  and  care-
fully dried.  It  has  a  strong,  aromatic,  peculiar,  agreeable  odor,  which
is  retained  when  properly  dried,  and  a  pungent,  aromatic,  and  camphor-
ous  taste.  Its  active  properties  depend  upon  a  pale-yellow,  or  greenish
volatile  oil,  [oleum  thymi),  of  specific  gravity  0.905,  and  which  may  be
obtained  by  distillation  with  water.  In  the  shops  it  is  frequently  met
with  of  a  brown  color,  under  the  name  of  "Oil  of  Origanum."  The
herb  yields  its  virtues  to  alcohol  or  boiling  water  by  infusion.

Properties  and  Uses. — Thyme  is  tonic,  carminative,  emmenagogue  and
antispasmodic.  The  cold  infusion  is  useful  in  dyspepsia  with  weak  and
irritable  stomach,  and  as  a  stimulating  tonic  in  convalescence  from
exhausting  diseases.  The  warm  infusion  is  beneficial  in  hysteria,  dys-
menorrhea, flatulence,  colic,  headache,  and  to  promote  perspiration.
Occasionally,  the  leaves  have  been  employed  externally,  in  fomentation.
The  oil  is  valuable  as  a  local  application  to  neuralgic  and  rheumatic
pains;  and  internally,  to  fulfill  any  of  the  indications  for  which  the  plant
is  used.  Dose  of  the  infusion  from  one  to  three  fluidounces  ;  of  the  oil,
from  two  to  ten  drops  on  sugar,  or  in  emulsion.

TRIFOLIUM  PRATENSE.

Red  Clover.

Nat.  Ord.— Fabacea?. Sex.  Syst.— Diadelphia  Decandria.

the  blossoms.

Description. — Red  Clover  is  a  biennial  plant  with  several  stems  arising

from  the  same  root,  ascending,  somewhat  hairy,  and  varying  much  in


Trifolium  Pratense.  931

its  hight.  The  leaves  are  ternate ;  the  leaflets  oval  or  obovate,  entire,
nearly  smooth,  often  notched  at  the  end,  and  lighter  colored  in  the
center.  The  stipules  are  ovate,  mucronate.  The  flowers  are  red,  fra-
grant, and  disposed  in  short,  dense,  ovate,  sessile  spikes  or  heads.  The
corollas  unequal,  monopetalous ;  the  lower  tooth,  of  the  calyx  longer  than
the  four  others,  which  are  equal,  and  all  shorter  than  the  rose-red
corolla.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  the  United  States,  being  exten-
sively cultivated  in  grass  lands,  with  herds-grass  (Phleum  Pratense)  and
other  grasses,  and  often  alone :  it  flowers  throughout  the  summer.  The
blossoms  or  flowers  are  the  parts  used.  A  strong  decoction  is  made  of
them,  which  is  evaporated  to  the  consistence  of  an  extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  extract  spread  on  linen  or  soft  leather,  is
said  to  be  an  excellent  remedy  for  cancerous  ulcers.  It  is  also  highly
recommended  in  ill  conditioned  ulcers  of  every  kind,  and  deep,  ragged-
edged,  and  otherwise  badly  conditioned  burns.  It  possesses  a  peculiar
soothing  property,  proves  an  efficacious  detergent,  and  promotes  a  health-
ful granulation.

There  are  two  other  varieties  of  clover  which  are  occasionally  em-
ployed by  practitioners,  viz :  the  Melilotus  Officinalis,  of  Willdenow,  or
M.  Vulgaris,  of  Eaton, — Yellow  Melilot  Clover,  with  an  erect,  sulcate
stem,  about  three  feet  high,  with  spreading  branches.  The  leaves  are
pinnately  trifoliate  ;  leaflets  obovate-oblong,  obtuse,  smooth,  with  remote,
mucronate  teeth.  The  flowers  are  yellow,  and  disposed  in  one-sided,
spicate,  axillary,  loose,  paniculate  racemes ;  calyx  half  as  long  as  the
corolla  ;  legume  ovoid,  two-seeded.  It  is  an  indigenous  annual,  growing
in  alluvia]  meadows,  and  flowering  in  June.  The  whole  plant  is  scented,
having  nearly  the  odor  of  the  sweet-scented  vernal  grass,  Anthoxanthum
Odoratum.  The  other  is  the  Melilotus  Leucantha,  of  Koch,  M.  Alba,  of
Nuttall,  and  Trifolium  Officinale,  of  Linnseus, — White  Melilot  Clover,  or
sweet-scented  clover,  a  biennial,  with  an  erect,  robust,  very  branching,
sulcate  stem,  from  four  to  six  feet  high  ;  leaflets  variable,  oval,  ovate,
ovate-oblong,  truncate,  and  mucronate  at  the  apex,  remotely  serrate,
and  one  or  two  inches  long;  stipules  setaceous.  The  flowers  are  white,
numerous,  the  racemes  more  loose  and  longer  than  in  the  preceding
species.  Petals  unequal,  banner  longer  than  wings  or  keel ;  calyx  shorter
than  the  corolla  by  more  than  one-half.  This  plant  grows  in  similar
situations  with  the  last,  flowering  in  July  and  August,  and  having  a
sweet  fragrance,  which  is  improved  upon  being  dried.  The  leaves  and
flowers  of  these  two  plants  are  boiled  in  lard,  and  formed  into  an  oint-
ment, which  is  found  of  utility  as  an  application  to  all  kinds  of  ulcers.
The  Vanilla  or  Seneca  Grass,  used  for  a  stimulant  purpose,  is  the  Hiero-
chloa  Borealis.


932  Materia Medica.

TRILLIUM  PENDULUM.

Beth  root.
Nat.  Ord.— Trilliaceae. Sex.  Syst.— Hexandria  Trigynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  one  of  an  extensive  genus  of  North  American,
herbaceous,  perennial  plants,  which  are  variously  known  under  the
names  of  Wake-Robin,  Birth-root,  Indian  Balm,  Lamb's  Quarter,  Ground
Lily,  etc.  It  has  an  oblong,  tuberous  root,  from  which  arises  a  slender
stem,  from  ten  to  fifteen  inches  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  three  in  number,
whorled  at  the  top  of  the  stem,  suborbicular-rhomboidal,  abruptly  acu-
minate, from  three  to  five  inches  in  diameter,  and  on  petioles  about  a
line  in  length.  The  flowers  are  white,  solitary,  terminal,  cernuous,  on  a
recurved  peduncle  from  an  inch  to  two  and  a  half  inches  long.  The
sepals  are  green,  oblong-lanceolate,  acuminate,  an  inch  long ;  the  petals
are  oblong-ovate,  acute,  and  an  inch  and  a  quarter  in  length  by  half  an
inch  broad. Styles  three,  erect,  with  recurved  stigmas.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  the  Middle  and  "Western  States,
growing  in  rich  soils,  in  damp,  rocky,  and  shady  woods,  and  flowering  in
May  and  June.  Nearly  all  the  species  of  the  genus  Trillium,  are  medi-
cinal, and  possess  analogous  properties  ;  and  among  them  the  T.  Erythro-
carpum,  T.  Grandiflorum,  T.  Sessile,  T.  Erectum  and  T.  Nivale,  are  the
most  common,  and  consequently  the  most  frequently  collected  and  em-
ployed. These  plants  may  generally  be  known  by  their  three  verticillate,
net-veined  leaves,  and  their  solitary,  terminal  flower,  which  varies  in
color  in  the  different  species,  being  white,  red,  purple,  whitish-yellow,
or  reddish-white  ;  the  peduncle  will  also  be  found  erect  in  some  species,
and  recurved  in  others.  The  roots  of  these  plants  are  oblong  or  terete,
somewhat  tuberous,  dark  or  brownish  externally,  white  internally,  from
one  to  five  inches  in  length,  and  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half
in  diameter,  beset  with  a  few  branching  fibers  laterally.  They  have  a
faint,  slightly  terebinthinate  odor,  and  a  peculiar  aromatic  and  sweetish
taste  ;  when  chewed  they  impart  an  acrid  astringent  impression  in  the
mouth,  causing  a  flow  of  saliva,  and  a  sensation  of  heat  in  the  throat
and  fauces.  The  root  is  said  to  contain  volatile  oil,  gum,  resin,  extrac-
tive, tannic  acid,  and  fecula.  It  yields  its  active  properties  to  water,
and  its  tonic  and  stimulant  virtues  to  diluted  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bethroot  is  astringent,  tonic,  and  antiseptic  ;  it
has  been  employed  successfully  in  hemoptysis,  hematuria,  menorrhagia,
uterine  hemorrhage,  leucorrhea,  cough,  asthma,  and  difficult  breathing,
and  is  said  to  have  been  much  used  by  the  Indian  women  to  promote
parturition.  The  most  astringent  are  used  in  hemorrhages  ;  the  most
acrid  in  asthma,  hectic  fever,  and  catarrhal  cough  ;  and  all  are  service-
able in  leucorrhea,  and  morbid  discharges  from  mucous  tissues. Boiled


Triosteum  Perfoliatttm.  933

in  milk,  it  has  been  administered  with  benefit  in  diarrhea  and  dysentery;
and  an  infusion  of  equal  parts  of  Trillium  and  Lycopus  Virginicus,  has
been  highly  recommended  for  the  cure  of  diabetes.  Externally,  the  root
made  into  a  poultice,  is  very  useful  in  tumors,  indolent  or  offensive
ulcers,  carbuncles,  bubos,  stings  of  insects,  and  to  restrain  gangrene.
In  some  instances  its  efficacy  has  been  increased  by  combination  with
bloodroot.  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell  states  that  the  red  bethroots  will  check
ordinary  epistaxis,  by  merely  smelling  the  freshly  exposed  surface  of  the
recent  root,  and  he  supposes  therefore  that  they  contain  an  astringent
principle  of  a  volatile  nature.  The  leaves  of  the  beth-plants,  boiled  in
lard  have  been  much  used,  in  some  sections  of  country,  as  an  application
to  ulcers,  tumors,  etc.  Dose  of  powdered  belhroot  one  drachm,  to  be
given  in  hot  water ;  of  the  strong  infusion,  which  is  the  most  common
form  of  administration,  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.  These  plants
undoubtedly  possess  active  properties,  and  deserve  further  investigation.


TRIOSTEUM  PERFOLIATUM.

Fever-root.
Nat. Ord. — Caprifoliaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  plant  is  known  also  by  the  names  of  Wild  Ipecac,
Horse-  Gentian,  Wild  Coffee,  and  Dr.  Tinker's  Weed.  It  is  indigenous,
with  a  perennial,  thick  and  fleshy  root,  subdivided  into  numerous  hori-
zontal branches.  The  stems  are  several  from  the  same  root,  simple,
stout,  erect,  round,  hollow,  soft,  pubescent,  and  from  two  to  four  feet
high.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  oval-acuminate,  mostly  connate,  entire,
abruptly  contracted  at  base,  nearly  smooth  above,  pubescent  beneath,
prominently  veined,  and  six  inches  long  by  three  broad  ;  in  some  plants
the  upper  leaves  are  almost  amplexicaul.  The  flowers  are  of  a  dull
purple  color,  axillary,  sessile,  mostly  in  clusters  of  three  or  five  in  the
form  of  whorls,  rarely  solitary.  The  calyx  is  composed  of  five  linear
segments  of  a  purplish  color,  with  a  single  bract  ;  the  corolla  is  rather
longer  than  the  calyx,  tubular,  five-lobed,  viscid-pubescent,  the  lobes
rounded,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  tube  gibbous.  The  stamens  are  five,
included,  with  hairy  filaments.  The  ovary  is  inferior,  roundish,  and
supports  a  long,  slender  style,  with  an  oblong  stigma.  The  fruit  is  an
oval  berry,  about  nine  lines  long  and  six  thick,  of  an  orange-red  or
purple  color  when  ripe,  hairy,  somewhat  three-sided,  crowned  with  the
persistent  calyx,  three-celled,  each  cell  containing  a  hard,  bony,  furrowed
seed.

History. — Fever-root  is  found  in  many  parts  of  the  United  States,  in
shady  and' rocky  situations,  and  in  rich  soil,  flowering  in  June  and  July.
The  bark  of  the  root  is  the  officinal  part ;  it  is  horizontal,  long,  from


934  Materia  Medica.

half  an  inch  to  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  of  a  brownish  or
yellowish  color  externally,  whitish  within,  and  furnished  with  fibers.  It
has  a  nauseous  odor,  and  an  unpleasant,  bitter  taste,  and  when  dried  is
brittle,  and  easily  pulverized.  Water  or  alcohol  takes  up  its  virtues.  It
has  not  been  analyzed.  The  Triosteum  Angustifolium,  smaller  than  the
above,  with  a  bristly,  hairy  stem,  lanceolate,  and  sub-connate  leaves,
tapering  to  the  base,  peduncles  opposite,  one-flowered,  and  flowers  of  a
greenish-cream  color,  possesses  analogous  properties,  and  may  be  substi-
tuted as  an  equivalent  for  the  above.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  bark  of  the  root  is  emetic  when  recent,  or
when  taken  in  large  doses  of  the  powder.  In  doses  of  from  a  scruple
to  a  drachm,  the  powder  is  a  mild,  but  slow  cathartic,  with  a  tonic  influ-
ence. In  the  early  stages  of  fever,  it  may  be  given  in  all  cases  where  a
gentle  action  on  the  bowels  is  desired.  It  has  been  recommended  as  a
laxative-tonic  in  dyspepsia,  and  autumnal  fevers,  also  in  hysteria,  hypo-
chondria, and  convalescence  after  febrile  diseases.  Some  have  stated  it
to  possess  diuretic  properties,  and  have  employed  it  in  chronic  rheuma-
tism with  success.  Rafinesque  considers  the  leaves  to  be  diaphoretic.
The  hard  seeds  are  said  to  be  a  very  excellent  substitute  for  coffee,  when
properly  prepared.  Dose  of  the  tincture  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms  ;
of  the  extract,  which  is  the  best  form  of  administration,  from  five  to
fifteen  grains.

TRITICUM  HYBERNUM.

Wheat.
Nat.  Ord. — Graminacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Digynia.

FLOUR OF THE SEEDS.

Sativum,  and  T.  Vulgare,  has  a  fibrous  root,  and  one  or  more  erect,
round,  smooth,  jointed  stems,  from  three  to  five  feet  in  bight,  with  the
internodes  somewhat  inflated.  The  leaves  are  linear,  pointed,  entire,  flat,
many-ribbed,  rough,  somewhat  glaucous,  with  truncate,  jagged-bearded
stipules.  The  flowers  are  in  a  solitary,  terminal,  dense,  smooth,  imbri-
cated, somewhat  four-sided  spike,  two  or  three  inches  long,  with  a  tough
rachis.  Spikelets  crowded,  broad-ovate,  about  four-flowered  ;  glumes
ventricose,  ovate,  truncate,  mucronate,  compressed  below  the  apex,
round  and  convex  at  the  back,  with  a  prominent  nervure.  Paleas  of  the
upper  florets  somewhat  bearded. Grains  loose.

History. — Several  species  of  Triticum  are  cultivated  in  different  coun-
tries, among  which  may  be  named  the  T.  Vulgare,  the  species  most
generally  raised  in  this  country  and  Europe.  It  has  two  varieties,  T.
Vulgare  JEstivum  or  Spring-Wheat,  and  T.  Vulgare  Hybernum,  or  Win-
ter-Wheat. Linnaeus  considered  these  as  distinct  species,  but  Botanists


Triticum  Htbernum.  935

of  the  present  day  generally  refer  them  to  one  common  stock.  Wheat
differs  from  barley  and  oats,  in  not  having  the  perianth  adherent  to  the
grain.  Its  native  country  is  unknown,  but  is  commonly  supposed  to
have  been  Central  Asia.  The  officinal  part  of  the  plant  is  the  flour  of
the  seeds ;  these  are  first  deprived  of  their  husks,  and  are  then  reduced
to  flour  by  grinding  and  sifting ;  the  interior  farinaceous  part  forming
the  farina,  or  flour,  which  varies  in  its  degree  of  fineness,  while  the
covering  or  external  coat,  which  constitutes  from  25  to  33  per  cent,  of
the  seeds,  furnishes  what  is  called  bran.

Wheat  flour  is  very  white,  of  a  faint,  peculiar  odor,  and  nearly  taste-
less. It  consists  chiefly  of  starch,  gluten,  albumen,  saccharine  matter,
gum,  a  little  ligneous  fiber,  and  some  moisture,  which  vary  considerably
in  their  proportions,  in  different  samples.  The  starch  is  the  most  abun-
dant ingredient,  and  is  of  finer  quality  and  of  greater  density  than  that
obtained  from  most  other  sources.  {See  Amylum.)  The  gluten  of  wheat
is  generally  assumed  as  the  most  perfect  form  of  that  principle,  and  is
more  abundant  in  wheat  than  any  other  grain ;  and  it  is  to  the  greater
proportion  of  this  principle,  that  wheat  flour  owes  its  superiority  over
that  from  other  grains  for  the  preparation  of  bread.  When  wheat  flour,
inclosed  in  a  linen  bag,  is  exposed  to  the  action  of  a  stream  of  water,
and  at  the  same  time  pressed  with  the  fingers  till  the  liquor  comes  away
colorless,  the  portion  which  is  left  in  the  bag  consists  of  gluten  and
vegetable  albumen,  which  may  be  separated  by  boiling  in  alcohol.  The
gluten  being  dissolved  by  the  alcohol,  and  the  vegetable  albumen  not
being  affected  by  it.  Each  of  these  substances  contain  nitrogen,  and
when  left  to  themselves  in  a  moist  state,  undergo  putrefaction.  By
placing  the  alcoholic  solution  of  gluten,  previously  filtered  while  hot,
into  water,  and  distilling  off  the  alcohol,  the  gluten  will  float  on  the  top
of  the  water  in  large  cohering  flakes.  It  may  be  still  further  purified
by  treating  it  with  ether,  to  remove  fat  oil.

Pure  gluten,  at  present  called  Vegetable  Fibrin,  is  a  pale-yellow,  adhe-
sive, elastic  substance,  becoming  darker-colored  and  translucent  when
dried,  somewhat  like  horn.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  ether,  and  in  the
fixed  and  volatile  oils.  Boiling  alcohol  dissolves  it  more  readily  than
cold.  It  forms  soluble  compounds  with  diluted  acids  or  alkaline  solu-
tions ;  and  nearly  insoluble  compounds  with  the  earths  and  metallic
oxides,  which  are  precipitated  when  the  earths  or  oxides  are  added  to
the  solution  of  gluten  in  liquid  potassa.  Its  acid  or  alkaline  solutions
are  precipitated  by  corrosive  sublimate,  which,  on  being  added  in  solu-
tion to  moist  gluten,  forms  a  compound,  which,  when  dry,  is  hard,
opake  and  incorruptible.  Infusion  of  galls  also  precipitates  gluten.
This  principle  exists  in  most  of  the  farinaceous  grains,  and  in  the  seeds
of  some  leguminous  plants.

Vegetable  Albumen  possesses  no  adhesiveness,  and,  when  dried,  is
opake,  and  of  a  white,  gray,  or  brown  color. It  exists  in  a  soluble


936  Materia Medica.

form  in  vegetables,  and  especially  in  the  oily  seeds,  along  with  caseine.
Before  coagulation  it  is  soluble  in  water,  but  insoluble  in  alcohol.  When
heated  to  from  140°  to  160°,  it  coagulates,  and  becomes  insoluble  in
water.  Its  solutions  are  also  coagulated  by  acids,  infusion  of  galls,
creosote,  and  corrosive  sublimate.  It  is  dissolved  by  solutions  of  the
caustic  alkalies.  When  a  fresh  vegetable  juice  is  filtered  and  boiled,  it
yields  a  coagulum,  which  is  nearly  pure  albumen.  It  is  a  constituent
of  all  the  seeds  which  form  a  milky  emulsion  with  water,  and  in  most
of  them  is  associated  with  gluten.

It  is  to  vegetable  fibrin  and  albumen,  aided  by  a  moderate  heat  and
the  presence  of  water,  that  starch  is  converted  partly  into  gum  and
partly  into  sugar,  as  in  the  germination  of  seeds  ;  the  gluten  becoming
acid  in  the  process,  loses  its  power  of  reacting  on  the  starch.

As  far  as  ascertained,  vegetable  albumen  is  identical  with  animal  albu-
men, and  the  gluten  of  vegetables  with  animal  fibrin  ;  and  these,  with  casein,
a  principle  existing  in  both  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,  consist
of  protein  in  combination  with  a  small  proportion  of  mineral  substances,  as
sulphur  and  phosphorus.  Protein  is  compounded  of  nitrogen,  carbon,  hy-
drogen and  oxygen,  its  formula  being  No  Ci8  H3J  Oh.  It  may  be  obtained
by  dissolving  any  of  the  above-named  substances  in  a  strong  solution  of
potassa,  heating  for  some  time  to  120°,  and  precipitating  with  acetic  acid.

Bread  is  formed  by  making  a  thick  paste  with  wheat  flour  and  water,
adding  a  little  salt,  and  some  yeast,  setting  it  aside  to  ferment,  and
then  baking  it.  The  carbonic  acid  gas  which  is  extricated  during  the
fermentation,  is  retained  by  the  tenacity  of  the  gluten,  forming  numerous
small  cells  through  the  mass,  and  thus  renders  the  bread  light.

Properties  and  Uses. — Wheat  flour  in  its  unaltered  state  is  seldom
used  in  medicine.  It  is  sometimes  sprinkled  on  the  skin  in  erysipelatous
inflammation,  and  various  itching  or  burning  eruptions,  particularly  the
nettle-rash  ;  though  rye-flour  is  generally  preferred  for  this  purpose.
In  the  state  of  bread  it  is  much  more  employed.  An  infusion  of  toasted
bread  in  water  is  a  pleasant,  somewhat  nutritive  drink,  very  well  adapted
to  febrile  complaints.  Within  our  experience,  no  drink  has  been  found
more  grateful  in  such  cases  than  this  infusion  sweetened  with  a  little
molasses,  and  flavored  by  lemon-juice.  Boiled  with  milk,  bread  consti-
tutes the  common  suppurative  poultice,  which  may  be  improved  by  the
addition  of  a  small  proportion  of  perfectly  fresh  lard.  Slices  of  it  steeped
in  borax  water,  or  the  crumb  mixed  with  the  fluid  and  confined  within  a
piece  of  gauze,  afford  a  convenient  mode  of  applying  this  preparation  to
local  inflammations.  The  crumb — mica  panis — is,  moreover,  frequently
used  to  give  bulk  to  minute  doses  of  very  active  medicines  administered
in  the  form  of  pill.  As  bread  contains  salt,  its  incompatibilities,  as  for  in-
stance, nitrate  of  silver,  should  be  remembered,  when  forming  pills  with  it.

Bran  is  sometimes  used  in  decoction,  as  a  demulcent  in  catarrhal
affections  and  complaints  of  the  bowels. It  has,  when  taken  in  substance,


Triticum  Htbernum.  937

laxative  properties,  and  is  used  by  some  persons  habitually  and  with
great  advantage  to  prevent  costiveness.  Bran  bread,  made  from  the
unsifted  flour,  forms  an  excellent  laxative  article  of  diet  in  some  dys-
peptic cases.  The  action  of  the  bran  is  probably  altogether  mechanical,
consisting  in  the  irritation  produced  upon  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
stomach  and  bowels  by  its  coarse  particles.

We  are  indebted  to  Dr.  T.  J.  Wright,  of  Cincinnati,  for  the  following
remarks  on  wheat,  the  correctness  of  which  has  been  corroborated  by
other  physicians  who  have  made  use  of  it  according  to  his  method.  His
mode  of  preparing  and  using  it  is  as  follows :

"  The  seeds  of  wheat  should  be  well  cleaned  before  cooking  them,  in
the  following  manner  :  Take  of  the  seeds  of  wheat  a  sufficient  quantity,
and  place  them  in  clear,  cold  water,  stir  it,  and  skim  off  the  light  grains
which  rise  to  the  surface  in  connection  with  foreign  substances  ;  then
change  the  water,  stir  the  grain,  and  skim  as  before,  and  thus  continue
till  the  wheat  is  perfectly  clean,  and  all  the  light  grains  and  extraneous
substances  are  removed.  To  the  wheat,  thus  cleansed,  add  a  sufficient
quantity  of  water  to  cover  it,  and  allow  it  to  stand  for  twelve  hours,  or
until  the  next  morning,  if  this  is  done  at  night ;  then  pour  off  the  liquid,
and  add  of  some  clean  water  a  sufficient  quantity,  and  boil  for  from  two
to  four  hours,  or  until  the  spermoderm  is  cracked,  when  remove  the
wheat  from  the  water,  let  it  cool,  and  it  is  ready  for  use.  Of  this  pre-
pared wheat,  small  quantities  ought  to  be  made  at  a  time,  especially  in
warm  weather,  as  it  is  apt  to  become  sour ;  enough  for  one  or  two  days
at  the  most,  is  sufficient,  and  it  should  always  be  kept  in  a  cool  place.

"  There  are  several  ways  in  which  this  preparation  can  be  used,  viz:
It  may  be  eaten  with  molasses  or  sugar,  as  boiled  rice  is  sometimes
eaten  ;  or  it  may  be  made  into  a  frumenty,  by  boiling  a  sufficient  quan-
tity of  milk,  and  thickening  it  with  flour  to  the  consistence  of  gruel ;
remove  from  the  fire,  add  as  much  prepared  wheat  as  desired,  and
sweeten.  But  the  preparation  which  I  prefer,  is  to  use  water  instead
of  milk,  and  thicken  with  Indian  meal  to  the  consistence  of  gruel,  then
remove  from  the  fire,  add  prepared  wheat  in  quantity  to  suit  the  patient
and  sweeten.  Wheat  thus  prepared,  undoubtedly  acts  mechanically,
owing  to  the  action  of  the  coarse  particles  upon  the  intestinal  mucous
lining  membrane,  which  maintain  the  peristaltic  motion  and  keep  the
bowels  in  a  soluble  condition  ;  and  in  addition  to  its  nutritive  qualities,
prepared  wheat  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  articles  of  diet  for  patients,
and  may  be  used  either  in  a  loose  or  torpid  state  of  the  bowels.  In
dyspepsia,  fistula  in  ano,  hemorrhoids,  constipation,  as  well  as  the
opposite  condition,  the  employment  of  it  is  not  only  beneficial,  but  mate-
rially assists  in  their  cure.  I  have  extensively  used  the  above  in  obsti-
nate constipation,  chronic  diarrhea,  and  other  diseases,  with  decided
advantage  in  every  case,  and  can,  therefore,  confidently  recommend  i<
to  my  medical  brethren."


938  Materia  Medica.

TUSSILAGO  FARFARA.

Coltsfoot.
Nat. Ord. — Asteracea?. Sex.  Syst. — Syngenesia  Superflua.

THE LEAVES.

Description.  —  Coltsfoot  has  a  long,  perennial  root,  with  the  leaves
radical,  cordate,  on  downy,  furrowed  petioles  somewhat  lobed  and
toothed,  smooth  and  dark-green  above,  white,  veined,  and  tomentose
beneath,  and  from  five  to  eight  inches  long,  by  three  to  six  wide ;  when
young,  the  leaves  are  revolute,  and  covered  with  a  cottony  down  ;  they
arise  after  the  flowers  have  withered.  The  scapes  are  several,  and
appear  before  the  leaves ;  they  are  erect,  slender,  round,  varying  in
color  from  pale-green  to  reddish-brown,  one-flowered,  and  beset  with
numerous  lanceolate  scales  ;  their  bight  is  from  five  to  six  inches.  The
flowers  are  large,  yellow,  compound;  the  florets  of  the  ray  being  ligulate,
numerous,  and  fertile,  while  those  of  the  disk  are  few,  tubular,  and
barren.  The  scales  of  the  involucre  are  linear-lanceolate,  equal  to  the
disk,  at  first  erect,  but  finally  reflexed.  The  achenia  are  smooth,  oblong,
and  compressed  ;  the  pappus  is  pilose,  sessile,  silvery,  and  permanent.

History.  —  This  plant  is  very  common  in  Europe,  and  has  become
naturalized  in  this  country,  especially  in  the  Northern  States;  it  flowers
in  April.  The  root  is  mucilaginous,  bitterish,  creeping  horizontally,
with  many  fibers.  It  grows  in  wet  places  and  low  meadows.  The
flowers  have  an  agreeable  odor,  which  they  retain  when  dried.  The
whole  plant  is  medicinal,  but  the  leaves  are  principally  employed.  They
should  be  gathered  after  their  full  expansion,  but  before  they  have
attained  their  greatest  magnitude.  The  dried  leaves  and  root  are  inodo-
rous, and  have  a  rough,  bitter,  mucilaginous  taste,  and  impart  their
properties  to  boiling  water. No  analysis  has  been  made  of  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — Coltsfoot  is  emollient,  demulcent,  and  slightly
tonic.  Useful  in  coughs,  asthma,  hooping-cough,  and  other  pulmonary
affections  ;  and  is  said  to  have  been  useful  in  scrofula.  The  powdered
leaves  form  a  good  errhine,  for  giddiness,  headache,  nasal  obstructions,
etc. Used  externally  in  form  of  poultice  to  scrofulous  tumors.


TYPHA  LATIFOLIA.
Cat-tail  Flag.
Nat.  Ord. — Typhaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Triandria.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Cat-tail  Flag,  or  Reed  Mace,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  is
a  perennial  plant,  with  a  smooth,  round  stem,  from  three  to  five  feet
high,  leafy  below,  and  terminated  by  large  cylindric  spikes.  The  leaves
are  flat,  erect,  ensiform,  slightly  concave  within  near  the  base,  from  two


Ulmus  Fulva.  939

to  four  feet  long,  and  nearly  one  inch  wide.  The  flowers  are  very  nu-
merous. The  spikes  are  of  a  brownish  color,  from  six  to  ten  inches  in
length,  and  about  one  inch  in  diameter,  and  are  composed  of  slender,
downy  flowers,  so  compact,  particularly  the  fertile  ones,  as  to  be  of  con-
siderable hardness.  The  upper  portion  is  smaller,  and  composed  of  the
sterile  flowers,  so  that  the  staminate  and  pistillate  parts  of  the  spike
approximate,  or  are  almost  continuous.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  and
is  found  growing  in  ditches,  muddy  pools,  borders  of  ponds,  and  other
wet  places,  flowering  in  July.  The  leaves  are  called  Flags,  and  are  used
for  weaving  the  seats  of  chairs ;  the  flowers  have  been  used  for  making
beds. The  root  is  the  part  used ;  it  yields  its  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Astringent  and  emollient.  Boiled  with  milk,  it
has  been  found  useful  in  dysentery,  diarrhea,  and  infantile  summer  com-
plaint, and  a  decoction  of  it  has  been  beneficial  in  gonorrhea.  Exter-
nally, the  root,  in  combination  with  elm  and  aromatics,  forms  an  excellent
poultice  for  white  swellings,  tumors,  and  ulcers.  The  root,  bruised  until
it  becomes  like  a  jelly,  forms  an  excellent  application  for  burns  and
scalds,  erysipelas,  ophthalmia,  and  all  local  inflammations.


ULMUS  FULVA.

Slippery  Elm.

Nat. Ord. — Ulmacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Digynia.

THE INNER BARK.

Description. — Slippery  Elm,  also  called  Red  Elm,  is  a  tree  from  twenty
to  sixty  feet  in  bight,  and  one  or  two  feet  in  diameter.  The  bark  of  the
trunk  is  brown,  that  of  the  branches  rough  and  whitish.  The  leaves  are
oblong-ovate,  acuminate,  nearly  equal  at  the  base,  unequally  serrate,
pubescent  and  very  rough  on  both  sides,  four  or  five  inches  long  by  two
or  three  in  breadth,  and  supported  on  short  footstalks.  The  buds  are
covered  with  fulvous  down.  The  flowers  appear  before  the  leaves,  are
reddish,  sessile,  and  in  clusters  at  the  ends  of  the  young  shoots  ;  the
bunches  of  flowers  are  surrounded  by  scales,  which  are  downy  like  the
buds.  The  calyx  is  downy  and  sessile ;  corolla  none  ;  stamens  five  or
seven,  according  to  the  number  of  calyx  lobes,  short,  and  of  a  pale  rose
color.  The  fruit  is  a  membranaceous  capsule  or  samara,  nearly  orbic-
ular, containing  in  the  center  one  round  seed,  without  any  fringe.

History. — The  Slippery  Elm  is  a  lofty  tree  indigenous  to  all  parts  of
the  United  States,  but  found  in  the  greatest  abundance  west  of  the  Alle-
ghany mountains,  in  open  and  elevated  situations,  in  rich,  firm  soil,  and
flowering  in  April.  The  inner  bark  is  the  part  used  in  medicine  ;  it  is
in  long,  flat  pieces,  from  one  to  two  lines  in  thickness,  of  a  fibrous  tex-
ture, a  tawny  color,  which  is  reddish  on  the  inner  surface,  a  peculiar


940  Materia  Medica.

sweetish,  not  unpleasant  odor,  and  a  highly  mucilaginous  taste  when
chewed.  By  grinding,  it  is  reduced  to  a  light,  grayish -fawn-colored
powder.  Water  takes  up  its  mucilage,  which  is  precipitated  by  solutions
of  acetate  and  subacetate  of  lead,  but  not  by  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Elm  bark  is  nutritive,  expectorant,  diuretic,
demulcent,  and  emollient,  and  is  a  very  valuable  remedial  agent.  In
mucous  inflammations  of  the  lungs,  bowels,  stomach,  bladder  or  kidneys,
used  freely  in  the  form  of  a  mucilaginous  drink,  it  is  highly  beneficial,
as  well  as  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  coughs,  pleurisy,  strangury,  and  sore
throat,  in  all  of  which  it  tends  powerfully  to  allay  the  inflammation.  A
tablespoonful  of  the  powder  boiled  in  a  pint  of  new  milk  affords  a  nour-
ishing diet  for  infants  weaned  from  the  breast,  preventing  the  bowel
complaints  to  which  they  are  subject,  and  rendering  them  fat  and
healthy.  Some  physicians  consider  the  constant  use  of  it,  during  and
after  the  seventh  month  of  gestation,  as  advantageous  in  facilitating  and
causing  an  easy  delivery ;  a  half  pint  of  the  infusion  to  be  drank  daily.
Elm  bark  has  likewise  been  successfully  employed  externally  in  cuta-
neous diseases,  especially  in  obstinate  cases  of  herpetic  and  syphilitic
eruptions,  and  certainly  possesses  higher  curative  powers  than  are  gene-
rally admitted.  As  an  emollient  poultice,  the  bark  has  been  found  very
serviceable  as  an  application  to  inflamed  parts,  suppurating  tumors,  fresh
wounds,  burns,  scalds,  bruises,  and  ulcers  ;  and  in  the  excruciating
pains  of  the  testes  which  accompany  the  metastatis  of  cynanche  paroti-
daea,  whether  of  recent  or  long  standing,  the  constant  use  of  an  elm
poultice  regularly  changed  every  four  hours  will  be  found  a  superior
remedy.  As  an  injection,  the  infusion  will  prove  useful  in  diarrhea,
dysentery,  tenesmus,  and  hemorrhoids,  also  in  gonorrhea  and  gleet.
The  powder,  sprinkled  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  will  prevent  and  heal
excoriations  and  chafings,  and  allay  the  itching  and  heat  of  erysipelas.
As  the  bark  increases  in  bulk  by  imbibing  moisture,  it  has  been  recom-
mended to  form  bougies  and  tents  of  it  for  the  dilatation  of  strictures,
fistulas,  etc.,  but  in  urethral  strictures  it  has  proved  troublesome,  from
liability  of  the  part  behind  the  stricture,  breaking  off  in  the  attempt  to
withdraw  it,  and  passing  into  the  bladder.  The  infusion  of  the  bark  is
the  common  form  of  administration,  and  may  be  drank  ad  libitum.

Off.  Prep. — Cataplasma  Ulmi ;  Infusum  Ulmi.

URTICA DIOICA.

Common  Nettle.

Nat.  Ord—  Urticaces. Sex.  Si/sL— Moncecia  Tetrandria.

THE ROOT AND LEAVES.

Description. — This  plant,  also  called  great  Stinging  Kettle,  is  a  peren-
nial, herbaceous,  dull-green  plant,  armed  with  minute  rigid  hairs  or


Uetica  Dioica.  941

prickles,  which  transmit  a  venomous  fluid  when  pressed.  The  stem  is
obtusely  four-angled,  branching,  and  from  two  to  four  feet  high,  and
arises  from  a  creeping  and  branching  root,  with  fleshy  shoots  and  many
fibers.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  petiolate,  cordate,  lance-ovate,  spread-
ing, conspicuously  acuminate,  coarsely  and  acutely  serrate,  the  point
entire,  armed  with  stings,  three  or  four  inches  long,  and  about  half  as
wide.  The  flowers  are  small,  green,  monoecious  or  dioecious,  in  branch-
ing, clustered,  axillary,  interrupted  spikes,  longer  than  the  petioles.

History. — This  is  a  well  known  plant,  common  to  Europe  and  the
United  States,  growing  in  waste  places,  by  wood-sides,  in  hedges,  and  in
gardens,  flowering  from  June  to  September.  A  decoction  of  the  plant
strongly  salted,  will  coagulate  milk  as  readily  as  rennet,  without  impart-
ing to  it  any  unpleasant  flavor.  The  leaves  and  root  are  generally  used,
and  yield  their  virtues  to  water.  No  analysis  has  been  made  of  the
plant.  The  young  shoots  have  been  boiled  and  eaten  as  a  remedy  for
scurvy.  The  irritation  caused  by  applying  the  sharp  hairs  of  the  nettle
to  the  skin,  is  said  to  be  owing  to  the  presence  of  free  formic  acid  in
them.

Properties  and  Uses. — Common  Nettle  is  astringent,  tonic,  and  diure-
tic. A  decoction  is  valuable  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  hemorrhoids,  vari-
ous hemorrhages,  and  scorbutic  affections,  and  has  been  recommended
in  febrile  affections,  gravel,  and  other  nephritic  complaints.  A  strong-
syrup  made  of  the  root,  combined  with  suitable  quantities  of  wild  cherry
bark  and  blackberry  root,  forms  an  excellent  remedy  for  all  summer
complaints  of  children,  and  bowel  affections  of  adults.  The  leaves  of
the  fresh  plant,  stimulate,  inflame,  and  even  raise  blisters  on  those  por-
tions of  the  skin  with  which  they  come  in  contact,  and  have,  in  conse-
quence, been  used  as  a  powerful  rubefacient.  Paralysis  is  said  to  have
been  cured  by  whipping  the  affected  limbs  with  them.  Applied  to  bleed-
ing surfaces  they  are  an  excellent  styptic.  The  seeds  and  flowers,  given
in  wine,  in  doses  not  to  exceed  one  drachm,  have  been  reputed  equal  to
cinchona  in  tertian  and  quartan  agues  —  larger  doses  will,  it  is  said,
induce  a  lethargic  sleep.  The  seeds,  in  doses  of  fourteen  or  sixteen
seeds,  and  repeated  three  times  daily,  are  highly  recommended  as  a
remedy  for  goitre,  and  to  reduce  excessive  corpulence  ;  they  are  also
considered  anthelmintic.  Dose  of  the  powdered  root  or  leaves  from
twenty  to  forty  grains  ;  of  the  decoction  from  two  to  four  fluidounces.

Urtica  Urens,  or  Dwarf  Nettle,  possesses  similar  properties,  and  has
been  found  very  efficacious  in  uterine  hemorrhage.  It  has  a  branching,
hispid,  stinging  stern,  one  or  two  feet  high,  with  broadly  elliptic,  acutely
serrate  leaves,  about  five-veined,  on  short  petioles,  one  or  two  inches
long,  and  about  two-thirds  as  broad.  The  flowers  are  in  drooping,
pedunculate,  nearly  simple  clusters,  two  in  each  axil,  and  shorter  than
the  petioles. This  is  an  annual,  introduced  from  Europe.


94:2  Materia Medica.

Urtica  Pumila,  Cool-weed,  Rich-weed,  or  Stingless  Nettle,  has  a  pecu-
liar, grateful,  strong  smell,  indicating  active  properties  ;  it  is  stated  that
the  leaves  bruised  give  immediate  relief  in  inflammations,  painful  swell-
ings, ecchymosis,  erysipelas,  and  the  topical  poison  of  rhus ;  and  that  an
ointment  made  from  it  is  beneficial  in  inflammatory  rheumatism.  It  is
the  Pilea  Pumila  of  Lindley,  and  has  a  smooth,  shining,  ascending,
weak  and  succulent,  often  branched,  and  translucent  stem,  from  four  to
eighteen  inches  high,  and,  together  with  the  whole  plant,  destitute  of
stings.  The  leaves  are  on  long  petioles,  opposite,  rhombic-ovate,  cre-
nate-serrate,  membranaceous,  glabrous,  pointed,  three-nerved,  about
two  inches  long,  and  two-thirds  as  broad.  The  flowers  are  monoecious,
triandrous,  in  axillary,  corymbed  heads  shorter  than  the  petioles.  Sepals
of  the  fertile  flowers  lanceolate,  and  a  little  unequal.  This  plant  is
worthy  of  further  investigation.


UVARIA  TRILOBA.

Papaw.

Nat  Ord. — Anonaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Polyandria  Polygynia.

THE SEEDS.

Description. — This  is  the  Porcelia  Triloba  of  Michaux,  and  the  Asi-
mina  Triloba  of  Adamson,  it  is  a  small  and  beautiful  indigenous  tree,
growing  from  ten  to  twenty  feet  high.  The  young  shoots  and  expanding
leaves  clothed  with  a  rusty  down,  soon  glabrous.  The  leaves  are  thin,
smooth,  entire,  ovate-oblong,  acuminate,  from  eight  to  twelve  inches
long,  by  three  or  four  broad,  and  tapering  to  very  short  petioles.  The
flowers  are  dull  purple,  axillary  and  solitary ;  the  petals  veiny,  round-
ovate,  the  outer  ones  orbicular  and  three  or  four  times  as  large  as  the
calyx.  The  flowers  appear  with  the  leaves,  and  are  about  an  inch  and
a  half  wide.  The  fruit  is  a  yellowish,  ovoid-oblong,  pulpy  pod,  two  or
three  inches  long  by  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  fragrant,  sweet  and
edible  in  autumn,  and  containing  about  eight  seeds.

History. — The  Papaw  or  Custard  Apple-tree  is  an  inhabitant  of  the
Middle,  Southern,  and  Western  States,  growing  in  rich  soil,  and  on  the
banks  of  streams,  and  flowering  from  March  to  June.  The  fruit  is  large
and  fleshy,  and  has  an  unpleasant  smell,  but  when  ripe  and  after  frost,
the  pulp  is  sweet,  luscious,  and  yellow,  similar  to  custard ;  it  is  consid-
ered a  healthy  fruit,  and  is  sedative  and  laxative.  The  seeds,  which  are
the  parts  used,  have  a  fetid  smell,  similar  to  stramonium;  they  are
covered  with  a  tough,  hard,  exterior  coat,  of  a  light-brownish  color  and
smooth  externally,  lighter  and  wrinkled  internally,  inclosing  a  kernel  of  a
whitish-yellow  color,  compressed,  deeply  fissured  on  both  sides,  nearly
inodorous,  very  faintly  bitter  and  sweetish,  and  dry  and  branny  when
chewed,  leaving  a  very  persistent,  faint,  but  rather  unpleasant  sensation


Uvularia Perfoliata.  943

of  nausea.  They  are  of  various  shapes,  being  fiat,  ovoid,  nearly  circu-
lar, or  somewhat  reniform,  with  a  longitudinal  furrow  or  depression  along
the  center  of  each  of  the  flat  surfaces,  and  frequently  a  ridge  or  eleva-
tion instead  of  the  furrow. They  yield  their  properties  to  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emetic  ;  for  which  purpose  a  saturated  tincture
of  the  bruised  seeds  is  employed,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  sixty  drops.
The  bark  is  said  to  be  a  bitter  tonic,  and  has  been  used  as  such  in
domestic  practice.  The  medical  properties  of  this  agent  have  not  been
fully  investigated.


UVULARIA  PERFOLIATA.

Bellwort.
Nat.  Ord. — Liliacea3. Sex.  Syst. — Hexandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Bellwort  has  a  perennial,  creeping  rootstock,  and  a  stem
from  eight  to  fourteen  inches  high,  dividing  at  top  into  two  branches.
The  leaves  are  clasping-perfoliate,  elliptical,  rounded  at  base,  acute  at
apex,  two  or  three  inches  long  by  one-third  as  broad,  smooth,  glaucous
underneath.  The  flowers  are  solitary,  pale-yellow,  about  an  inch  long,
and  pendulous  from  the  end  of  one  of  the  branches ;  perianth  subcam-
panulate,  tuberculate-scabrous  within  ;  segments  linear-lanceolate,  about
an  inch  long,  twisted  ;  anthers  cuspidate,  three-fourths  of  an  inch  long.
Capsule  or  pod  obovate-truncate,  divergently  three-lobed  at  top  ;  lobes
with  convex  sides.

History. — Bellwort  is  a  smooth,  handsome  plant  common  to  the  United
States,  growing  in  moist  copses,  woods,  etc.,  and  flowering  in  May.  The
root  is  the  part  employed,  which,  when  recent,  is  acrid  and  mucilagi-
nous. It  imparts  its  properties  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bellwort  is  tonic,  demulcent,  and  nervine,  and
may  be  used  in  decoction  or  powder,  as  a  substitute  for  cypripedium.
The  decoction  has  proved  beneficial  in  sore  mouth  and  affections  of  the
throat,  also  inflammation  of  the  gums.  A  poultice  of  it  is  useful  in
wounds  and  ulcers.  Boiled  in  milk,  and  the  decoction  drank  freely,
with  a  poultice  of  the  root  applied  to  the  wound,  it  has  considerable
reputation  as  an  alexipharmic  in  the  bites  of  venomous  snakes.  A  poul-
tice of  the  green  or  dried  root,  in  powder,  and  mixed  with  hot  new  milk,
is  very  highly  recommended  in  all  stages  of  erysipelatous  inflammation,
to  be  renewed  when  dry ;  the  same  application  has  been  used  benefi-
cially in  acute  ophthalmia.  An  ointment  made  by  simmering  the  pow-
dered roots  and  green  tops  in  lard,  for  an  hour,  over  a  slow  fire,  and
straining  by  pressure,  is  useful  in  herpetic  affections,  sore  ears,  mouths,
etc.,  of  children,  and  also  in  mild  cases  of  erysipelas.


914  Materia Medica.

VACCINIUM FROND OSUM.

Blue  Whortleberry.

Nat. Ord.  —  Ericaceae. Sex. Syst.  —  Decandria  Monogynia.

THE FRUIT.

Description. — This  is  a  shrub  from  three  to  six  feet  high,  with  a  gray-
ish bark,  and  round,  smooth,  slender  and  divergent  branches.  The  leaves
are  deciduous,  obovate-oblong,  obtuse,  entire,  pale,  glaucous  beneath,
and  covered  with  minute  resinous  dots,  the  margin  being  slightly  invo-
lute. The /lowers  are  small,  nearly  globose,  reddish-white,  and  arranged
in  loose,  slender,  lateral,  bracteate  racemes ;  brads  oblong  or  linear,
rather  deciduous,  shorter  than  the  pedicels  ;  pedicels  from  five  to  ten  lines
long,  slender,  drooping,  bracteate  near  the  middle.  Corolla  ovoid-cam  -
panulate,  with  acute  divisions,  and  inclosing  the  stamens.  Fruit  large,
globose,  dark-blue,  covered  with  a  glaucous  bloom,  sweet  and  edible.

Vaccinium  Resinosum,  Black  Whortleberry  or  Huckleberry,  is  a  bushy
shrub  from  one  to  three  feet  in  hight.  The  branches  are  cinerous-brown,
and  villose  when  young.  The  leaves  are  deciduous,  oblong-ovate,  or
oblong-lanceolate,  rather  obtuse,  entire,  petiolate,  one  or  two  inches
long,  and  about  one-third  as  wide,  thickly  covered  with  shining  resinous
dots  beneath.  The  flowers  are  reddish,  tinged  with  green,  or  yellowish-
purple,  and  disposed  in  lateral,  secund,  dense,  corymbose  racemes,  small
and  drooping ;  pedicels  about  the  length  of  the  flowers,  sub-bracteolate  ;
bracts  and  bradlets  reddish,  small,  and  deciduous.  The  corolla  is  ovoid-
conic,  at  length  subcampanulate,  five-angled,  contracted  at  the  mouth,
and  longer  than  the  stamens,  but  shorter  than  the  style.  Fruit  globose,
black,  without  bloom,  sweet  and  edible.

History. — These  plants  are  common  to  the  Northern  States,  growing
in  woods  and  pastures,  flowering  in  May  and  June,  and  ripening  their
fruit  in  August.  The  fruit,  or  berries,  together  with  the  bark  of  the
root  are  the  parts  used. They  yield  their  virtues  to  water.

The  different  varieties  of  Whortleberry  possess  similar  properties,  as
the  V.  Dumosum,  or  Bush-Whortleberry,  V.  Corymbosum,  or  Giant-
Whortleberry,  V.  Pennsylvanicum,  or  Black-blue-Whortleberry,  V.  Vitis
Idcea,  or  Bilberry,  and  several  others.  Several  species  are  found  grow-
ing in  the  mountainous  regions  of  some  of  the  Southern  States.  Torry
and  Gray  have  removed  the  V.  Frondosum,  V.  Resinosum,  and  V.  Du-
mosum, from  the  genus  Vaccinium,,  and  placed  them  in  a  new  one  called
Gaylussacia,  in  honor  of  the  distinguished  chemist,  Gay-Lussac.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Diuretic  and  astringent.  The  fruit  is  very
useful,  eaten  alone,  with  milk  or  sugar,  in  scurvy,  dysentery,  and
derangements  of  the  urinary  organs.  The  berries  and  root,  bruised
and  steeped  in  gin,  form  an  excellent  diuretic,  which  has  proved  of  much


Valeriana  Officinalis.  945

benefit  in  dropsy  and  gravel.  A  decoction  of  the  leaves  or  bark  of  the
root  is  astringent,  and  may  be  used  in  diarrhea,  or  as  a  local  application
to  ulcers,  leucorrbea,  and  ulcerations  of  the  mouth  and  throat.  Both  the
berries  and  root-bark  of  V.  Arboreum,  or  farkleberry,  are  very  astrin-
gent, more  so  than  the  other  varieties  above-named,  and  may  be  used  in
all  cases  where  this  class  of  agents  is  indicated.


VALERIANA OFFICINALIS.

Valerian.
Nat.  Ord. — Valerianacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Triandria  Monogynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — The  officinal  Valerian,  sometimes  known  as  Great  Wild
Valerian,  is  a  large,  handsome,  herbaceous  plant,  with  a  perennial,
short,  tuberculated  rhizome,  from  which  issue  many  long,  slender  fibers
of  a  dusky-brown  color,  and  having  a  fetid  smell.  The  stem  is  erect,
hollow,  smooth,  furrowed,  and  about  three  or  four  feet  high.  The  leaves
are  of  a  deep  glossy-green,  serrated,  somewhat  hairy  beneath,  opposite,
pinnate,  but  diffei-ing  in  the  number  of  leaflets.  The  lower  leaves  are
generally  furnished  with  ten  pairs,  those  of  the  stem  with  nine,  and  the
upper  ones  with  from  five  to  seven ;  the  leaves  of  the  stem  are  attached
by  short  broad  sheaths,  the  radical  ones  are  larger,  and  have  long
petioles.  The  leaflets  of  the  stem  are  lanceolate  and  partially  dentate,
those  of  the  radical  leaves  are  elliptical  and  deeply  serrate.  The  flowers
are  small,  of  a  reddish-white  color,  fragrant,  and  disposed  in  dense
corymb-like  panicles,  terminal  and  perfect.  Bracts  ovate -lanceolate,
acuminate,  herbaceous,  membranous  at  the  edge,  appressed,  rather
longer  than  the  ovary.  The  calyx  is  superior,  rolled  inwaixl  in  the  form
of  a  rounded  thickened  rim,  finally  expanding  into  a  kind  of  pappus  to
the  seed.  The  corolla  is  funnel-shaped  and  smooth ;  the  tube  gibbous  at
the  base  on  that  side  of  the  flower  turned  away  from  the  axis,  hairy
internally;  limb  spreading,  divided  into  five  nearly  equal,  concave,
linear,  rounded  segments.  The  stamens  are  three,  exserted,  subulate,
white,  from  the  middle  of  the  corolla-tube,  with  oblong  yellow  anthers.
The  ovary  is  inferior,  narrow-oblong,  compressed,  one-celled,  with  a
single  pendulous  ovule ;  style  filiform ;  stigma  divided  into  three  filiform
lobes.  Fruit  light-brown,  linear-ovate,  compressed,  with  a  slightly  ele-
vated ridge  on  one  side,  terminated  by  the  twelve  filiform,  plumose,
recurved  segments  of  the  calyx-limb.

History. — Valerian  is  a  European  plant  growing  in  damp  woods  and
meadows,  and  sometimes  in  dry  banks ;  those  found  in  dry  elevated
situations,  present  botanical  differences  of  a  marked  character,  and  are
considered  superior  to  the  others  in  medicinal  virtue.  The  plant  flowers
in  June  and  July.  There  are  several  varieties  growing  in  this  country.
60


946  Materia  Medica.

The  root  is^the  officinal  portion,  and  consists  of  long,  slender,  cylindri-
cal fibers,  about  four  inches  in  length,  and  half  a  line  in  thickness,
issuing  from  a  tubereulated  head  or  rhizoma.  It  should  be  collected  in
spring  before  the  stem  begins  to  shoot,  or  in  the  autumn  when  the  leaves
decay,  and  should  be  dried  quickly  and  kept  in  a  dry  place.  Exter-
nally, its  color  is  yellowish  or  brown,  and  internally  white,  and  when
dried  it  possesses  a  strong,  peculiar  odor,  very  disagreeable  to  many  per-
sons, and  a  taste  at  first  sweetish,  afterward  bitter  and  aromatic;  its
powder  is  yellowish-gray.  It  imparts  its  properties  readily  to  water,  rec-
tified spirit,  or  ammoniated  spirit.  The  best  valerian  is  obtained  from
England.  Valerian  contains  volatile  oil,  a  peculiar  extractive  matter,
soluble  in  water,  insoluble  in  ether  or  alcohol,  and  precipitated  by  me-
tallic solutions,  gum,  soft  odorous  resin,  and  lignin.  Among  these  the
most  important  is  the  essential  oil,  in  which  the  virtues  of  the  root
chiefly  reside ;  it  is  of  a  pale-greenish  color,  becoming  yellow  and  viscid
by  exposure,  of  specific  gravity  0.934,  with  a  powerful,  penetrating
valerian  odor,  and  a  warm  aromatic  taste.  It  may  be  obtained  by  dis-
tillation of  the  root  with  water.  An  acid,  termed  Valerianic  acid,  is
obtained  by  oxidation  of  the  volatile  oil:  it  is  a  colorless  liquid,  oleagi-
nous in  consistence,  having  a  valerian  odor,  a  very  strong,  sour,  disa-
greeable taste,  and  forming  salts  with  salifiable  bases.  This  acid  can
likewise  be  obtained  by  the  action  of  caustic  potassa  on  the  oil  of  potato
spirit.  Valerianic  acid  may  also  be  prepared  by  distilling  100  parts  of
valerian  root  with  500  of  water,  10  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  6  of  bichro-
mate of  potassa;  or,  boil  valerian  root  for  three  hours  in  rather  more
than  its  bulk  of  water,  in  which  an  ounce  of  carbonate  of  soda  is  dis-
solved for  every  pound  of  the  root,  replacing  the  water  as  it  evaporates.
Express  strongly,  and  boil  the  residuum  twice  with  the  same  quantity
of  water,  expressing  each  time  as  before.  Mix  the  liquids,  add  two
fluidrachms  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  for  every  pound  of  the  root,  and
distil  till  three-fourths  of  the  liquid  have  passed  over.  Neutralize  this
with  carbonate  of  soda,  concentrate  the  liquid,  decompose  the  valerian-
ate of  soda  contained  in  it  by  sulphuric  acid,  and  separate  the  valerianic
acid  now  set  free,  either  by  a  separatory  or  by  distillation.  Gruneberg
recommends  the  following:  Take  2|  lbs  of  bichromate  of  potassa,  intro-
duce it  into  a  retort,  and  pour  4i  lbs  of  hot  water  upon  it.  A  cooled
mixture  of  1  lb  of  fusel  oil  and  4  lbs  of  sulphuric  acid  diluted  with
2  lbs  of  water  is  to  be  allowed  to  flow  very  slowly  and  in  a  thin  stream
into  the  liquid  in  the  retort,  and  the  whole  is  then  to  be  distilled.  The
distillation  goes  on  quietly,  and  9  ounces  of  oily  valerianic  acid  are
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — Valerian  is  tonic,  antispasmodic,  and  calmative.
In  large  doses  it  produces  a  sense  of  heaviness  and  dull  pain  in  the  head,
with  other  effects  indicating-  nervous  disturbance.  It  is  useful  in  cases
of  irregular  nervous  action,  as  in  the  restlessness  and  irritability  occur-


Vanilla  Aromatica.  947

ring  in  hysterical  constitutions,  in  the  morbid  vigilance  of  fevers,  in
hypochondriasis,  epilepsy,  hemicrania,  and  occasionally  in  intermittent
and  remittent  fevers.  It  may  be  used  in  powder  or  infusion,  the  latter
being  less  liable  to  irritate  the  alimentary  canal ;  the  tincture  is  also
officinal.  The  extract  or  decoction  should  not  be  employed,  as  the  virtue
of  the  root  resides  in  a  volatile  oil.  Dose  of  the  powder  from  thirty  to
ninety  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  of  the  infusion  from  one  to
two  fiuidounces ;  of  the  tincture  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluid-
drachms  ;  of  the  oil  from  four  to  six  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Acidum  Valerianicum ;  Extractum  Valerianae  Fluidum  ;
Infusum  Valerianae ;  Oleum  Valerianae ;  Pilulae  Valerianae  Compositae  ;
Tinctura  Valerianae  ;  Tinctura  Valerianae  Ammoniata.


VANILLA  AROMATICA.

Vanilla.
Nat.  Ord. — Vanillaceas. Sex.  Syst. — Gynandria  Monandria.

THE FRUIT OR  PODS.

Description. — Vanilla  Aromatica  is  a  shrubby,  climbing,  aerial  parasite,
it  commences  its  growth  in  the  crevices  of  rocks,  or  on  the  trunks  of
trees,  suspending  itself  to  contiguous  objects,  and  finally  becomes  de-
tached from  its  original  support,  being  truly  an  aerial  plant.  Planted
in  the  woods  or  in  warm  ravines,  it  grows  rapidly,  fastening  upon  the
trees  in  its  neighborhood,  especially  those  whose  barks  are  soft  and
spongy.  The  stem  is  round,  about  as  thick  as  the  finger,  from  twenty
to  thirty  feet  in  length,  and  often  smaller  at  the  base  than  at  the  sum-
mit. The  leaves  are  alternate,  oblong,  entire,  on  short  petioles,  glaucous,
green,  fleshy,  and  pointed  by  a  species  of  abortive  tendril,  which  is  a
continuation  of  the  midrib;  opposed  to  each  leaf  are  one  or  two  aerial
roots,  which  attach  themselves  to  surrounding  objects.  The  flowers  are
axillar)-,  paniculate,  yellowish-white  at  base,  and  attended  with  one
green  bract;  they  expand  one  after  another  and  endure  only  for  a  day.
The  ovaries  appear  at  first  view  to  be  peduncles,  they  are  erect  after
fecundation,  and  then  become  pendulous  as  they  enlarge.  The  fruit  is
a  silique  or  species  of  bean,  yellow  or  buff  color,  of  an  agreeable  aro-
matic odor,  and  filled  with  a  pulpy  matter  containing  acicular  crystals
of  an  impure  benzoic  acid.  They  must  be  dried  with  care  or  they  lose
their  properties.

History. — Vanilla  grows  in  the  West  Indies,  Mexico,  and  South  Ame-
rica. The  pods  are  collected  before  they  are  quite  ripe,  dried  in  the
shade,  covered  over  with  a  coat  of  fixed  oil,  and  then  tied  in  bundles,
which  are  surrounded  with  sheet-lead,  or  inclosed  in  small  metallic
boxes,  and  sent  into  the  market.  There  are  several  varieties  of  vanilla
in  commerce,  the  most  valuable consisting  of  cylindrical,  somewhat


948  Materia Medica.

flattened  pods,  six  or  eight  inches  long,  three  or  four  lines  thick,  nearly
straight,  narrowing  toward  the  extremities,  bent  at  the  base,  shining,
and  dark-brown  externally,  wrinkled  longitudinally,  soft  and  flexible,
and  containing  within  their  tough  shell  a  soft  black  pulp,  in  which
numerous  minute,  black  glossy  seeds  are  imbedded.  It  possesses  a
warm,  aromatic,  sweetish  taste,  and  a  strong,  peculiar,  but  agreeable
odor. It  yields  its  virtues  to  water  or  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Aromatic  stimulant.  Useful  in  infusion  in  hys-
teria, rheumatism,  and  low  forms  of  fever.  It  is  also  considered  an
aphrodisiac,  powerfully  exciting  the  generative  system.  Much  used  in
perfumery,  and  to  flavor  tinctures,  syrups,  ointments,  chocolate,  ice-
cream, etc.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  eight  to  ten  grains;  of  the  infu-
sion, made  in  the  proportion  of  half  an  ounce  to  a  pint  of  boiling  water,
half  a  fluidounce,  three  or  four  times  a  day.


VERATRUM ALBUM.

White  Hellebore.

Nat. Ord. — Melanthacese. Sex.  Syst. — Polygamia  Moncecia.

THE RHIZOMA.

Description. — By  some  Botanists  this  plant  is  placed  in  the  class  and
order  of  the  Sexual  System,  Hexandria  Trigynia.  Veratrum  Album  is
a  herbaceous  plant,  with  a  perennial,  fleshy,  oblong,  somewhat  horizon-
tal, premorse  rhizoma,  about  the  thickness  of  a  finger,  blackish,  or  yel-
lowish-white externally,  whitish,  or  pale  yellowish-gray  internally,  and
beset  with  long  cylindrical  fibers  of  a  grayish  color,  which  constitute
the  true  root.  The  stem  is  erect,  thick,  round,  striated,  and  from  one  to
four  feet  in  bight.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  broad-ovate,  acute,  entire,
plaited  longitudinally,  and  about  ten  inches  long  by  five  broad ;  they  are
of  a  yellowish-green  color,  and  embrace  the  stem  at  their  base.  The
flowers  are  yellowish-white,  green  at  the  back,  eight  lines  in  diameter,
and  disposed  in  a  terminal  panicle ;  the  segments  spreading,  serrulate,  and
somewhat  wavy. In  other  respects  it  resembles  the  Veratrum  Viride.

History.  — White  Hellebore  is  a  native  of  Europe,  growing  in  the
mountainous  regions  of  that  country,  especially  on  the  Alps  and  Pyr-
enees. The  whole  plant  is  active  and  poisonous,  but  the  rhizoma  only  is
officinal.  When  dried  it  is  usually  found  in  pieces,  from  one  to  three
inches  long,  and  nearly  an  inch  in  diameter,  cylindrical,  or  in  the  shape
of  a  truncated  cone,  whitish  or  grayish-brown  internally,  blackish  exter-
nally, wrinkled,  and  rough  with  the  remains  of  the  fibers  which  have
been  cut  off  near  their  origin.  It  deteriorates  by  keeping.  Its  odor  is
disagreeable  when  recent,  but  which  is  lost  by  drying,  and  its  taste  at
first  sweetish,  becomes  intensely  and  permanently  bitter,  acrid,  and
burning. Diluted  alcohol  is  its  best  solvent. The  pulverized  root  is  of


Veratrum  Sabadilla.  949

a  grayish  color.  It  contains  supergallate  of  veratria,  an  oily  substance
consisting  of  olein,  stearin,  and  a  volatile  acid,  yellow  coloring  matter,
starch,  gum,  lignin,  silica,  and  various  salts  of  lime  and  potassa.  Two
other  principles  have  likewise  been  detected  by  Simon,  named  barytina
and  jervina.  Its  properties  are  owing  to  the  veratria  it  contains.  (See
Veratria. )

Properties  and  Uses. — White  Hellebore  is  a  violent  emetic  and  purga-
tive, and  has  been  used  in  mental  diseases,  as  a  diaphoretic  in  chronic
cutaneous  diseases,  and  as  a  sternutatory  in  headache,  amaurosis,  and
ophthalmia.  Seldom  used,  however,  except  externally  in  the  form  of
decoction  or  ointment  for  the  cure  of  itch  and  other  cutaneous  eruptions,
and  as  an  errhine,  diluted  with  six  or  seven  parts  of  some  mild  powder,
in  gutta  serena  and  lethargic  affections.  A  mixture  of  three  parts  of
the  wine  of  White  Hellebore,  and  one  of  the  wine  of  opium  has  been
considerably  employed  in  gouty  and  rheumatic  affections.  White  Helle-
bore is  a  violent,  irritant  poison,  producing,  when  snuffed  up  into  the
nostrils,  severe  coryza,  and  when  swallowed,  urgent  vomiting,  and  pro-
fuse diarrhea.  When  it  proves  fatal,  narcotic  symptoms,  as  stupor  and
convulsions,  are  superadded.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  one  to  eight
grains  gradually  and  cautiously  increased,  commencing  with  one  grain;
of  the  vinous  tincture,  from  twenty  to  sixty  minims.  Its  use  always
requires  great  care.

Off.  Prep. — Unguentum  Sulphuris  Compositum;  Unguentum  Veratri
Albi.


VERATRUM  SABADILLA.

Cevadilla.
Nat.  Ord. — Melanthaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Polygamia  Monoecia.

THE SEEDS.

Description.  —  The  precise  origin  of  this  remedy  is  yet  involved  in
uncertainty ;  by  some,  Cevadilla  is  referred  entirely  to  the  Veratrum  Offici-
nale, which  has  been  variously  denominated  Belonias  Officinalis,  and
Asagrcea  Officinalis  ;  while  others  consider  it  the  product  of  the  V.  Saba-
dilla and  A.  Officinalis,  with  other  plants  of  the  same  order.  More  exact
information  is  required  before  its  origin  can  be  positively  determined.
The  following  is  a  description  of  two  plants  from  which  it  is  reputed  to
be  obtained : —

Veratrum  Sabadilla  of  Retzius  is  a  plant  three  or  four  feet  high,
with  the  leaves  radical,  numerous,  spreading  on  the  ground,  ovate-obl
obtuse,  with  from  eight  to  fourteen  ribs,  and  glaucous  beneath.  The
scape  or  flower-stem  is  erect,  simple,  and  round,  and  bears  a  spreading,
simple,  or  but  slightly  branched  panicle  of  somewhat  nodding  powers,
supported  upon  very  short  pedicels. The  flowers  are  blackish-purple,


950  Materia  Medica.

approximate  in  twos  and  threes ;  the  fertile  eventually  becoming  turned
to  one  side,  and  the  sterile  falling  off  and  leaving  a  scar.  The  segments
of  the  perianth  are  ovate-lanceolate,  and  veinless.  The  ovaries  are  three,
oblong,  connate,  obtuse  ;  styles  acute,  dilated  downward  ;  stigmas  simple.
Capsules  three,  in  form  resembling  those  of  Larkspur,  occupying  only
one  side  of  the  stem,  and  opening  at  the  apex  inside.  Seeds  three  in
each  cell,  imbricated,  curved,  blunt  on  one  side,  sooty,  acrid.  This
plant  grows  in  Mexico  and  the  West  Indies.

Asagr.ea  Officinalis,  Lindley,  Veratrum  Officinale,  Schlechtendahl,
and  Helonias  Officinalis  of  Don,  is  a  ceespitose  plant,  bulbous,  with  the
leaves  linear,  tapering  to  a  point,  even,  smooth,  entire,  channeled  above,
carinate  at  the  back,  about  four  feet  long,  by  three  lines  broad.  The
scape  is  naked,  about  six  feet  high,  round,  simple,  terminating  in  a  very
dense,  straight,  spike-like  raceme,  eighteen  inches  long.  The  perianth
is  deeply  six-parted,  spreading,  yellowish-white,  permanent,  with  linear,
thick,  veinless,  obtuse  segments,  three  of  which  are  rather  broader  than
the  others.  Filaments  six,  somewhat  clavate,  those  opposite  the  broad
segments  of  the  perianth  longer  than  the  others,  and  all  longer  than  the
perianth.  Anthers  large,  yellow,  cordate,  obtuse.  Ovary  formed  of
three  cells,  united  by  their  sutures,  with  an  obscure  stigma.  Follicles
three,  acuminate,  papery  ;  seeds  scimitar  shaped,  corrugated,  winged.
This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  eastern  side  of  the  Mexican  Andes,  near
Barranca  de  Tioselo,  by  the  Hacienda  de  la  Laguna,  in  grassy  places.

History. —  Cevadilla  seeds  are  brought  from  Vera  Cruz,  and  usually
occur  mixed  with  the  fruit  of  the  plant.  This  consists  of  tri-capsular
follicles,  which  open  above,  and  present  the  appearance  of  single  capsules
with  three  cells  ;  they  are  about  three  or  four  lines  long,  a  line  and  a
half  thick,  obtuse  at  the  base,  light  brown,  or  yellowish,  smooth,  and
containing  in  each  capsule,  one  or  two  seeds.  The  seeds  are  elongated,
pointed  at  each  end,  flat  on  one  side  and  convex  on  the  other,  somewhat
curved,  two  or  three  lines  long,  wrinkled,  slightly  winged,  black  or  dark
brown  on  the  outside,  whitish  within,  hard,  inodorous,  and  of  an  exceed-
ingly acrid,  burning,  and  persistent  taste.  They  contain  veratria  com-
bined with  gallic  acid,  fatty  matter,  cevadic  or  sabadillic  acid  being  a
peculiar,  volatile  fatty  acid,  yellow  coloring  matter,  wax,  gum,  lignin,
and  other  unimportant  constituents.  They  yield  about  0.58  parts  of
veratria  to  every  one  hundred.  Merck  has  also  discovered  a  peculiar
acid,  which  he  has  named  veratric  acid ;  it  occurs  in  colorless  crystals,
is  fusible  and  volatilizable  without  decomposition,  but  slightly  soluble  in
cold  water,  more  soluble  in  hot  water,  insoluble  in  ether,  soluble  in
alcohol,  reddens  litmus  paper,  and  forms  soluble  salts  with  the  alkalies.
(See  Veratria.)

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Cevadilla  seeds  have  been  employed  as  an
anthelmintic,  but  require  much  caution  in  their  administration,  as  they


Veratrum  Viride.  951

are  a  dangerous,  acrid,  drastic  erneto-cathartic.  They  have  also  been
employed  for  the  destruction  of  vermin  in  the  hair,  but  should  never  be
advised  for  this  purpose,  as  dangerous  consequences  have  resulted  from
this  application  of  them.  Externally  applied  they  are  very  irritating.
The  dose  is  from  five  to  thirty  grains,  for  the  expulsion  of  taenia,  and
other  worms.  An  extract  has  proved  beneficial  in  painful  rheumatic  and
neuralgic  affections.  At  present,  they  are  seldom  used  in  practice,  their
chief  employment  being  for  the  preparation  of  veratria.
Off.  Prep. — Veratria.


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.
American  Hellebore.
Nat.  Orel- — Melanthaceaj. Sex.  Syst. — Polygamia  Monoecia.
the  rhizoma.

Description. — This  plant,  known  also  by  the  names  of  Swamp  Helle-
bore, Indian  Poke,  and  Itch-weed,  has  a  perennial,  thick  and  fleshy
rhizoma,  tunicated  above,  solid  below,  and  sending  forth  numerous
whitish  radicles.  The  stem  is  annual,  round,  solid,  striated,  pubescent,
and  from  three  to  six  feet  high,  being,  throughout  the  greater  part  of  its
length,  closely  invested  with  the  sheathing  bases  of  the  leaves.  The
leaves  are  alternate,  and  gradually  decrease  in  size  as  they  ascend ;  the
lower  are  from  six  to  twelve  inches  long,  oval,  acuminate,  pubescent,
strongly  ribbed  and  plaited,  the  lower  part  of  their  edges  meeting  round
the  stem;  the  upper  leaves  are  gradually  narrower;  the  uppermost  or
bracts  linear-lanceolate.  The  Jlowers  are  numerous,  yellowish-green,
and  arranged  in  compound  racemes,  axillary  from  the  upper  leaves,  and
terminal  ;  each  flower  is  accompanied  with  a  boat-shaped,  acuminate,
downy  bract,  much  longer  than  its  pedicel ;  peduncles  roundish,  downy.
The  perianth  is  divided  into  six  oval,  acute,  nerved  segments,  of  which
the  alternate  ones  are  the  longest,  and  all  contracted  at  the  base  into  a
sort  of  claw  with  a  thickened  or  cartilaginous  edge.  The  stamens  are
six,  with  recurved  filaments,  and  roundish,  two-lobed  anthers.  Ovaries
three,  cohering,  with  acute  recurved  styles  as  long  as  the  stamens.  The
fruit  consists  of  three  capsules,  united  together,  separating  at  top,  and
dehiscing  on  their  inner  side.  Seeds  flat,  winged,  imbricated.  A  part
of  the  flowers  at  the  upper  end  of  the  branchlets  are  barren,  and  have
only  the  rudiments  of  styles,  those  on  the  lower  portion  are  fruitful.

History.  —  American  Hellebore  is  indigenous  to  many  parts  of  the
United  States,  usually  growing  in  swamps,  wet  meadows,  and  on  the
banks  of  mountain  streamlets,  flowering  from  May  to  July.  The  rhizoma
is  the  officinal  part ;  it  should  be  collected  in  autumn,  and  not  kept  longer
than  one  year,  as  its  virtues  are  rapidly  impaired  by  age.  It  consists  of
a  tunicated  top,  with  a  thick,  fleshy  base,  having  numerous  radicals


952  Materia  Medica.

attached.  When  recent  it  has  a  disagreeable,  fetid  odor,  which  disap-
pears on  desiccation.  The  taste  is  at  first  sweetish,  afterward  bitter,
followed  by  an  acrid,  pungent,  and  persistent  sensation.  In  its  appear-
ance, as  well  as  its  sensible  properties,  it  somewhat  resembles  white
hellebore,  and  according  to  Mr.  Worthington,  of  Philadelphia,  it  con-
tains veratria,  gallic  acid,  extractive,  etc.  Mr.  W.  precipitated  a  cold
infusion  of  the  root  with  subacetate  of  lead,  separated  the  excess  of  lead
with  sulphureted  hydrogen,  evaporated  to  one-half,  boiled  with  an  excess
of  magnesia.  The  precipitate  was  collected  on  a  filter,  dried,  treated
with  boiling  alcohol  and  animal  charcoal,  and  the  filtered  alcoholic  solu-
tion evaporated.  The  light-colored  pulverulent  residue  was  nearly  inso-
luble in  water,  more  soluble  in  ether,  and  very  soluble  in  alcohol.  It
melted  when  heated,  and  burned  without  residue  ;  had  a  burning  acrid
taste,  acted  powerfully  as  a  sternutatory,  and  formed  salts  with  the  acids,
of  which  the  sulphate,  tartrate,  and  oxalate  only  were  crystallizable.
From  these  properties,  Mr.  Worthington  infers  its  identity  with  veratria;
but  it  is  probable  that  it  is  not  veratria,  but  like  colchicia,  a  distinct,
though  analogous  principle.

Properties  and  Uses. — Its  effects  upon  the  s)'stem  are  similar  to  those
of  the  V.  Album,  although  its  cathartic  action  is  denied  by  Dr.  Osgood,
who  states  that  it  reduces  the  frequency  and  force  of  the  pulse,  some-
times as  low  as  thirty-five  strokes  in  the  minute.  It  is  also  an  emetic,
and  the  action  is  often  violent  and  long  continued.  In  addition  to  which,
it  is  said  to  increase  most  of  the  secretions,  and  when  freely  taken,  to
exercise  a  powerful  influence  over  the  nervous  system,  indicated  by  faint-
ness,  somnolency,  vertigo,  headache,  dimness  of  vision,  and  dilated
pupils.  Prof.  Tully,  of  New  Haven,  regards  it  as  an  excellent  substitute
for  colchicum,  in  gouty,  neuralgic  and  rheumatic  affections,  to  which
diseases  it  seems  best  adapted.  It  is  a  remedy  deserving  the  attention
of  the  profession.  The  best  forms  of  administration  are  the  tincture  or
extract ;  and  it  should  never  be  given  in  doses  sufficient  to  produce
vomiting.  Dose  of  the  powder,  from  four  to  six  grains ;  of  a  saturated
tincture,  ten  drops  gradually  increased  until  some  effect  is  produced;  of
the  extract,  or  inspissated  juice,  one-third  of  a  grain,  gradually  increased.
The  V.  Parvlflorum  and  V.  Angustifolium,  of  this  country,  are  probably
active,  and  should  be  examined.

Dr.  W.  C.  Norwood,  of  Cokesbury,  S.  C,  in  some  recent  communi-
cations published  in  the  Southern  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  states
that  from  actual  experiments  made  by  himself  this  plant  has  proved : —

1 .  Slightly  acrid,  and  confining  this  action  mostly  to  the  mouth  and
fauces.

2.  Expectorant,  and  unsurpassed  by  any  other  article  for  which  this
property  is  claimed.

3.  Diaphoretic,  being  one  of  the  most  certain  belonging  to  the  Materia
Medica  ;  often  exciting  great  coolness  or  coldness  of  the  surface ;  some-


Vebatrum  Viride.  953

times  rendering  the  skin  merely  soft  and  moist,  and  at  others  producing
free  and  abundant  perspiration,  without  reducing  or  exhausting  the
system.

4.  Adanagic,  deobstruent,  or  alterative,  far  surpassing  iodine,  and
from  which  much  advantage  may  be  expected  in  the  treatment  of  cancer
and  consumption.

5.  Nervine,  and  never  narcotic.  This  property  renders  it  of  great
value  in  the  treatment  of  painful  diseases,  and  such  as  are  accompanied
with  spasmodic  action,  convulsions,  morbid  irritability,  and  irritative  mo-
bility, as  in  chorea  especially,  epilepsy,  pneumonia,  puerperal  fever,
neuralgia,  etc.  And  it  produces  its  effects  in  this  respect,  without  stupe-
fying and  torpifying  the  system,  as  opium  is  known  to  do.

6.  Emetic  ;  it  is  slow,  but  certain  and  efficient,  rouses  the  liver  to
action  during  its  operation,  and  vomits  without  occasioning  the  prostra-
tion or  exhaustion  which  follows  the  action  of  most  other  emetics.  It  is
also  superior  to  the  majority  of  emetics,  in  not  being  cathartic.  It  is
peculiarly  adapted  as  an  emetic  in  hooping-cough,  croup,  asthma,  scarlet
fever,  and  in  all  cases  where  there  is  much  febrile  or  inflammatory  action.

7.  Arterial  sedative.  This  he  considers  its  most  valuable  and  inter-
esting property,  and  for  which  it  stands  unparalleled  and  unequaled  as
a  therapeutic  agent.

8.  In  small  doses,  it  creates  and  promotes  appetite,  beyond  any  agent
with  which  we  are  acquainted.

Dr.  Norwood  recommends  the  following  formula  for  the  tincture :
Take  of  the  dried  root  of  Veratrum  Viride,  eight  ounces;  alcohol  .835
sixteen  ounces.  Macerate  for  two  weeks,  express,  and  filter.  To  an
adult,  eight  drops  are  given,  and  which  must  be  repeated  every  three
hours,  increasing  the  dose  one  or  two  drops  every  time,  until  nausea  or
vomiting,  or  a  reduction  of  the  pulse  to  65  or  70  ensue ;  then  reduce  to
one-half  in  all  cases.  Females  and  persons  from  fourteen  to  eighteen,
should  commence  with  six  drops,  and  increase  as  above  ;  children  from
two  to  five  years  to  begin  with  two  drops,  and  increase  one  drop  only ;
below  two  years  of  age,  one  drop.  When  nausea,  vomiting,  or  other
unpleasant  effects  ensue  from  its  administration  according  to  the  above
directions,  they  may  be  speedily  relieved  by  one  or  two  portions  of  syrup
of  morphia  and  tincture  of  ginger,  or  brandy  and  laudanum.  He  has
reduced  the  pulse  by  its  use,  to  35  beats  per  minute,  without  exciting
the  least  nausea  or  vomiting.  In  pneumonia,  typhoid  fever,  and  many
other  diseases,  it  must  be  continued  for  from  three  to  five  or  seven  days
after  the  symptoms  have  subsided ;  and  in  typhoid  fever,  while  using
the  veratrum,  quinia  is  absolutely  inadmissible.  It  is  administered  in  a
little  sweetened  water.  Its  employment  may  be  continued  indefinitely,
in  moderate  doses,  or  short  of  nausea,  without  the  least  inconvenience.
The  correctness  of  Dr.  Norwood's  statements  will  be  determined  by
future  investigations.


954  Materia  Medica.

VERBASCUM  THAPSUS.

Mullein.

Nat.  Ord. — Scrophulariaceffl. Sex.  Si/st. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND FLOWERS.

Description. — Mullein  is  a  biennial  plant,  with  an  erect,  round,  rigid,
stout,  hairy  stem,  from  three  to  five  feet  in  hight,  and  winged  by  the
decurrent  bases  of  the  leaves.  The  leaves  are  alternate,  oblong,  acute,
decurrent,  indented  at  the  margin,  rough,  and  densely  tomentose  on  both
sides.  The  flowers  are  of  a  golden  yellow  color,  rotate,  nearly  sessile,
and  are  arranged  in  a  dense,  spiked,  club-shaped  raceme ;  calyx  five-
parted  and  downy  ;  corolla  five-lobed,  rotate,  lobes  broad  and  rounded,
somewhat  unequal ;  stamens  five,  the  two  lower  smooth,  the  rest  downy.
Capsule  or  pod,  ovoid-globose,  two-valved,  many-seeded.

History.  —  Mullein  is  common  to  the  United  States,  growing  in
neglected  fields,  along  roadsides,  and  in  newly  cleared  places,  flowering
from  June  to  August.  Some  Botanists  consider  it  to  have  been  intro-
duced from  Europe.  The  leaves  and  flowers  are  the  parts  used.  They
have  a  slight,  somewhat  narcotic  smell,  rather  agreeable,  and  a  feebly
mucilaginous,  herbaceous,  and  bitter  taste,  and  yield  their  virtues  to
boiling  water.  The  flowers  are  said  to  contain  volatile  oil,  yellow  resin,
saccharine  matter,  chlorophylle,  malic  and  phosphoric  acids.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Mullein  is  demulcent,  diuretic,  anodyne  and
antispasmodic.  The  infusion  is  useful  in  coughs,  catarrh,  hemoptysis,
diarrhea,  dysentery  and  piles.  Its  diuretic  properties  are  rather  weak,
yet  it  is  very  useful  in  allaying  the  acridity  of  urine,  which  is  present  in
many  diseases.  It  may  be  boiled  in  milk,  sweetened,  and  rendered
more  palatable  by  the  addition  of  aromatics,  for  internal  use,  especially
bowel  complaints.  A  fomentation  of  the  leaves  also  forms  an  excellent
local  application  for  inflamed  piles,  ulcers  and  tumors.  The  leaves  and
pith  of  the  stalk  form  a  valuable  cataplasm  in  white  swellings,  and
infused  in  hot  vinegar  or  water,  it  makes  an  excellent  poultice  to  be
applied  to  the  throat  in  cynanche  tonsillaris,  cynanche  maligna,  and
mumps.  The  seeds,  it  is  said,  will  rapidly  pass  through  the  intestines,
and  have  been  successfully  used  in  intestinal  obstructions.  They  are
narcotic,  and  have  been  used  in  asthma,  infantile  convulsions,  and  to
poison  fish.  The  infusion  may  be  drank  freely.  The  flowers,  placed
into  a  well-corked  bottle,  and  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  sun,  are  said
to  yield  a  fine  relaxing  oil.

Of.  Prep. — Cataplasma  Verbasci.


*


Vekbena  Hastata.  955

VERBENA HASTATA.

Vervain.

Nat.  Ord. — Verbenacese. Sex.  Syst. — Didynamia  Gymnospermia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — Vervain,  sometimes  known  by  tbe  names  of  Wild  Hys-
sop, or  Simpler's  Joy,  is  an  erect,  tall,  elegant,  and  perennial  plant,  with
an  obtusely  four-angled  stem,  three  or  four  feet  high,  and  having  oppo-
site, paniculate  branches  above.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  petiolate,
lanceolate,  acuminate,  rough,  and  incisely  serrate  ;  the  lower  often
lobed  or  somewhat  hastate.  The  flowers  are  small,  purplish-blue,  sessile,
tetrandrous,  and  arranged  in  long,  erect,  slender,  imbricated,  terminal
and  axillary,  panicled  spikes.  Calyx  five-toothed  ;  corolla  funnel-form,
limb  five-cleft,  nearly  equal;  seeds  four.

History. — Vervain  is  indigenous  to  the  United  States,  growing  along
roadsides,  and  in  dry,  grassy  fields,  flowering  from  June  to  September.
The  root  is  the  part  used  ;  it  is  woody  and  fibrous,  faintly  odorous  and
of  a  bitter,  somewhat  astringent,  nauseous  taste,  and  imparts  its  proper-
ties to  water.  There  are  several  varieties  of  this  plant,  as  the  V.  Urti-
cifolia,  or  nettle-leaved  vervain,  with  white  flowers,  the  V.  Spuria,  with
blue  flowers,  and  others,  the  roots  of  which  possess  similar  properties,
but  in  a  milder  degree  than  the  V.  Hastata.  Sometimes  the  leaves  of
V.  Hastata  are  used  instead  of  the  root,  but  they  are  less  active.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Vervain  is  tonic,  emetic,  expectorant,  and
sudorific.  As  an  emetic  and  sudorific  it  has  proved  beneficial  in  inter-
mittent fever,  given  in  warm  infusion  or  in  powder.  In  all  cases  of
colds  and  obstructed  menstruation  it  may  be  used  as  a  sudorific.  Taken
cold,  the  infusion  forms  a  good  tonic  in  some  cases  of  debility,  anorexia,
and  during  convalescence  from  acute  diseases.  It  has  been  reputed
valuable  in  scrofula,  visceral  obstructions,  gravel  and  worms.  The  fol-
lowing application  has  been  recommended  as  effectual  in  promoting  the
absorption  of  the  blood  effused  in  bruises,  and  in  allaying  the  attendant
pain  :  Take  of  vervain,  senna  and  white  pepper,  of  each  equal  parts.
Make  a  cataplasm  by  mixing  with  the  white  of  eggs.  Dose  of  the  pow-
dered root,  from  one  to  two  scruples  ;  of  the  infusion,  from  two  to  four
fluidounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  or  oftener  if  it  is  desired  to  vomit.
The  root  of  V.  Urticifolia  boiled  in  milk  and  water,  with  the  inner  bark
of  Quercus  Alba,  and  the  decoction  drank  freely,  is  said  to  be  an  excel-
lent antidote  for  poisoning  from  the  Rhus  Toxicodendron.  The  V.
Officinalis  is  a  European  plant,  possessing  similar  properties  with  the
above,  but  less  active.


956  Materia  Medica.

VERNONIA FASCICULATA.
Ironweed.

Nat.  Ord.— Asteracea?. Sex.  Syst.— Syngenesia  .ffiqualis.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous,  perennial,  coarse,  purplish-green
weed,  with  a  tall  striate  or  grooved,  tomentose  stem,  from  three  to  ten
feet  in  hight.  The  leaves  are  from  four  to  eight  inches  long,  by  one  or
two  broad,  narrow-lanceolate,  tapering  to  each  end,  serrulate,  alternate,
smooth  above,  the  lower  ones  petiolate.  The  flower-heads  are  numerous,
in  a  compact  or  loose,  somewhat  fastigiate  cyme.  The  corolla  is  showy,
dark  purple,  tubular,  twice  as  long  as  the  involucre.  Involucre  smooth,
ovoid-campanulate  ;  scales  appressed,  all  but  the  lowest  rounded  and
obtuse,  without  appendage.

History. — Ironweed  is  a  very  common  plant  in  the  Western  States,
growing  in  the  woods  and  prairies,  and  along  river-streams,  and  flower-
ing from  July  to  September.  The  root,  which  is  the  part  used,  is  bitter,
and  imparts  its  properties  to  water  or  alcohol.  The  Vernonia  Novebora-
censis,  growing  in  the  Eastern,  Western,  and  Middle  States,  and  its
variety  V.  Prcealta,  bearing  purple  flowers,  and  the  V.  Tomentosa,  with
some  other  species,  possess  similar  medicinal  properties.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Ironweed  is  a  bitter  tonic,  deobstruent,  and
alterative.  In  powder  or  decoction,  the  root  is  beneficial  in  amenorrhea,
dysmenorrhea,  leucorrhea,  and  menorrhagia.  In  intermittent,  remittent,
and  bilious  fevers,  the  decoction  or  a  saturated  tincture  has  been  recom-
mended. Said  to  have  been  useful  in  scrofula,  and  some  cutaneous
diseases.  Dose  of  the  decoction,  one  or  two  fluidounces  ;  of  the  tincture,
one  or  two  fluidrachms.  The  leaves  or  powdered  root  in  the  form  of
poultice  make  an  excellent  discutient  application  to  tumors.


VERONICA  OFFICINALIS.

Speedwell.

Nat.  Ord. — Scropliulariaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Diandria  Monogynia.

THE LEAVES AND TOPS.

Description.  —  This  is  a  roughish-pubescent  plant,  the  stem  of  which
is  prostrate,  rooting  at  the  base,  from  six  to  twelve  inches  long,  with
ascending  branches.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  vary  from  ovate  to
obovate,  but  are  generally  elliptical,  short-petioled,  obtuse,  serrate,
mostly  narrowed  to  the  base,  and  an  inch  or  an  inch  and  a  half  long.
The  flowers  are  pale-blue,  and  arranged  in  long,  axillary,  erect,  dense,
many  flowered,  pedunculate  racemes ;  pedicels  shorter  than  the  calyx.
Calyx  four-parted  ;  corolla  rotate.  The  pod  or  capsules  is  puberulent,
obovate-triangular,  emarginate,  strongly  flattened,  several  seeded.


Viburnum  Opulus.  957

History. — Speedwell  is  a  native  of  Europe,  and  now  very  common  in
North  America,  growing  on  dry  hills,  and  in  woods  and  open  fields,
flowering  from  April  to  August.  The  leaves  and  tops  are  employed ;
they  have  a  faint  odor,  and  a  slightly  bitter  and  aromatic  taste.  The
V.  Beccahunga,  or  brook-lime,  is  found  in  most  of  the  Eastern  and  Nor-
thern States,  growing  in  small  streams  and  near  watercourses  ;  this,
together  with  the  V.  Anagallis,  V.  Scutellata,  V.  Agrestis,  and  V.  Perc-
qrina,  possesses  somewhat  similar  properties.  They  all  impart  their
virtues  to  water.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Speedwell  is  tonic,  expectorant,  diaphoretic,
and  diuretic.  It  was  formerly  administered  in  pectoral  and  nephritic
complaints,  diseases  of  the  skin,  icterus,  and  in  the  treatment  of  wounds.
Likewise  reputed  beneficial  in  scrofula,  and  other  diseases  where  altera-
tives are  indicated,  especially  the  V.  Peregrina;  to  be  given  internally,
and  used  as  a  wash.  The  V.  Beccahunga  is  antiscorbutic,  diuretic,
febrifuge,  and  emmenagogue,  and  said  to  be  beneficial  in  cases  of
obstructed  menstruation,  scurvy,  fevers,  and  coughs.  The  decoction  of
the  plants  may  be  used  freely.


VIBURNUM  OPULUS.

High  Cranberry.

Nat.  Ord. — Caprifoliaceee. Sex.  St/st. — Pentandria  Trigynia.

THE BARK.

Description. — This  is  the  Viburnum  Oxycoccus  of  Pursh;  it  is  a  nearly
smooth  and  upright  shrub  or  small  tree,  rising  from  five  to  twelve  feet
in  hight ;  the  steins  are  several  from  the  same  root,  branched  above.
The  leaves  are  three-lobed,  three-veined,  broadly  wedge-shaped  or  trun-
cate at  base,  broader  than  long  ;  the  lobes  divaricate,  acuminate,  crenate-
ly-toothed  on  the  sides,  entire  in  the  sinuses;  the  petioles  have  two  or
more  glands  at  the  base,  and  are  channeled  above.  The  flowers  are
white  or  reddish-white,  and  are  disposed  in  rayed,  pedunculated  cymes;
the  marginal  flowers  are  large  and  sterile,  the  inner  flowers  much  smaller
and  fertile.  The  fruit  is  ovoid,  red,  very  acid,  ripens  late,  and  remains
upon  the  bush  after  the  leaves  have  fallen  ;  it  resembles  the  common
cranberry,  and  is  sometimes  substituted  for  it.  The  V.  Roseum,  Snow-
ball, or  Guelder-rosetree,  is  a  cultivated  European  variety,  with  the
whole  cyme  turned  into  large  sterile  flowers.

History. — This  is  a  handsome  indigenous  shrub,  growing  in  low  rich
lands,  woods,  and  borders  of  fields,  in  the  northern  part  of  the  United
States  and  Canada,  flowering  in  June,  and  presenting  at  this  time  a  very
showy  appearance.  The  flowers  are  succeeded  by  red  and  very  acid
berries,  resembling  low  cranberries,  and  which  remain  through  the  win-
ter. The  bark  is  the  officinal  part ;  as  met  with  in  the  shops,  it  is  in


958  Materia  Medica.

thin,  longitudinally  curved  pieces,  from  one-fourth  of  an  inch  to  two  or
three  inches  in  length,  and  from  two  to  six  lines  in  width,  with  a  dark-
grayish  epidermis,  and  whitish-yellow,  or  reddish-yellow  internal  integ-
ument ;  it  has  no  smell,  and  a  peculiar,  not  unpleasant,  bitterish  and
astringent  taste.  It  is  frequently  put  up  by  the  Shakers,  when  it  is
somewhat  flattened  from  pressure.  It  yields  its  properties  to  water  or
diluted  alcohol.  The  Pharmaceutical  Institute  of  the  city  of  New  York,
profess  to  have  obtained  the  active  principle  of  this  plant,  which  they
have  called  Viburine.  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  its  mode  of  prepara-
tion, nor  have  I  seen  any  of  it,  and  therefore  cannot  recommend  it.  There
is  a  great  disposition  among  some  of  the  manufacturers  of  our  concen-
trated remedies  to  keep  their  processes  secret ;  this  is  very  reprehen-
sible, and  the  maxim  cannot  be  too  frequently  repeated — "  Never  use  a
prepared  remedy  unless  its  mode  of  preparation  is  made  known" — to  do
differently  savors  of  charlatanism.  Beside,  great  imposition  may  be
practiced  upon  physicians  by  designing  and  speculating  individuals.

Properties  and  Uses. — High-Cranberry-bark  is  a  powerful  antispas-
modic, and  in  consequence  of  this  property,  it  is  more  generally  known
among  Eclectic  practitioners  by  the  name  of  Cramp  Bark.  It  is  very
effective  in  relaxing  cramps  and  spasms  of  all  kinds,  as  asthma,  hyste-
ria, cramps  of  the  limbs  or  other  parts  in  females,  especially  during
pregnancy,  and  it  is  said  to  be  highly  beneficial  to  those  who  are  subject
to  convulsions  during  pregnancy,  or  at  the  time  of  parturition,  prevent-
ing the  attacks  entirely,  if  used  daily  for  the  last  two  or  three  months
of  gestation.  The  following,  forms  an  excellent  preparation  for  the
relief  of  spasmodic  attacks,  viz  :  Take  of  Cramp  Bark  two  ounces,
Scullcap,  Skunkcabbage,  of  each  one  ounce,  Cloves  half  an  ounce,  Cap-
sicum two  drachms.  Have  all  in  powder,  coarsely  bruised,  and  add  to
them  two  quarts  of  good  sherry  or  native  wine.  Dose,  one  or  two
fiuidounces,  two  or  three  times  a  day.  Dose  of  the  decoction,  or  vinous
tincture  of  Cramp  Bark,  two  fiuidounces,  two  or  three  times  a  day.  It
may  be  proper  to  remark  here  that  I  have  found  a  poultice  of  low  cran-
berries very  efficacious  in  indolent  and  malignant  ulcers  ;  and  applied
round  the  throat  in  the  inflammation  and  swelling  attending  scarlatina-
maligna,  and  other  diseases,  it  gives  prompt  and  marked  relief.  Pro-
bably, the  High- Cranberries  will  effect  the  same  results.  (See  Cata-
plasma  Oxy cocci.)

Viburnum  Dentatum,  Arrow-wood,  or  Mealy-tree,  called  by  the
former  name  on  account  of  its  long,  straight,  slender  branches  or  young
shoots,  is  a  somewhat  smooth  shrub,  from  six  to  twelve  feet  in  bight,
growing  in  low  grounds,  damp  woods  and  thickets,  throughout  the
United  States,  with  roundish-ovate,  dentate-serrate,  furrow-plaited  leaves,
on  long,  slender  petioles.  The  leaves  are  two  or  three  inches  in  diame
ter,  the  upper  pair  oval, the veins  beneath  prominent,  parallel,  and


Viburnum  Pruxifolium.  959

pubescent  in  their  axils.  The  flowers  are  white,  in  pedunculate  cymes,
and  appear  in  June.  The  fruit  consists  of  small  ovoid-globose,  dark-
blue  berries.

The  bark  of  this  tree  is  ash-colored,  and  is  employed  as  a  diuretic
and  detergent,  and  has  been  highly  recommended  as  an  internal  and
external  agent  to  cure  cancer  ;  the  infusion  to  be  used  freely.  It  cer-
tainly deserves  the  attention  of  the  profession  in  their  treatment  of  this
formidable  disease. It  may  also  be  used  in  extract,  pills,  or  plaster.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Viburni  Hydro-alcoholicum  ;  Tinctura  Viburni
Composita.


VIBURNUM PRUNIFOLIUM.

Black  Haw.

Nat.  Ord. — Caprifoliacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Trigynia.

THE BARK OF THE ROOT.

Description. — This  shrub  or  tree,  also  known  by  the  name  of  Sloe,  is
indigenous  to  this  country,  growing  to  the  hight  of  from  ten  to  twenty
feet.  The  branches  are  spreading,  some  of  them  often  stinted  and  naked,
giving  the  plant  an  unthrifty  aspect.  The  leaves  are  about  two  inches
long,  and  nearly  as  wide,  roundish-ovate,  smooth,  shining  above,  obtuse
at  both  ends,  acutely  serrate,  with  uncinate  teeth,  and  situated  on  short
petioles,  slightly  margined  with  straight,  narrow  wings.  The  flowers,
are  white,  in  large,  terminal,  and  sessile  cymes.  The  fruit  consists  of
ovoid-oblong,  sweet,  edible,  blackish  berries.

History. — This  tree  is  found  throughout  the  United  States,  being  most
abundant  in  the  Middle  and  Southern  States.  It  flowers  from  March  to
June,  and  presents  at  this  time  a  very  handsome  appearance.  It  is
usually  found  in  woods  and  thickets.  The  bark  of  the  roots,  stem,  and
branches  are  medicinal,  but  that  of  the  root  is  preferred.  It  is  fawn-
colored  externally,  with  a  feeble  odor,  and  a  very  bitter,  slightly  aroma-
tic taste.  Water  or  alcohol  extracts  its  properties.  It  is  readily  pulver-
ized when  dry,  and  affords  a  reddish-colored  powder  tinged  with  gray.
It  is  said  to  contain  extractive  matter,  gum,  tannin,  gallic  acid,  and  a
peculiar  resinous  principle,  for  which  the  name  of  Viburnin  has  been
proposed.  It  is  obtained  by  the  usual  process  for  separating  the  resinous
principles  from  plants,  and  is  a  light  reddish-brown  powder,  intensely
bitter,  possessing  the  properties  of  the  bark  in  a  concentrated  form.

Properties  and  Uses.  — Black  Haw  is  tonic,  astringent,  diuretic,  and
alterative  ;  the  decoction  has  been  used  as  a  gargle  in  aphthae,  as  a  wash
to  indolent  ulcers,  and  ophthalmic  affections  ;  and  internally  in  chronic
diarrhea,  dysentery,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.  It  appears  to  exert
an  especial  tonic  influence  upon  the  uterus,  and  is  highly  recommended


960  Materia  Medica.

in  cases  of  threatened  abortion,  and  as  a  preventive  in  cases  of  habitual
miscarriage  ;  in  the  latter  case  its  use  should  commence  a  week  or  two
previous  to  the  aborting  period,  and  be  continued  through  the  remaining
period  of  pregnancy.  It  has  also  proved  useful  in  relieving  severe  after-
pains.  The  infusion  may  be  given  in  half  rluidounce  doses,  several
times  a  day ;  or  the  tincture,  in  doses  of  a  fluidrachm,  four  or  five  times
a  day. The  powder  may  be  given  in  half  drachm,  or  drachm  doses.


VIOLA  PEDATA.

Blue  Violet.

Nat. Ord. — Violace*. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE WHOLE PLANT.

Description. — Blue-Violet,  or  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  Bird's-foot
Violet,  is  an  indigenous,  stemless  plant,  glabrous,  with  the  leaves  and
scapes  all  from  perennial,  fleshy,  premorse,  subterranean  rootstocks.
The  leaves  are  pedately  five  to  nine-parted  ;  the  lobes  being  linear-lan-
ceolate, obtuse,  and  nearly  entire.  Petioles  with  long,  ciliate  stipules  at
base.  The  flowers  are  large,  very  showy,  an  inch  broad,  pale  or  deep
lilac-purple,  and  fragrant.  Peduncles  somewhat  four-sided,  much  longer
than  the  leaves.  The  divisions  of  the  calyx  are  linear,  acute-ciliate,
emarginate  behind.  Petals  veinless,  entire,  and  beardless.  Spur  or
beak  obscure.  The  stigma  is  large,  compressed  tit  the  sides,  obliquely
truncate,  and  perforate  at  the  apex.

History. — This  plant  is  common  to  the  United  States,  growing  from
New  England  to  Carolina,  and  west  to  Missouri,  in  dry  sandy  fields  and
rocky  woods,  flowering  in  May  and  June.  The  herb  and  root  are  used,
and  impart  their  virtues  to  water.

The  Viola  Odorata  or  Sweet  Violet  of  Europe,  is  much  cultivated  in
this  country  on  account  of  its  beautiful  flowers,  which  appear  in  April
and  May.  It  is  a  small,  pretty,  creeping  plant,  the  runners  of  which
are  furnished  with  fibrous  roots,  and  send  up  annually  tufts  of  leaves
and  flowers.  The  leaves  are  cordate,  crenate,  nearly  smooth,  and  sup-
ported on  long  petioles.  The  flowers  are  small  and  fragrant,  at  the  sum-
mit of  delicate,  quadrangular,  channeled,  bracted,  radical  peduncles.
The  stipules  are  lanceolate  and  toothed.  The  -petals  are  obovate,  obtuse,
unequal,  bluish-purple,  or  deep  violet  color,  except  at  the  claws,  which
are  whitish,  and  longer  than  the  obtuse,  ovate  sepals.  The  two  lateral
petals  are  spreading,  with  a  hairy  line  toward  the  base,  the  inferior  furn-
ished with  a  large  blunt  spur,  and  the  two  upper  reflected.  The  stamens
are  in  the  center  with  very  short  filaments,  and  anthers  slightly  cohering
by  an  orange-colored  membranous  expansion.  Stigma  hooked,  naked  ;
capsules  turgid,  hairy  ;  seeds  turbinate,  pallid.


Viscum  Flavescens.  961

The  flowers  of  this  species  have  a  very  slightly  bitter  taste,  and  a
peculiar,  agreeable  odor,  which,  however,  occasions  faintness  and  giddi-
ness with  some  persons.  Their  odor  is  lost  by  drying.  They  should  be
gathered  before  being  fully  blown,  deprived  of  their  calyx,  and  rapidly
dried  in  a  heated  room.  An  infusion  of  them  affords  a  very  delicate
test  for  acids  and  alkalies,  the  former  changing  it  to  red,  the  latter  to
green.  Three  or  four  drachms  of  the  seeds,  made  into  an  emulsion
with  sugar  and  water,  act  as  a  mild  and  pleasant  purgative.  The  roots
are  emetic  and  purgative,  but  are  very  uncertain  in  their  action.  A
peculiar  alkaline  principle  has  been  detected  in  this  plant,  called  Violia,
it  bears  some  resemblance  to  Emetia.  It  is  probably  contained  in  other
species  of  Viola.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Blue  Violet  is  mucilaginous,  emollient,  and
slightly  laxative ;  also  antisyphilitic,  and  forms  a  valuable  remedy  for
this  disease,  when  combined  with  Corydallis  Formosa.  Has  been  used
in  pectoral,  nephritic,  and  cutaneous  affections,  especially  crusta  lactea.
The  plant  should  be  used  when  fresh,  as  drying  destroys  its  active  pro-
perties. The  seeds  of  the  European  sweet  violet,  Viola  Odorata,  have
been  used  in  gravel,  and  for  similar  purposes  as  the  V.  Pedata.  The
V.  Tricolor,  or  pansy,  may  be  used  as  a  substitute.  The  roots  of  these
plants  are  bitterish  and  slightly  acrid,  and  in  doses  of  from  eight  to  ten
grains  are  tonic ;  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  grains,  purgative ;  and  from
forty  to  sixty  grains,  emetic.

The  Viola  Ovata,  or  rattlesnake  violet,  has  been  highly  recommended
in  the  bites  of  rattlesnakes,  the  infusion  to  be  freely  administered ;  and
the  infusion  used  internally,  with  a  fomentation  of  the  leaves  locally
applied,  have  proved  efficacious  in  obstinate  chronic  ophthalmia;  a  simi-
lar course  is  reputed  very  valuable  in  scrofulous  diseases.  Probably  all
the  species  possess  analogous  properties ;  they  are  undoubtedly  more
active  agents  than  generally  supposed,  and  deserve  further  investigation.


VISCUM  FLAVESCENS.

Mistletoe.
Nat. Ord. — Loranthacea?. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Tetrandria.

THE LEAVES.

Description. — This  is  the  Viscum  Verticillalum  of  Nuttall,  and  Viscum
Album  of  Walter;  it  is  a  yellowish-green,  succulent  parasite,  growing
on  the  branches  and  trunks  of  old  trees,  especially  elms,  oaks,  hicko-
ries, etc.  The  stems  are  jointed,  an  inch  or  an  inch  and  a  half  in  length,
rather  thick,  with  many  round,  spreading,  opposite,  and  sometimes  ver-
ticillate,  terete  branches.  The  leaves  are  opposite,  cuneate-obovate,
three-veined,  obtuse,  smooth,  entire,  contracted  at  the  base  into  a  short
petiole,  and  from  nine  to  sixteen  lines  long,  by  from  four  to  nine  broad.
61


962  Materia  Medica.

The  flowers  are  small,  greenish -white,  sterile  ones  mostly  three-parted,
and  arranged  in  axillary,  solitary  spikes,  about  as  long  as  the  leaves.
Fruit  globose,  yellowish-white,  smooth,  semi-transparent,  with  a  viscous
pulp,  in  clusters,  and  contain  one  fleshy  seed ;  they  remain  throughout
the  winter.

History. — This  parasitic  shrub  is  found  growing  on  various  trees ;  but
that  which  is  found  on  the  oak  is  preferred.  The  bark  and  leaves  have
a  peculiar  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  nauseous,  sweetish,  slightly  bitter
taste.  The  proper  time  for  collection  is  in  November,  when  it  should
be  gradually  dried,  pulverized,  and  kept  in  a  well-stopped  bottle.  It
should  never  be  kept  more  than  a  year,  as  age  impairs  its  active  quali-
ties. The  mistletoe  growing  on  the  water  or  black  elm  (  TJlmus  Nemo-
ralis),  and  on  the  water-oak  (  Quercus  Aquatica),  is  reputed  to  possess
the  most  energetic  medicinal  virtues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Narcotic,  antispasmodic,  and  tonic.  Has  been
found  beneficial  in  epilepsy,  insanity,  paralysis,  and  other  nervous  dis-
eases. In  using  this  agent  it  is  always  necessary  to  regulate  the  condi-
tion of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  the  menstrual  discharge,  and  other
faulty  secretions,  and  remove  worms,  if  any  are  present,  previous  to  its
exhibition.  It  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  thirty  to  sixty  grains,  and
gradually  increased  to  three  or  four  drachms,  three  or  four  times  a  day,
and  if  it  produces  sleep  or  other  narcotic  effects,  the  doses  must  be
diminished.  This  plant  is  by  no  means  inert,  and  its  failures  in  the
hands  of  some  practitioners  must  be  attributed  to  the  want  of  proper
doses,  or  to  the  employment  of  an  article  which  age  or  exposure  to  the
air  had  injured. The  powder  is  best  given  in  an  infusion  of  valerian.


VITIS  VINIFERA.

The  Grape.

Nat. Ord. — Vitaceaj. Sex. Syst. — Pentandria  Monogynia.

THE FRUIT, AND ITS FERMENTED JUICE.

Description. — The  Grapevine  is  well  known  nearly  all  over  the  globe ;
yet  it  is  so  variable  in  its  character  that  no  description  will  apply  to  all
the  kinds.  The  leaves  are  more  or  less  lobed,  sinuated,  smooth,  pubes-
cent, downy,  or  naked  ;  are  flat,  crisped,  or  even  plaited,  and  either  of
a  pale-green  or  dark-green  color.  The  branches  may  be  prostrate,
climbing,  or  erect,  and  tender  or  hard;  the  racemes  or  bunches  are  loose
or  compact,  ovate  or  cylindrical.  The  fruit  or  berries  are  red,  yellow,
purple,  white,  or  pale;  globose,  ovate,  or  oblong  in  form;  and  sweet,
murky,  or  austere  in  taste.  The  seeds  are  variable  in  number,  and
sometimes  by  abortion  are  wholly  wanting.

History. — The  Grapevine  grows  wild  in  the  south  of  Asia  and  in
Greece,  and  was,  probably,  first  cultivated  in  the  East,  but  at  what
period,  it  is  impossible  to  say;  it  must  have  been  known  to  the  antedilu-


VlTIS VlNIFERA.  963

vian  world,  as  we  are  told  in  Scripture,  that  Noah,  after  leaving  the  ark,
planted  a  vineyard,  and  drank  of  the  wine.  At  present  it  is  cultivated
in  the  warm  temperate  climates  of  Europe  and  America.  The  leaves
and  tendrils  are  somewhat  astringent,  and  were  formerly  employed  in
diarrhea,  hemorrhages,  and  other  morbid  discharges.  The  juice  of  the
stem  has  also  had  medicinal  virtues  attributed  to  it,  and  is  often  added
at  the  present  day  to  washes  for  improving  the  hair  and  removing  bald-
ness. The  juice  of  the  unripe  fruit  is  called  Verjuice,  and  contains
malic,  citric,  tartaric,  and  racemic  acids,  with  bitartrate  of  potassa,  sul-
phates of  potassa  and  lime,  a  little  tannic  acid,  etc.  The  juice  of  the
ripe  fruit  is  called  Must,  and  contains  sugar,  gum,  malic  acid,  bitartrate
of  potassa,  various  inorganic  salts,  etc. :  when  fermented  it  is  called
Wine.  So  long  as  the  ripe  grape  remains  entire,  it  undergoes  little
change  beyond  gradual  desiccation  and  a  conversion  of  its  acid  into
sugar;  but  if  the  grape  be  crushed,  or  its  juice  expressed,  and  the  tem-
perature maintained  at  between  60°  and  70°,  fermentation  ensues
through  the  action  of  the  air,  and  of  the  insoluble  glutenoid  principle
existing  in  the  husk,  which  acts  the  same  part  as  that  of  yeast  in  the
fermentation  of  malt  or  solutions  of  sugar.  The  consequence  is,  the
must  becomes  warmer,  the  sugar  gradually  disappears  and  carbonic  acid
escapes,  which  causes  a  head — the  name  given  to  the  more  solid  parts
which  are  thrown  to  the  surface  in  a  hemispherical  mass  of  froth ;  alco-
hol is  now  formed,  changing  the  liquor  from  a  sweet  to  the  vinous  flavor,
and  if  the  grapes  were  red,  the  liquor  assumes  a  deep-red  color.  After
a  while  the  fermentation  slackens,  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  acce-
lerate it  by  thoroughly  mixing  the  contents  of  the  vat.  When  the  juice
contains  too  large  a  proportion  of  sugar,  some  tartar  is  added  to  it,  and
where  the  saccharine  matter  is  deficient,  sugar  is  added.  When  the
liquor  has  acquired  a  strong  vinous  taste,  and  becomes  perfectly  clear,
the  wine  is  considered  formed,  and  is  racked  off  into  casks ;  but  even  at
this  stage  of  the  process,  the  fermentation  continues  for  several  months
longer;  during  which  period,  a  frothy  matter  is  formed,  which  for  the
first  few  days  collects  round  the  bung,  but  afterward  precipitates  along
with  coloring  matter  and  tartar,  forming  a  deposit  which  constitutes  the
Wine  Lees.

Climate,  soil,  and  many  other  circumstances,  have  much  influence
upon  the  quality  of  the  wine  ;  and  during  its  preparation,  not  only  does
it  require  different  treatment,  according  to  the  character  of  the  wine,
but  it  also  requires  great  care,  attention,  and  practical  skill  to  manage
the  fermentation  properly.

Wines  are  divided  into  the  Red  and  White,  according  to  their  color ;
and  according  to  their  taste  and  other  qualities,  are  either  spirituous,
sweet,  dry,  light,  sparkling,  still,  rough  or  acidulated.  Red  wines  are
prepared  from  the  must  of  black  grapes,  fermented  with  their  husks ;
White  wines,  from  white  grapes,  or from  the  juice  of  black  grapes


964  Materia Medica.

fermented  apart  from  their  husks.  When  the  process  of  fermentation  is
arrested  at  an  early  stage,  while  a  considerable  part  of  the  sugar  remains
unaltered,  Sweet  wines  are  formed.  When  the  wines  are  bottled  before
the  fermentation  is  fully  completed,  the  process  continuing  gradually  in
the  bottle,  impregnating  the  liquor  with  the  carbonic  acid  which  is  gen-
erated and  cannot  escape,  it  renders  it  effervescent,  forming  the  Spark-
ling wines.  When  from  the  presence  of  a  large  proportion  of  saccharine
matter,  fermentation  proceeds  until  checked  by  the  alcohol  produced,
generous  or  Spirituous  wines  are  the  result.  When  the  sugar  and  fer-
ment are  in  considerable  amount,  and  in  the  proper  relative  proportions
for  mutual  decomposition,  the  wine  will  be  strong-bodied  and  sound,
without  any  sweetness  or  acidity,  and  is  called  Dry.  The  Still  wines  are
those  in  which  fermentation  proceeds,  until  the  greater  part  of  the  sugar
has  disappeared  ;  they  do  not  effervesce.  Light  wines  are  those  in  which
only  a  small  proportion  of  saccharine  matter  exists  in  the  grape-juice,
and  consequently  a  small  amount  only  of  alcohol  is  generated.  The
Rough  or  Astringent  wines  owe  their  flavor  to  a  portion  of  tannic  acid
derived  from  the  husks  of  the  grape,  and  the  Acidulous  and  Sparkling
wines  to  the  presence  of  carbonic  acid,  or  in  the  former  instance  to  an
unusual  proportion  of  tartar.  Wines  are  manufactured  in  many  coun-
tries, and  are  known  by  various  names,  according  to  their  source.  Those
most  usually  employed  in  medicine  are  Port,  Sherry,  Claret,  Madeira,
and  Malaga  wines.

Port  wine  is  of  a  deep  purple  color,  and  when  recent  is  rough,  strong
and  slightly  sweet ;  it  is  the  strongest  of  wines  in  common  use ;  when
too  long  kept  it  becomes  deteriorated.  Considerable  quantities  of
brandy  are  generally  added  to  it,  which  causes  its  heating  quality  on
the  palate.

Sherry  is  of  a  deep-amber  color,  and  when  good  possesses  a  dry,  aro-
matic flavor  and  fragrancy,  without  any  acidity  ;  it  ranks  among  the
stronger  white  wines,  and  is  indicated  in  this  country  and  England  as  the
officinal  wine.

Claret  is  a  red  wine,  and  ranks  as  a  light  wine ;  it  has  a  deep  purple
color,  and  when  good,  a  delicate  taste,  in  which  the  vinous  flavor  is
blended  with  slight  acidity  and  astringency.  The  most  esteemed  kinds
are  the  Medoc  clarets,  called  Chateau- La fite,  Chateau- Margaux,  Chdteau-
Latour,  and  Chdteau-Havt  Brion.

Madeira  is  the  strongest  white  wine  in  general  use.  It  is  a  slightly
acid  wine,  and  when  of  proper  age  and  in  good  condition,  has  a  rich,
nutty,  aromatic  flavor.  All  these  wines,  are,  however,  much  subject  to
adulteration,  and  some  care  must  be  taken,  in  order  to  obtain  a  pure
article.

The  intoxicating  ingredient  in  all  wines  is  the  alcohol  which  they
contain  ;  and  hence  their  relative  strength  depends  upon  the  quantity


VlTIS VlNIFERA.


965


of  this  substance  entering  into  their  composition.  The  alcohol,  however,
naturally  in  wine,  is  so  blended  with  its  other  constituents  as  to  be  in  a
modified  state,  which  renders  it  less  intoxicating  and  less  injurious  than
the  same  quantity  of  alcohol  separated  by  distillation  and  diluted  with
water.  Mr.  Brande  has  published  a  very  interesting  table,  giving  the
per  centage  by  measure  of  alcohol  of  sp.  gr.  0.825  in  different  kinds  of
wine. The  following  abstract  contains  his  principal  results  : —


Alcohol.
per  cent.

Lissa,  average 25.41

Raisin  wine,  average 25  12

Marsala,  [Sicily  Madeira,]  average  25.09

Port 25.83

Ditto 24.29

Ditto 23.71

Ditto 23.39

Ditto 22.30

Ditto 21.40

Ditto 19.00

Average 22.96

Madeira 24.42

Ditto 2  5.93

Ditto  (Sercial) 2140

Ditto 19.24

Average 22.27

Sherry 19.81

Ditto 19.83

Ditto 18.79

Ditto 18.25

Average 19.17

Teneriffe 19.79

Colares 19.75

Lacliryma  Christi 19.70

Cotistantia,  white 19.75

Ditto,  red 18.92

Lisbon 18.94

Bucellas 18.49

Red  Madeira,  average 20.35

Cape  ruuschat 18.25

Beside  the  grape,  a  number  of  other  fruits  yield  a  juice  susceptible
of  the  vinous  fermentation.  The  infusion  of  malt,  also,  is  capable  of
undergoing  this  process,  and  becomes  converted  into  the  different  kinds
of  porter  and  ale.  The  product  in  all  these  cases,  though  not  commonly
called  a  wine,  is  nevertheless  a  vinous  liquor,  and  may  be  classed  among
the  wines  properly  so  called.  The  following  is  a  list  of  these  vinous
liquors,  together  with  the  per-centage  of  alcohol  which  they  contain,  as
ascertained  by  Mr.  Brande.  Currant  wine,  20.55;  gooseberry  wine,
11.84  ;  orange  wine,  11.26;  elder  wine,  8.79  ;  cider,  from  5.21  to  9.87;
perry,  7.26 ;  mead,  7.32 ;  Burton  ale,  8.88 ;  Edinburgh  ale,  6.20 ;
brown  stout,  6.80;  London  porter,  4.20;  small  beer,  1.28.


Alcohol.
per  cent.

Cape  Madeira,  average 20.51

Grape  wine 18.11

Calcavella,  average 18.65

Vidonia 19.25

Alba  flora 17.26

Malaga 17.26

White  Hermitage 17.43

Rousillon,  average 18.13

Claret 17.11

Ditto 16.32

Ditto 14.08

Ditto 12.91

Average 15.10

Malmsey  Madeira 1G.40

Lunel 15.52

Sheraaz 15.52

Syracuse 15.28

Sauterne 14.22

Burgundy,  average 14.57

Hock,  average 12.08

Nice  14.63

Barsac 13.86

Tent 13.30

Champagne,  average 12.61

Red  Hermitage 12.32

Vin  de  Grave,  average 13.37

Frontignac,  Rivesalte 12.79

Cote  R6tie 12.32

Tokay 9.88


!)66  Materia Medica.

The  native  Catawba  grape,  introduced  to  public  notice  by  Major  Adlum,
of  Washington  city,  is  a  superior  wine  grape,  producing  a  most  excel-
lent wine,  which  will  undoubtedly  supersede  the  use  of  all  foreign  wines,
at  least,  for  medical  and  pharmaceutical  uses.  Mr.  N.  Longworth,  of
Cincinnati,  has  been  for  a  long  time  engaged  in  the  cultivation  of  this
and  other  kinds  of  grapes,  as  well  as  in  the  manufacturing  of  native  wines,
and  by  dint  of  perseverance  and  careful  investigation  has  succeeded  in
preparing  wines  which  are  fully  equal  to  those  of  foreign  origin.  Long-
worth's  Catawba,  and  Sparkling  Catawba,  are  becoming  known  through-
out the  country  as  superior  articles,  and  their  purity  and  freedom  from
adulterations  render  them  preferable  in  all  instances  where  these  agents
are  indicated  or  required.

Wines  consist  chiefly  of  water  and  alcohol,  with  grape-sugar,  gum,
extractive,  coloring  matter,  tannic,  malic,  and  carbonic  acids,  bitartrate
of  potassa,  tartrate  of  lime,  volatile  oil,  and  cenanthic  ether.  The  pre-
sence of  these  constituents  varies  according  to  the  kind  of  wine,  a  part
being  absent  in  some  and  present  in  others ;  thus  sugar  is  present  in
sweet  wines,  tannic  acid  in  rough  wines,  and  carbonic  acid  in  the  spark-
ling varieties.

Many  of  the  imported  wines  are  subject  to  adulteration,  some  of
which  it  is  difficult  to  detect.  The  addition  of  lead  may  be  ascertained
by  the  black  precipitate  occasioned  on  testing  the  wine  with  sulphureted
hydrogen ;  the  presence  of  lime  by  the  large  amount  of  precipitate
occasioned  by  the  addition  of  a  solution  of  oxalate  of  ammonia.  Many
counterfeit  or  spurious  wines  are  also  prepared,  some  of  which  are  decid-
edly injurious  in  their  effects  upon  the  stomach,  and  when  relied  upon
as  therapeutic  agents,  always  produce  mischief  and  disappointment.
Port  is  frequently  imitated  with  a  mixture  of  real  port,  cider,  juice  of
elder-berries,  brandy,  logwood  and  alum.  Madeira  is  likewise  frequently
met  with  of  a  spurious  character.  Champagne  is  seldom  met  with  in
this  country,  unless  it  be  an  imitation,  hence,  the  great  preference  given
all  over  the  country  to  Longworth's  Sparkling  Catawba,  which  is  fully
equal  to  the  imported  Champagne.  An  excellent  imitation  of  Champagne
wine  is  made  as  follows :  Take  of  good  cider,  (crab-apple  cider  is  the
best),  twenty-eight  gallons;  fourth-proof  brandy  one  gallon;  genuine
Champagne  wine  five  gallons ;  milk  one  pint,  bitartrate  of  potassa,  half
a  pound.  These  are  mixed  together,  allowed  to  stand  for  a  time,  and
bottled  while  fermenting.

When  quite  ripe,  the  grape  is  a  most  pleasant  and  grateful  fruit,  and
on  account  of  its  refreshing  properties,  is  admirably  adapted  to  febrile
complaints ;  in  large  quantities  it  is  diuretic  and  gently  laxative,  but
eaten  moderately  will  be  found  beneficial  to  those  disposed  to  diarrhea
or  dysentery  ;  it  is  also  useful  in  many  instances  of  acid  stomach.  Grapes
are  also  dried  in  several  ways  ;  the  most  esteemed  is  to  partially  cut  the
stalks  of  the  bunches  before  the  grapes  are  perfectly  ripe,  and  allow


VlTIS VlNIFERA.  967

them  to  dry  upon  the  vine ;  or,  they  may  be  picked  when  properly  ma-
tured, steeped  for  a  short  time  in  an  alkaline  ley,  and  then  dried.  Dried
grapes  are  the  raisins  (uva  passa)  of  commerce,  of  which  there  are
several  varieties,  the  Malaga,  Smyrna,  and  Corinthian  raisins  or  currants,
as  they  are  commonly  called  in  this  country,  of  which  the  first  named  is
considered  the  best.  The  raisins  of  commerce  are  prepared  from  the
grapes  of  the  Mediterranean  countries.  They  contain  more  sugar  than
grapes,  as  may  often  be  seen  by  its  efflorescence  on  the  surface  of  the
raisins  or  its  concretion  in  small  masses  within  their  substance.  Grape-
sugar  is  not  so  sweet  as  cane-sugar,  is  less  soluble  in  cold  water,  is  more
soluble  in  cold  alcohol,  forms  a  syrup  of  less  viscidity,  and  is  identical
with  sugar  of  starch.  •

Properties  and  Uses. — Wine  is  consumed  in  most  civilized  countries;
but  in  a  state  of  health  it  is  at  least  useless,  if  not  absolutely  pernicious.
The  degree  of  mischief  which  it  produces,  depends  very  much  on  the
character  of  the  wine.  Thus  the  light  wines  of  France  are  compara-
tively innocuous ;  while  the  habitual  use  of  the  stronger  ones,  such  as
port,  madeira,  sherry,  etc.,  even  though  taken  in  moderation,  is  always
injurious,  as  having  a  tendency  to  induce  gout  and  apoplexy,  and  other
diseases  dependent  on  plethora  and  over-stimulation.  All  wines,  how-
ever, when  used  habitually  in  excess,  are  productive  of  b;id  conse-
quences. They  weaken  the  stomach,  produce  diseases  of  the  liver,  and
give  rise  to  dropsy,  gout,  apoplexy,  tremors,  and  not  unfrequently  mania.
Nevertheless,  wine  is  an  important  medicine,  productive  of  the  best
effects  in  certain  diseases  and  states  of  the  system.  As  an  article  of  the
Materia  Medica,  it  ranks  as  a  stimulant  and  antispasmodic.  In  the  con-
valescence from  protracted  fever,  and  in  sinking  of  the  vital  powers,  it
is  frequently  the  best  remedy  that  can  be  employed.  In  certain  stages
of  typhoid  fevers,  and  in  extensive  ulceration  and  gangrene,  this  remedy,
either  alone,  or  conjoined  with  bark  or  opium,  is  often  our  main  depend-
ence. In  low  febrile  affections,  if  it  increase  the  fullness  and  lessen  the
frequency  of  the  pulse,  mitigate  delirium,  and  produce  a  tendency  to
sleep,  its  further  use  may  be  deemed  proper  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  if  it
render  the  pulse  quicker,  augment  the  heat  and  thirst,  produce  restless-
ness, or  increase  delirium,  it  should  be  immediately  laid  aside  as  inju-
rious. In  some  convulsive  diseases,  as  for  example  tetanus,  wine,
liberally  given,  has  been  found  useful.

Wine,  when  used  medicinally,  should  be  sound,  and  good  of  its  kind;
for  otherwise  it  will  disagree  with  the  stomach,  and  prove  rather  detri-
mental than  useful.  The  individual  wine  selected  for  internal  exhibition
must  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  disease,  and  the  particular
object  in  view.  Teneriffe  is  a  good  variety  of  white  wine  for  medicinal
use,  being  of  about  a  medium  strength,  and  agreeing  very  well  with
most  stomachs.  Sherry,  when  in  good  condition,  is  also  a  fine  wine,
and,  being  free  from  all  acid,  is  to  be  preferred  whenever  the  stomach  is


9GS  Materia  Medica.

delicate,  or  has  a  tendency  to  dyspeptic  acidity.  Unfortunately,  how
ever,  it  is  of  very  unequal  quality.  Good  Madeira  is  the  most  generous
of  the  white  wines,  particularly  adapted  to  the  purpose  of  resuscitating
debilitated  constitutions,  and  of  sustaining  the  sinking  energies  of  the
system  in  old  age.  The  slight  acidity,  however,  of  pure  Madeira  causes
it  to  disagree  with  some  stomachs,  and  renders  it  an  improper  wine  for
gouty  persons.  Port  is  generally  used  in  cases  of  pure  debility,  espe-
cially when  attended  with  a  loose  state  of  the  bowels,  unaccompanied  by
inflammation.  In  such  cases,  it  often  acts  as  a  powerful  tonic  as  well  as
stimulant,  giving  increased  activity  to  all  the  functions,  especially  diges-
tion. Claret  is  much  less  heating,  and  is  often  useful  on  account  of  its
aperient  and  diuretic  qualities.

All  the  acid  and  acidulous  wines  are  contra-indicated  in  the  gouty
and  uric  acid  diathesis,  as  they  are  very  apt  to  convert  the  existing  pre-
disposition into  disease.  They  are  useful,'  however,  in  what  is  called
the  phosphatic  diathesis,  their  acidity  tending  to  prevent  the  deposition
of  the  earthy  phosphates.

The  quantity  of  wine  which  may  be  given  with  advantage  in  disease,
is  necessarily  very  variable.  In  low  fevers,  it  may  be  administered  to
the  extent  of  a  bottle  or  more  in  twenty-four  hours,  either  pure,  or  in
the  form  of  wine-whey.  This  is  made  by  adding  from  a  gill  to  half  a
pint  of  wine  to  a  pint  of  boiling  milk,  straining  without  pressure  to  sepa-
rate the  curd  which  is  formed,  and  sweetening  the  clear  whey  with  loaf-
sugar.  Wine-whey  forms  a  peculiarly  safe  and  grateful  stimulus  in
typhoid  fevers  and  other  febrile  affections,  which,  after  depletion,  may
tend  to  a  state  of  deficient  action  and  be  accompanied  with  a  dry  skin.
Under  these  circumstances,  it  often  acts  as  a  diaphoretic,  and,  if  used  of
moderate  strength,  without  stimulating  the  system  in  any  marked
degree. —  U.  S.  Disp.

Wine  is  employed  as  a  menstruum  to  extract  the  virtues  of  several
plants,  and  the  preparations  thus  formed  are  called  Vinous  tinctures  or
Medicated  wines.

The  chief  medical  use  of  raisins  is  to  flavor  demulcent  beverages ;
taken  in  substance  they  are  gently  laxative,  but  are  also  flatulent  and
difficult  of  digestion,  and  when  largely  eaten  sometimes  produce  un-
pleasant effects,  especially  in  children.  An  excellent,  pure,  and  spark-
ling wine  may  be  made  as  follows  :  Take  twelve  pounds  of  good  raisins,
cut  each  raisin  in  two,  and  put  them  into  a  five  gallon  demijohn,  nearly
filled  with  clean  soft  water ;  let  it  stand  uncorked  for  about  fourteen
days,  then  filter,  bottle,  and  cork  well.  Upon  the  residue,  after  the
wine  is  poured  off,  put  as  much  water  as  before,  let  it  stand  a  sufficient
time,  and  the  result  will  be  a  good  white  wine  vinegar.


Xanthorrhiza  Apiifolia.  969

XANTHORRHIZA  APIIFOLIA.

Yellowroot.
Nat.  Ord. — Ranunculacese. Sex.  Syst. — Pentandria  Polygynia.

THE ROOT.

Description. — This  is  an  indigenous  shrub,  two  or  three  feet  in  bight,
with  a  thick  horizontal  root,  throwing  up  numerous  suckers.  The  stem
is  short,  woody,  leafy  above,  with  a  smooth  bark,  and  bright  yellow
wood.  The  leaves,  which  stand  thickly  at  the  upper  part  of  the  stem,  are
pinnate,  about  eight  inches  long,  including  the  long  petioles,  which  em-
brace the  stem  at  their  base,  glabrous,  consisting  of  about  three  pairs  of
leaflets  with  an  odd  one  ;  the  leaflets  are  two  or  three  inches  long,  ovate
or  rhomboidal,  lanceolate,  acute,  sessile,  incisely  lobed  and  dentate.  The
flowers  are  small,  dark-purple,  and  arranged  in  long,  drooping,  divided,
and  axillary  racemes ;  they  are  also  many,  and  appear  with  the  leaves.
The  petals  are  obovate,  two-lobed  ;  the  ovaries  from  five  to  nine.  Folli-
cles or  capsules  spreading,  a  line  and  a  half  long,  inflated,  compressed,
one-celled,  two-valved,  opening  at  the  apex;  seeds  oval,  flattened.

History. — This  is  a  native  of  the  Southern  States,  being  principally
restricted  to  the  mountains;  it  is  likewise  abundant  in  some  of  the  West-
ern States,  and  along  the  lower  parts  of  the  Ohio.  It  flowers  in  March
and  April.  The  root  is  the  part  directed  to  be  used  ;  it  is  from  three
inches  to  a  foot  in  length,  about  half  an  inch  in  thickness,  of  a  yellow
color,  and  of  a  simple,  but  extremely  bitter  taste.  It  imparts  its  virtues
to  water,  and  the  infusion  is  not  affected  by  a  solution  of  the  sulphate  of
iron.  The  bark  of  the  stem  is  equally  as  efficacious  as  the  root.  It  was
well  known  to  the  Indians  on  account  of  its  tinctorial  properties  ;  it
imparts  a  drab  color  to  wool,  and  a  rich  yellow  to  silk,  but  is  said  to
have  no  effect  on  cotton  or  linen.  With  Prussian  blue  it  affords  a  dull
olive  green.

Properties  and  Uses. — Yellow  root  is  a  pure,  bitter  tonic  ;  considered
by  the  late  Professor  Barton  to  be  superior  to  Colombo.  It  may  be  used
for  all  purposes  in  which  the  other  simple  tonic  bitters  are  applicable.
It  may  be  given  in  decoction,  tincture,  or  powder  ;  two  scruples  of  the
powder  agree  well  with  the  stomach.  From  the  intensely  bitter  char-
acter of  the  resin,  alcohol  would  appear  to  be  the  best  menstruum.


XANTHOXYLUM  FRAXINEUM.

Prickly  Ash.
Nat.  Ord. — Xanthoxylacese. Sex.  Syst. — Dioecia  Pentandria.

THE BARK AND BERRIES.

Description. — This  shrub  is  the  Xanthoxylum  Americanum  of  Miller,
the  X.  Fraxinifolium  of  Marshall,  the  X.  Ramiflorum  of  Michaux,  and


970  Materia  Medica.

the  X.  Tricarpum  of  Hooker.  It  is  known  by  the  various  names  of
Northern  Prickly  Ash,  Toothache-bush,  Yellow-wood,  etc.  It  is  an  indi-
genous shrub,  ten  or  twelve  feet  in  hight,  with  alternate  branches,  which
are  covered  with  strong,  conical,  brown  prickles,  with  a  broad  base,
scattered  irregularly,  though  most  frequently  in  pairs  at  the  insertion
of  the  young  branches.  The  leaves  are  alternate  and  pinnate ;  the  leaflets
about  five  pairs  with  an  odd  one,  nearly  sessile,  ovate,  acute,  with  slight
vesicular  serratures,  somewhat  downy  underneath.  The  common  petiole
is  round,  usually  prickly  on  the  back,  and  sometimes  unarmed.  The
flowers  are  in  small,  dense,  sessile  umbels,  near  the  origin  of  the  young
branches,  they  are  small,  greenish,  dioecious  or  polygamous,  appear
before  the  leaves,  and  have  a  somewhat  aromatic  odor.  In  the  sterile
flower  the  calyx  is  five-leaved,  with  oblong,  obtuse,  erect  segments,  five
stamens  with  subulate  filaments,  and  sagittate,  four-celled  anthers  ;  the
ovary  is  abortive.  In  the  hermaphrodite  or  perfect  flower,  the  calyx  and
stamens  are  like  the  last,  ovaries  three  or  four,  pedicelled,  with  erect,
converging  styles  nearly  as  long  as  the  stamens.  The  fertile  or  female
flowers  grow  upon  a  separate  tree,  are  apetalous,  with  a  smaller  and
more  compressed  calyx,  and  five  pedicelled  ovaries,  with  styles  converg-
ing into  close  contact  at  top,  and  a  little  twisted  ;  stigmas  obtuse.  Each
fruitful  flower  is  followed  by  as  many  capsules  as  it  had  ovaries.  The
capsules  are  stipitate,  oval,  covered  with  excavated  dots,  varying  from
green  to  red,  two  valved,  and  one-seeded  ;  seeds  oval  and  blackish.

History. — The  Prickly  Ash  is  a  native  of  North  America,  growing
from  Canada  to  Virginia,  and  West  to  the  Mississippi,  in  woods,  thickets,
and  moist  shady  places,  and  flowering  in  April  and  May  before  the
appearance  of  the  leaves.  The  whole  plant  is  endowed  with  active
qualities;  the  leaves  and  fruit  abound  in  a  fragrant,  volatile  oil,  some-
what resembling  in  odor  that  of  lemons  ;  and  the  bark  is  acrid,  pungent,
and  aromatic.  Both  the  bark  and  fruit  (berries)  are  officinal.  As
found  in  the  shops,  the  bark  is  in  quilled  fragments,  a  line  or  two  in
thickness,  with  a  grayish-white  epidermis,  which  is  frequently  removed,
internally  of  a  whitish  color,  and  somewhat  shining ;  that  from  the  small
branches  is  beset  with  prickles.  It  is  light,  brittle,  with  a  somewhat
amylaceous  fracture,  and  when  dry  nearly  inodorous,  having  a  taste  at
first  sweetish  and  aromatic,  but  ultimately  bitterish  and  acrid.  It  yields
its  properties  to  boiling  water  or  alcohol.  The  fruit  or  berries  as  met
with  in  the  shops,  consists  of  an  open,  bivalved,  oval  capsule,  about
three  lines  in  length  and  two  in  diameter,  brownish  and  covered  with
excavated  dots  externally,  whitish-yellow,  and  smooth  internally,  and
usually  with  a  portion  of  the  stalk  appended  ;  they  inclose  an  oval,
shining,  black,  wrinkled  seed,  which  in  the  dried  state  is  hollow,  and
grayish-yellow,  or  light  brownish-yellow  internally,  inodorous,  very
brittle,  and  having  the  peculiar  taste  of  the  capsule  in  a  very  faint  degree;
this  seed  is  more  often  absent  than  present  in  the  capsule,  from  whose


Xanthoxylum  Fraxineum.  971

opening  it  escapes,  and  may  be  generally  found  separated  from  it,  but
mixed  up  with  the  mass.  The  medicinal  virtues  of  the  fruit  reside  iu
the  capsules,  which  have  a  faintly  aromatic,  peculiar  odor,  and  a  warm,
pungent,  peculiar,  aromatic,  and  pleasant  taste,  both  of  which  properties
are  more  energetic  in  the  recent  than  in  the  dried  fruit.  They  depend
upon  a  volatile  oil  for  their  properties,  which  they  yield  to  alcohol  or

ether.

The  bark  has  been  analyzed  by  Dr.  Staples,  who  found  it  to  consist
of  a  volatile  oil,  a  greenish  fixed  oil,  resin,  gum,  coloring  matter,  and  a
peculiar  crystallizable  principle  which  he  calls  Xanthoxyline,  but  the
properties  of  which  are  not  yet  determined.  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell  has
prepared  an  oil  from  the  berries,  which  he  calls  Oil  of  Xanthoxylum;  it  is
obtained  by  macerating  the  bruised  berries  in  alcohol  or  ether,  filtering,
and  evaporating.  That  made  by  the  agency  of  alcohol  is  the  most
turbid  and  probably  contains  resin  and  extractive.  It  is  of  a  dark-brown
color,  of  a  faint,  peculiar  odor,  and  of  the  taste  peculiar  to  the  berries  in
a  high  degree  of  concentration,  being  aromatic,  and  very  warm  and
pungent.  One  pound  of  the  berries  yields  about  four  fluidounces  of  the
oil ;  and  one  fluidounce  of  this  to  thirty-two  fluidounces  of  alcohol  makes
a  good  strong  tincture,  equal  to  one  made  by  macerating  two  ounces  of
the  berries  in  a  pint  of  alcohol.

Mr.  J.  B.  Robinson  of  this  city  has  prepared  an  ethereal  oil  from
Prickly  Ash  Bark;  he  makes  a  tincture  with  ether,  filters,  and  then  eva-
porates or  distils  off  the  ether.  Four  pounds  of  the  bark  thus  treated
yield  one  pound  of  oil.  The  oil  made  by  Mr.  Robinson  is  dark  green-
ish-black in  bulk,  yellowish-green  in  thin  layers,  very  fluid,  possessing
an  odor  of  ether,  and  the  peculiar  taste  of  the  bark  in  an  eminent  degree.
It  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  and  alkaline  solutions,  and  will  probably  be
found  to  possess  the  active  principle  of  the  bark  in  a  concentrated  form.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Prickly  Ash  Bark  is  stimulant,  tonic,  altera-
tive, and  sialogogue.  When  swallowed,  it  produces  a  sense  of  heat  in
the  stomach,  with  more  or  less  arterial  excitement,  and  a  tendency  to
diaphoresis.  It  is  used  as  a  stimulant  in  languid  states  of  the  system,
and  as  a  sialogogue  in  paralysis  of  the  tongue  and  mouth.  It  has  proved
highly  beneficial  in  chronic  rheumatism,  colic,  syphilis,  hepatic  derange-
ments, and  wherever  a  stimulating  alterative  treatment  is  required.
Combined  with  equal  parts  of  pulverized  blueflag  and  mandrake,  it  will
bring  on  salivation,  and  is  useful  on  this  account  in  the  treatment  of
scrofulous,  syphilitic  and  other  diseases,  where  there  is  a  want  of  sus-
ceptibility to  the  influence  of  other  alterative  agents  ;  the  mixture  must
be  given  in  small  doses,  and  repeated  at  short  intervals.  Externally,  it
forms  an  excellent  stimulating  application  to  indolent  and  malignant
ulcers. Dose  of  the  powder,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains,  three  times  a  day.

Prickly  Ash  Berries  are  stimulant,  carminative,  and  antispasmodic,
acting  especially  on  mucous  tissues. Combined  with  pokeberries,  in  the


972  Materia  Medica.

form  of  tincture,  they  are  invaluable  in  chronic  rheumatism,  and  tertiary
syphilis.  The  tincture  is  also  useful  in  all  nervous  diseases,  spasms  of
the  bowels,  flatulency,  and  in  diarrhea.  In  tympanitic  distension  of  the
bowels,  during  peritoneal  inflammation,  it  is  a  safe  and  superior  remedy,
used  internally  and  as  an  injection  ;  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm,
internally,  every  hour  or  two  in  sweetened  water — and  half  a  fluidounce
of  the  tincture,  with  occasionally  ten  or  twenty  drops  of  laudanum
added,  according  to  the  symptoms,  given  by  enema  every  fifteen  or  thirty
minutes.  In  Asiatic  cholera,  it  was  extensively  used  by  the  Eclectic
physicians  of  Cincinnati,  and  with  great  success  —  it  acted  like  electri-
city, so  sudden  was  its  influence  over  the  system ;  indeed,  many  patients
likened  its  action  to  an  electric  shock,  which  seemed  to  diffuse  itself
throughout  the  whole  frame.  We  gave  it  in  teaspoonful  doses,  slightly
diluted,  and  repeated,  according  to  circumstances,  every  five,  ten  or
fifteen  minutes,  with  an  injection,  prepared  as  above-mentioned,  which
was  given  immediately  after  each  discharge  from  the  bowels,  and  retained
by  the  patient  as  long  as  possible.  This  is  one  of  our  most  valuable
agents.  The  dose  of  the  tincture  of  the  berries,  as  a  carminative  and
antispasmodic,  is  from  ten  to  thirty  drops,  three  or  four  times  a  day.
Used  by  some,  during  the  intermissions,  as  a  remedy  in  intermittent
fever,  which  it  is  said  to  remove  speedily.  There  is  a  material  difference,
in  their  influence  on  the  system,  between  the  tincture  of  the  bark,  or  that
of  the  berries,  which  should  always  be  had  in  view.  A  patient  with
cholerine  came  very  near  losing  life,  in  consequence  of  using  the  tincture
the  prescription  supposed  the  properties  of  each  were  similar,  and  that
they  could  be  safely  substituted  the  one  for  the  other.  The  oil  of  xan-
thoxylum  may  be  used  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  berries,  in  doses
of  from  two  to  ten  drops  in  mucilage,  or  on  sugar;  and  its  tincture,  made
according  to  the  formula  above,  may  be  administered  in  the  same  doses
as  the  tincture  of  the  berries.

The  Aralia  Sjnnosa  is  frequently  but  erroneously  called  by  the  name
of  Southern  Prickly  Ash  ;  it  differs  from  the  xanthoxylum  in  its  botanical
character,  as  well  as  in  its  medicinal  virtues.  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell,  has
been  for  some  time  engaged  in  the  investigation  of  the  true  character  of
these  plants,  and  he  informs  me  that  he  is  confident  that  the  agent  which
was  employed  during  the  cholera,  and  has  been  used  since,  as  the  Aralia
Spinosa,  is  really  a  Xanthoxylum.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  so  much
confusion  should  exist  in  relation  to  the  identity  of  some  of  our  valuable
agents,  and  which  is  principally  owing  to  the  similarity  of  vulgar  names
among  different  plants,  and  an  inattention  to  their  systematic  names  and
characters.  We  hope  that  the  above  doubt  may  be  satisfactorily  solved
by  those  having  the  proper  opportunities  to  effect  it.

Off.  Prep. — Enema  Xanthoxyli;  Extractum  Xanthoxyli  Fluidum  ;
Tinctura  Laricis  Composita  ;  Tinctura  Xanthoxyli.


Xanthoxylin.  973

XANTHOXYLIN.

Xanthoxylin.

THE OLEO-RESINOUS PRINCIPLE OF PRICKLY ASH BARK.

Preparation. — Prepare  a  saturated  tincture  of  Prickly  Ash  Bark,
filter,  distil  off  the  alcohol,  and  to  the  residue  add  water, — the  oleo-resin
precipitates  to  the  bottom.  After  precipitation  has  ceased,  collect  the
oleo-resin,  and  wash  it  in  clear  water ;  allow  it  to  subside,  and  then
separate  it  from  the  water.

History. — The  profession  are  indebted  to  Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell  for  the
preparation  of  this  valuable  agent,  which  possesses  all  the  medicinal
properties  of  the  bark  in  a  concentrated  form.  When  in  mass  it  is
blackish,  but  of  a  reddish-brown  color  in  thin  layers  ;  it  has  a  peculiar
odor,  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  most  oleo-resins,  and  a  peculiar,  bitter-
ish taste,  quickly  succeeded  by  a  persistent  pungency  in  the  mouth  and
fauces.  It  is  insoluble  in  water  ;  partially  soluble  in  aqua  ammonia  and
liquor  potassa,  forming  a  solution  with  a  soapy  feeling;  soluble  in  ether,
from  which  aqua  ammonia  removes  a  portion  without  much  change  of
color;  soluble  in  oil  of  turpentine,  and  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  in  oil
of  savin,  and  some  other  essential  oils  ;  and  soluble  in  alcohol,  from
which  water  precipitates  it,  forming  a  dirty-white  solution.  Acetic,
nitric,  sulphuric,  and  muriatic  acids,  when  added  to  the  alcoholic  solu-
tion, occasion  no  precipitate.

Properties  and  Uses. — Xanthoxylin  is  stimulant,  tonic,  alterative  and
sialogogue,  and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  it  is  desired  to  stimulate
and  strengthen  mucous  tissues.  It  forms  an  excellent  remedy  for  rheu-
matism unaccompanied  with  inflammation,  or  where  there  is  an  asthenic
condition  of  the  system,  and  I  have  often  used  it  for  this  purpose  with
cimicifugin,  in  doses  of  one  grain  of  each,  every  one,  two,  or  three
hours,  with  much  advantage.  Combined  with  quinia,  it  will  be  found
very  beneficial  in  cases  where  quinia  alone  appears  to  exert  no  influ-
ence, and  will  prove  a  valuable  agent  in  dyspepsia,  accompanied  with
want  of  appetite,  flatulence,  and  distress  after  eating,  given  in  conjunc-
tion with  ptelein.  In  low  typhoid  fever,  Xanthoxylin  will  be  found  a
valuable  and  permanent  stimulating  tonic,  and  may,  when  necessary,  be
added  to  laxatives,  in  that  disease,  to  prevent  too  much  prostration — it
must,  however,  be  employed  only  during  the  stage  of  prostration.  It
may  be  used  alone  as  a  stimulating  #mic  and  alterative.  Where  a  stim-
ulating tonic  is  required  for  children  after  diarrhea,  dysentery,  or  other
debilitating  diseases,  a  combination^  of  hydrastin  with  xanthoxylin,  will
admirably  fulfill  the  indication.  In  chronic  rheumatism  I  have  found  the
following  preparation  highly  beneficial  :  Take  of  Cimicifugin,  Xanthoxy-
lin and  Apocynin,  of  each  one  drachm,  Proof  Spirits  or  Whisky  one
pint;  mix. Of  this,  the  dose  is  a  tablespoonful  three  times  a  day,  or


974  Materia Medica.

sufficient  to  slightly  affect  the  head,  at  the  same  time  attending  to  the
surface  and  excretory  functions.  Sometimes  I  add  two  drachms  of
guaiacum  to  the  above.  The  dose  of  Xanthoxylin  is  from  one  to  three
grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

ZEA  MAYS.

Indian Corn.

Nat.  Ord. — Graminacere. Sex.  Syst. — Monoecia  Triandria.

THE FRUIT OR SEEDS.

Description. — Indian  Corn  is  a  monoecious  paniceous  grass,  annual,
with  a  fibrous  root,  and  an  erect,  leafy  stem,  channeled  on  one  side,  and
from  five  to  ten,  and  in  some  varieties,  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  high.
The  leaves  are  lance-linear,  entire,  keeled,  and  two  or  three  feet  in  length ;
seeds  immersed  in  an  oblong  receptacle,  mostly  eight-rowed.

History. — This  plant  is  a  native  of  the  warm  latitudes  of  America,  and
its  varieties  are  exceedingly  numerous.  Corn  is  universally  cultivated
in  the  United  States,  and  also  in  the  southern  countries  of  Europe,  and
partially  in  Asia.  In  America,  especially  in  the  warmer  portions,  it
forms  the  main  article  of  food.  It  is  extremely  wholesome  and  nutri-
tious, and  is  employed  in  a  variety  of  forms ;  as  it  contains  no  gluten,
the  meal  does  not  undergo  the  fermentation  called  "  rising,"  as  with
wheat,  rye,  etc.  The  young  ears  boiled,  are  in  general  a  nutritious  and
digestible  article  of  diet,  but  should  be  eaten  with  caution  by  those  pre-
disposed to,  or  suffering  from  disease  of  the  bowels.  According  to  Dr.
Gorham,  corn  contains  77  per  cent,  of  starch,  3  of  a  principle  analo-
gous to  gluten,  called  Zein,  2.5  of  albumen,  1.45  of  sugar,  0.8  of  ex-
tractive, 1.75  of  gum,  1.5  of  sulphate  and  phosphate  of  lime,  3  of  lig-
nin,  and  9  of  water.  A  yellow  oil  has  likewise  been  procured  from  corn,
which  has  been  much  used,  instead  of  lard  or  fish  oils,  in  lamps, — it
consists  of  carbon  79.68,  hydrogen  11.53,  and  oxygen  8.79.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  meal  is  prepared  into  a  gruel,  which  is
sometimes  more  grateful  to  the  sick  than  that  made  from  oat-meal  ;  in
the  form  of  mush  it  is  an  excellent  and  nutritious  diet  for  patients  during
convalescence,  and  makes  an  excellent  emollient  poultice,  for  ulcers,
swellings,  rheumatic  pains,  etc.  An  infusion  of  parched  corn  is  useful
in  allaying  the  nausea  and  vomiting  attendant  upon  many  diseases  ;  it
may  be  drank  freely.


ZINCI  SULPHAS.

Sulphate of  Zinc.
Preparation. — Take  of  Zinc,  in  small  pieces,  four  ounces,  Sulphuric
Acid  six  ounces,  Distilled  Water  four  pints. To  the  zinc  and  water,


Zinci Sulphas.  975

previously  introduced  into  a  glass  vessel,  add  by  degrees  the  sulphuric
acid,  and,  when  the  effervescence  shall  have  ceased,  filter  the  solution
through  paper  ;  then  boil  it  down  till  a  pellicle  begins  to  form,  and  set
it  aside  to  crystallize.

When  Zinc  is  brought  into  contact  with  strong  sulphuric  acid,  very
little  action  ensues ;  but,  when  the  acid  is  diluted,  the  water  is  decom-
posed, its  hydrogen  escaping  with  effervescence,  and  its  oxygen  com-
bining with  the  zinc  forming  an  oxide.  This  oxide  is  dissolved  by  the
acid,  forming  a  sulphate  of  the  oxide  of  zinc,  which  may  be  obtained  in
fine,  transparent  colorless  crystals  by  evaporation.  The  object  in  adding
the  sulphuric  acid  gradually,  is  to  avoid  the  excessive  effervescence
which  takes  place  when  the  materials  are  mixed  at  once.  Impure  Sul-
phate of  Zinc,  called  White  Vitriol,  is  prepared  by  roasting  the  native
sulphuret  of  zinc,  or  Zinc-blende  of  mineralogists,  in  a  reverberatory
furnace,  then  exposing  it  to  the  air  in  a  moist  state  until  the  sulphuret  is
converted  by  oxidation  of  its  sulphur  and  metal  into  the  sulphate  ;  this
is  lixiviated,  and  the  solution,  concentrated  by  evaporation,  is  poured
into  molds,  where  it  concretes  into  cakes  like  loaf-sugar.  In  this  state
it  contains  many  impurities,  as  copper,  lead,  cadmium,  and  especially
iron,  in  the  form  of  sulphates  ;  and  from  which  it  may  be  purified  by  dis-
solving the  mass  in  water,  and  adding  oxide  of  zinc  to  it,  which  precip-
itates the  metallic  bases,  and  unites  with  their  sulphuric  acid,  forming-
sulphate  of  zinc.  The  solution  may  then  be  filtered,  and  crystallized
by  sufficient  evaporation.

iiftsfory.— Sulphate  of  Zinc  is  a  colorless,  transparent  salt,  having  an
intense,  disagreeable,  metallic,  styptic  taste,  and  crystallizing  usually  in
small  four-sided  prisms.  It  effloresces  on  exposure  to  the  air,  is  insol-
uble in  alcohol,  but  soluble  in  two  parts  and  a  half  of  temperate  water,
and  in  considerably  less  boiling  water.  When  heated,  it  first  fuses  in  its
water  of  crystallization,  which  is  subsequently  driven  off;  and  at  a  still
higher  temperature,  the  anhydrous  salt  parts  with  a  portion  or  the  whole
of  its  acid,  and  the  oxide  of  zinc  only  remains.  Its  watery  solution  is
precipitated  white  by  the  alkalies  or  their  carbonates,  oxide  or  carbonate
of  zinc  being  thrown  down  ;  and  either  precipitate  is  soluble  in  an
excess  of  the  alkali.  Of  course,  if  iron  be  present,  which  is  generally
the  case,  it  is  not  redissolved.  Ferrocyanate  of  potassium  and  hydro-
sulphate  of  ammonia  also  occasion  a  white  precipitate.  Crystallized
sulphate  of  zinc  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  oxide  of  zinc  40.3,
one  of  acid  40.1,  and  seven  of  water  63=143.4.  Its  formula  is  Zn  0+
SO-3  -|-7Aq.  The  commercial  White  Vitriol  contains  but  three  equiva-
lents of  water.  Sulphate  of  Zinc  is  incompatible  with  alkalies  and  alka-
line carbonates,  hydro-sulphates,  lime-water,  and  astringent  vegetable
infusions.

Properties  and  Uses. — By  a  certain  class  of  practitioners,  Sulphate  of
Zinc  is  used  as  a  tonic,  astringent,  and  emetic. As  a  tonic  it  has  been


976  Materia  Medica.

used  in  doses  of  a  grain  or  two,  in  dyspepsia,  obstinate  inter  mi  ttents,
epilepsy,  chorea,  pertussis,  debility  attended  with  irritation,  etc.  As  an
astringent,  its  solution  has  been  applied  to  bleeding  surfaces,  and  chronic
inflammation  of  mucous  surfaces.  As  an  emetic,  the  dose  is  from  ten
to  thirty  grains,  and  it  usually  produces  vomiting  very  rapidly.  In  large
doses  it  is  an  irritant  poison,  but  seldom  produces  dangerous  effects,  as  the
patient  is  relieved  by  the  vomiting  which  it  occasions.  This  agent  is
never  used  internally  by  Eclectics,  but  is  sometimes  employed  in  solu-
tion, from  one  to  six  grains  to  an  ounce  of  water,  as  a  collyrium  in
chronic  ophthalmia,  as  an  injection  in  chronic  gonorrhea,  gleet,  and  leu-
corrhea,  as  a  gargle  in  aphthous  sore-throat,  and  relaxation  of  the  uvula;
and  as  a  desiccative  lotion  in  old  ulcers  with  excessive  discharges.  It  is
also  very  much  used  as  a  local  application  to  cancer,  in  which  disease  it
has  accomplished  very  beneficial  results.  Combined  with  powdered
bloodroot,  it  has  been  successfully  used  in  nasal  polypi,  and  also  in
chancres.  Prof.  R.  S.  Newton  has  recently  discovered  it  to  possess
antiseptic  properties,  and  has  extensively  and  successfully  employed  it  in
gangrene  or  mortification  ;  as  this  is  a  matter  of  some  moment  to  the
profession,  we  extract  from  his  remarks  on  the  subject,  as  published  in
the  Eclectic  Medical  Journal,  May,  1849,  Vol.  I,  No.  5,  as  follows  :

"  I  am  of  the  opinion,  that  as  far  as  a  constitutional  treatment  is  indi-
cated, it  will  be  important  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  complaint,  and
that  one  single  remedy  is  sufficient  to  fulfill  every  indication,  and  that
more  dependence  may  be  placed  upon  it,  than  upon  any  constitutional
treatment,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  profession  will  willingly
hail  this  discovery.  My  practice  in  this  malady,  has  led  me  to  step  out
of  the  old  beaten  track,  in  search  of  some  agent  that  can  be  relied  upon
for  its  efficacy,  its  general  application  with  safety  in  all  cases,  with  but
little  modification,  and  one  that  will  remove  the  necessity  of  so  much
attention  to  constitutional  remedies,  in  many  cases  entirely.

This  agent  may  also  be  used  in  the  treatment  of  some  varieties  of  ery-
sipelas, which  will  be  referred  to  hereafter.  Sulphate  of  zinc  is  the
article  to  which  I  wish  to  draw  the  attention  of  practitioners,  as  a  remedy
for  mortification,  and  to  show  its  beneficial  results,  by  the  description  of
a  few  cases  treated  by  it.  It  may  be  argued,  that  the  use  of  any  remedy
that  will  of  itself  produce  active  inflammation,  could  not  be  applied  to  a
highly  inflamed  part,  without  producing  fatal  consequences,  by  increas-
ing the  disease  beyond  the  reach  of  remedies.  This  will  doubtless
appear  true  to  many,  but  experience  has  proved  to  the  contrary,  for  it
has  been  used  in  cases  where  the  parts  were  in  the  highest  state  of
inflammation,  and  although  this  was  increased  for  a  few  hours  by  its
action,  yet  in  no  case  have  I  found  it  to  produce  any  bad  effect,  or  to  so
augment  this  condition,  as  to  present  any  difficulty  in  the  subsequent
treatment. It  will  be  remembered  that  all  cases  of  mortification  are


Zinci  Sulphas.  977

attended  with  a  very  offensive  fetor,  which  is  one  of  the  characteristic
symptoms  of  this  disease,  and  which  is  caused  by  a  decomposition  of  the
healthy  structure  of  the  parts  attacked,  and  this  very  cause  produces
the  continuance  of  the  disease,  the  changing  of  which  is  the  indication
to  be  fulfilled  in  every  variety  of  treatment  that  has  been  adopted.

No  agent  will  act  so  immediately  in  producing  this  change  as  the  sul-
phate of  zinc ;  the  most  extensively  mortified  surface,  with  the  offensive
fetor  arising  from  it,  can  be  stopped  in  a  few  hours  after  its  application,
and  after  one  or  two  applications,  the  parts  become  hardened,  and  the
fetor  entirely  removed.  It  fulfills  two  indications  in  this  respect,  viz. :
arresting  the  decomposition  going  on  in  the  parts,  and  correcting  all
unpleasant  fetor  which  may  exist;  and  it  should  be  borne  in  mind,  that
as  long  as  this  fetor  is  present,  the  disease  is  not  arrested.  The  follow-
ing cases  will  be  illustrative  of  the  method  of  using  it,  in  which  I  have
found  it  useful.

Case  I. — Mr.  F.,  aged  25,  residing1  in  Fulton,  came  to  consult  me  in
December,  1846,  with  an  extensive  mortification  of  the  whole  palatine
arch  and  gums  of  the  superior  maxillary,  succeeding  a  mercurial  action
which  had  been  produced  and  continued  a  long  time,  and  which  had
resisted  the  usual  treatment  for  its  arrest.  I  was  induced  to  try  the  sul-
phate of  zinc,  and  mixed  a  small  quantity  of  it  in  fine  powder,  with  a
sufficient  quantity  of  flour  and  water  to  make  a  paste ;  this,  I  spread
upon  soft  leather,  and  applied  over  the  parts  affected,  retaining  it  there
until  the  paste  sufficiently  adhered,  by  a  sponge  placed  upon  the  tongue.
I  would  here  remark,  that  this  was  a  well-marked  case.  The  fetor
arising  from  the  mouth,  was  such,  that  one  could  scarcely  stay  in  the
room  with  him.  On  the  succeeding  day,  I  found  the  fetor  much  dimin-
ished, and  the  parts  secreting  but  little,  with  a  portion  entirely  hardened.
I  made  a  second  application,  in  a  similar  manner,  and  on  the  next  morn-
ing the  unpleasant  fetor  was  entirely  removed,  and  the  whole  of  the
diseased  parts  covered  with  a  dry,  hard  surface,  and  no  vestige  of  secre-
tion from  any  part  of  it.  I  considered  this  to  have  been  carried  far
enough,  and  made  no  further  application  of  the  zinc,  but  recommended
the  mucilage  of  ulmus  and  warm  water  to  be  used  freely  in  the  mouth,
which  was  pursued  for  three  days,  when  the  entire  portion  upon  which
the  zinc  had  been  used,  sloughed  off,  leaving  a  healthy  appearance  of
the  parts.  It  may  be  well  to  state  here,  that  the  entire  structure  of  the
arch,  with  a  large  portion  of  the  bone,  came  away,  after  which  it  was
treated  as  a  common  ulcer,  and  healed  in  about  ten  days,  since  which
time  he  has  remained  in  good  health.

Case  II. — Mrs.  S.  was  under  treatment  for  a  cancerous  condition  of
the  breast.  It  had  ulcerated,  and  was  attended  with  all  the  unpleasant
symptoms  of  such  a  condition.  I  made  use  of  caustic  applications  for
its  removal,  but  found  upon  the  second  day,  that  the  whole  gland  was
in  a  state  of  mortification,  and  that  the  system  was  fast  failing  from  its
62


978  Materia Medica.

effect.  I  immediately  applied  the  zinc,  in  the  form  of  powder,  covering
the  affected  parts  with  it ;  in  less  than  six  hours  a  change  of  the  fetid
smell  was  very  perceptible,  but  the  inflammation  continued  without  any
abatement  during  twenty-four  hours.  On  the  next  day  I  found  that  the
remedy  had  dried  and  hardened  a  portion  of  the  diseased  surface  ;  I,
therefore,  again  applied  it  and  covered  the  medicine  with  a  poultice  of
elm  bark,  mixed  with  cold  water ;  this  dissolved  the  zinc  in  a  few  hours,
and  had  the  desired  effect  of  changing  and  arresting  any  further  exten-
sion of  the  mortification.  In  this  case  two  applications  were  sufficient.
It  will  be  found,  that  in  some  cases,  the  zinc  will  produce  a  hardened
surface,  so  as  to  prevent  a  sufficient  quantity  from  acting  throughout
the  diseased  parts ;  this  can  be  l-emedied  by  applying  an  elm  poultice
after  the  zinc  is  used,  which  will  soften  the  surface  enough  to  allow  its
full  action,  which  is  known,  as  before  said,  by  absence  of  the  fetor.  All
the  dressing  that  is  required,  is  the  elm  poultice,  both  before  and  after
the  use  of  the  zinc ;  if  the  first  application  increases  the  inflammation  to
any  extent,  apply  the  elm  for  ten  or  fifteen  hours,  after  which  apply  the
zinc. The  part  will  usually  slough  off  in  three  or  four  days.

Case  III. — J.  F.,  aged  forty-eight,  had  an  encephaloid  tumor,  situ-
ated on  the  leg,  which  required  to  be  removed  by  an  operation,  previous
to  the  application  of  medicine  for  its  permanent  cure.  J.  King,  M.  D.,
assisted  me  in  removing  the  tumor,  which  had  arrived  at  several  inches
in  diameter.  It  was  removed  without  any  unnatural  appearances  attend-
ing the  case.  But  on  the  second  day,  the  whole  incision,  and  for  Ihree
inches  around,  became  gangrenous,  and  accompanied  with  a  high  degree
of  inflammation.  I  immediately  applied  the  zinc,  and  continued  it  for
three  days,  when  it  became  completely  arrested,  and  in  three  days
longer  the  diseased  parts  sloughed  off,  leaving  a  healthy  condition  of  the
remaining  integuments,  which  were  then  treated  without  any  further
difficulty.

I  have  made  use  of  this  agent  in  forty-five  cases,  and  in  each  it  proved
highly  successful,  so  much  so,  that  in  only  five  cases  was  a  slight  consti-
tutional treatment  demanded.  As  these  cases  are  all  similar  to  those
given,  I  deem  it  unnecessary  to  particularize  any  further.  In  four  cases
of  ulcerated  erysipelatous  inflammation,  I  have  used  the  zinc  with  simi-
lar success,  though  in  these  instances,  it  required  a  smaller  quantity  of
the  article,  a  greater  number  of  applications,  and  at  greater  intervals
between  the  applications.  At  some  future  time,  I  may  again  refer  to
this  article,  and  its  effects  in  other  forms  of  disease."

Off.  Prep.  —  Lotio  Hydrastis  Composita ;  Lotio  Myrrhae  Composita ;
Lotio  Sodii  Composita;  Lotio  Zinci  Composita;  Unguentum  Zinci  Sul-
phatis ;  Unguentum  Zinci  Compositum.


Zingiber  Officinale.  979

ZINGIBER  OFFICINALE.
Ginger.

Nat.  Ord. — Zingiberaceae. Sex.  Syst. — Monandria  Monogynia.

THE RHIZOMA.

Description. — The  Ginger  plant  has  a  biennial,  creeping,  tuberous  root
or  rhizoma;  the  stems  are  erect,  oblique,  round,  solid,  annual,  invested
by  the  smooth  sheaths  of  the  leaves,  and  two  or  three  feet  in  bight.
The  leaves  are  subsessile,  on  long  sheaths,  alternate,  lanceolate,  linear,
acute,  smooth  above  and  nearly  so  beneath,  bifarious,  and  five  or  six
inches  long  by  an  inch  broad ;  the  sheaths  are  smooth,  and  crowned  with
a  bifid  ligula.  The  scapes  are  radical,  solitary,  a  little  removed  from  the
stems,  from  six  to  twelve  inches  high,  enveloped  in  a  few  obtuse  sheaths,
the  uppermost  of  which  end  in  tolerably  long  leaves,  and  terminate  in
oval,  obtuse,  bracteal,  imbricated  spikes,  about  the  size  of  the  thumb.
The  exterior  brads  are  imbricated,  one-flowered,  obovate,  smooth,  mem-
branous at  the  edge,  faintly  striated  lengthwise ;  the  interior  enveloping
the  ovary,  calyx,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  tube  of  the  corolla.
Flowers  small,  of  a  dingy-yellow  color,  and  appear  two  or  three  at  a
time  between  the  bracteal  scales.  The  calyx  is  tubular,  opening  on  one
side,  three-toothed;  corolla  with  a  double  limb;  outer  of  three,  nearly
equal,  oblong  segments ;  inner  a  three-lobed  lip,  of  a  dark  purple  color.
Sterile  stamens  subulate  ;  filament  short.  Anther  oblong,  double,  crowned
with  a  long,  curved,  tapering,  grooved  horn.  Ovary  oval,  three-celled,
with  many  ovules  in  each;  style  filiform  ;  stigma  funnel-shaped,  ciliate,
lodged  just  under  the  apex  of  the  horn  of  the  anther.

History. — Ginger  is  supposed  to  be  a  native  of  Hindostan,  and  is  cul-
tivated in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  and  at  Sierra  Leone  in  Africa.  The
flowers  and  the  stems  when  bruised,  have  an  aromatic  odor,  but  the
root  is  the  officinal  part.  In  a  young  state  these  roots  are  preserved  in
sugar,  forming  a  well  known  sweetmeat ;  when  old,  they  are  taken  up,
scalded  in  hot  water,  to  prevent  germination,  and  dried,  constituting
the  black  ginger  of  commerce  ;  or  if  they  are  scraped  previous  to  being
dried,  they  form  the  white  ginger.  The  roots  are  gathered  in  January
and  February,  after  the  stems  have  withered.  The  East  Indian  vari-
ety is  generally  imported  from  Calcutta,  while  the  West  Indian  is
derived  from  the  West  Indies,  usually  by  way  of  England.  The  recent
root  is  from  one  to  four  inches  long,  somewhat  flattened  on  its  upper  and
under  surface,  knotty,  obtusely  and  irregularly  branched  or  lobed,
externally  of  a  light  ash  color,  and  marked  with  circular  rugae.  Inter-
nally, fleshy  and  yellowish-white.  The  two  varieties  met  with  in  com-
merce, are  the  Jamaica  or  White  Ginger,  and  the  Common  East  India  or
Black  Ginger.  The  latter  is  most  extensively  used  in  this  country.  In


980  Materia  Medica.

epidermis,  which  being  removed  in  some  places,  exhibits  patches  of  an
almost  black  color,  apparently  the  result  of  exposure.  Beneath  the
epidermis  is  a  brownish,  resinous,  almost  horny  cortical  portion.  The
interior  parenchyma  is  whitish  and  somewhat  farinaceous.  The  powder
is  of  a  light  yellowish-brown  color.  The  former  differs  in  being  deprived
of  epidermis,  and  white  or  yellowish-white  on  the  outside.  The  pieces
are  rounder  and  thinner,  firm  and  resinous,  and  possess  more  of  the  sen-
sible qualities  of  ginger  than  the  black  variety.  The  powder  is  of  a
beautiful  yellowish-white  color.  Ginger  is  of  an  aromatic  and  penetrat-
ing odor,  with  a  pungent,  hot,  spicy  and  biting  taste.  It  yields  its  vir-
tues to  water,  proof  spirit  or  rectified  spirit.  Age  or  long  exposure
diminishes  its  activity.  Pieces  which  are  very  fibrous,  light  and  friable,
or  worm  eaten,  should  be  rejected.  Ginger  consists  of  a  greenish-blue
volatile  oil ;  a  soft,  acrid,  aromatic  resinous  matter,  soluble  in  ether  or
alcohol ;  a  sub-resin  insoluble  in  ether ;  osmazome  ;  gum  ;  starch  ;  a
vegeto-animal  matter ;  sulphur ;  acetic  acid ;  acetate  of  potassa  ;  and
lignin.  The  flavor  of  the  root  probably  depends  on  the  volatile  oil,  and
its  pungency  on  the  resinous  extractive.

Properties  and  Uses. — Ginger  is  stimulant,  rubefacient,  errhine,  and
sialoo-ocme.  When  chewed  it  occasions  an  increased  flow  of  saliva,  and
when  swallowed  it  acts  as  a  stimulating  tonic,  stomachic  and  carminative,
increasing  the  secretion  of  gastric  juice,  exalting  the  excitability  of  the
alimentary  muscular  system,  and  dispelling  gases  accumulated  in  the
stomach  and  bowels.  It  is  much  used  to  disguise  other  drugs,  conceal-
ing their  nausea,  or  preventing  their  tendency  to  cause  tormina.  When
snuffed  into  the  nostrils  it  causes  violent  sneezing.  It  has  been  used  in
combination  with  astringents  or  other  agents,  in  diarrhea  and  dysentery ;
prepared  with  rhubarb,  in  the  form  of  cordial  or  syrup,  few  articles  are
more  valuable  in  cholera  morbus,  and  cholera  infantum.  It  is  eminently
adapted  to  flatulent  habits,  dyspepsia,  hysteria,  and  the  feeble  state  of
the  alimentary  canal  attendant  upon  atonic  gout ;  and  is  excellent  to
relieve  nausea,  pains  and  cramps  in  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  to
obviate  tenesmus.  Combined  with  black  willow  bark,  it  forms  an  excel-
lent poultice  for  indolent  ulcers;  and  is  sometimes  employed  as  a  local
remedy  in  relaxation  of  the  uvula,  and  paralysis  of  the  tongue.  Dose  of
the  powder,  from  ten  to  thirty  grains ;  of  the  infusion,  prepared  by
adding  half  an  ounce  of  the  powdered  or  bruised  root  to  a  pint  of  boil-
ing water,  one  or  two  fluidounces.  A  large  quantity  of  ginger  taken
internally  might  produce  serious  effects.

Of.  Prep.— Acidum  Sulphuricum  Aromaticum  ;  Infusum  Zingiberis  ;
Pulvis  Asclepice  Compositus  ;  Pulvis  Jalapa3  Compositus  ;  Syrupus  Zin-
giberis ;  Tinctura  Zingiberis.


PART III.


PHARMACY


COLLECTION AND  PRESERVATION OF PLANTS.

It  is  of  vital  importance  to  the  practitioner  that  the  agents  which
he  employs  in  practice  be  as  perfect  in  their  character  as  circumstances
•will  admit;  for,  no  matter  how  excellent  a  remedy  may  be  when  properly
prepared,  an  inattention  to  the  requisites  demanded  for  their  purity  and
excellence  may  prove  very  serious  in  its  results.  The  custom  pursued
by  some  apothecaries  of  retaining  on  hand  an  old  and  inert  stock  of
medicine,  and  palming  it  off  upon  the  physician  or  his  patient  as  genuine,
is  very  reprehensible,  and  cannot  be  too  severely  discountenanced,  and
we  are  glad  that  this  practice  is  confined  to  but  very  few.  It  is  the  posi-
tive duty  of  the  apothecary  to  furnish  himself  with  good  articles  of  medi-
cine, to  take  especial  care  in  preserving  them,  that  they  do  not  become
soiled  or  otherwise  injured,  to  prepare  them,  when  called  for,  in  a  neat,
scientific,  and  expeditious  method,  and  to  dispense  them  strictly  accord-
ing to  the  physician's  prescription,  without  using  his  own  judgment  in
the  matter,  or  substituting  other  agents  for  those  which  may  not  be  in
his  store,  because,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  he  should  know  the  indi-
cations which  the  practitioner  desires  to  fulfill,  nor  the  especial  object  in
view  which  originated  the  prescription.  One  exception,  perhaps,  may
be  made,  in  which  the  agents  are  of  a  deleterious  or  poisonous  character,
when,  should  the  apothecary  consider,  from  the  largeness  of  the  article,
or  its  dose,  if  that  can  be  ascertained,  that  a  mistake  or  oversight  may
have  occurred,  it  is  then  his  duty,  not  to  alter  or  modify  the  prescrip-
tion, but  to  send  it  back  to  the  physician,  or  present  it  himself  in  person,
that  it  may  be  examined  and  corrected.  As  by  far  the  greater  number
of  agents  used  in  Eclectic  practice  are  derived  from  the  vegetable  king-
dom, an  attention  to  the  following  observations  will,  as  a  general  rule,

insure  pure  and  active  medicines.

(981  )


982  Pharmacy.

All  medicinal  plants,  with  but  a  few  exceptions,  have  their  active  quali-
ties more  or  less  impaired  by  long  keeping ;  hence,  the  pharmaceutist
should,  as  a  general  rule,  reject  the  supply  of  the  previous  year,  and
provide  himself  with  fresh  agents  ;  with  our  indigenous  remedies  this  is
more  especially  necessary,  as  these  can  be,  and  should  be,  freshly  col-
lected every  year.  Plants  should  be  gathered  at  a  proper  period,
according  to  the  portion  designed  for  use,  and  which  is  generally  recog-
nized as  being  at  the  time  when  the  natural  juices  of  such  part  exist  in
it  more  abundantly.  Great  attention  should  be  bestowed  upon  this  mat-
ter; as  the  reputation  of  an  agent  depends  entirely  upon  its  careful  col-
lection and  preservation ;  thus  many  of  our  most  active  agents  possess
but  little  medicinal  powers  when  young,  and  are  at  this  early  period
often  eaten  with  impunity  as  greens,  among  which  may  be  named  the
young  shoots  of  poke,  asclepias,  dandelion,  etc.  Soil,  climate,  and  cul-
tivation exert  a  remarkable  influence  on  the  properties  of  plants,  and,
with  the  exception  of  the  Labiatas,  whose  aroma  becomes  much  improved
by  cultivation,  nearly  all  other  plants  become  deteriorated  and  useless  as
medicines  when  reared  under  the  hand  of  the  cultivator.  Plants  found
in  their  places  of  natural  growth  present  the  greatest  degree  of  medi-
cinal activity,  consequently,  it  is  recommended  to  collect  these  and  no
others.  Most  of  the  Umbelliferae  growing  in  a  dry  soil  are  aromatic,
while  those  peculiar  to  wet  places  are  narcotic  and  poisonous.  The
Cruciferae  thrive  best  in  damp  localities,  while  the  Labiatse  found  in  dry
soils  are  to  be  preferred.  The  attention  of  the  herb-collector  should
always  be  directed  to  these  several  points.

Roots. — Roots  must  be  collected  according  to  the  character  of  the
plant ;  thus  an  annual  plant  will  yield  the  most  actively  medical  root,
just  previous  to  the  flowering  season ;  though  the  generality  of  this  class
of  roots  are  erroneously  gathered  after  the  flowering  period,  and  conse-
quently are  less  active  and  do  not  retain  their  qualities  for  any  reliable
time.  The  roots  of  biennial  plants  are  most  energetic  if  collected  after
the  vegetation  of  the  first  year  has  ceased,  or  on  the  disappearance  of
the  first  year's  leaves.  The  roots  of  -perennial  plants  are  best  collected
in  the  winter  or  early  in  the  spring,  previous  to  vegetation.  Bulbs
should  be  collected  when  the  new  bulb  is  perfected,  but  not  yet  vege-
tated, or  about  the  time  the  leaves  decay.

Stems. — Herbaceous  stems  are  best  gathered  after  the  appearance  of
the  leaves,  but  before  the  time  of  flowering.  Ligneous  or  woody  stems
during  the  winter,  as  then  the  wood  contains  more  extract.

Barks.  —Barks  from  the  root,  body,  or  stems,  should  be  collected
when  they  can  be  most  easily  separated  from  the  wood,  and  which  is
generally  either  previous  to  the  appearance  of  the  flowers,  or  in  the
autumn,  after  the  termination  of  the  reproductive  process.  Too  much
care  cannot  be  displayed  in  selecting  barks ;  those  which  are  very  young,


Collection  and  Preservation  op  Plants.  983

or  somewhat  old,  and  especially  decayed  portions,  should  be  at  once
rejected.

Leaves.  —  Leaves  should  be  collected  after  their  full  development,
before  the  fading  of  the  flowers,  or  previous  to  the  ripening  of  the  fruit
or  seeds.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  leaves  of  biennial  plants,  are
not  in  full  perfection  until  the  second  year ;  consequently,  they  should
be  gathered  only  at  this  period.

Flowers.  —  Flowers  must  be  gathered  either  before  or  immediately
after  they  have  fully  expanded,  and  some  while  yet  in  the  bulb.  Aro-
matic herbs  are  best  when  gathered  during  the  season  of  flowering.  Stalks
and  twigs  should  be  collected  in  autumn ;  and  seeds  as  soon  as  they
have  fully  ripened.  Berries  and  succulent  fruits  generally,  are  to  be
collected  only  when  ripe.

Drying  of  Plants. — This  is  a  very  important  process  in  the  preserva-
tion of  medicinal  plants,  as  the  activity  of  an  agent  depends,  probably,
as  much  upon  the  method  adopted  in  drying  it,  as  upon  its  inherent
qualities.  Many  remedies  are  often  injured  or  rendered  inert  by  an
improper  or  careless  mode  of  drying.  Leaves,  herbs,  and  flowers,
should  always  be  gathered  in  dry  weather;  in  the  morning  after  the
evaporation  of  the  dew  is  the  best  period.  Much  care  is  necessary,  not
only  in  drying  roots,  but  the  other  parts  of  plants  ;  in  general,  they
should  be  dried  in  a  well  ventilated  room,  and  with  as  much  rapidity  as
may  be  necessary  for  their  proper  preservation ;  and  during  damp
weather,  it  will  be  advantageous  to  heat  the  room  artificially  by  means
of  a  small  stove,  or  drum,  allowing  the  temperature  to  range  between
70°  and  100°  F.  The  articles  to  be  dried  should  be  so  arranged  that
the  currents  of  air  may  pass  over  and  through  them,  and  they  should  be
frequently  stirred.  Roots  should  be  washed,  and  the  fibers,  if  not  used,
separated  ;  then,  especially  if  large  and  succulent,  cut  into  transverse
pieces,  from  one-fourth  to  half  an  inch  in  length,  and  dried  in  the  sun,
or  in  the  drying  room  at  100°  F.  ;  in  order  to  prevent  molding,  they
should  be  frequently  turned.  Fibrous  roots  may  likewise  be  dried  in  the
sun,  or  in  a  temperature  not  to  exceed  85°.  Bulbs  may  be  dried  simi-
larly, after  first  having  had  the  outer  membranes  removed.

Barks,  stems,  woods,  and  twigs,  during  the  process  of  drying,  may  be
arranged  in  thin  layers,  or  hung  up  in  small,  loose  bundles,  and  dried
in  the  open  air.  Leaves  are  to  be  dried  in  a  manner  which  will  preserve
their  natural  color ;  they  should  be  freed  from  the  stalks,  and  as  much
as  possible  from  external  moisture,  then  laid  in  thin  layers,  and  loosely
strewed  in  a  dark  room,  the  temperature  of  which  must  not  be  less  than
130°  or  140°  F.  and  in  which  they  must  remain  for  three  or  four  hours,
or  until  they  begin  to  shrivel.  They  should  then  be  turned,  in  the  same
temperature,  which  should  be  maintained  for  six  or  eight  hours  longer;
when  the  operation  is  finished,  which  may  be  known  by  the  leaves  readily


984  Pharmacy.

crumbling  in  the  hand.  Leaves  thus  dried  retain  their  color  and  medical
properties  in  a  high  degree,  and  should  be  kept  in  well-stopped  vessels,
and  carefully  excluded  from  light  and  moisture.  The  usual  method  of
drying  leaves  is  to  strip  them  from  the  stem,  lay  them  loosely  on  the
floor  of  a  dark  room,  and  turn  them  several  times ;  and  when  dried,
press  them  in  packages.  The  custom  of  moistening  or  steaming  leaves
and  other  preparations  previous  to  packing  them  in  bundles,  for  the  pur-
pose of  causing  them  to  pack  more  solidly,  and  which  is  pursued  by
many  collectors  of  medicinal  plants,  is  exceedingly  improper.  The  arti-
cles become  very  much  deteriorated  in  quality  thereby,  and  soon  mold.
Flowers  are  frequently  very  difficult  to  dry,  so  as  to  retain  both  their
odor  and  color.  They  should  be  dried  rapidly,  in  the  manner  recom-
mended for  the  drying  of  leaves  ;  and  as  soon  as  thoroughly  dried
should  be  firmly  compressed  into  packages,  and  kept  in  dry  situations.
Some  flowers  cannot  be  completely  dried,  without  destroying  their  active
properties  at  the  same  time  ;  these  may  be  kept  loosely  in  proper  jars.
Berries  and  succulent  fruits  may  be  suspended  in  bunches  and  dried,  or
removed  from  tlie  branches  and  spread  in  thin  layers  on  a  wicker  frame
in  a  dry  and  darkened  room  ;  they  should  be  frequently  stirred  during
the  drying  process.  Seeds  may  be  dried,  when  this  is  necessary,  by
spreading  them  out  thinly,  and  drying  in  a  dark  room.  Aromatic  herbs,
and  annual  plants  generally,  when  not  too  juicy,  may  be  tied  in  small
bundles,  and  suspended  on  lines  stretched  across  the  drying-room.

In  the  drying  of  plants,  there  is  considerable  loss  of  water,  and  some
of  the  volatile  constituents.  The  Edinburgh  Dispensatory  gives  the  fol-
lowing table,  as  showing  the  amounts  obtained  from  1000  parts  of  the
respective  articles  named,  after  having  been  dried :

Roots  of  Angelica  Arch'l 263  |  Twigs  of  Sola.  Dulcamara 308


Aspi'rn  Filix  Mas 500

Inula  Helenium 187

Valeriana  sylves 316


Leaves  of  Atro.  Belladon 140

Conii  Maculatum 185

Datura  Stramon'ra 110


Bark  of  the  Oak 410  ,  Leaves  of  Digitalis  purpur 180

Elder 292  | Hyoscyamus  niger 135

Elm 375  | Melissa  officinalis 220

Leaves  of  Salvia  officinalis 220  i  Flowers  of  Lavandula  vera 510

Tops  of  Mentha  piperita 215  j Sambucus  Ebulus 256

Flowers  of  Anth's  nobilis 338 Petals  of  Papaver  Rhoeas 84

Borago  officinalis 96  1 Rosa  rubra 330

In  relation  to  the  preservation  of  medicines,  which  is  of  much  impor-
tance to  apothecaries,  the  following  rules  have  been  recommended.  The
store-room  should  be  quite  dry,  exempt  from  vermin,  and  capable  of
being  ventilated  when  desired.  Drugs  should  not  be  put  away  until
thoroughly  dried,  and  should  be  kept  from  the  light,  and  on  the  addition
of  new  parcels  to  the  old,  the  latter  should  be  examined,  and  freed  from
all  impurities.  Moots,  barks  and  woods  may  be  kept  in  barrels  or  boxes,
with  well  fitted  covers,  and  other  drugs  can  be  well  kept  in  tin  canisters,


Weights  and  Measures.  985

or  in  glass  or  earthenware  vessels.  All  medicines  should  be  frequently
inspected,  particularly  in  warm  weather,  to  prevent  injury  from  insects  or
dampness,  and  when  the  former  are  discovered,  they  may  be  destroyed
by  suspending  an  open  vial  containing  chloroform  in  the  canister  or
vessel  holding  them,  which  is  to  be  securely  closed,  and  thus  saturate
the  atmosphere  of  the  vessel  with  its  vapor.  Oils,  fixed  or  volatile,  are
best  kept  in  a  dark  place,  and  in  a  temperature  ranging  from  60°  to
65°  F.  Care  should  always  be  taken  to  separate  the  various  drugs  from
admixtures,  inert  substances  and  dirt,  and  the  finest  quality  should
always  be  preserved  separate  from  that  of  the  second.

Aromatic  leaves,  flowers,  and  pulverized  drugs  should  be  kept  in  tin
vessels,  or  glass  jars,  and  excluded  from  the  light  as  much  as  possible,
as  the  action  of  light  upon  them  impairs  their  activity.  All  parts  of
plants  requiring  to  be  kept  fresh  for  as  long  a  time  as  possible,  should
be  buried  in  dry  sand,  especially  roots,  bulbs,  and  succulent  fruits.


WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.
In  this  country  the  apothecary  makes  use  of  the  Avoirdupois  weight
in  buying  and  selling  medicines,  but  employs  the  Troy  measure  of
weight  in  compounding  and  dispensing  them,  which  is  divided  for  the
convenience  of  the  apothecary,  into  grains,  scruples,  and  drachms ;  thus,
twenty  grains  being  equal  to  one  scruple  ;  three  scruples  to  one  drachm  ;
eight  drachms  to  one  ounce;  and  twelve  ounces  to  one  pound;  this
measure  is  frequently  termed  "  apothecaries  weight."  The  fluid  meas-
ures recognized  are  the  wine  gallon  and  pint.  Other  measures  of  an
approximative  character  are  also  employed  in  dispensing  medicines,  as
the  wineglass,  tablespoonful,  dessert-spoonful,  tea-spoonful,  and  drops.
(See  Weights  and  Measures  in  the  Appendix.)  For  the  measurement  of
liquids,  graduated  glass  measures,  varying  from  four  to  sixteen  ounces,
are  made  use  of,  in  which  any  quantity  not  less  than  one  fluidrachm
may  be  proportioned ;  and  for  obtaining  fractions  of  a  fluidrachm,  the
minimeter,  graduated  into  sixty  parts  or  minims  is  a  ver}'  convenient
instrument.  The  mode  pursued  by  many  apothecaries,  of  dropping
liquids  from  the  lip  of  the  bottle,  is  very  inaccurate  and  objectionable,
from  the  fact,  that  the  drops  of  various  liquids  vary  considerably  in  size,
and  even  those  of  the  same  liquid  vary  considerably,  according  to  the
size  of  the  vessel  from  which  they  are  dropped,  as  the  following  results
of  Mr.  Alsop's  investigations  verify.

When  dropped  from  When  dropped  from

a  Large  Bottle.  a  Small  Bottle.

One  fluidrachm  of  Diluted  sulphuric  acid,  yielded 24  drops,  84  drops.

" of  Scheele's  hydrocy.  acid, " 35 "  70 "

of  Distilled  water, " 31 "  54 "

" of  Solution  of  Ammonia, " 40 "  48 "

" of  Tincture  of  Opium, " 84 "  135 "

of  Rectified  Spirit, " 100 "  130 «

of  Tine,  of  Muriate  of  Iron, " 100 "  150 '


986  Pharmacy.

From  this  table  will  be  seen  the  disadvantages  of  measuring  medicines
by  drops.  To  obviate  the  difficulty  heretofore  experienced  in  measuring
fractions  of  a  fiuidrachm,  Mr.  Alsop  has  invented  a  minimcter,  which  is
probably  the  most  convenient  and  accurate  instrument  for  such  purposes ;
it  consists  of  a  very  slender  glass  syringe,  graduated  into  sixty  parts,
each  being  equal  to  a  minim.


DETERMINATION OF SPECIFIC GRAVITIES.

It  is  often  a  matter  of  importance  to  the  apothecary  to  determine  the
specific  gravity  of  an  article,  in  order  to  test  its  purity.  The  instrument
generally  used  for  this  purpose,  when  applied  to  liquids,  is  Baurae's
hydrometer.  It  consists  of  a  glass  bulb,  properly  loaded  at  one  end,
drawn  out  at  the  other  into  a  tube,  on  which  the  scale  is  accurately
marked.  In  order  that  this  instrument  may  be  used  in  small  vessels,  it
should  have  a  very  short  tube,  and  especially  when  intended  for  syrups,
be  graduated  from  20°  to  40°  of  Raume's  scale  for  heavy  liquids.  The
specific  gravities  of  syrups,  acids,  and  saline  solutions  are  usually  ascer-
tained by  hydrometers.  When  used  for  alcohol,  the  instrument  is
graduated  by  loading  it  until  it  sinks  to  the  foot  of  the  stem  (which  is
marked  zero)  in  a  solution  of  nine  parts  of  water  to  one  of  common  salt.
It  is  then  placed  into  water,  and  the  place  to  which  it  sinks  marked  10°
of  the  scale,  which  is  constructed  from  these  data.  For  liquids  heavier
than  water,  the  instrument  is  loaded  until  it  sinks,  when  in  distilled
water,  nearly  to  the  top  of  the  stem,  which  is  the  zero  of  the  scale.  It
is  then  placed  in  a  solution  of  fifteen  parts  of  salt  in  eighty-five  parts  of
water,  and  the  place  to  which  it  sinks  marked  15°,  and  the  scale  pro-
perly divided  off  into  fifteen  equal  divisions  or  degrees,  and  as  many
more  degrees  added  as  the  length  of  the  stem  will  admit  of.

Other  means  are  sometimes  employed.  Thus,  a  bottle  which  will  hold
exactly  a  thousand  grains  of  water,  at  60°,  will  give  the  specific  gravity
of  any  liquid  which  it  will  hold,  by  the  weight  in  grains  of  that  quantity  of
the  liquid.  Such  bottles,  made  very  accurately,  can  be  had  in  the  shops.
Or  an  ordinary  vial  may  be  employed,  and  the  weight  of  the  liquid
examined,  being  divided  by  the  weight  of  the  water,  will  give  its
specific  gravity.

The  centesimal  alcoholmeter  of  Gay  Lussac  will  indicate  the  percent-
age of  absolute  alcohol  in  any  mixture  of  pure  spirit  and  water.

There  are  several  other  hydrometers  in  use,  as  Fahrenheit's,  Nichol-
son's, which  is  also  applicable  for  taking  the  specific  gravities  of  solid
substances,  Carders',  for  liquids  lighter  than  water,  Twaddle's,  Zanetti's,
Sike's,  and  various  others.  Also  hydrometers  for  determining  the  den-
sity of  syrups  called  Saccharometers;  the  purity  of  oil,  called  Elaeome-
lers;  the  density  of  urine,  called  Urinometers,  and  for  ascertaining  the
quality  of  milk,  called  Galactometers.


Pulverization  of  Medicines.  987

To  obtain  the  specific  gravity  of  a  solid,  it  must  be  first  weighed  in
air  and  then  in  water,  and  the  difference  between  the  two  divided  into
the  former  weight.  If  the  body  be  lighter  than  water,  after  first  weigh-
ing it  in  the  air,  weigh  it  again  in  air  and  water,  in  connection  with  a
heavier  body,  which  last  has  been  previously  weighed  in  air  and  in
water.  The  weight  of  the  lighter  body  in  the  air  should  be  divided  by
the  excess  of  the  difference  between  the  weights  in  air  and  water  of  the
two  conjoined,  over  that  of  the  weights  in  air  and  water  of  the  heavier
body  alone.  If  the  body  be  soluble  in  water,  its  relative  weight  to  that
of  some  other  liquid  of  known  specific  gravity  should  be  ascertained  in
the  manner  above  directed,  and  its  weight  multiplied  by  the  specific
gravity  of  the  liquid.

PULVERIZATION OF MEDICINES.

In  order  to  reduce  medicinal  agents  to  a  state  of  minute  division,  or
to  more  readily  extract  their  virtues,  various  processes  are  employed,  as
slicing,  bruising,  rasping,  filing,  trituration,  grinding,  sifting,  levigation,
and  elutriation.  The  most  important  drugs  are,  however,  purchased
already  pulverized,  thus  saving  the  apothecary  considerable  time  and
labor;  yet  as  much  fraud  is  perpetrated  in  this  department  of  medicinal
preparations,  too  much  care  cannot  be  observed  that  they  are  obtained
from  honest  individuals.  As  it  is  often  necessary,  however,  to  pulverize
small  quantities  of  medicines  not  usually  kept  in  the  form  of  powder,
the  apothecary  should  be  provided  with  iron,  brass,  and  Wedgewood
mortars,  also  of  glass  and  marble,  several  sieves  of  various  degrees  of
fineness,  a  hand-mill,  cutting-knives,  rasp,  and  a  pair  of  pruning-shears.

Pulverization  is,  under  the  above-named  circumstances,  usually  per-
formed in  an  iron  or  brass  mortar,  with  the  pestle  suspended  on  a  spring
so  as  to  assist  in  elevating  it;  and  to  prevent  loss,  the  mortar  is  covered
with  a  piece  of  leather,  firmly  attached  to  its  outer  edge,  and  through
the  center  of  which  the  pestle  passes,  having  the  leather  fastened  to  it
at  that  place.  The  operator  should  be  careful  not  to  introduce  too  great
a  quantity  of  the  article  at  a  time,  and  should  also  guard  himself  against
the  powder  or  vapor  of  acrid  substances,  by  covering  his  mouth  and
nostrils  with  a  wet  cloth,  or  otherwise.  After  contusion  has  been  carried
on  for  some  time,  the  finer  particles  should  be  separated  by  the  sieve,
while  the  coarser  particles  are  to  be  returned  to  the  mortar  for  further
bruising,  and  this  course  must  be  pursued  alternately  from  time  to  time,
until  complete  pulverization  is  effected.

For  the  coarse  division  of  drugs,  the  hand-mill  may  be  employed ;
Swift's  drug-mill  is  probably  the  best  of  the  kind ;  and  in  using  it  for
fibrous  roots  or  barks,  as  elm  bark  or  sarsaparilla,  they  should  be  sliced
transversely,  in  short  sections.

Trituration  is  most  generally  applied  to  friable  and  other  substances,
where  it  is  desirable  to  bring  them  to  a  uniform  state  of  division,  and  13


988  Pharmact.

accomplished  by  a  circular  motion  being  given  to  the  pestle,  accompa-
nied with  more  or  less  pressure,  the  circular  movement  being  so  made
as  to  bring  the  pestle  alternately  in  contact  with  all  portions  of  the  sur-
face of  the  mortar.  For  this  purpose,  the  glass  or  Wedgewood  mortar
is  usually  selected.

Levigation  is  the  same  as  trituration  in  its  principles,  the  difference
consisting  in  its  being  effected  between  the  flat  surfaces  of  a  slab  and
muller,  which  are  usually  made  of  glass,  porphyry,  marble,  or  Wedge-
wood  ware;  it  divides  the  particles  of  a  substance  more  uniformly,  than
the  trituration  carried  on  between  the  curved  surfaces  of  a  mortar  and
pestle.  The  powder  is  generally  brought  into  a  pasty  consistence  by
means  of  water,  alcohol,  or  some  other  fluid  in  which  it  is  insoluble.

Elutriution  consists  in  agitating  a  powder  obtained  either  by  tritura-
tion or  levigation,  in  a  large  quantity  of  water,  allowing  the  coarser  par-
ticles to  subside,  and  pouring  off  the  supernatant  fluid,  holding  the  finer
particles  in  suspension,  that  they  may  settle  separately.  The  pasty
thick  mass,  which  is  left  when  the  clear  liquid  is  decanted,  is  then  put
into  a  funnel,  and  dropped  in  small  portions  on  a  chalkstone  so  as  to
form  small  conical  masses.

In  all  cases,  in  order  to  facilitate  the  operation  of  pulverization,  all
parts  of  vegetables  must  be  thoroughly  dried,  especially  those  contain-
ing volatile  principles,  and  resins,  gums,  and  gum-resins  must  be  pow-
dered in  cold  frosty  weather;  tragacanth  and  nux  vomica  must  be  dried
in  a  stove  and  powdered  while  hot.  The  efflorescent  salts  may  be
obtained  in  fine  powder,  by  exsiccation ;  and  those  which  are  insoluble
in  alcohol,  may  be  precipitated  from  their  aqueous  solutions,  in  an  impal-
pable powder,  by  this  liquid.  Insoluble  substances  are  best  reduced  to
powder  by  levigation.  Squill  and  colocynth  are  best  powdered  in  a  dry
atmosphere,  after  being  thoroughly  dried  by  a  stove-heat.  Cloves,  cap-
sicum pods,  cantharides,  and  the  aromatic  seeds  may  be  ground  in  a
hand-mill,  and  afterward  triturated.  Fibrous  roots  should  always  be  cut
into  transverse  slices  previous  to  powdering.  Magnesia,  white  lead,  and
agaric  may  be  reduced  to  powder  by  gently  rubbing  through  a  fine
wire-sieve;  or  agaric  may  be  beaten  into  a  paste  with  water,  then  dried
and  triturated.  Some  agents  require  the  aid  of  an  intermedium  before
they  can  be  reduced  to  powder;  thus,  camphor  and  the  hard  compound
extract  of  colocynth  require  the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  alcohol ;
vanilla,  gold-leaf,  mace,  and  oily  aromatic  substances  require  the  addi-
tion of  sugar  before  they  can  be  powdered ;  phosphorus  may  be  pow-
dered by  means  of  lime-water  and  heat,  and  the  mixture  is  to  be  stirred  up
till  it  cools.  Some  articles  are  prepared  for  pharmaceutical  purposes  by
filing  and  rasping,  as  horn,  ivory,  nux  vomica,  iron,  etc. ;  some  by  turn-
ing in  a  lathe,  as  quassia,  guaiacum-wood,  iron-wood,  etc. ;  some  by
cutting  with  large  shears  or  a  cutting  instrument,  as  herbs,  some  roots,
stalks,  etc. ;  and  tin  or  zinc  are  granulated  by  melting  them  and  pouring


Separation  of  Mixed  Substances.  939

them  into  a  mortar,  heated  a  little  above  their  melting  point,  and  agitat-
ing them  rapidly  as  they  cool.  In  all  pharmaceutical  preparations,  the
inert  portions  of  the  substances  entering  into  them  should  be  rejected,
as  the  dead  epidermis  of  various  barks,  inert  central  woody  portions  of
various  roots  and  stems,  etc.


SEPARATION  OF  MIXED  SUBSTANCES.

Solids  are  separated  from  liquids  in  which  they  are  insoluble,  or  in
which  they  are  not  acted  upon  chemically,  by  being  allowed  to  subside,
and  then  carefully  pouring  off  or  decanting  the  supernatant  liquid, — or  a
syphon  may  be  used  to  drain  it  off,  or  it  may  be  filtered.  Decanting  or
precipitating  jars  are  larger  at  the  bottom  than  at  the  top,  and  are  furn-
ished with  a  lip  for  pouring ;  the  process  of  decantation  may  be  facili-
tated by  holding  a  glass  rod  in  a  slightly  inclined  vertical  position,  one
end  of  which  is  placed  in  the  receiving  vessel ;  the  lip  of  the  decanting
jar  is  brought  nearly  or  quite  in  contact  with  the  upper  part  of  this  rod
and  the  liquid  poured  upon  it.  The  glass  rod  attracts  and  gives  a  direc-
tion to  the  current,  and  prevents  any  of  the  fluid  from  running  down  the
sides  of  the  vessel.  If  the  circumference  of  the  vessel  be  so  large  as  to
render  it  impossible  to  pour  with  the  guiding  rod,  which  is  very  apt  to  be
the  case  if  its  sides  be  perpendicular,  with  no  lip  present,  and  the  fluid
contained  nearly  filling  it, — a  little  grease  rubbed  over  the  part  of  the
vessel  at  which  it  is  designed  for  the  liquid  to  flow,  will  by  preventing
any  adhesion  of  it  to  the  surface  of  the  vessel  at  that  point,  cause  it  to
flow  in  a  more  cylindrical  stream,  and  with  less  liability  of  overrunning
the  sides  of  the  vessel.

Cases,  however,  occur  where,  from  the  character  of  the  fluid,  the
shape  or  size  of  the  vessel  containing  it,  or  from  the  disturbance  occa-
sioned to  the  precipitate  upon  motion,  decantation  is  difficult  or  impos-
sible ;  in  such  cases  the  syphon  will  effect  the  separation.  The  syphon
is  a  bent  tube  somewhat  resembling  the  letter  U,  having  one  leg  shorter
than  the  other.  By  filling  it  with  fluid,  and  placing  the  short  leg  into
the  fluid  to  be  drawn  off,  a  current  is  established  toward  the  longer  limb,
owing  to  the  greater  weight  of  its  contents,  and  all  the  fluid  may  be
removed  as  long  as  the  short  limb  is  kept  below  its  surface.

Pipettes  are  instruments  used  for  removing  small  quantities  of  liquids
from  the  surface  of  precipitates  or  from  places  from  which  it  would  be
difficult  otherwise  to  remove  them.  A  pipette  is  a  slender  glass  tube
with  one  end  drawn  to  a  very  small  point  and  capillary  orifice,  and  at  an
inch  or  so  from  which  a  bulb  is  blown.  The  instrument  may  be  straight,
or  it  may  be  bent  above  the  bulb  at  an  oblique  angle.  To  remove  the
liquid  the  small  point  of  the  instrument  is  carefully  placed  in  contact
with  it,  while  with  the  mouth,  or  which  is  better,  by  means  of  a  syringe
attached  to  the  upper  part  of the  instrument,  suction  is  made  and


990  Pharmacy.

continued  until  the  bulb  is  filled — this  is  then  removed,  and  the  process  is
to  be  continued  until  all  the  liquid  has  been  removed.

When  it  is  desired  to  separate  liquids  which  are  immiscible  with  each
other,  as  oils  and  water,  ether  and  water,  etc.,  separating  funnels  or
separators  are  employed,  of  which  there  are  three  or  four  varieties.

Filtration  is  the  pouring  a  mixture  on  a  porous  surface,  called  a  filter
or  strainer,  through  which  the  fluid  only  can  pass,  and  which  separates
the  solid  from  the  fluid,  presenting  the  latter  in  a  clear  form.  Filters  are
generally  made  of  unsized  paper,  cotton,  linen,  woolen  cloth,  charcoal,
glass  and  sand.  Tinctures  are  usually  filtered  through  paper ;  syrups
through  flannel ;  acids  through  siliceous  sand ;  oils,  syrups,  and  oxymels
through  coarse  paper,  or  muslin ;  melted  fats,  resins  or  wax,  and  plasters
through  muslin,  hair  cloth,  or  wire  gauze.  Liquids  which  are  affected
by  exposure  to  the  atmosphere,  or  which  evaporate  readily  should  have
the  filter  in  which  they  are  placed  covered  with  a  sheet  of  tin  foil  or
plate  of  glass  luted,  with  a  small  hole  in  the  cover,  or  a  small  tube  may
be  placed  within  and  against  the  side  of  the  funnel,  extending  nearly  to
the  top,  so  as  to  form  a  communication  between  the  atmosphere  of  the
receptacle  and  that  of  the  funnel.

Expression  is  usually  accomplished  by  screw-presses,  for  the  purpose
of  separating  the  last  portions  of  tinctures,  infusions,  etc.,  from  the
dregs.  Fresh  plants  require  to  be  well  beaten,  before  being  pressed,
water  being  added  to  those  which  are  hard  and  dry.  Succulent  fruits
may  be  placed  in  strong  flannel  bags,  filling  about  two-thirds,  and  the
juices  expressed.  Seeds  containing  oil  are  to  be  first  bruised,  put  in
strong  bags,  and  then  subjected  to  strong,  sudden  pressure.  Cylinders
of  strong  sheet  tin,  having  the  sides  pierced  with  small  holes,  are  usually
employed  to  contain  the  substance  to  be  pressed  ;  a  block  of  wood  which
fits  the  cylinder,  like  a  piston,  being  placed  upon  the  substance,  and
gradually  brought  to  bear  upon  it,  by  means  of  the  screw-press.  The
liquid  flows  through  the  small  holes,  and  is  received  into  a  tray  of  tin
placed  below  on  the  lower  platform  of  the  press,  and  from  which  it  is
passed  into  other  vessels.

Clarification  of  liquids  may  nearly  always  be  accomplished,  by  beat-
ing the  white  of  an  egg  with  water,  adding  it  to  the  liquid,  and  then
coagulating  with  a  gentle  heat.  Expressed  oils  are  clarified  from  muci-
lage by  boiling  them  with  water.  The  expressed  juices  of  many  plants
may  be  clarified  by  the  vegetable  acids.


FLUID  PREPARATIONS.

The  active  principles  of  vegetables  are  obtained  by  infusion,  macera-
tion, digestion,  decoction,  lixiviation,  or  by  displacement.

Infusion  is  the  subjecting  a  substance  containing  soluble  principles,  to
the  action  of  some  menstruum,  as  alcohol,  etc.,  but  most  usually  water.


Fluid Preparations.  091

Hot  infusions  are  made  by  pouring  boiling  water  on  tbe  substance,  cover-
ing it,  and  allowing  it  to  remain  till  cold.  Cold  infusions  are  made  with
cold  water,  and  require  more  or  less  time  to  attain  their  full  strength,
according  to  the  ready  solubility  of  the  active  principle.  When  liquids
are  allowed  to  act  upon  medicines  for  some  time,  at  a  temperature  rang-
ing from  60°  to  90°,  it  is  termed  maceration;  if  the  temperature  be
higher,  but  below  the  boiling  point  of  the  liquid,  it  is  termed  digestion.
Decoction  is,  when  the  article  has  been  boiled  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter
time,  according  to  the  readiness  with  which  its  virtues  are  extracted.
The  employment  of  either  of  these  processes  depends  entirely  upon  the
character  of  the  article  to  be  extracted  ;  thus,  many  plants  are  injured
by  long  boiling,  others  require  it — some  yield  their  properties  to  cold,
others  to  hot  water ;  and  volatile  principles  are  easily  dissipated  by
boiling.

Lixiviation  is  a  process  used  to  separate  a  soluble  from  a  porous  insol-
uble body  ;  as  for  instance,  the  procuring  lye,  by  lixiviating  wood  ashes.
The  method  of  displacement,  or  percolation,  is  an  improvement  upon  this
process.  It  consists  in  reducing  the  article  to  be  acted  upon  to  a  proper
degree  of  fineness,  then  soaking  ic  for  a  few  hours  with  a  sufficiency  of  the
spirit  to  make  it  into  a  stiff  pulp  ;  it  is  then  to  be  packed  in  a  cylinder
with  the  requisite  degree  of  pressure,  which  can  only  be  learned  from
experience,  and  the  alcohol  or  spirit  poured  over  it.  The  cylinder  may
be  made  of  tin,  twelve  inches  in  length,  two  and  a  half  inches  in  diame-
ter, or  fourteen  by  four,  or  seventeen  by  six  ;  the  lower  part  of  this
cylinder  is  made  funnel-fashion,  to  the  base  of  which  a  metallic  plate
pierced  with  holes  is  accurately  fitted,  and  which,  when  in  operation,
should  have  a  thin  stratum  of  carded  cotton  laid  over  it,  previous  to
placing  in  the  powder.

The  solution  which  first  passes  through  is  always  in  a  state  of  high  con-
centration, and  should  be  set  aside.  The  others  are  weaker,  and  may
be  evaporated  to  the  proper  strength,  or  mixed  with  the  first  portion,  as
required.  The  United  States  Pharmacopoeia  gives  the  following  direc-
tions for  this  process  :

"  The  kind  of  filtration  commonly  designated  as  the  Process  of  Dis-
placement, which  is  employed  in  many  of  the  processes  of  this  Pharma-
copoeia, is  to  be  effected  in  the  following  manner,  unless  otherwise
specially  directed :  A  hollow  cylindrical  instrument,  called  a  percolator,
is  to  be  used,  somewhat  conical  toward  the  inferior  extremity,  having  a
funnel-shaped  termination,  so  as  to  admit  of  being  inserted  into  the
mouth  of  a  bottle,  and  provided  internally,  near  the  lower  end,  with  a
transverse  partition  or  diaphragm,  pierced  with  numerous  minute  holes,
or,  in  the  absence  of  such  a  partition,  obstructed  with  some  insoluble
inert  substance,  in  such  a  manner  that  a  liquid  poured  into  it  may  per-
colate slowly.  The  substance  to  be  acted  upon  having  been  reduced  to
a  coarse  powder and  mixed  with  enough  of  the  menstruum  to  moisten


992  Pharmacy.

it  thoroughly,  is,  after  a  maceration  of  some  hours,  to  be  introduced
into  the  instrument,  and  slightly  compressed  upon  the  diaphragm.  Any
portion  of  the  macerating  liquid  which  may  not  have  been  absorbed  by
the  powder,  is  afterward  to  be  poured  upon  the  mass  in  the  instrument,
and  allowed  to  percolate.  Sufficient  of  the  menstruum  is  then  to  be
gradually  added  to  drive  before  it,  or  displace  the  liquid  contained  in  the
mass  ;  the  portion  introduced  is  in  like  manner  to  be  displaced  by  another
portion  ;  and  so  on  till  the  required  quantity  of  filtered  liquor  is  ob-
tained. If  the  liquor  which  first  passes  should  be  turbid,  it  is  to  be
again  introduced  into  the  instrument.  Care  must  be  taken  that  the
powder  be  not,  on  the  one  hand,  too  coarse  or  loosely  pressed,  lest  it
should  allow  the  liquid  to  pass  too  quickly,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  too
fine  or  compact,  lest  it  should  offer  an  unnecessary  resistance.  Should
the  liquor  flow  too  rapidly,  it  is  to  be  returned  to  the  instrument,  which
is  then  to  be  closed  beneath  for  a  time,  in  order  that  the  finer  parts  of
the  powder  may  subside,  and  thus  cause  a  slower  percolation."

(For  further  and  more  detailed  accounts  of  the  various  manipulations
required  in  Pharmacy,  the  reader  is  referred  to  "  Mohr  and  Redwood's
Practical  Pharmacy,  by  Wm.  Procter,  Jr.,  a  very  valuable  work  which
should  be  in  the  possession  of  every  physician  and  druggist  in  the
country.)


DISPENSING  OF  MEDICINES.

The  dispensing  of  medicines  from  the  counter,  in  which  they  are
extemporaneously  combined  and  prepared  in  divers  modes,  constitutes  a
major  portion  of  the  apothecary's  duties  ;  and  to  perform  it  correctly,
neatly  and  expeditiously,  requires  a  thorough  knowledge  of  his  profes-
sion, united  with  a  quick  perception,  accurate  judgment,  physical  agility,
and  an  expertness  at  manipulating.  In  connection  with  these,  cleanli-
ness and  urbanity  are  indispensable  requisites.  The  apothecary  who
attends  to  the  dispensing  of  medicines  should  never  be  found  doing  so
in  his  shirt-sleeves;  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  excuse  for  it,  and  no  matter
how  warm  the  weather  may  be,  a  thin  light  coat  should  always  be
worn.  Some  apothecaries  I  have  seen  who  lick  the  mouths  of  their
bottles,  after  having  poured  the  required  quantities  of  fluid  from  them,
or  who,  in  helping  themselves  to  syrups  or  other  preparations  kept  in
bottles,  apply  the  mouth  of  the  bottle  to  their  own  mouth,  instead  of
pouring  it  into  some  proper  vessel  from  which  they  could  drink  it;  these
are  very  disgusting  habits,  of  which  no  properly  bred  person  would  be
guilty,  and  which  alone  should  be  sufficient  cause  for  a  withdrawal  of  all
public  patronage.  And  if  these  are  valid  reasons  for  bestowing  custom
upon  some  more  cleanly  dispenser  of  medicines,  what  can  be  said  of
those  individuals  who  scratch  their  heads,  and  blow  their  noses  with
their  fingers,  not  only  while  in  the  act  of  preparing  medicines,  but  even


Dispensing  of  Medicines.  993

in  sight  of  their  patrons  ?  A  man  of  coarse  mind,  possessing  none  of
the  polish  of  refinement,  and  having  no  regard  or  care  for  the  views  or
sentiments  of  others  relative  to  the  above  points,  is  no  more  fit  to  dispense
medicines  than  the  most  ignorant  boor.  Medicines  are,  in  general,  suf-
ficiently repulsive,  without  having  extra-aversion  added  to  them  through
disgusting  and  uncleanly  habits,  and  the  apothecary  should  so  observe
and  regulate  his  actions  as  to  win  the  confidence  of  the  most  fastidious
individuals.  A  neat,  cleanly  and  orderly  store,  a  polite,  attentive,  and
cleanly  apothecary  or  clerk,  devoid  of  all  offensive  habits  whatever,
together  with  accuracy,  neatness  and  dispatch  in  filling  prescriptions,
will  always  command  the  confidence  and  patronage  of  physicians,  as
well  as  patients.

In  Eclectic  practice,  decoctions  and  infusions  are  seldom  ordered  in
prescriptions;  but  where  they  do  occur,  the  infusion  mug  of  Mr.  Alsop
of  London,  will  be  found  one  of  the  best  instruments  for  facilitating  the
process.  If  an  infusion  or  decoction  be  strained  while  hot,  and  bottles
heated  previously  in  order  to  prevent  their  cracking,  be  filled  with  it,  it
may  be  kept  for  some  months,  even  in  hot  weather,  provided  the  bottles
be  so  stopped  with  accurately  ground  stoppers,  as  to  have  the  stopper
displace  its  own  bulk  of  the  liquid.  The  hotter  the  liquid,  and  the  freer
from  air-bubbles,  the  longer  will  the  infusion  be  preserved.  Cork
stoppers  may  answer  the  same  purpose,  provided  the  orifice  in  the  neck
of  the  bottle  be  instantly  closed,  and  the  cork  covered  with  sealing  wax.

Aromatic  waters  may  be  made  extemporaneously,  by  rubbing  together
two  drops  of  any  essential  oil  with  five  or  six  grains  of  carbonate  of
magnesia  for  every  fluidounce  of  water,  adding  the  water  gradually
while  rubbing,  and  then  filtering.  Water  may  likewise  be  saturated
with  camphor,  by  triturating  the  gum  with  carbonate  of  magnesia  first,
and  then  gradually  adding  the  water.  The  oils,  solid  fats,  and  gum-
resins  triturated  with  camphor,  render  it  miscible  with  water;  one-fifth
of  gum-myrrh  will  render  a  large  proportion  of  the  camphor  miscible
wish  water.  Camphor  softens  the  gum-resins.  In  the  preparation  of
emulsions,  the  gum-resins  should  be  triturated  until  all  the  particles  are
softened,  and  then  strained.  Ether  becomes  more  soluble  in  water  by
trituration  with  spermaceti,  separating  the  excess  of  spermaceti  by  filtra-
tion. Elaterium  may  be  thoroughly  incorporated  with  other  articles,  by
rubbing  it  at  first  with  a  little  alcohol,  and  then  with  sugar  or  syrup.  A
little  olive  oil  added  to  a  few  drops  of  croton  oil,  ordered  in  a  mixture,
will  render  the  mixture  more  permanent.

All  vessels  used  by  the  apothecary  should  be  cleansed  immediately
after  using  them,  wiping  them  perfectly  dry.  Fatty  substances  and
resins  may  be  removed  by  pearlashes  or  other  alkali,  or  alcohol;  prus-
siate  of  iron  by  pearlash  ;  metallic  substances  by  nitric  or  muriatic  acids;
the  odor  of  essential  oils,  musk,  etc.,  may  be  removed  by  bruised  peach-
kernels,  or  peach-leaves,  or  other  articles  containing  hydrocyanic  acid —
63


994  Pharmacy.

in  all  cases  having  first  removed  fats,  if  present,  by  some  alkaline  solu-
tion, and  resins  by  alcohol.  The  dispensing  scales  should  be  kept
constantly  clean,  and  in  some  place  not  exposed  to  the  dust,  as  for
instance,  in  a  glass  case,  and  they  should  be  frequently  examined  to
ascertain  whether  they  continue  properly  adjusted.  Scales  adjusted  to
weighing  grains  and  parts  of  an  ounce,  are  easily  rendered  inaccurate
by  being  placed  in  situations  where  they  are  exposed  to  much  jarring,
or  frequent  unnecessary  handling;  the  apothecary  will  do  well  to  observe
this  statement,  and  act  in  accordance  with  it.

In  some  parts  of  this  country,  it  is  not  uncommon  for  the  dispensing
office  to  contain  one  or  more  idlers  or  loungers,  during  a  portion  of  every
day,  who,  from  their  continual  staring  at  lady-customers,  as  well  as  their
tobacco-spitting  and  smoking,  drive  the  respectable  portion  of  patrons  to
other  shops  ;  these  are  more  generally  the  associates  of  the  assistants
or  clerks,  who,  without  intending  offense  frequently  offend  very  seri-
ously. A  proper  course  should  be  adoped  in  relation  to  this  class  of
visitors.


COMPOSITION  OF  VEGETABLES,  AND  THEIR  PROXIMATE
PRINCIPLES  AND  PROGRESS  IN  PHARMACY.

BY W. S. MEERELL, A. SI.

The  Vegetable  Kingdom  is  the  great  source  from  which  all  animal
life  derives  its  nutriment  in  health,  and  for  the  most  part  its  medicine
in  disease.  All  vegetable  matter  is  composed  of  a  very  few  elementary
substances — carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen,  constitute  nineteen-
twentieths  of  all  the  innumerable  variety  of  the  vegetable  world.  The
small  quantity  of  silex,  potassa,  soda,  lime,  iron,  etc.,  which  compose
the  ashes  after  combustion,  constitute  the  rest.  But  these  few  primary
principles  enter  into  a  great  variety  of  definite  combinations,  which
form  distinct  organized  substances,  which  we  term  proximate  principles.
These,  although  composed  of  the  same  primary  elements,  yet,  in  conse-
quence of  the  different  proportions  of  them,  and  the  different  arrange-
ments of  their  particles,  possess  properties  altogether  peculiar  and
different  from  each  other.

Of  these  proximate  principles  of  vegetable  matter,  the  most  abundant
is  the  Lignin,  or  Woody  Fiber,  which  constitutes  the  framework,  and,  as  it
were,  the  bones  of  all  vegetation.  It  is  insoluble  in  all  ordinary  menstrua,
and  is  that  portion  of  a  plant  which  is  left  after  having  been  fully  digested
in  water,  alcohol,  ether,  or  dilute  acids.  It  is,  therefore,  considered
inert,  and  as  possessing  neither  nutritive,  nor  medicinal  properties.

Next  in  abundance,  and  first  in  importance  in  the  constituents  of
plants,  are  those  proximate  principles  which  are  capable  of  being  digested
or  changed  by  the  action  of  the  gastric  fluids,  and  which  are  thereby
assimilated  to  the  principles  of  the  animal  organism,  and  thus  nourish


Composition  of  Vegetables.

and  sustain  animal  life.  Such  are  starch,  gum,  mucilage,  sugar,  fixed
oil,  vegetable  albumen,  gluten,  and  a  few  others  analogous  to  these.  All
vegetables  in  which  these  constitute  a  large  proportion  unmixed  with
other  constituents  that  are  deleterious,  are  useful  for  the  food  of  man  and
animals.

But,  beside  these,  there  are  a  great  number  of  other  organized  com-
pounds or  proximate  principles  found  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  which  are
incapable  of  being  so  assimilated,  and,  therefore,  afford  no  nourishment  to
the  animal  tissues,  but  which,  nevertheless,  when  taken  into  the  system,
or  applied  upon  its  surface,  change,  or  in  some  way  affect  the  action  of
the  animal  functions.  Many  of  these,  if  taken  in  considerable  quanti-
ties, derange,  and  even  destroy  the  healthy  action  of  those  functions,
and  are  thus  regarded  as  %)oisons ;  yet,  when  those  functions  are  deranged
by  disease,  they  serve,  when  administered  in  appropriate  doses,  to  arrest
such  morbid  action,  and  to  restore  such  functions  to  their  normal  con-
dition, and  thus  they  become  important  medicines.  It  is  the  study  of  the
nature  of  these  substances,  and  their  proper  application  to  the  preservation
or  restoration  of  health,  that  constitutes  the  high  calling  of  the  physician  ;
and  the  proper  mode  of  preparing  and  dispensing  them,  constitutes  the
scarcely  less  important  avocation  of  the  pharmaceutist  and  the  apothe-
cary.

In  their  earlier  application  to  the  healing  art,  those  vegetables  which
contained  medicinal  properties  were  either  administered  in  substance,  in
the  form  of  powder,  in  which  case  all  the  woody  fiber  and  other  inert
elements  were  thrown  together  into  the  stomach,  often  in  large  and
repulsive  doses,  or  else  their  more  soluble  principles  were  extracted  by
infusion  or  decoction,  and  given  in  copious  and  nauseating  draughts.

The  first  of  these  forms  is  now  seldom  eligible,  except  for  administer-
ing those  vegetable  products  which  nature  herself  has  presented  in  a
high  degree  of  concentration,  or  of  those  whose  medicinal  principles  are
so  very  active,  that  the  bulk  thus  required  is  not  objectionable  ;  and  the
latter  may  now  be  dispensed  with,  except  in  cases  where  it  is  desirable
to  present  the  medicine  to  the  stomach  very  much  diluted,  or  where  the
indications  to  be  fulfilled  make  it  expedient  to  accompany  it  with  large
draughts  of  hot  or  tepid  fluids.

It  was  one  step  in  progress,  from  these  forms,  to  dissolve  out  the
medicinal  principles  of  plants  or  roots  by  Wine  or  Spirits,  and  present
them  in  the  form  of  medicinal  tinctures.  This  was,  in  many  cases,  an
improvement  on  the  watery  infusion  or  decoction,  because  such  tincture
could  be  preserved  for  some  time  unchanged,  and  thus  be  kept  ready
prepared  for  immediate  use,  but  chiefly,  because  alcohol  is  an  almost  uni-
versal solvent  of  the  medicinal  proximate  principles,  many  of  which  are
scarcely  soluble  in  aqueous  fluids,  and  are,  therefore,  not  extracted  by  such
menstruums.  But  in  many  cases,  even  this  form  of  dispensing  medicine
is  very  objectionable,  on  account  of  the  large  proportion  of  alcoholic


9dQ  Pharmacy.

stimulus  with  which  the  medicinal  principles  are  thus  combined,  and
which  renders  them  almost  inadmissible  in  diseases  of  an  inflammatory
type.  Of  such  a  character  are  many  of  the  numerous  officinal  tinctures
still  found  in  the  pharmacopoeia  of  the  so-called  regular  practice.  A
few  preparations  of  this  kind  may  be  still  properly  retained  in  the  Eclec-
tic Materia  Medica,  but  it  should  be  only  those  of  the  more  powerful
medicines  of  which  the  dose  is  sufficiently  small,  and  these  should  be,
mostly,  saturated  tinctures,  containing  as  much  of  the  medicinal  principle
of  the  substance  as  the  menstruum  will  hold  in  solution.  (See  Art.
Tinctures.)

Another  improvement  on  the  crude  administration  of  vegetable  medi-
cines, was  the  formation  of  Aqueous  Extracts,  by  dissolving  out  all  the
constituents  of  a  plant  that  are  soluble  in  boiling  water,  and  then  evapo-
rating off  the  liquid  until  the  exhausted  matter  was  of  a  suitable  con-
sistence to  be  formed  into  pills.  By  this  means,  the  bulky  and  inert
lignin  is  dispensed  with,  and  the  medicinal  agents  presented  in  a  form
and  bulk  somewhat  less  objectionable.  This  is  still  an  eligible  form  of
presenting  many  valuable  medicines.  (See  Art.  Extracts.)  But  in  most
cases,  it  is  liable  to  several  objections,  as,  when  the  active  principle  is  of
a  resinous  or  oleaginous  character,  it  is  very  imperfectly  soluble  in  water,
and,  therefore,  the  aqueous  extracts  of  vegetables  containing  such  prin-
ciples are  comparatively  worthless,  from  the  fact  that  the  real  active
agent  is  still  left  behind  in  the  refuse;  again,  if  the  medicinal  principle
is  volatile,  as  it  is  in  many  instances,  then  it  is  dissipated  and  lost  in  the
process.  In  other  cases  the  active  principle  is  of  so  delicate  a  nature  as
to  be  chemically  decomposed  and  destroyed  by  the  continuous  action  of
the  hot  water  necessary  to  the  process.  This  is  the  case  with  the  arum,
sarsaparilla,  stillingia,  and  many  other  most  valuable  remedies.  More-
over, in  this  process,  the  starch,  gum,  mucilage,  coloring  matter,  and
all  the  other  non-medicinal  principles  are  extracted,  as  well  as  the  medi-
cinal, and  as  we  do  not  know  what  proportion  the  latter  bear  to  the
former,  in  different  specimens  of  the  plant,  the  extract  may  appear  well,
and  yet  be  almost  inert.

The  next  great  step,  therefore,  in  the  progress  of  pharmacy  was  to
unite  the  principles  of  these  two  improvements,  and  form  the  Alcoholic
Extracts.  Alcohol,  as  before  observed,  is  an  almost  universal  solvent
of  those  proximate  principles  of  vegetables  on  which  their  medical  vir-
tues depend.  I  know  of  no  principle  of  such  activity  as  to  deserve
the  name  of  medical,  which,  in  its  native  combination,  is  not  dissolved
by  this  agent,  either  pure,  or  when  diluted  to  the  strength  of  proof
spirit.  The  alkaloids,  resins,  essential  and  fixed  oils,  acids,  salts,  and
neutral  principles,  all,  as  they  are  found  in  their  native  combinations,  are
soluble  in  these  menstrua;  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  non-medicinal
principles,  as  starch  and  gum,  which,  next  to  the  lignin,  are  the  most
abundant elements in most vegetables,  are quite insoluble  in  pure


Composition  of  Vegetables.  997

alcohol,  and  but  partially  soluble  in  dilute.  By  obtaining,  therefore,  an
alcoholic  or  hydro-alcoholic  tincture,  either  by  digestion  or  displacement,
and  then  distilling  off  the  alcohol  and  carefully  reducing  the  residue  to
a  pilular  consistence,  an  extract  is  obtained  which,  in  the  first  place,
fully  contains  all  the  medicinal  principles  of  the  substance  in  their  native
proportions,  and,  in  the  second  place,  is  diluted  by  but  a  small  propor-
tion of  those  non-medicinal  substances  which  abound  in  the  watery  pre-
parations. These  extracts,  moreover,  will  generally  keep  unchanged,
while  those  obtained  by  water,  and  especially  the  inspissated  juices,
which  are  the  best  preparations  of  that  class,  are  liable  to  mold,  or
become  otherwise  decomposed.

Another  important  form  of  the  alcoholic  extract,  and  one  that  is  justly
becoming  very  popular,  is  that  in  which  the  concentration  of  the  tincture
is  not  carried  to  the  pilular  consistence,  but  is  left  in  a  fluid  or  semifluid
state,  and  preserved  from  decomposition  by  the  little  alcohol  in  it,  or  by
the  addition  of  a  sufficient  quantity  of  sugar  or  other  antiseptic.  These
are  called  Fluid  Extracts,  and  will  be  referred  to  again,  when  the  cases
in  which  they  should  be  preferred,  and  their  peculiar  advantages  will  be
noticed. (See  Fluid  Extracts.)

Almost  every  article  of  the  vegetable  Materia  Medica,  might  properly
be  prepared  and  presented  in  the  form  of  alcoholic,  or  hydro-alcoholic
extracts,  either  inspissated  or  fluid ;  for  even  where  the  active  principle
of  a  plant  has  been  fully  isolated,  these  preparations  will  often  be  found
convenient.  Still  they  are  not  perfect  pharmaceutical  preparations,
for  even  alcohol  dissolves  the  sugar,  coloring  matter,  and  other  inert
principles  of  vegetables  with  which  the  real  medicine  is  combined,  and
as  these  are  not  uniform  in  their  proportions,  but  vary  according  to  the
season  of  gathering,  and  other  circumstances,  such  extracts  are  not,
therefore,  definite  and  uniform  in  their  strength,  even  when  made  with
the  greatest  care.  And  a  source  of  still  greater  disappointment,  is  their
ever  varying  quality,  according  to  the  skill  and  honesty  of  those  who
prepare  them,  and  their  strength  is  subject  to  no  convenient  test  but
that  of  actual  demonstration.  Therefore,  when  employed,  those  only
should  be  relied  on,  which  are  made  by  pharmaceutists  of  acknowledged
skill  and  integrity.

But  another  step  has  been  taken:  these  objections  are  obviated,  and
pharmacy  placed  among  the  exact  sciences  of  the  age.  This  consists  in
separating  that  proximate  principle, — that  peculiar  organized  substance
on  which  the  medicinal  virtues  of  a  plant  depends, — from  all  the  other
substances  with  which  it  is  combined,  and  thus  presenting  the  very
medicine  itself,  in  a  pure  isolate  state.

One  great  advantage  of  this  improvement,  is  the  smallness  of  the  bulk
to  which  medicines  are  thus  reduced.  Of  these  preparations,  the
physican  can  carry  in  his  pocket  an  assortment,  which  once  required  a
horse-load,  and  can  administer  in  a  single  pill  or  delicate  powder,  a  dose


998  Pharmacy.

at  which,  in  its  cruder  forms,  the  stomach  revolted.  But  it  has  another
and  even  more  important  advantage  than  this,  and  that  is  the  definite-
ness  with  which  medicines  so  prepared  can  be  apportioned.

In  every  other  form  in  which  vegetable  medicines  can  be  presented,
their  strength,  as  has  been  observed,  is  constantly  subject  to  variation,
but  is  frequently  at  a  loss  whether  to  attribute  his  failure  in  obtaining
the  desired  result,  to  the  inertness  of  the  medicine,  or  to  his  misjudg-
ment  in  selecting  the  proper  agent.  Thus,  for  example,  two  samples  of
Peruvian  Bark,  or  the  ordinary  tinctures  or  extracts  obtained,  may
appear  equally  fair,  and  both  be  unadulterated,  and  yet  one  contain  ten
times  the  medicinal  virtue  of  the  other.  But  with  regard  to  the  proxi-
grain  of  quinia,  knows  just  how  much  of  the  real  medicinal  substance
he  is  administering,  and  it  matters  not  whether  it  required  twenty  or  two
hundred  grains  of  the  bark  to  yield  that  amount, — itself,  is  definite  and
invariably  of  the  same  strength.  In  relation  to  these  principles,  the  only
question  is,  are  they  pure?  And  being  definite  chemical  substances,
their  purity  may  in  most  cases  be  easily  tested.

These  proximate  principles  are  divided  into  several  general  classes,
distinguished  by  their  general  characteristics  and  reactions  with  other
substances.  These  are  the  Acids,  Fixed  Oils,  Essential  Oils,  Resins,
Resinoids,  and  the  Alkaloids,  and  perhaps  a  few  others  that  cannot
properly  be  classed  with  either  of  these.

Every  medical  plant,  as  has  been  before  intimated,  contains  one  or
more  of  these  principles,  on  which  all  its  virtues  as  a  medicine  depends;
and  all  the  skill  of  the  enlightened  pharmaceutist  is  now  called  into
requisition  to  separate  these  from  their  native  combinations,  and  present
them  in  their  purest  and  most  eligible  forms.

Acids  are,  in  general,  readily  recognized  as  those  substances  Avhich
give  a  sensation  of  sourness  to  the  taste ;  but  the  term  is  chemically
applied  to  all  substances  which  redden  vegetable  blues,  are  electro-nega-
tive in  relation  to  other  principles,  and  combine  with  alkalies  to  form
neutral  compounds.  The  acidity  of  certain  fruits,  and  other  parts  of
vegetables  must  ever  have  been  noticed,  but  it  is  of  comparatively
modern  date  that  the  different  vegetable  acids  were  distinguished  from
each  other.  We  now  recognize  the  Malic,  Citric,  Tartaric  and  Oxalic  acids,
as  existing  abundantly  in  fruits,  etc.,  either  pure,  or  combined  with  po-
tassa  in  form  of  bi-salts,  or  those  in  which  the  acid  predominates.  In
genera],  they  are  isolated  from  their  native  combinations  by  saturating
them  with  an  alkali  or  metallic  oxide,  and  in  this  state,  separating  them  by
precipitation  or  crystallization,  and  then  decomposing  such  neutral  com-
pound, and  removing  the  alkaline  or  earthy  base,  by  the  superior  affinity
of  some  stronger  acid,  generally  the  sulphuric.  After  which,  except-
ing the  malic,  they  may  be  further  purified  by  repeated  crystallization.


Composition  of  Vegetables  999

These  acids  are  used,  in  their  uncombined  state,  to  form  coolino-  and
febrifuge  draughts,  also  as  antiscorbutics,  and  in  combination  they  form
valuable  hydragogue  aperients.  Beside  these  four  vegetable  acids,  which
are  so  manifestly  distinguished  by  their  sourness,  there  are  several  other
electro-negative  principles  found  in  certain  vegetables,  as  the  benzoic,
tannic,  gallic,  and  other  acids,  all  possessed  of  peculiar  and  valuable
medical  qualities  ;  and  by  natural  decay  and  destructive  decomposition,
an  almost  indefinite  number  of  similar  organic  substances  are  found,
capable  of  uniting  with  alkaline  bases,  and  forming  an  endless  variety
of  neutral  compounds.  But  few  of  these  have  yet  been  examined,  with
reference  to  their  medicinal  action,  and,  therefore,  with  the  exception  of
the  well-known  article,  vinegar,  which  is  formed  by  the  combination  of
oxygen  with  liquids  that  have  undergone  the  vinous  fermentation,  they
form  no  part  of  the  Materia  Medica.

The  Fixed  Oils  too  were  obtained  and  used  in  medicine  at  an  early
period.  They  are  analogous  to  the  acids  in  being  electro-negative,  and
as  such,  they  combine  with  alkalies,  and  form  compounds  called  Soaps.
They  are  obtained  in  abundance  from  many  seeds  and  fruits  by  simple
grinding  and  expression ;  but  most  of  them,  as  of  the  olive  and  linseed,
possess  feeble  medicinal  powers,  and  are  useful  for  food  and  in  the  arts,
rather  than  as  sanative  agents.  Indeed,  it  is  probable  that  the  medici-
nal virtues  of  most  of  the  expressed  oils  depend,  not  on  the  oil  itself,
but  on  other  peculiar  principles  held  in  solution  by  it,  the  same  as  the
peculiar  flavor  and  medical  qualities  of  different  kinds  of  spirits,  as  rum,
brandy,  gin,  etc.,  depend  not  on  any  singularity  of  the  alcohol  itself,  but
on  certain  volatile  oils  dissolved  in  it.  In  some  cases  at  least,  as  in  that
of  mustard,  the  fixed  oil  may  be  obtained,  by  expression,  bland  and
almost  tasteless,  while  the  more  active  principle  is  left  behind,  and  may
be  afterward  obtained  by  other  means.  A  few  of  the  expressed  oils,
however,  as  those  of  ricinus  and  croton  tiglium,  are  powerful  and  valu-
able articles  of  the  Materia  Medica.

The  Essential  Oils  constitute  another  important  class  of  proximate
medical  principles.  These  differ  from  the  fixed  or  expressed  oils  in
being  volatile  without  decomposition,  and  in  being,  for  the  most  part,
warm  and  pungent  to  the  taste,  and  powerfully  stimulant  in  their  medici-
nal character.  As  the  process  of  separating  them  from  other  substances
is  simple,  many  of  them  were  long  since  discovered  and  prepared.  They
are  mostly  procured  by  the  simple  process  of  distillation ;  the  plant,  or  the
part  of  it  containing  the  oil — usually  in  its  recent  state — is  put  into  a  large
still,  with  a  portion  of  water,  and  by  converting  the  latter  into  steam,  the
volatile  oil  of  the  plant  is  carried  over  in  vapor  with  it,  and  is  condensed
by  passing  through  a  suitable  worm  or  condenser  of  other  form.  The
oil  separates  from  the  water,  for  which  it  has  no  chemical  affinity,  and
either  floats  or  sinks,  according  as  its  specific  gravity  is  greater  or  less
than  the  water,  and  is  thus  easily  separated.


1000  Pharmacy.

In  this  manner  are  obtained  the  oils  of  mint,  sassafras,  cloves,  etc.,
and  with  a  few  exceptions,  all  others  of  a  valuable  character.  Gum
camphor,  so  called,  belongs  to  this  class  of  medicines,  being  only  an
essential  oil  in  a  concrete  or  congealed  state,  at  ordinary  temperature ;
and  several  others,  as  those  of  the  anise  and  the  rose,  assume  this  con-
crete form  when  the  temperature  is  only  moderately  reduced.  Several
medicines  of  this  class  are  used,  and  highly  esteemed,  in  the  Eclectic
practice,  which  are  yet  wholly  unknown  to  the  old  pharmacopoeias,
among  which  are  the  oils  of  Erigeron  Canadense  and  Erechthites
Hieracifolius.

From  these  oils  we  pass,  by  an  easy  transition,  to  another  class  of  the
proximate  principles,  viz. :  the  Resins,  many  of  which  appear  to  be
formed  from  the  volatile  oils  by  the  absorption  of  oxygen,  which  renders
them  fixed  and  concrete.  Thus,  the  purest  Camphene,  or  oil  of  turpen-
tine, by  exposure  to  the  air,  combines  with  its  oxygen,  and  is  gradu-
ally changed  into  a  diminished  quantity  of  common  rosin;  and  almost
all  essential  oils  become  thickened  and  resinous  by  long  standing,  unless
entirely  excluded  from  the  air.

The  pure  resins,  and  many  gums  with  which  they  are  compounded,
were  early  found  and  recognized  as  dried  exudations  from  certain  trees.
Their  distinguishing  characteristics  are  ;  their  fusibility  by  heat,  great
inflammability,  insolubility  in  water,  solubility  in  alcohol  or  essential  oils,
and  their  capability  of  combining  with  alkalies,  forming  saponaceous
compounds.  The  resins  (or  so  called  gums)  of  the  various  species  of
pine,  spruce,  and  larch  are  of  this  character.

The  Gums,  properly  so  called,  are  distinguished  by  the  opposite  char-
acteristics, not  being  fusible  by  heat,  not  readily  inflammable,  not  soluble
in  pure  alcohol,  but  soluble  in  water  forming  a  viscid  fluid,  called  mucr-
lage ;  such  are  the  gums  of  acacia,  prunus,  amygdalus  persica,  etc.
These  are  articles  of  diet  rather  than  medicine,  and  are  used  in  pharmacy
only  as  demulcents  and  vehicles  to  shield  the  action  of  more  active
agents.

There  are,  however,  an  intermediate  class  of  articles  called  Gum-
resins,  partaking  in  part,  of  the  properties  of  each  of  the  above,  and
which  are  active  and  important  articles  of  the  Materia  Medica;  such  are
the  gum  myrrh,  assafetida,  ammoniac,  and  gamboge;  but  of  these,  the
resinous  portion  is  the  medicinal  one,  for  alcohol,  which  dissolves  the
resin  and  leaves  the  true  gum,  holds  in  solution  all  their  medical  virtues.

But  there  is  another  class  of  resinous  substances,  less  abundant  than
those,  which  exude  from  the  trees  that  contain  them,  and  which  possess
medical  virtues  of  a  much  higher  degree.  They  exist  in  roots,  and,  in
some  cases,  other  parts  of  numerous  plants,  but  combined  with  such
large  proportions  of  woody  fiber  and  other  principles,  that  they  can  be
separated  only  by  chemical  agency.  These  possess,  in  general,  the
properties  of  the  common  resins,  viz  •.  fusibility,  inflammability,  solubility


Composition  of  Vegetables.  1001

in  alcohol,  and  not  in  water,  etc.,  but  as  they  are  not  fully  liquifiable  by
heat,  and  differ  somewhat  in  other  respects  from  the  pure  resins,  we
term  them  Resinoids.

Many  of  them  may  be  obtained  by  the  following  simple  process;  form
a  saturated  tincture  of  the  root  or  plant  desired,  which  is  best  done  by
displacement,  or  leaching  alcohol  through  the  ground  material.  From
this  tincture,  distil  or  evaporate  off  the  alcohol,  having  previously  added
plenty  of  water;  the  alcohol,  which  held  the  resin  in  solution,  being  thus
removed,  and  the  resin  not  being  soluble  in  water,  it  is  precipitated,
while  the  other  substances  which  the  alcohol  had  dissolved  out,  as  the
extractive  and  coloring  matter,  beinir  also  soluble  in  water,  are  held  in
solution  by  the  water  and  thus  separated  from  the  resinoid.  The  pre-
cipitate is  then  collected  and  purified  by  frequent  washing,  or  by  being
redissolved  in  alcohol,  and  again  precipitated — and  is  then  dried  and
powdered  for  use.  Thus  may  be  obtained  the  resins  of  podophyllum,
cimicifuga,  leptandra,  etc.

By  this  process  alone,  the  resinoid  is  not  obtained  in  its  chemically
pure  state :  it  probably  still  contains  from  two  to  five  per  cent,  of  color-
ing and  extractive  matter,  which,  however,  does  not  sensibly  affect  its
use  as  a  medicine.  While  a  further  purification  would  not  only  add  to
its  cost,  but  might  even  endanger  its  activity.  Its  complete  purification
must  be  effected  by  redissolving  it  in  alcohol,  digesting  the  solution  with
animal  charcoal,  then  filter,  and  again  precipitate  by  water.

In  some  analyses,  the  resin  has  been  separated  by  boiling  the  sub-
stance in  milk  of  lime,  or  some  other  alkali,  by  which  the  resin  is  sepa-
rated and  rendered  soluble,  and  from  which  solution  it  is  precipitated  by
neutralizing  the  alkali  with  an  acid.  By  this  means  the  resinoid  is
obtained  very  cheaply,  and  very  fair  in  appearance,  but  its  medical  pro-
perty is  nearly  or  quite  destroyed.  It  is,  indeed,  no  longer  the  resinoid,
but  probably  bears  the  same  relation  to  it  that  stearic  acid,  which  has
passed  through  the  same  process,  does  to  stearin,  and  the  precipitate
thus  obtained  from  podophyllum  is  not  podophyllin,  but  podophyl-Zmic
acid.  The  process  is  an  eligible  one  for  scientific  analysis,  for  as  the
stearic  acid  obtained  is  a  correct  indication  of  the  amount  of  stearin  con-
tained in  a  given  quantity  of  fat,  so  would  this  acidified  resin  be  of  the
true  resin  or  resinoid  in  a  given  quantity  of  the  root.  This  was  the
process  pursued  by  Mr.  Wm.  Hodgson  of  Philadelphia,  in  his  analysis
of  podophyllum,  as  published  in  the  United  States'  Dispensatory ;  but
the  process  is  entirely  inapplicable  in  pharmacy,  as  the  product  is  worth-
less. Mr.  Hodgson  did  not  obtain  podophyllin,  but  podophyllinic  acid ;
and  yet  Dr.  J.  Kost,  who  now  professes  to  have  made  and  recommended
many  of  the  resinoids  before  they  were  introduced  at  the  Eclectic  Insti-
tute in  the  summer  of  1848,  not  only  does  not  mention  them  in  his
"Family  Physician,"  published  one  year  previous,  but  in  his  Materia
Medica,  published  in  1849,  gives  the  above  futile  process  for  preparing


1002  Pharmacy.

them,  plainly  showing  that  up  to  that  period,  he  had  never  made  a
genuine  article.

The  introduction  of  these  and  analogous  preparations  into  the  Materia
Medica,  which  is  of  very  recent  date,  constitutes  an  era  in  medical  prac-
tice, especially  in  that  of  the  Eclectic  schools  of  medicine.  The  distin-
guished and  lamented  Prof.  T.  V.  Morrow,  pronounced  the  discovery
of  the  podophyllin  alone,  the  greatest  improvement  in  pharmacy  that
had  been  made  for  the  last  thirty  years.

Until  within  the  present  century,  the  science  of  vegetable  analysis  was
unknown;  and  within  the  last  few  years,  the  researches  of  chemists  in
this  field  had  shown  that  many  vegetables  contained,  among  other  proxi-
mate principles,  those  of  a  resinous  or  resinoid  character;  but,  fur  the
most  part,  such  discoveries  lay  as  dead  and  useless  facts  in  the  records
of  science,  without  being  applied  to  any  practicable  use.  Nor  was  it
even  ascertained,  in  most  cases,  that  such  resins  contained  any  medical
power,  much  less  that  they  Were  the  depositories  of  the  principal,  if  not
the  whole  medical  virtues  of  the  plants  that  contained  them.  To  this
there  were  a  few  exceptions  ;  the  resin  of  jalap  was  known  to  the  pro-
fession, and  used  as  an  active  medicine.  Professor  Tully,  of  New  Haven,
Connecticut,  had  obtained  the  resin  of  cimicifuga,  and  perhaps  of  some
others,  and  recommended  them  to  the  attention  of  his  medical  brethren  ;*
but  it  is  not  known  that  any  other  one  ever  prepared  or  used  it.  Profes-
sor John  King,  the  author  of  the  present  volume,  first  discovered  and  sepa-
rated the  resins  of  the  podophyllum,  cimicifuga,  iris,  and  several  other
roots,  and  used  them  successfully  in  his  own  practice  for  a  series  of
years;  and  as  early  as  July,  1844,  in  the  "New  York  Medical  Philo-
sophical Journal,"  and  again  in  April,  1846,  in  the  "Western  Medical
Reformer,"  he  introduced  and  recommended  them  to  the  Eclectic  Medi-
cal profession,  as  valuable  agents  in  several  forms  of  disease ;  but  these
discoveries  and  recommendations  had  passed  unheeded,  and  were
unapplied,  chiefly,  it  is  presumed,  because  other  practitioners  could  not
devote  the  time  and  skill  necessary  to  their  preparation,  and  because  no
pharmaceutist  had  undertaken  their  manufacture.  But  in  the  summer
of  1848,  the  writer  of  this  article  separated  them,  with  several  others
of  his  own  discovering,  and  having  the  advantage  of  being  engaged  in
the  sale  instead  of  the  administration  of  medicines,  immediately  put  them
up  in  a  neat  and  eligible  form,  and  thus  directly  presented  them  to  the
notice  of  the  profession.

Since  that  time  their  sale  and  use  have  increased  with  an  unexampled
rapidity,  which  shows  how  high  an  estimate  is  placed  on  them.  To  the
Eclectic  branch  of  the  profession  belongs  the  honor  of  first  discovering,
testing  and adopting them. Physicians  of  the Physo-medical  school

*  I  am  not  aware  that  Prof.  Tully  ever  obtained  this  resin,  though  he  mentioned
its  existence  to  me. — J.  K.


Composition  of  Vegetables.  1003

60on  followed  in  the  use  of  them,  and  their  pharmaceutists  in  their  pre-
paration and  sale.  And  at  the  present  time,  hundreds  of  physicians  of
the  old  Allopathic  schools  are  testing  and  adopting  them.

The  names  applied  to  these  resinoids,  by  the  writer  of  this,  on  pre-
sentino-  them  to  the  profession,  have  now  become  generally  adopted,  and
which  are  formed  by  changing  the  termination  of  the  generic  name  of
the  plant  into  in,  after  the  analogy  of  Resm,  or  Rosm;  thus  from  Podo-
phyllum, we  have  Podophyllin  ;  from  Leptandra,  Leptandiin,  etc.

The  most  important  of  these  Resinoids,  when  properly  prepared,  are
dry  and  pulverizable,  and  are  prepared  for  the  profession  in  that  form  ;
but  a  larger  proportion  of  this  class  of  principles  possess  so  much  of  an
oleaginous  character,  or  the  resin  is  so  combined  with  a  fixed  oil,  that
they  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  powdered  state  without  injuring,  if  not
destroying  them.  These  we  denominate  Oleo-resins,  and  they  are  of
all  degrees  of  consistence,  from  the  almost  perfect  fluid  of  the  Ptelein,
to  the  buttery  spissitude  of  the  Xanthoxylin,  and  the  tough,  gummy
compactness  of  the  Cypripedin  and  Asclepidin.  But  they  all  belong  to
the  same  general  class  of  proximate  principles,  and  are  obtained  pre-
they  are  less  popular  and  less  used  than  the  powdered  resinoids,  because
they  cannot  be  so  conveniently  combined  with  other  medicine,  and  are
not  so  easily  administered  as  the  dry.  But  they  possess  all  the  advan-
tages of  great  concentration  of  medical  power,  and  of  perfect  definite-
ness  of  strength,  which  is  the  distinguishing  character  of  the  pure  prox-
imate principles.

There  is  one  class  more  of  these  medical  principles,  which  deserves
our  special  notice,  and  which,  together  with  the  resinoids  just  noticed,
forms  the  acme  of  improvement  in  scientific  pharmacy.  This  is  the
Alkaloids.

The  Resinoids  are  electro-negative  substances  ;  the  Alkaloids,  electro-
positive ;  those  combine  with  alkalies  and  form  saponaceous  compounds, —
these  combine  with  acids  and  form  salts  ; — those  are  mostly  colored  and
opake — these  mostly  white  and  crystalline.  The  great  pioneers  in  this
branch  of  Pharmacy  were  Pelletier  and  Caventou  of  France,  who  per-
fected the  discovery  of  Morphia,  Cinchonia,  and  Quinia,  and  who  were
the  first  to  clearly  define  the  chemical  character  of  these  agents,  in
about  1820.  I  say,  perfected  the  discovery,  for  like  every  great  improve-
ment in  art  or  science,  there  were  previous  discoveries  approximating  to
the  result.

The  Alkaloids  do  not  generally  exist  in  vegetables  in  their  pure  state,
but  in  the  form  of  salts  produced  by  their  combination  with  some  pecu-
liar acid.  Thus,  morphia  is  found  in  opium  combined  with  meconic  acid,
forming  meconate  of  morphia,  and  quinia  exists  in  the  barks  combined
with  kinic  acid,  forming  a  kinate  of  quinia.  These  native  salts  are  in  a
greater  or  less  degree  soluble  in  water ;  but  the  pure  alkaloids  are  very


1004  Pharmact.

sparingly  soluble  in  that  menstruum,  although  soluble  in  hot,  and  most
of  them,  in  cold  alcohol.  But  as  the  processes  of  separating  and  puri-
in  different  works  on  the  subject,  the  student  is  referred  to  them  for  that
instruction.  By  these  and  similar  processes,  those  substances  which
were  once  considered  as  homogeneous,  have  been  analyzed,  and  made
to  yield  those  principles  on  which  their  virtues  depend,  pure  and  iso-
lated. And  those  agents  which  are  provided  for  the  healing  of  our  infir-
mities, are  presented  in  doses,  small,  definite,  and  less  repulsive.

But  while  we  refer  with  pride  to  the  work  which  has  already  been
accomplished,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  field  has,  as  yet,  been  just
entered.  A  vast  expanse  is  yet  to  be  explored.  Not  one-tenth  of  the
articles  of  the  Materia  Medica  have  yet  been  analyzed,  and  in  most  of
these  even,  the  examination  has  been  partial  and  imperfect.  The  physi-
cian, however,  should  not  rest  satisfied,  nor  the  pharmaceutist  stay  his
hand,  until,  as  in  the  mineral,  so  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  every  known
substance  should  be  made  to  yield  both  its  elementary  and  its  proximate
principles,  separate  and  isolated  ;  and  the  action  of  the  latter  on  the
animal  economy,  should  be  tested  and  made  known.


ACETA.

Vinegars.  t

These  are  officinal  liquid  medicines,  formed  of  vinegar,  and  charged
by  maceration  with  different  medicinal  principles.  Many  medicines  con-
tain active  principles  which  are  not  readily  soluble  in  water  or  alcohol,
or  are,  perhaps,  insoluble  in  them,  but  which  are  freely  soluble  in  vine-
gar ;  others  again,  although  soluble  in  water  or  alcohol,  are  not  as  effi-
cient and  energetic  thus  prepared,  as  when  tinctured  in  vinegar  ;  on  this
account,  medicated  vinegars  are  especially  useful  in  many  instances.  The
vinegar  of  commerce  is  very  apt  to  contain  impurities  and  principles
which  lead  to  its  decomposition,  hence,  when  used  as  a  solvent  for  phar-
maceutical purposes,  it  should  always  be  purified  by  distillation.  The
solvent  property  of  vinegar  depends  chiefly  upon  the  acetic  acid  which
it  contains,  and  which  renders  it  an  excellent  menstruum  of  the  organic
alkalies,  which  it  converts  into  acetates,  thereby  in  many  instances  pro-
ducing more  efficient  preparations  from  them.  Alcohol  is  usually  added
to  medicated  vinegars,  on  account  of  their  proneness  to  spoil,  and  owing
to  which,  it  is  preferable  to  prepare  them  only  in  small  quantities  that
they  may  not  be  kept  for  any  considerable  length  of  time.  Mr.  W.  S.
Merrell  states  "  that  in  the  vinegars  of  lobelia,  and  sanguinaria  (or
where  the  color  of  the  preparation  is  necessarily  dark),  good  cider  or
wine  vinegar  is  to  be  preferred  to  distilled  vinegar ;  and  in  these  prepa-
rations the  alcohol  necessary  for  their  preservation  should  be  first  added


Aceta.  1005

to  the  powdered  ingredients  so  as  to  aid  in  dissolving  their  oily  and  res-
inous principles,  and  then  displaced  or  expressed  with  the  vinegar.
When  a  pure  vinegar  is  desirable,  the  acetic  acid  of  the  shops  diluted
with  six  parts  of  pure  water,  forms  a  more  definite,  and  therefore,  more
eligible  preparation  than  the  Acetum  Destillatum."

Acetum  Destillatum. Distilled Vinegar.

Preparation. — Take  of  Vinegar  a  gallon.  Distil,  by  means  of  a  sand-
bath,  from  a  glass  retort  into  a  glass  receiver,  until  seven  pints  have
been  distilled,  when  discontinue  the  process.  Keep  the  seven  pints  for
use.—  U.  S.

History. — In  this  distillation,  the  first  portion  which  passes  into  the
receiver,  contains  alcohol  and  pyro-acetic  spirit,  these  being  the  most  vol-
atile ingredients  ;  secondly,  the  acetic  acid  passes  over  in  a  purified
condition,  but  being  less  volatile  than  water,  it  is  weaker  than  it  existed
in  the  vinegar.  A  good  substitute  for  distilled  vinegar  may  be  made  by
adding  one  part  of  strong  acetic  acid  to  five  or  six  parts  of  distilled
water,  or  sufficient  to  give  the  density  of  distilled  vinegar,  which  is  1.005
to  1.006.  A  fluidounce  of  distilled  vinegar  should  be  saturated  by
thirty-five  grains  of  crystallized  bicarbonate  of  potassa,  which  is  a
proper  test  of  its  strength.

Wine  vinegar  is  usually  preferred  to  cider  or  malt  vinegar,  as  it  furn-
ishes a  stronger  and  more  aromatic  distilled  article  ;  and  when  distilled
it  should  be  in  glass  vessels,  as  the  use  of  lead  or  copper  vessels  or
tubes  is  extremely  hazardous,  from  the  danger  of  metallic  impregnation.
The  surest  test  of  the  purity  of  distilled  vinegar,  is  its  saturating  power,
as  above-mentioned  ;  its  specific  gravity  cannot  be  depended  upon,  as  it
will  vary  according  to  the  amount  of  alcohol  or  pyro-acetic  spirit  which
may  be  present.

Distilled  vinegar  is  a  clear,  colorless  liquid,  having  a  faint  but  percep-
tible acetous  odor  and  taste,  less  agreeable,  however,  than  those  of  com-
mon vinegar.  It  is  wholly  evaporated  by  heat.  It  usually  contains  a
small  portion  of  organic  matter  which  passes  over  in  the  distillation,
which  is  liable  to  partial  decomposition,  and  which,  when  thus  decom-
posed, causes  the  reddish  or  brownish  color  upon  saturation  with  an
alkali.  Pure  distilled  vinegar  is  devoid  of  any  empyreumatic  taste,  or
sulphurous  odor  ;  but  that  generally  met  with  is  slightly  empyreumatic.
It  may  be  rendered  unfit  for  pharmaceutical  purposes  by  the  presence
of  metals  or  mineral  acids.  If  copper  be  present,  saturate  the  vinegar
with  ammonia,  and  add  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium,  which  occasions  a
brown  cloud.  If  lead  be  present,  the  addition  of  iodide  of  potassium
causes  a  yellow  precipitate.  If  it  be  tainted  with  tin,  the  addition  of  a
solution  of  chloride  of  gold  will  occasion  a  purplish  color.  Sulphureted-
hydrogen  occasions  a  dark-colored  precipitate,  when  either  of  the  two
last  metals  are  present  and  its  non-action  proves  the  absence  of  metals
generally. Sulphuric acid may be detected by acetate of lead, or


1006  Pharmacy.

chloride  of  barium  ;  muriatic  acid  by  forming  a  precipitate  with  nitrate
of  silver  ;  and  nitric  acid  by  the  solution  of  silver  digested  in  the  vine-
gar, which  metal  may  subsequently  be  detected  by  muriatic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  properties  of  distilled  vinegar  are  similar
to  those  of  ordinary  vinegar,  (see  page  151).

Acetum  Lobelia. Vinegar  of  Lobelia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lobelia  Seed,  in  powder,  four  ounces  ;  Dis-
tilled Vinegar  two  pints.  Macerate  the  Lobelia  Seed  with  the  Distilled
Vinegar,  in  a  close  glass  vessel,  for  seven  days ;  then  express  the  liquor,
filter,  and  add  to  the  filtered  product,  Alcohol  one  fluidounce.

History. — In  this  preparation,  Diluted  Acetic  Acid  may  be  used  as  a
substitute  for  the  Distilled  Vinegar.  The  Alcohol  is  added  to  retard  the
decomposition,  and  as  its  quantity  is  very  small,  no  objection  can  reason-
ably be  made  to  its  presence.  We  have  known  this  preparation  to  retain
its  activity  for  two  years,  when  kept  well  corked  and  not  exposed  to  the
action  of  light.

Properties  and  Uses. — Vinegar  of  Lobelia  is  an  emetic,  nauseant,  and
expectorant,  and  is  a  valuable  relaxant  in  spasmodic  affections.  It  may
be  given  to  fulfill  all  the  indications  for  which  lobelia  is  administered.
Externally,  it  forms  an  excellent  application  in  several  cutaneous  dis-
eases, as  salt-rheum,  erysipelas,  poisoning  by  rhus,  etc.  Dose,  as  an
emetic,  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms,  repeated  every  fifteen  minutes  ;  as
an  expectorant,  from  five  to  thirty  drops  or  more,  every  half  hour  or
hour,  in  elm  or  flaxseed  infusion.

Acetum  Sanguinari^e. Vinegar  of  Bloodroot.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Bloodroot,  in  powder,  four  ounces;  Distilled
Vinegar,  two  pints.  Macerate  the  Bloodroot  with  the  Distilled  Vinegar,
in  a  close  glass  vessel,  for  seven  days  ;  then  express  the  liquor,  filter,
and  add  to  the  filtered  product,  Alcohol  one  fluidounce.

History. — In  this  preparation,  Diluted  Acetic  Acid  may  be  used  as  a
substitute  for  the  Distilled  Vinegar.  When  kept  well  corked  and  in  the
dark,  it  may  be  preserved  for  a  long  time.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Vinegar  of  Bloodroot  is  seldom  used  as  an
emetic,  except  in  combination  with  other  agents  of  this  class.  Its  chief
employment  internally  is  as  an  expectorant,  hepatic,  and  alterative.  As
an  external  application  it  is  useful  in  many  cutaneous  affections.  Dose,
from  ten  to  thirty  drops,  in  some  mucilage  or  syrup,  and  repeated  three
or  four  times  a  day.

Acetum  Scili^e. Vinegar  of  Squill.

Preparation. — Take  of  Squill,  sliced  or  bruised,  four  ounces;  Dis-
tilled Vinegar,  two  pints.  Macerate  the  Squill  with  the  Distilled  Vinegar,
in  a  close  glass  vessel,  for  seven  days;  then  express  the  liquor,  and  set
it  by  that  the  dregs  may  subside  ;  lastly,  pour  off  the  clear  liquid,  and
add  Alcohol  one  fluidounce.


JEtherea.  1007

History. — In  this  preparation,  Diluted  Acetic  Acid  may  be  used  as  a
substitute  for  the  Distilled  Vinegar.  When  either  of  the  above  prepara-
tions are  made  with  Diluted  Acetic  Acid,  the  addition  of  the  Alcohol
may  be  omitted.  The  Vinegar  of  Squill,  when  long  kept,  deposits,
according  to  Vogel,  a  precipitate  of  citrate  of  lime  and  tannic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Vinegar  of  Squill  contains  all  the  medicinal
pectorant in  several  forms  of  dropsy,  and  in  pulmonary  affections.  The
syrup  and  oxymel  are  generally  preferred,  as  they  are  less  unpleasant
to  the  taste,  and  do  not  decompose  so  soon.  The  dose  is  from  half  a
fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms;  vomiting  is  likely  to  be  caused  by  the
latter  quantity.  It  should  be  given  in  cinnamon-water,  mint-water,  or
some  other  aromatic  liquid  calculated  to  conceal  its  taste,  and  obviate
its  nauseating  effect.  Its  principal  use,  however,  is  in  making  the  Syrup
of  Squill,  which  see.


^ETHEREA.
Ethers.

Ethers  are  liquids  resulting  from  the  action  of  acids  on  alcohol.  They
are  of  a  very  volatile  and  inflammatory  nature,  possessing  a  peculiar
fragrance,  with  some  sweetishness,  and  vary  in  composition,  according
to  the  acid  employed  in  generating  them.  On  account  of  their  highly
inflammable  character,  too  much  care  cannot  be  taken  to  avoid  decanting
them  near  a  flame,  as  in  the  vicinity  of  a  lamp,  candle,  or  gas-light.
They  require  to  be  kept  in  accurately  stopped  bottles,  and  in  a  cool
place,  otherwise  considerable  loss  may  ensue  in  consequence  of  their
evaporation.  Chemists  admit  three  kinds  of  ethers,  viz.,  1.  Those  con-
sisting of  etherine  and  water,  or  where  the  acid  does  not  enter  into  the
composition  of  the  ether  generated,  but  merely  acts  as  a  chemical  agent
on  the  alcohol ;  of  which  we  have  an  example  in  sulphuric  ether.  2.
Those  consisting  of  an  acid,  etherine,  and  water,  as  in  the  case  of  hyponi-
trous  ether.  3.  Those  consisting  of  an  acid  and  etherine  only,  as  with
muriatic  or  hydrochloric  ether.  Of  these  the  first  two  are  more  gene-
rally used  in  medicine.

^Etiier  Aceticus. Acetic  Ether. Acetate  of  Oxide  of  Elhyle.

Preparation.  —  Acetic  ether  may  be  formed  by  several  processes,
among  which  may  be  named  the  following  :  1.  Mix  one  hundred  parts  oi
Alcohol  (sp.  gr.  0.83)  with  sixty -three  parts  of  concentrated  Acetic  Acid,
and  seventeen  parts  of  strong  Sulphuric  Acid,  and  distil  one  hundred  and
tu-cnty-fiue  parts  into  a  receiver,  kept  cold  with  wet  cloths.  2.  Distil  a
mixture  of  ten  parts  of  Acetate  of  Soda,  sixteen  of  Sulphuric  Acid,  and  six
of  Alcohol.  Rectify  the  product  over  lime  and  chloride  of  calcium.  3.
Distil  to  dryness,  a  mixture  of  three  parts  of  Acetate  of  Potassa,  three
of  Alcohol,  and  two  of  Sulphuric  Acid,  and  mix  the  distilled  product  with


1008  Pharmacy.

one-fifth  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  distil  a  second  time  an  amount  of  ether
equal  to  the  alcohol  employed.  It  may  also  be  obtained  by  distilling-  any
sulphovinate  with  strong  acetic  acid  ;  the  acetic  acid  is  brought  in  contact
with  nascent  ether,  and  combines  with  it.

History.  —  Acetic  ether  is  a  colorless  liquid,  of  a  refreshing,  very
grateful  odor,  and  a  peculiar,  agreeable  taste.  It  boils  at  160°,  and  its
specific  gravity  is  0.866.  It  does  not  decompose  by  keeping,  but  is
easily  changed  by  alkalies,  yielding  an  acetate  and  alcohol ;  acids  also
decompose  it.  It  is  very  combustible,  burning  readily  when  brought
into  contact  with  flame,  at  the  same  time,  diffusing  an  acid  odor.  It  is
always  present,  in  small  quantity,  in  wine  vinegar,  which  owes  its  flavor
to  this  compound.  It  dissolves  in  seven  and  a  half  parts  of  water,  and
nnites  with  alcohol  in  all  proportions.  It  consists  of  one  equivalent  of
acetic  acid  51,  one  of  etherine  28,  and  one  of  water  9=88.  Its  formula
is  given  as  Ct  Hi  0-(-C±  H3  Os,  and  by  Gregory  as  Ae  0,  Ac  (h.

Properties  and  Uses.  -^-Acetic  ether  is  stimulant  and  antispasmodic,
and  is  occasionally  used  to  fulfill  these  indications.  Sometimes  it  is
applied  externally,  by  frictions,  to  relieve  rheumatic  and  neuralgic  pains,
and  as  a  resolvent.  The  dose  is  from  fifteen  to  thirty  drops,  sufficiently
diluted  with  water.

JEther  Hydriodicus. Hydriodic  Ether.

Preparation. — Mix  four  parts  of  Iodine  with  ten  parts  of  Alcohol  38°.
Add  little  by  little  one  part  of  Phosphorus,  and  submit  the  whole  to  dis-
tillation. When  the  larger  part  of  the  alcohol  has  distilled  over,  add
three  parts  more,  and  distil  to  dryness.  The  product  of  the  distillation
is  mixed  with  water  to  separate  the  alcohol  from  the  ether,  which  last
is  then  rectified  from  chloride  of  calcium.

History. — Hydriodic  ether  has  no  acid  reaction.  Its  odor  is  ethereal,
its  taste  pungent,  but  less  sharp  than  that  of  sulphuric  ether.  Its  den-
sity is  1.9206  at  72°  F.  ;  it  boils  at  110°  F.,  and  is  not  inflammable.
When  thrown  on  burning  coals,  it  expands  in  purple  vapors.  It  is  not
decomposed  immediately  by  potassa,  nor  by  nitric  or  sulphurous  acids,
but  sulphuric  acid  decomposes  it,  and  sets  free  a  part  of  the  iodine.  The
action  of  the  air  discolors  it  slightly  by  liberating  a  little  iodine,  which
may  be  readily  removed  by  the  alkalies,  or  mercury,  a  g-lobule  of  which
thrown  into  the  vial,  is  sufficient  to  retain  the  ether  in  a  state  proper  for
inhalation.  Its  density  admits  of  its  being  kept  under  water,  in  which
it  is  insoluble. Its  formula  is  Ci  Hs  I.

Properties  and  Uses. — Hydriodic  ether,  is  recommended  by  Dr.  Huette,
by  way  of  inhalation,  as  a  remedial  agent  in  several  diseases,  especially
in  pulmonary  consumption,  tubercular  affections  in  any  part  of  the  body,
and  where  it  is  desired  to  saturate  the  system  quickly  with  iodine  ;  it
appears  likely  to  play  an  important  part  in  medicine.  Fifteen  to  thirty
grains  of  the  hydriodic  ether  are  transferred,  by  means  of  a  graduated


^Ethersa.  1009

pipette,  into  a  little  ground  stoppered  bottle,  (3  or  4  centimetres)  an
inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  high.  The  ether  is  covered  with  a  stratum
of  water  about  two  or  two  and  a  half  millimetres  thick,  the  object  of
which  is  to  moderate  the  evaporation;  when  the  vial  is  applied  to  one  of
the  nostrils,  and  the  air  contained  within  it  is  drawn  by  an  inspiration.
The  ethereal  vapor  is  sufficiently  diluted  with  air  before  reaching-  the
lungs.  The  evaporation  of  the  ether  may  be  accelerated  by  inclining
the  vial  to  one  side,  so  that  the  continuity  of  the  watery  layer  may  be
broken  ;  and  the  heat  of  the  hand  may  be  applied  to  the  same  object.
Fifteen  or  twenty  inspirations  suffice  for  the  impregnation  of  the  system
with  iodine,  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  cessation  of  the  inhala-
tions, iodine  is  found  in  the  urine,  and  has  also  been  found  present  in
fifty  or  sixty  hours  afterward.

The  physiological  effects  of  this  ether,  are  said  to  be,  "  After  some
inhalations,  an  impression  of  calmness  and  satisfaction  announces  that
the  hydriolic  ether  acts  at  first  conformably  with  the  sedative  properties
of  the  other  ethers  employed  in  medicine.  The  respiratory  motions  are
carried  on  with  a  readiness  and  fullness,  advantageous  to  the  circulation;
but  the  antispasmodic  action  of  the  ethereal  vapor  which  favors  the
absorption  of  the  remedy,  is  soon  followed  by  the  influence  of  the
absorbed  iodine.  The  increase  of  vigor  ceasing  to  be  limited  to  the
thoracic  muscles,  extends  to  the  muscular  system.  The  appetite  is
developed,  the  secretions  are  increased,  the  genital  feelings  become  more
sensitive,  the  pulse  acquires  fullness,  and  the  vivacity  of  the  feelings,
and  the  activity  of  the  intellect,  prove  that  the  impulse  given  to  the
other  organs  extends  to  the  brain  also.  Such  are  the  effects  that  four
daily  inhalations  of  ten  minutes  each  produced  on  Dr.  Huette.  As  to
accident,  he  never  experienced  anything  but  a  little  corvza,  and  fre-
quently when  the  vapor  has  been  too  concentrated,  a  slight  feeling  of
pressure  in  the  temples."

He  thinks,  that  in  many  cases  there  will  be  an  advantage  in  substi-
tuting the  inhalation  of  hydriodic  ether,  for  the  other  preparations  of
iodine,  observing  that  inhalation  permits  the  fractioning  of  the  doses  to
any  extent,  and  causes  the  absorption  of  the  medicine  by  more  extended
surfaces,  more  generally  accessible  in  all  their  parts,  and  better  calcu-
lated for  the  absorption  of  the  smallest  medicinal  atoms,  than  are  the
digestive  organs.

Spiritus  ^theris  Nitrici.  Sweet  Spirit  of  Xitre.  Spirit  of  Nitric
Ether. Solution  of  the  impure  Hyponitrite  of  Oxide  of  Etltyle  in  Alcohol.

Preparation.  —  Mix,  in  a  large  glass  retort,  Nitrate  of  Potassa,  in
coarse  powder,  two  pounds,  with  Alcohol  nine  pints  and  a  half;  then  gra-
dually pour  in  Sulphuric  Acid  a  pound  and  a  half,  and  digest  with  a
gentle  heat  for  two  hours  ;  then  raise  the  heat  and  distil  a  gallon.  To
the  distilled  liquor  add  Diluted  Alcohol  a  pint,  and  Carbonate  of  Potassa
one  ounce,  and  again  distil  a  gallon. —  U.  S.
64


1010  Pharmacy.

History. — The  officinal  spirit  of  nitric  ether  is  composed  of  hyponitrous
ether  and  rectified  spirit,  in  variable  proportions.  When  a  reaction  is
effected  between  alcohol  and  nitric  acid,  directly,  or  between  alcohol
and  the  ingredients  from  which  nitric  acid  may  be  generated,  as  from
nitre  and  sulphuric  acid,  the  result  is  always  hyponitrous  ether  ;  but
when  the  ingredients  for  forming  the  ether  hold  alcohol  in  excess,  this
distils  over  with  the  ether,  forming  the  spirit  of  nitric  ether.

In  the  process  for  preparing  this  ether,  given  above,  the  sulphuric
acid  being  gradually  added  to  the  mixture  of  nitre  and  alcohol  in  the
retort,  and  a  gentle  heat  applied,  nitric  acid  is  evolved,  which  reacting
upon  a  portion  of  the  alcohol,  generates  the  hyponitrous  ether.  When
the  temperature  is  subsequently  increased,  the  ether,  together  with  the
remaining  alcohol,  passes  over  as  the  sweet  spirit  of  nitre,  holding  a
portion  of  acid  in  the  solution,  from  which  it  is  purified  by  the  last  dis-
tillation from  carbonate  of  potassa.  The  object  in  adding  the  diluted
alcohol  previous  to  the  last  distillation,  is,  that  a  quantity  of  the  spirit  of
nitric  ether  may  be  obtained,  equal  to  that  procured  by  the  first  distilla-
tion without  reducing  the  mixture  in  the  retort  to  dryness,  and  thereby
give  rise  to  the  formation  of  empyreuma.  Were  the  alcohol  and  sul-
phuric acid  to  be  first  mixed  together,  instead  of  the  alcohol  and  nitre,
ordinary  sulphuric  ether  would  probably  be  generated,  and  the  addition
of  the  nitre  would  not  give  rise  to  the  desired  spirit  of  nitric  ether.  In
conducting  this  process  the  retort  should  be  of  sufficient  capacity  to  hold
double  the  amount  of  articles  employed.

Spirit  of  nitric  ether,  according  to  its  strength,  is  either  colorless  or
of  the  lightest  straw  color.  When  properly  prepared  it  is  a  colorless,
volatile  liquid,  requiring  to  be  kept  in  well  stopped  bottles,  possessing  a
peculiar  and  fragrant  ethereal  odor,  somewhat  resembling  (hat  of  apples,
and  a  pungent,  sweetish,  cooling,  sharp  taste  ;  its  specific  gravity  is
between  0.834  and  0.837,  and  it  boils,  when  heated  by  means  of  a  water
bath,  at  160°.  It  gradually  becomes  acid  by  long  keeping,  in  which
state  it  becomes  unfit  for  medical  use,  on  account  of  its  chemical  reac-
tions with  other  substances  with  which  it  may  be  united,  in  many  in-
stances greatly  impairing  the  efficacy  of  the  mixture  ;  these  effects  may
be  obviated  by  keeping  the  sweet  spirit  of  nitre  standing  on  crystals  of
bicarbonate  of  potassa.  It  is  very  inflammable  and  burns  with  a  whitish
flame.  It  reddens  litmus  paper,  but  does  not  effervesce  with  carbonate
of  soda,  unless  it  becomes  acid.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol  or  water  in  all
proportions.

Sweet  spirit  of  nitre  is  very  subject  to  impurities.  When  it  is  the
product  of  a  too  long  continued  distillation,  it  contains  at  first,  aldehyd,
which  subsequently  becomes,  by  the  absorption  of  oxygen,  acetic  acid.
Aldehyd  may  be  detected  by  the  addition  of  a  weak  solution  of  potassa,
■which  forming  an  aldehyd  resin,  communicates  a  yellow  tint  to  the  liquid
containing  it,  in  addition  to  which  a  pungent  odor,  with  acridity  will  be


^Etherea.  1011

observed.  An  equal  volume  of  sulphuric  acid  added  to  sweet  spirit  of
nitre  hardly  affects  it  if  good;  but  if  much  aldehyd  be  present,  the
mixture  will  become  dark-colored.  Acids  may  be  detected  by  the  effer-
vescence of  the  preparation  when  the  alkaline  carbonates  or  bicarbonates
are  added  to  it.  Alcohol  and  water  are  frequently  added  to  sweet  spirit
of  nitre,  thereby  very  much  impairing  its  value  ;  it  is  extremely  difficult
to  detect  these  adulterations.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sweet  spirit  of  nitre  is  a  stimulant,  antispas-
modic, diuretic  and  diaphoretic.  It  is  considered  useful  in  dropsy
associated  with  diseased  heart,  more  so  than  when  connected  with  dis-
eased kidney;  being  a  stimulant  diuretic,  it  is  best  adapted  to  asthenic
conditions.  In  dropsy  it  may  be  advantageously  combined  with  other
diuretics,  as  syrup  of  squill,  acetate  of  potassa,  nitre,  bicarbonate  of
potassa,  or  tincture  of  digitalis.  It  is  useful  in  strangury,  and  is  a  good
addition  to  copaiba  as  a  diuretic  for  diluting  the  acrimony  of  the  urine.
It  is  often  used  in  febrile  affections,  either  alone  or  in  conjunction  with
sedative  or  diuretic  agents,  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  diuresis  and
diaphoresis.  If  the  preparation  becomes  old,  nitrous  acid  is,  probably,
formed,  and  when  taken  internally,  it  will  give  rise  to  pain  in  the
6tomach  and  griping.  Spirit  of  nitric  ether  is  a  narcotic  poison  ;  the
accidental  inhalation  of  its  vapor  during  sleep,  has  occasioned  death.
Dose,  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms,  three  or  four  times  a
day  in  water,  or  according  to  the  indications  to  be  fulfilled.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Copaibse  Composita.

./Ether  Sulphuricus. Sulphuric  Ether. Oxide  of  Ethyle.

Preparation.  —  Gradually  add  in  an  open  v esse],  fourteen  fluidounces
of  Sulphuric  Acid,  to  Alcohol  two  pints,  stirring  them  together  fre-
quently. While  still  hot,  pour  the  mixture  into  a  glass  tubulated  retort
placed  upon  a  sand-bath,  and  connected  by  a  long  adapter  with  a  receiver
kept  cold  by  ice  or  iced  water ;  then  raise  the  heat  quickly  until  the
liquid  begins  to  boil.  When  about  half  a  pint  of  the  ethereal  liquid  has
passed  over,  gradually  introduce  into  the  retort  through  a  tube  reaching
nearly  to  its  bottom,  Alcohol  two  pints  previously  mixed  with  Sulphuric
Acid  two  fluidounces.  Care  must  be  taken  that  this  mixture  flow  in  a
continuous  stream,  and  in  sufficient  quantity  to  supply  the  place  of  the
liquid  which  distils  over;  this  may  be  accomplished  by  having  the  tube
through  which  it  flows  furnished  with  a  stop-cock  to  regulate  the  size
of  the  current  —  the  tube  itself  being  passed  through  a  cork  accurately
fitted  into  the  tubulure.  Then  continue  the  distillation  until  about  three
pints  have  passed  over,  or  until  white  vapors  appear  in  the  retort.  To
this  distilled  product  add  Potassa  six  drachms,  previously  dissolved  in
Distilled  Water  three  fluidounces,  and  shake  them  frequently.  At  the
end  of  twenty-four  hours  pour  off  the  supernatant  liquid  into  a  retort,
and  with  a  gentle  beat  redistil  it,  until  two  pints  of  ether  shall  have


1012  Pharmacy.

passed  over,  or  until  the  distilled  liquid  becomes  of  the  specific  gravity
0.750.—  U.  S.

History. — Ether  is  formed  from  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  upon  alco-
hol, and  consists  of  four  equivalents  of  carbon,  five  of  hydrogen,  and
one  of  oxygen;  its  proximate  constituents  may  be  considered  to  be  one
equivalent  of  etherine,  and  one  of  water.  It  is  commonly  but  impro-
perly called  Sulphuric  Ether,  probably  on  account  of  the  sulphuric  acid
employed  in  its  preparation ;  but  no  sulphuric  acid  enters  into  its  com-
position, and  the  action  of  other  acids  on  alcohol,  will,  it  is  stated,  pro-
duce an  identical  ether.

The  view  taken  of  the  formation  of  ether  has  been  that,  as  alcohol  is
a  hydrated  oxide  of  ethyle,  and  ether,  oxide  of  ethyle  without  water,
the  abstraction  of  the  water  from  alcohol  is  all  that  is  required  to
convert  it  into  ether.  To  effect  this  removal  of  the  water  from  alcohol,
sulphuric  acid  is  employed  on  account  of  its  great  affinity  for  water.
The  action,  however,  of  the  acid,  is  not  direct  but  intermediate  ;  when
two  equivalents  of  sulphuric  acid  are  mixed  with  one  equivalent  of  alco-
hol, the  bi-sulphate  of  oxide  of  ethyle  (sulphovinic  acid),  is  formed,  or
a  double  sulphate  of  ether  and  water.  When  this  is  heated  to  about
285°,  and  the  liquid  kept  in  steady  ebullition,  it  becomes  decomposed,
and  the  sulphuric  acid  seizing  upon  the  water,  prevents  the  ether  from
reuniting  with  it  to  reproduce  alcohol,  and  the  ether  consequently  dis-
tils over,  leaving  two  equivalents  of  sulphuric  acid  with  one  of  water  in
the  retort,  and  one  equivalent  of  ether  in  the  receiver.

Ether,  has,  however,  been  produced  without  distillation,  or  the  forma-
tion of  the  bi-sulphate  of  oxide  of  ethyle,  by  using  a  larger  proportion
of  alcohol  than  is  commonly  employed,  and  causing  the  reaction  to  take
place  in  glass  tubes  sealed  and  exposed  for  a  short  time  to  a  temperature
of  320°.  From  which  it  appears  that  the  theory  above  given  is  a  ques-
tionable one.

In  the  formula  above  given  for  the  preparation  of  ether,  the  process
is  to  be  commenced  by  using  only  a  part  of  the  alcohol,  and  when  de-
composition has  ensued  and  a  portion  of  ether  distilled  over,  the  remain-
der of  the  alcohol  is  to  be  gradually  added,  so  as  to  replace  that  which,
during  the  progress  of  the  distillation,  is  constantly  disappearing  by  its
conversion  into  ether.  If,  instead  of  this  course,  the  whole  of  the  alco-
hol were  added  at  the  first,  a  large  portion  of  it  would  distil  over  with
the  ether.  The  small  amount  of  acid  added  to  the  last  portion,  is  deemed
advantageous,  on  account  of  the  weakness  effected  in  the  acid  in  the
retort.  The  appearance  of  the  white  vapors  during  the  distillation  is
indicative  of  the  commencement  of  new  reactions  unlike  those  which
generate  the  ether.  However  carefully  the  process  may  have  been  con-
ducted, the  ether  is  usually  impregnated  with  sulphurous  acid,  heavy-
oil  of  wine,  alcohol,  and  water,  and  consequently  its  purification  becomes
necessary. This  is  accomplished  by  the  addition  of  potassa  for  sulphu-


^Ethera.  * 1013

rous  acid  and  water,  and  water  for  alcohol,  agitating  the  crude  ether
with  the  purifying  agent,  and  redistilling  at  a  gentle  heat.

Ether  is  a  colorless,  very  mobile,  highly  refracting  liquid,  having  a
penetrating  and  sweet  odor,  and  a  cooling,  pungent,  aromatic  taste.
When  pure  it  has  the  specific  gravity  0.713,  boils  at  95°,  forming  a
vapor  of  the  density  2.586.  It  does  not  freeze  at  16G°  below  zero.
When  imperfectly  prepared  or  too  long  kept,  it  reddens  litmus  paper,
but  not  when  pure.  It  is  very  combustible,  and  its  vapor  is  apt  to  form
dangerous  explosive  mixtures  with  air.  When  slowly  oxidized,  it  yields
aldehyde,  aldehydic  acid,  acetic  and  formic  acids.

For  medicinal  purposes  the  density  should  not  be  greater  than  0.750.
It  is  extremely  volatile,  evaporating  speedily  in  the  open  air  with  the
production  of  much  cold.  It  is  highly  inflammable,  on  which  account
it  should  never  be  brought  near  a  lighted  candle,  or  other  flame  ;  water
and  carbonic  acid  are  the  products  of  its  combustion.  It  is  decomposed
by  too  long  keeping,  and  is  partly  converted  into  acetic  acid.  Iodine
and  bromine  are  dissolved  by  it,  and  sulphur  and  phosphorus  sparingly.
It  also  dissolves  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  many  resins  and  balsams,  caout-
chouc, tannic  acid,  and  most  of  the  organic  vegetable  alkalies.  It  differs
from  alcohol  in  not  dissolving  potassa  or  soda ;  and  it  unites  with  alcohol
in  all  proportions.

Dr.  C.  F.  Schonbein  states  that  if  a  little  pure  ether  be  put  into  a
bottle  filled  with  pure  oxygen  or  atmospheric  air,  and  exposed  to  dif-
fused light,  the  bottle  being  occasionally  shaken,  the  ether,  after  the
lapse  of  four  months,  will  have  acquired  new  properties.  Although  pro-
ducing no  action  upon  blue  litmus  paper,  it  will  discharge  the  color  of
solution  of  indigo,  convert  pure  phosphorus,  when  immersed  in  it,  into
phosphorus  acid,  eliminate  iodine  from  iodide  of  potassium,  change  pure
sulphate  of  protoxide  of  iron  to  the  basic  and  acid  sulphate  of  the  deu-
toxide,  transform  yellow  prussiate  of  potassa  into  the  red  salt,  convert
sulphuret  of  lead  into  the  sulphate,  etc.  Similar  effects  are  produced
with  oil  of  turpentine  and  oil  of  lemons,  when  treated  in  the  same  way
as  the  ether.  He  expresses  an  opinion  that  the  property  which  these
substances  thus  acquire,  is  due  to  the  presence  of  oxygen  in  a  chemically
exalted  condition.

Ether  is  frequently  impure  from  the  presence  of  foreign  substances.  If
the  impurity  be  an  acid,  it  may  be  detected  by  litmus  paper,  and  removed
by  agitation  with  potassa ;  if  fixed  substances  are  present,  they  will
remain  upon  the  evaporation  of  the  ether.  If  heavy  oil  of  wine  is  the
impurity,  it  may  be  known  by  the  milky  appearance  of  the  ether  upon
being  agitated  with  water.  In  the  officinal  ether  a  portion  of  alcohol  is
generally  present,  but  if  there  be  too  large  a  proportion  of  it,  it  will
increase  the  density  of  the  ether  to  too  high  a  point.  When  this  is  the
case,  the  alcohol  may  be  removed  by  agitating  the  ether  with  twice  its
bulk  of  water ;  this  fluid  unites  with  the  alcohol,  and  upon  resting,  forms


1014  Pharmact.

a  heavy  layer  upon  which  the  ether  floats.  The  latter  may  be  poured
off,  and  purified  by  agitation  with  fresh  burnt  lime,  and  subsequent  dis-
tillation.

Properties  and  Uses.— Ether  is  a  powerful  diffusible  stimulant,  and  is
likewise  possessed  of  narcotic,  antispasmodic,  and  expectorant  properties.
When  applied  externally,  and  allowed  to  evaporate,  it  acts  as  a  refriger-
ant ;  but  if  its  evaporation  be  repressed,  it  becomes  a  powerful  rubefa-
cient, and  even  vesicant.  As  a  stimulant  and  antispasmodic  it  is  used
beneficially  in  low  fevers  attended  with  subsultus  tendinum,  nervous
headache,  cramp  of  the  stomach,  fainting,  asphyxia,  flatulent  colic,
gastrodynia,  hysteria,  asthma,  dyspnoea,  palpitation,  and  gout  of  the
stomach ;  it  is  also  efficacious  when  given  alone,  or  in  combination  with
oil  of  turpentine,  in  relieving  the  pain  and  spasm  caused  by  the  passage
of  biliary  calculi.  As  an  antispasmodic,  it  will  be  found  useful  in  all
forms  of  spasmodic  action,  unattended  by  inflammation,  as  chorea,  epi-
lepsy, tetanus,  etc.  The  dose  of  ether  is  from  ten  to  sixty  drops,  to  be
frequently  repeated  when  the  full  effect  of  the  remedy  is  desired.

When  applied  locally  as  a  refrigerant,  allowing  it  to  evaporate,  it  is
useful  in  nervous  and  other  headaches,  in  external  inflammations,
strangulated  hernia,  etc.  As  a  rubefacient,  it  may  be  employed  in  all
cases  where  this  effect  is  indicated,  by  checking  its  evaporation.

The  virtues  of  many  agents  containing  vegetable  oils  and  resins,  may
be  taken  up  by  ether  in  the  form  of  tincture,  when,  by  evaporating  the
ether,  the  desired  active  product  is  left  behind  ;  this  is  the  case  with
lobelia  seeds,  capsicum,  Scutellaria,  podophyllum,  ptelea,  stillingia,  xan-
thoxylon  berries,  iris,  and  several  other  officinal  preparations.  Under
the  name  of  Lethean,  ether  is  sometimes  employed  as  an  anaesthetic
agent,  for  the  prevention  and  removal  of  pain  and  spasm,  and  whenever
severe  operations  are  about  being  performed.  It  has  also  been  employed
in  this  manner,  in  severe  dysmenorrhea,  as  well  as  during  parturition.
To  use  it,  a  soft  sponge,  hollowed  out  on  one  side,  is  saturated  with  pure
ether— this  is  applied  to  the  nostrils  of  the  patient,  and  inhaled  by  him;
at  first  a  short  cough  is  generally  produced,  which  soon  disappears,  and
in  from  two  to  five  minutes,  or  when  about  two  fluidounces  of  ether  have
been  expended,  the  anesthetic  effect  takes  place.  A  feeble  and  slow
pulse  during  its  use,  or  convulsions,  indicate  its  discontinuance,  and  m
the  latter  case,  a  free  application  of  cold  water.  To  produce  anaesthesia
chloroform  is  more  commonly  preferred.  The  practice  of  frequently
inhaling  ether  is  dangerous,  often  causing  inflammation  of  the  brain,  or

anity.

Off.  Prep. — Lotio  Athens  Composite


Preparations  of  Ammonia.  1015

PREPARATIONS  OF  AMMONIA.

Ammonite  Carbonas.  Carbonate  of  Ammonia.  Sesquicarbonale  of
Ammonia. Mild  Volatile  Alkali.

Preparation. — Take  of  Muriate  of  Ammonia  a  pound ;  Carbonate  of
Lime,  (Chalk)  dried,  a  pound  and  a  half.  Pulverize  them  separately,
then  mix  them  thoroughly,  and  sublime  with  a  gradually  increasing
heat,  from  an  earthenware  retort,  into  a  receiver  kept  cold. —  U.  S.

History. — By  the  above  process  the  following  reactions  happen ;  the
muriatic  acid  unites  with  the  lime,  forming  chloride  of  calcium  and
water,  while  the  carbonic  acid  unites  with  the  ammonia  producing  car-
bonate of  ammonia.  During  sublimation  the  carbonate  and  water  pass
off  together  as  a  hydrated  carbonate  of  ammonia,  and  the  chloride  of
calcium  is  left  behind.  The  retort  used  in  this  process  should  have  a
wide  cylindrical  neck,  and  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  the  extraction
of  the  sublimate,  the  receiver  should  be  cylindrical.  One  equivalent  of
chalk,  and  one  of  muriate  of  ammonia,  mutually  decompose  each
other,  but,  as  in  the  above  formula,  when  an  excess  of  chalk  is  added  it
causes  a  perfect  decomposition  of  the  muriate  of  ammonia,  without
which,  a  portion  of  this  latter  salt  would  sublime  also,  and  thereby  ren-
der the  carbonate  impure.

On  the  large  scale,  carbonate  of  ammonia  is  prepared  by  sublimation
of  the  materials  employed,  from  an  iron  pot,  into  a  large  earthen  or
leaden  receiver.  It  may  be  manufactured  from  sulphate  of  ammonia,
and  indirectly,  from  gas-liquor,  and  bone-spirit.

Carbonate  of  ammonia  is  usually  met  with  in  white,  translucent,
fibrous  and  somewhat  crystalline  masses,  moderately  hard,  of  a  power-
ful ammoniacal  odor,  and  a  strong,  penetrating,  alkaline  and  ammoniacal
taste.  When  exposed  to  the  air,  it  gradually  becomes  opake  and  friable,
loses  ammonia,  and  falls  to  a  powder  of  bicarbonate  of  ammonia.  It  is
soluble  in  about  four  times  its  weight  of  cold  water,  and  abundantly  so
in  diluted  alcohol  ;  boiling  water  decomposes  it,  disengaging  ammonia
with  effervescence.  Acids  decompose  it,  as  do  likewise  the  fixed  alka-
lies and  their  carbonates,  lime-water,  magnesia,  solution  of  chloride  of
calcium,  alum,  acid  salts,  solutions  of  iron,  corrosive  sublimate,  acetate,
and  subacetate  of  lead,  and  sulphates  of  iron,  and  zinc.

It  is  sometimes,  from  faulty  preparation,  rendered  impure  by  the  pre-
sence of  the  sulphate  or  muriate  of  ammonia;  the  former  may  be  de-
tected by  the  solution,  when  neutralized  with  nitric  acid,  giving  a  white
precipitate  with  chloride  of  barium,  and  the  latter,  by  the  neutralized
solution  yielding  a  precipitate  with  nitrate  of  silver.  If  turmeric  paper
held  over  it,  undergoes  no  change,  it  has  passed  into  the  bicarbonate.

Carbonate  of  ammonia  consists  of  two  equivalents  of  ammonia  34.3,
three  of  carbonic  acid  66.36,  and  two  of  water  18=118.39.


1016  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses  carbonate  of  ammonia  is  a  pow-
erful narcotic  and  irritating  poison  ;  in  small  doses  it  is  an  energetic  dif-
fusible stimulant,  diaphoretic,  antispasmodic,  and  antacid.  As  a  stimu-
lant it  is  used  in  low  stages  of  continued  fever,  in  which  it  augments  the
action  of  the  heart  and  arteries  without  producing  an  undue  excitement
of  the  brain,  for  which  purpose  it  is  also  employed,  as  well  as  for  its
antacid  properties,  in  atonic  gout,  and  in  derangements  of  the  stomach
arising  from  dissipation.  In  conjunction  with  guaiacum,  it  has  proved
beneficial  in  chronic  rheumatism.  It  has  also  proved  very  beneficial  in
epilepsy,  chorea,  and  scrofula,  especially  when  attended  with  much  acid-
ity of  the  stomach.  It  has  likewise  proved  serviceable  in  some  cases  of
diabetes.  It  is  rarely  employed  as  an  emetic  in  cases  of  paralysis  in
the  dose  of  thirty  or  forty  grains.  It  is  much  used  as  a  stimulant  in
hysteria  and  fainting,  combined  with  some  aromatic  oil,  and  known  as
Smelling  Salts.  Externally  it  is  a  gentle  rubefacient,  but  is  seldom  em-
ployed in  this  way.  The  dose  is  from  five  to  twenty  grains  every  three
or  four  hours,  in  the  form  of  pill,  or  dissolved  in  some  aqueous  vehicle.

Ammonite  Liquor.  Liquor  Ammonia.  Aqua  Ammonice.  Solution
of  Ammonia. Water  of  Ammonia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Muriate  of  Ammonia,  in  very  fine  powder,  a
potmd ;  Lime,  recently  burnt,  a  ]>oitnd  and  a  half;  Distilled  Water  c
pint;  Water  nine  fluidounces.  Break  the  lime  in  pieces,  and  pour  the
water  upon  it,  in  an  earthen  or  iron  vessel  ;  then  cover  the  vessel,  and
set  it  aside  till  the  lime  falls  into  powder,  and  becomes  cold.  Mix  this
thoroughly  with  the  Muriate  of  Ammonia,  in  a  mortar,  and  immediately
introduce  the  mixture  into  a  glass  retort.  Place  the  retort  upon  a  sand-
bath,  and  adapt  to  it  a  receiver,  previously  connected,  by  means  of  a
glass  tube,  with  a  quart  bottle,  containing  the  distilled  water.  Then
apply  heat,  to  be  gradually  increased  till  the  bottom  of  the  iron  vessel
containing  the  sand  becomes  red-hot ;  and  continue  the  process  so  long
as  the  ammonia  comes  over.  Remove  the  liquor  contained  in  the  quart
bottle,  and  for  every  fluidounce  of  it  add  three  and  a  half  fuidrachms  of
Distilled  water,  or  so  much  as  may  be  necessary  to  raise  its  specific  gra-
vity to  0.96,  and  preserve  it  in  small  vials  well  stopped.  Or  it  may  be
prepared  by  combining  one  part,  by  measure,  of  Stronger  Solution  of
Ammonia,  with  two  parts  of  Distilled  Water. —  U.  S.

History. — In  the  above  process  the  muriatic  acid  of  the  ammonia
having  a  greater  affinity  for  the  lime,  combines  with  it  forming  chloride
of  calcium  and  water,  while  the  ammonia  is  set  free,  and  passes  into  the
receiver,  where  it  is  absorbed  by  the  water.  With  this  absorption  there
is  an  augmentation  of  the  bulk  of  the  fluid  in  the  receiver,  hence  the
receiver  should  be  larger  than  required  to  hold  the  exact  amount  of
water.  Equal  weights  of  muriate  of  ammonia  and  lime  are  sufficient
for  the  production  of  the  ammoniacal  gas,  but  by  the  addition  of  an


Preparations  of  Ammonia.  1017

excess  of  lime,  the  complete  decomposition  of  the  muriate  of  ammonia
is  insured.

Water  is  capable  of  absorbing-  670  times  its  volume  of  ammoniacal
gas  at  50°,  at  the  same  time  increasing  its  bulk  about  two-thirds.  In
the  above  process  it  contains  about  ten  per  cent,  of  ammonia.  When
prepared  on  a  large  scale,  it  is  usually  obtained  from  the  sulphate  of
ammonia.

Liquor  ammonia  is  a  colorless,  strongly  alkaline  liquid,  having  a  pecu-
liar, pungent  odor,  and  a  caustic,  acrid  taste.  It  is  incomjjutil/le  with
acids,  acidulous,  and  most  earthy  and  metallic  salts,  and  is  much  used
for  various  pharmaceutical  purposes.  The  salts  of  lime,  baryta,  and
strontia,  are  not  decomposed  by  it,  and  those  of  magnesia  only  partially.
Lime-water  causes  a  precipitate  if  the  ammonia  be  partly  carbonated.
Upon  neutralizing  it  with  nitric  acid,  it  will  yield  no  precipitate,  if  pure,
with  chloride  of  barium,  carbonate  of  ammonia,  or  nitrate  of  silver;  if
the  first  occasions  a  precipitate,  it  indicates  the  presence  of  sulphuric
acid,  or  a  sulphate  ;  if  the  second,  earthy  matter  is  present  ;  and  if  the
third  produces  a  precipitate,  muriatic  acid,  or  a  muriate  is  indicated.  A
large  proportion  of  the  liquor  ammonia  of  commerce  is  obtained  from
coal-gas  liquor,  and  is  liable  to  contain  pyrrol,  naphtuline,  and  other  im-
purities. These  may  be  distinguished  by  nitric  acid,  which  reddens  the
solution,  and  by  the  liquor  imparting  a  rich  purple  color  to  a  strip  of
fir  wood,  after  having  been  previously  supersaturated  with  muriatic
acid.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Liquor  ammonia  is  a  powerful  irritant  and
narcotic  poison,  producing  in  large  doses  tetanus  and  coma,  and  in
smaller  quantit}*  inflammation  or  ulceration.  In  medicinal  doses  it  is
stimulant,  sudorific,  antacid,  and  rubefacient.  It  more  especially  stimu-
lates the  heart  and  arteries,  without  unduly  exciting  the  brain.  As  an
antacid  it  has  been  used  in  acidity  of  the  stomach,  sick-headache  caused
by  acid  stomach,  heartburn,  etc.  It  has  likewise  been  used  as  a  stimu-
lant and  antispasmodic  in  neuralgia  of  the  face  and  head,  asthma,
pertussis,  and  delirium-tremens  ;  and  is  highly  recommended  as  an
internal  stimulant  in  cases  of  retrocession  of  old  and  obstinate  cutaneous
eruptions.  Applied  to  the  nostrils,  it  is  sometimes  beneficial  in  syncope,
asphyxia,  hysteria,  and  similar  affections  ;  and  has  been  recommended
as  a  rubefacient  application  to  burns.  It  is  employed  externally  in  the
form  of  liniment,  combined  with  oils,  as  a  rubefacient.  I  have  used  the
liquor  ammonia  successfully  in  the  treatment  of  hydrophobia,  an
account  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  Western  Medical  Reformer,  Vol.
VI,  October,  1846,  No.  4,  page  83.  The  dose  of  liquor  ammonia  is
from  ten  to  thirty  drops,  largely  diluted  with  water,  to  prevent  its
caustic  influence  on  the  mouth  and  throat.  When  swallowed  undiluted,
or  in  an  overdose,  it  acts  as  a  corrosive  poison,  and  the  best  antidotes  to


1018  Pharmacy.

its  dangerous  effects  are  vinegar  or  lemon-juice,  which  must  be  promptly
administered;  they  act  by  neutralizing  the  ammonia.

Off.  Prep.—  Linimentum  Ammoniee  ;  Linimentum  Cnpsici  Composi-
tum  ;  Linimentum  Saponis  Camphoratum.

Ammonite  Liquor  Fortior.  Liquor  Ammonite  Fortior.  Stronger
Solution  of  Ammonia.

Preparation. — The  process  for  obtaining  this  is  similar  to  that  em-
ployed in  procuring  the  Liquor  Ammonia,  the  difference  consisting  only
in  the  specific  gravities  of  the  two  solutions,  that  of  the  present  stronger
solution  being  0.882.

History. — Its  properties  are  very  similar  to  those  of  the  Liquor  Ammo-
nia, being,  however,  more  highly  caustic,  acrid,  and  alkaline.  Its
impurities  are  also  similarly  distinguished.  In  purchasing  or  preparing
the  solutions  of  ammonia,  the  apothecary  should  always  ascertain  their
densities  by  the  hydrometer  ;  the  stronger  solution  should  be  0.882,  the
officinal  soluiion  0.96.  Both  of  these  solutions  should  be  kept  in  small
vials,  and  well  stopped,  as  they  rapidly  lose  their  ammoniacal  strength
by  contact  with  the  atmosphere.

Properties  and  Uses. — Undiluted,  this  solution  of  ammonia  is  entirely
too  strong  for  medicinal  use.  Its  principal  employment  is  externally  as
a  rubefacient,  vesicant,  and  caustic.  The  vesicating  ammoniacal  oint-
ment of  Dr.  Gondret  is  prepared  as  follows:  melt,  together  by  a  gentle
heat,  thirty-two  parts  of  lard  and  two  parts  of  oil  of  sweet  almonds,
and  pour  the  melted  mixture  into  a  bottle  with  a  wide  mouth.  Then
add  seventeen  parts  of  solution  of  ammonia  of  25°,  and  mix,  with
continued  agitation,  until  the  whole  is  cold.  Preserve  in  ground-
stopper  bottles,  and  in  a  cool  place.  If  well  prepared,  it  will  vesicate
in  ten  minutes.

Liquor  Ammonite  Acetatis.  Ammonite  Acetatis  Liquor.  Solution
of  Acetate  of  Ammonia. Spirit  of  Mindererus.

Preparation. — Take  of  Diluted  Acetic  Acid  a  pint ;  Carbonate  of  Am-
monia, in  powder,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Add  the  Carbonate  of  Ammonia
gradually  to  the  Acid,  stirring  constantly,  until  effervescence  ceases.
The  Diluted  Acetic  Acid,  directed  in  this  formula,  is  to  be  made  by
mixing  together  Acetic  Acid  (sp.  gr.  1.041)  a  pint,  with  Distilled  Water
seven  pints.

This  liquor  may  likewise  be  made  by  dissolving  Carbonate  of  Ammo-
nia one  scruple,  in  Distilled  Water  seven  fluidounces,  and  then  gradually
adding  Acetic  Acid,  with  frequent  agitation,  a  sufficient  quantity,  until
saturation,  which  is  known  by  the  cessation  of  effervescence.  Owing  to
the  unequal  strength  of  the  acetic  acid  of  commerce,  the  latter  is  the
more  definite  formula.

History. — In  this  process  the  carbonate  of  ammonia  is  decomposed
by  the  acetic  acid,  the  carbonic  acid  being  evolved  with  effervescence,


Preparations  of  Ammonia.  1019

while  the  acid  unites  with  the  ammonia,  forming  an  acetate  ofammonia;
the  result  of  this  action  is  an  aqueous  solution  of  acetate  of  ammonia.
The  point  at  which  saturation  is  reached  may  be  ascertained  by  the
alternate  use  of  litmus  and  turmeric  paper;  and  it  is  recommended  to
allow  a  slight  acidity  to  prevail,  which  is  owing  to  a  small  amount  of  car-
bonic acid  being  dissolved  in  the  liquid,  but  which  will  become  removed
by  time.

Solution  of  acetate  of  ammonia  is  a  transparent  and  colorless  liquid,
with  scarcely  any  odor,  and  a  faint,  mawkish,  saline  taste,  but  bitter
when  it  contains  an  excess  of  alkali.  It  is  very  apt  to  spoil,  and  hence
should  be  made  only  in  small  quantities  at  a  time.  It  may  be  readily
known  by  setting  free  acetous  acid  on  the  addition  of  sulphuric,  and  by
giving  an  ammoniacal  odor  on  the  addition  of  caustic  potassa;  solution
of  sulphate  of  iron  renders  it  reddish-brown.  When  evaporated  in
vacuo,  very  deliquescent  crystals  may  be  obtained.  The  pure  solution
is  not  colored  by  hydrosulphuric  acid,  nor  precipitated  by  chloride  of
barium.  Sulphureted  hydrogen  occasions  a  black  precipitate  if  copper
or  lead  enters  into  the  solution;  nitrate  of  baryta  causes  a  white  precipi-
tate if  sulphuric  acid  be  present;  and  nitrate  of  silver  a  white  precipi-
tate if  muriatic  acid  be  present.

If  the  solution  of  acetate  of  ammonia  is  kept  ready  prepared  in  the
shop,  it  should  be  left  slightly  acidulated;  and  when  dispensed  a  small
particle  of  carbonate  of  ammonia  should  be  added  to  impregnate  it  anew
with  the  carbonic  acid  gas  which  exhales  by  standing.

Solution  of  acetate  of  ammonia  is  incompatible  with  acids,  the  fixed
alkalies  and  their  carbonates,  lime-water,  magnesia,  sulphate  of  magne-
sia, corrosive  sublimate,  the  sulphates  of  iron,  copper,  and  zinc,  and
nitrate  of  silver.

Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell  recommends  the  following  preparation  o,s  an  elegant
and  pleasant  anodyne,  and  diaphoretic  in  fevers,  worthy  the  notice  of  the
profession;  he  calls  it  Liquor  Amnion.  Acetat.  et  Morphice :  Take  of  Solu-
tion of  Acetate  of  Ammonia  one  Jluidrachm ;  Acetate  of  Morphia  one
grain;  Syrup  of  Lemon  one  fiiddrachm ;  mix  together.  The  dose  is
from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm,  to  be  taken  in  water.  Each
fiuidrachm  contains  one-eighth  of  a  grain  of  acetate  of  morphia.

Properties  and  Uses. — Solution  of  acetate  of  ammonia  is  diaphoretic
and  diuretic,  and  is  used  in  febrile  and  inflammatory  diseases.  Ii  proves
diuretic  when  the  patient  is  kept  cool,  and  diaphoretic  when  he  is  kept
warm.  Externally,  it  has  been  used  as  an  application,  on  hot  flannel,
to  mumps,  and  likewise  applied,  by  compresses  kept  constantly  moist,  in
the  hydrocele  of  children.  In  chronic  ophthalmia,  it  forms  an  excellent
collyrium,  in  the  quantity  of  one  fluidounce  to  seven  fluidounces  of  rose-
water,  and  two  fluidrachms  of  laudanum.  In  porrigo  of  the  scalp,  it
has  been  effectual,  used  as  a  lotion. The  dose  is  from  half  an  ounce  to


1020  Fharmacy.

one  and  a  half  fluidounces,  every  three  or  four  hours,  mixed  with  sweet-
ened water.

Off.  Prep. — Lotio  yElheris  Composita.

AQU^E MEDICATE.
Medicated  Waters.

These  consist  of  water  variously  impregnated  with  some  medicinal
substance  ;  and  as  Eclectics  occasionally  employ  them,  a  brief  reference
to  them  will  be  necessary.

When  water  is  distilled  from  aromatic  plants,  it  acquires  their  peculiar
flavor  as  well  as  a  portion  of  their  medicinal  qualities;  this  is  chiefly
owing  to  the  volatile  oil  of  the  plants  rising  with  the  aqueous  vapor
and  condensing  with  it  in  the  receiver ;  but  from  the  incapability  of  water
holding  much  oil  in  solution,  these  preparations  are  generally  possessed
of  but  little  strength.  The  most  simple  and  easy  process  for  the  prepa-
ration of  medicated  waters,  is  to  impregnate  distilled  water  with  the
volatile  oil  by  trituration  with  carbonate  of  magnesia,  and  then  filtering  ;
this  course  is  now  generally  pursued  in  the  preparation  of  most  aromatic
waters.  The  object  of  the  carbonate  of  magnesia  is  to  cause  the  oil  to
be  more  minutely  divided,  that  it  may  present  a  larger  surface  to  the
action  of  the  solvent.  Other  agents  have  been  recommended  for  this
purpose,  as  finely  powdered  glass  or  silica,  porcelain-clay,  and  pumice-
stone.  It  is  very  important  that  pure  distilled  water  be  used  in  the
preparation  of  medicated  waters,  as  any  other  may  contain  articles
which  will  decompose  or  destroy  the  virtues  of  the  oil.

Aqua  Acidi  Carbonici.  Carbonic  Acid  Water.  Soda  Water.  Mine-
ral Water. Artificial  Seltzer  Water.

Preparation.  —  By  means  of  a  forcing-pump,  throw  into  a  suitable
receiver,  nearly  filled  with  water,  a  quantity  of  Carbonic  Acid  Gas  equal
to  five  times  the  bulk  of  the  water.  Carbonic  acid  gas  is  obtained  from
powdered  marble  by  means  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid. —  U.  S.

History. — Under  common  atmospheric  pressure,  water  takes  up  its
volume  of  carbonic  acid  gas;  if  the  pressure  be  doubled,  the  quantity
of  the  gas  absorbed  will  also  be  doubled,  and  so  on.  Consequently,  in
saturating  the  water  as  above,  with  five  times  its  volume  of  carbonic  acid
gas,  it  must  be  subjected  to  a  pressure  of  five  atmospheres.

Carbonic  acid  water  is  a  sparkling  liquid,  having  a  pleasant,  pungent,
and  slightly  acidulous  taste.  It  is  known  familiarly  by  the  name  of
"soda  water,"  or,  when  put  up  in  bottles  and  mixed  with  syrups  of
various  kinds,  as  "  mineral  water."  The  vessels  which  contain  it  should
be  kept  in  a  cold  place,  and  be  perfectly  tight,  otherwise  the  gas  will
escape  and  the  water  lose  its  briskness.  Too  much  care  cannot  be
taken  to  avoid  metallic  impurities,  especially  of  lead. The  first  daily


AqujE  Medicate.  1021

draught  of  carbonic  acid  water,  from  a  fountain  furnished  with  tubes  of
lead,  should  invariably  be  thrown  away,  as  its  use  might  give  rise  to
unpleasant  symptoms.

Carbonic  acid,  formerly  called  fixed  air,  is  a  colorless  gas,  of  an  odor
somewhat  subacid  and  pungent,  and  a  slight  acidulous  taste.  It  com-
bines with  salifiable  bases,  forming  salts  which  are  called  Carbonates,  and
from  which  it  is  driven  off  by  all  the  strong  acids.  It  reddens  litmus,
although  the  blue  color  is  restored  by  boiling,  the  gas  being  given  off.
It  extinguishes  flame,  and  is  quickly  fatal  when  inhaled.  If  a  light  be
introduced  into  a  well,  pit,  mine,  or  other  place,  it  will  burn  dimly  or  be
extinguished  if  this  gas  be  present,  and  the  air  of  such  place  will  cer-
tainly destroy  life  if  respired.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1.527;  and  it  is  so
much  heavier  than  air  that  it  may  be  poured  from  one  vessel  into
another.  The  sparkling  and  effervescing  properties  of  many  kinds  of
wine,  beer,  cider,  etc.,  are  owing  to  the  presence  of  carbonic  acid  gas.
It  is  liquefied  by  a  pressure  of  36  atmospheres;  and  is  solidified  by
removing  the  pressure,  and  allowing  the  gas,  which  almost  instantly
evaporates,  to  escape  through  a  jet;  this  produces  such  a  degree  of  cold
as  to  freeze  a  part  of  the  gas  into  a  white  solid  like  snow.  When  car-
bonic acid  has  accumulated  in  cellars  or  other  places,  so  as  to  render
them  fatal  to  animal  life,  it  may  be  removed  by  sprinkling  about  some
liquor  amrnonice ;  this  combines  with  the  carbonic  acid  to  form  carbonate
of  ammonia,  and  fresh  air  rushes  in  to  fill  up  the  space  produced  by  the
condensation  of  the  acid.  It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  carbon  6,
and  two  of  oxygen  16=22;  its  formula  is  CO2.

Properties  and  Uses. — Carbonic  acid  water  is  diaphoretic,  diuretic,  and
anti-emetic.  It  forms  a  pleasant  drink  in  fevers,  allaying  thirst,  lessen-
ing nausea  and  gastric  uneasiness,  and  promoting  diuresis.  It  may  be
administered  four  or  five  times  daily  in  doses  of  from  three  to  six
fluidounces.

Aqua  Ammonia. (See  Amrnonice  Liquor.)

Aqua  Amygdalae  Amar^e. Bitter  Almond  Water.

Preparation.  —  Rub  Essential  Oil  of  Bitter  Almonds  sixteen  minims,
with  Carbonate  of  Magnesia  one  drachm,  and  gradually  add,  while  con-
tinuing the  trituration,  Distilled  Water  two  pints :  filter  through  paper.

History. — This  preparation  is  very  liable  to  spontaneous  decomposi-
tion, and  should,  therefore,  be  prepared  only  in  small  quantities  at  a
time,  or  as  required  for  use.  If  a  drop  of  sulphuric  acid  be  added  to  a
pint  of  the  mixture,  and  it  be  kept  closely  stopped  and  excluded  from
the  light  and  air,  it  may  be  preserved  for  a  long  time.  This  is  a  pre-
ferable preparation  to  that  made  by  distilling  bitter  almonds  with  water,
which  is  much  stronger  than  that  made  according  to  the  above  formula,


1022  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — It  is  a  sedative,  affecting  the  system  similarly
to  medicinal  hydrocyanic  acid,  and  has  been  employed  alone,  and  in
combination  with  other  agents,  in  nervous  cough,  and  various  spas-
modic affections.  The  dose  of  it,  when  freshly  made,  is  two  fiuidrachms,
which  may  be  carefully  and  gradually  increased  to  six  or  eight
fiuidrachms,  and  which  may  be  repeated  two  or  three  times  daily.

Aqua  Calcis. Lime- Water.

Preparation. — Add  about  four  ounces  of  Unslaked  Lime  to  Distilled
Water  one  gallon.  Stir  it  up  well,  and  then  set  it  aside  for  three  or  four
hours. Then  pour  off  the  clear  liquor  as  it  may  be  wanted.

History. — This  is  a  solution  of  lime  in  water,  and  may  be  made  with
pure  spring  or  river  water,  instead  of  distilled  water.  Water  dissolves
but  a  very  small  proportion  of  lime,  and  in  larger  quantity  when  cold
than  when  hot;  hence  the  propriety  of  employing  cold  water  in  the  pro-
cess. Lime-water  is  colorless,  inodorous,  and  of  a  disagreeable  alkaline
taste ;  it  forms  an  imperfect  soap  with  oils,  and  changes  vegetable  blues
to  green.  It  attracts  carbonic  acid  from  the  atmosphere,  with  the  for-
mation of  carbonate  of  lime,  on  which  account  it  should  be  kept  in  closely
stopped  bottles,  or  what  is  more  convenient,  in  bottles  containing  an
excess  of  lime.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Lime-water  is  antacid,  anti-lkhic,  tonic,  and
astringent.  It  has  been  recommended  in  epilepsy,  palpitation  of  the
heart,  and  spasmodic  diseases  generally,  accompanied  with  acidity  of
stomach,  also  in  painful  affections  of  the  stomach  dependent  on  disor-
dered digestion,  as  pyrosis  and  gastrodynia.  It  is  likewise  beneficial  in
chronic  dysentery  and  diarrhea,  and  diabetes,  especially  when  given  in
combination  with  a  decoction  of  white  oak-bark.  In  dyspepsia,  phthisis,
and  other  forms  of  disease,  where  from  acidity  of  the  stomach  the  usual
food  is  rejected,  or  if  retained  gives  rise  to  much  uneasiness  and  unplea-
sant symptoms,  one  part  of  lime-water  added  to  three  parts  of  good
sweet  milk,  has  been  found  useful  both  as  medicine  and  diet.  A  table-
spoonful  of  lime-water  will  often  allay  vomiting.  It  has  been  advan-
tageously used  as  an  injection  in  gleet,  gonorrhea,  leucorrhea,  ulceration,
and  increased  discharges  from  the  bladder;  in  all  instances  during  the
absence  of  inflammation.  Externally,  it  has  been  applied  as  a  wash  in
tinea  capitis,  scabies,  foul  and  gangrenous  ulcers,  and  when  mixed  with
linseed  oils  forms  a  liniment  of  much  value  in  burns  and  scalds.  It  has
frequently  been  employed  as  a  vermifuge  in  combination  with  worm-
seed  oil,  or  some  other  anthelmintics.  If  its  use  be  too  long  continued,
it  debilitates  the  stomach.  An  overdose  produces  unpleasant  symptoms;
the  remedies  for  which  are  bland  and  mucilaginous  drinks.  The  dose
of  lime-water  is  from  four  fiuidrachms  to  four  fluidounces;  it  is  best  taken
in  an  equal  measure  of  milk.

Off.  Prep. — Linimentum  Calcis.


Aqu-iE  Medicate.  1023

Aqua  Camphors. Camphor  Water.

Preparation.  —  Triturate  Camphor  two  drachms  with  Alcohol  forty
minims,  then  add  Carbonate  of  Magnesia  four  drachms,  and  continue
the  trituration,  and  finally,  gradually  add  Distilled  Water  two  pints ;
when  all  is  well  rubbed  together,  filter  through  paper.

History. — By  the  above  process  one  fluidounce  of  water  is  made  to
contain  over  three  grains  of  camphor.  The  first  trituration  with  the
alcohol,  deprives  the  camphor  of  its  cohesiveness,  and  renders  it  more
readily  pulverizable,  and  the  subsequent  trituration  with  carbonate  of
magnesia  effects  a  very  minute  division  of  it,  so  that  a  permanent  solu-
tion of  camphor  is  obtained,  of  sufficient  strength  to  exert  an  influence
on  the  system. The  filtration  separates  the  magnesia.

Properties  and  Uses. — Camphor  water  is  chiefly  used  in  low  fevers
and  typhoid  conditions,  for  the  purpose  of  quieting  restlessness  and  other
sj'mptoms  of  nervous  derangement  or  debility.  It  has  also  been  em-
ployed to  allay  uterine  after-pains,  and  in  all  cases  where  camphor  is
indicated.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  two  fluidounces  repeated
every  one  or  two  hours.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Camphorse  Composita.

Aqua  Cinnamomi. Cinnamon  Water.

Preparation. — Triturate  Oil  of  Cinnamon  half  a  fiuidrachm  with  Car-
bonate of  Magnesia  a  drachm,  and  then  with  Distilled  Water  two  pints,
(o  be  gradually  added  ;  finally  filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Cinnamon  water  should  be  cautiously  used  in
inflammatory  complaints.  It  is  useful  in  passive  hemorrhage  from  the
lungs,  stomach,  kidneys,  or  uterus,  and  in  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysen-
tery; and  is  much  employed  as  a  vehicle  for  other  less  agreeable
medicines.  It  will  sometimes  allay  vomiting.  The  dose  is  from  two
fluidrachms  to  two  fluidounces.

Aqua  Destillata. Distilled  Water.

Preparation.  —  In  a  clean  retort  kept  only  for  this  purpose,  place
Water  ten  gallons.  First  distil  two  pints  and  throw  them  away;  then
distil  eight  gallons.  Keep  the  Distilled  water  in  glass  bottles,  well
stopped.

History. — Distilled  water,  although  not  a  medicated  water,  is  intro-
duced here,  partly  to  avoid  a  separate  place  for  it,  and  partly  on  account
of  its  extensive  employment  in  the  preparation  of  medicated  waters.  For
medicinal  purposes,  distilled  water  should  undergo  no  change  by  sul-
phureted  hydrogen,  nor  on  the  addition  of  tincture  of  soap,  subacctate
of  lead,  chloride  of  barium,  oxalate  of  ammonia,  nitrate  of  silver,  or  lime-
water,  and  should  evaporate  without  residue.  In  many  pharmaceutical
and  chemical  processes,  distilled  water  is  very  essential,  while  in  others
pure  spring  or  river,  or  rain  water  will  be  sufficient. As  the  first  portion  of


1024  Pharmacy.

water  which  comes  over  during  distillation  is  apt  to  contain  carbonic
acid,  or  other  volatile  impurity,  it  is  commonly  rejected.  For  the  pro-
perties and  uses  of  water,  see  Aqua  in  Part  I.

Aqua  Mentha  Piperita. Peppermint  Water.

Preparation.  —  Triturate  Oil  of  Peppermint  half  a  fiuidrachm,  with
Carbonate  of  Magnesia  a  drachm,  then  with  Distilled  Water  two  'pints,
to  be  gradually  added  ;  finally,  filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — Peppermint  wa'er  is  used  as  an  antispasmodic
and  carminative,  in  flatulence  and  flatulent  colic,  to  allay  nausea  and
vomiting,  and  as  a  gentle  aromatic  stimulant.  The  dose  is  from  four
fluidrachms  to  two  fluidounces,  three  or  four,  or  more  times  a  day.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Camphors  Composita.

Aqua  Mentha  Viridis. Spearmint  Water.

Preparation. — Triturate  Oil  of  Spearmint  half  a  fiuidrachm,  with  Car-
bonate of  Magnesia  a  drachm,  then  with  Distilled  Water  two  pints,  to  be
gradually  added;  finally,  filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — Similar  to  those  of  peppermint  water,  to  which
some  persons  prefer  it. The  dose  is  also  the  same.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Camphorae  Composita.

Aqua  Picis  Liquids. Tar  Water.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tar  two  pints,  Boiling  Water  a  gallon.  Mix
together,  and  stir  with  a  wooden  rod  for  fifteen  minutes.  When  cold,
and  the  tar  has  subsided,  strain  the  liquor  and  keep  it  in  well  stopped
bottles.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tar  water  is  stimulant  and  diuretic,  and  exerts
an  influence  more  especially  on  mucous  membranes,  hence  it  has  been
found  useful  in  chronic  catarrhal  and  urinary  affections,  in  doses  of  one
or  two  pints  daily.  Sometimes  tar  water  is  prepared  in  pulmonary  affec-
tions, as  above-named,  with  an  addition  of  Honey  two  pints.  Externally,
it  is  useful  as  a  wash  in  several  chronic  cutaneous  diseases.

Aqua  Pimento. Pimento  Water.

Preparation. — Triturate  Oil  of  Pimento  two  fluidrachms,  with  Powdered
Silex  two  drachms,  then  with  Distilled  Water  one  gallon,  to  be  gradually
added  ;  finally,  filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — Carminative  in  the  dose  of  one  or  two  fluid-
ounces.

Aqua  Hedeom.e  Pulegioides. Pennyroyal  Water.

Preparation. — Triturate  Oil  of  American  Pennyroyal  half  a  fiuidrachm,
with  Carbonate  of  Magnesia  a  drachm,  then  with  Distilled  Water  two
pints,  to  be  gradually  added  ;  finally,  filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Pennyroyal  water  may  be  used  for  the  same
purposes  and  in  the  same  doses  as  peppermint  and  spearmint  waters,  to
which  some  persons  prefer  it.


Cataplasmata.  1025

Aqua  Ros^e. Rose  Water.

Preparation. — To  the  fresh  petals  of  Hundred-leaved  Roses  eight
pounds,  add  Water  two  gallons. Distil  one  gallon.

History. — When  thus  prepared  rose  water  has  the  fragrance  of  the
rose  in  great  perfection  ;  but  is  liable  to  spoil  by  long  keeping,  especially
if  exposed  to  the  action  of  light  and  air.  It  may  also  be  prepared  in
the  same  manner  as  pursued  for  Cinnamon  Water;  or  by  distilling
together  water  and  the  oil  of  roses.

Properties  and  Uses. — Rose  water  is  destitute  of  any  irritating  proper-
ties, and  is  much  used  in  collyria  and  other  lotions,  chiefly  on  account
of  its  agreeable  odor;  applied  to  the  eye,  it  has  a  slightly  stimulating
and  cooling  influence.

Aqua  Sambuci. Elder  Flower  Water.

Preparation.  —  To  Fresh  Elder  Flowers  ten  pounds,  add  Water  two
gallons,  distil  one  gallon.

Elder  flowers  yield  very  little  oil;  the  water  distilled  from  them  is
sometimes  used  in  collyria  and  other  lotions.

N.  B.  Medicated  Waters  are  frequently  mau  by  adding  to  a  few
pounds  of  the  leaves  or  flowers  of  the  ariicle  required,  six  or  seven  fluid-
ounces  of  proof  spiiit,  and  two  gallons  of  water;  from  which  one  gallon
is  distilled.  In  this  way  was  formerly  obtained  nearly  all  of  these
preparations,  but  the  processes  given  above,  are  now  esteemed  the  best.
Aqua  Floium  Aurantii,  Orange  Flower  Water,  Aqua  Foeniculi,  Fennel
Water,  Aqua  Menthae  Piperitaa,  Peppermint  Water,  Aqua  Mt  nthae  Viri-
dis,  Spearmint  Water,  together  with  several  others  may  be  procured
from  the  plant  or  flowers,  by  the  mode  of  distillation  just  referred  to.


CATAPLASMATA.
Cataplasms.

Cataplasms  or  poultices  are  substances  intended  for  local  application  ;
they  are  always  moist,  and  of  a  consistence  not  to  adhere  firmly  to  the
skin,  nor  to  spread  over  the  parts  adjacent  to  their  application.  They
are  of  various  kinds  ;  some  are  discutient,  others  favor  suppuration  ;
some  again  are  refrigerant,  and  others  emollient,  or  stimulating.  They
are  usually  applied  tepid  or  warm,  and  should  not  be  allowed  to  dry
previous  to  being  renewed.

Cataplasma  Careonis. Charcoal  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — Macerate  Bread,  two  ounces,  with  Water  ten  fluid  ounces,
for  a  short  lime  near  the  lire  ;  then  gradually  add  and  mix  with  it  Pow-
dered Flaxseed  ten  drachms,  stirring  so  as  to  make  a  soft  cataplasm.
With  this  mix  Powdered  Charcoal  two  drachms,  and  when  prepared  for
application,  sprinkle  one  drachm  of  charcoal  on  the  surface  of  the  cata-
plasm.

65


1026  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — As  recently  prepared  charcoal  absorbs  the  prin-
ciples on  which  the  offensive  odor  of  putrid  animal  matter  depends,  this
cataplasm  will  be  found  an  excellent  application  to  foul  and  gangrenous
ulcers,  correcting  their  fetor,  and  improving  their  condition.  It  should
be  renewed  two  or  three  times  in  every  twenty-four  hours.

Cataplasma  Dauci. Carrot  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — Take  of  Garden  Carrots,  scraped,  four  ounces,  Indian-
meal  one  ounce,  Boiling  Water  a  sufficient  quantity  to  form  a  cataplasm
of  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  will  be  found  a  valuable  application  to
indolent  and  gangrenous  ulcers,  and  painful  tumors.

Cataplasma  Fermenti. Yeast  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — To  one  pint  of  Milk,  tepid,  add  Yeast  four  Jluidounces,
and  fine  Slippery  Elm  bark  a  sufficient  quantity  to  form  a  cataplasm  of
the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  valuable  as  an  antiseptic  application.
It  will  be  found  especially  serviceable  in  gangrenous  ulcerations,  the
fetor  of  Avhich  it  corrects,  while  it  hastens  the  suppuration  of  the  slough.

Cataplasma  Lini. Flaxseed  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — To  Boiling  Water  ten  Jluidounces,  add  gradually,  Pow-
dered Flaxseed  four  ounces  and  a  half,  or  a  sufficient  quantity  ;  stir  con-
stantly, so  as  to  make  a  cataplasm.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  convenient  emollient  poultice,  to
relieve  the  tense  condition  of  the  vessels  in  inflammation,  and  to  promote
suppuration.  Fresh  lard,  or  olive  oil  spread  over  its  surface,  will  pre-
serve its  softness,  and  prevent  it  from  adhering  to  the  skin.

Cataplasma  Lobelia. Lobelia  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — To  equal  ]?arls  by  weight  of  Powdered  Lobelia  and
fine  Elm  bark,  add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  weak  Ley,  warm,  to  form  a
cataplasm.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  excellent  application  to  felons,
white-swelling,  wounds,  fistula,  inflammation  of  the  breast  and  other
parts,  stings  of  insects,  erysipelatous  inflammations,  and  painful  swellings
or  ulcerations. It  should  be  frequently  renewed.

Cataplasma  Oxycocci. Cranberry  Cataplasm.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  ripe  Cranberries  any  quantity,  and  bruise
them  to  form  a  cataplasm.

Properties  and  Uses. — Applied  around  the  throat  in  quinsy,  and  in
swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  throat  in  scarlatina  and  other  diseases,  I
know  of  no  more  useful  agent;  its  action  is  very  prompt,  relieving  in  a
few  hours.  It  has  been  likewise  reputed  useful  in  cancerous  ulcers,  ery-
sipelatous inflammations,  and  gouty-rheumatism.


Cerata.  1027

Cataplasma  Phytolacca. Poke-root  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — Place  fresh  Poke-root  in  hot  ashes  to  roast,  -when  suffi-
ciently done,  mash  it,  and  form  a  cataplasm.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  may  be  applied  to  all  kinds  of  tumors  in
order  to  discuss  them ;  or  if  they  be  too  far  advanced,  it  will  hasten
suppuration.  In  the  latter  instance  its  action  is  accompanied  with  much
pain.  It  is  especially  valuable  in  tumors  of  an  indolent  character,  as
bubos. It  should  be  renewed  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Cataplasma  Stramonii. Stramonium  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  fresh  Leaves  of  Stramonium  any  quantity,
bruise  them,  and  add  a  small  quantity  of  hot  Water  to  form  a  sufficiently
moist  cataplasm.

Properties  and  Uses. — I  have  found  this  a  decidedly  efficacious  appli-
cation in  peritoneal  inflammation,  the  whole  abdomen  is  to  be  covered
with  it;  likewise  in  acute  rheumatism,  and  in  gastro-intestinal  inflamma-
tions. Applied  to  the  perineum  in  enlargement  of  the  prostate,  for  the
purpose  of  securing  the  passage  of  the  catheter  in  case  of  retention  of
urine,  when  it  cannot  otherwise  be  entered  into  the  bladder,  I  know  of
no  better  agent — it  should  remain  on  the  parts  about  an  hour,  before
attempting  the  introduction  of  the  catheter.  It  will  be  found  valuable
in  all  rheumatic  or  neuralgic  pains.

Cataplasma  Ulmi. Elm  Cataplasm.

Preparation. — Take  of  Powdered  Elm  bark  a  sufficient  quantity  ;  stir
it  in  hot  Water,  or  Milk  and  Water,  to  the  consistence  of  a  cataplasm.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  cataplasm  is  of  almost  universal  applica-
tion, and  is  superior,  in  many  respects,  to  every  other.  As  an  applica-
tion to  painful  swellings,  inflammations,  ulcerations,  and  to  facilitate  the
separation  of  the  slough  produced  by  caustics,  and  for  various  other
purposes,  it  stands,  and  justly  too,  in  high  repute  among  Eclectic  physi-
cians.


CERATA.

Cerates.

These  are  substances  of  an  unctuous  character,  and  are  usually  com-
posed of  lard  or  oil  combined  by  means  of  heat  with  wax,  spermaceti,  or
resin,  and  to  which  various  medicinal  agents  are  often  added.  They  have
a  consistence  between  those  of  ointments  and  plasters,  and  at  the  ordinary
temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  are  capable  of  being  spread  upon  linen
or  leather,  by  means  of  a  spatula  ;  and  when  applied  to  the  surface  of  the
body,  they  do  not  melt  or  run.  In  the  preparation  of  cerates,  the
apothecary  should  be  very  cautious  not  to  employ  oil  or  lard  which  pos-
sesses the  slightest  degree  of  rancidity ;  fresh  and  sweet  articles  of  this


1028  Pharmacy.

kind  must  alone  be  used.  A  gentle  heat  will  be  sufficient  to  effect  the
fusion,  and  this  is  best  obtained  by  means  of  a  water  bath;  and  when
the  mixture  is  cooling,  it  should  be  constantly  stirred,  and  the  portions
which  concrete  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel  should  be  removed  from  time
to  time,  and  mixed  thoroughly  with  the  more  fluid  portion,  until  the
whole  attains  the  proper  consistence.  In  the  preparation  of  a  large  quan-
tity of  cerate,  it  is  better  to  heat  the  vessel  in  which  the  cooling  takes
place,  previous  to  pouring  in  the  mixture,  so  that  the  portion  next  the
vessel  may  not  cool  too  suddenly  and  render  the  mixture  less  uniform  in
its  consistence.

Ceratum Calamine. Calamine  Cerate. Turner's  Cerate.

Preparation. — Take  of  Yellow  Wax  three  ounces,  Lard  one  pound,
melt  them  together,  and  when  upon  cooling  they  begin  to  thicken,  add
Prepared  Calamine  three  ounces,  and  stir  the  mixture  constantly  until
cool.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  cerate  is  mildly  astringent,  and  may  be
used  in  excoriations  and  superficial  ulcerations,  produced  by  irritating
secretions,  chafing  of  the  skin,  burns,  scalds,  or  other  causes.

Ceratum Cetacei. Spermaceti  Cerate.

Preparation. — Melt  together  White  Wax  three  ounces,  and  Spermaceti
one  ounce;  then  add  of  Olive  Oil,  previously  heated,  six  Jtuidounces,  and
stir  the  mixture  until  cool.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  cerate  is  employed  as  a  mild  dressing  for
blisters,  wounds,  and  excoriations ;  and  as  the  basis  of  more  active
preparations.

Ceratum Crotonis. Crotvn  OH  Cerate.

Preparation. — Melt  Lard  Jive  ounces,  with  White  Wax  one  ounce,  and
when  nearly  cool,  add  Croton  Oil  two  ounces,  and  stir  until  cool.

Properties  and  Uses. — Croton  oil  cerate  is  a  rubefacient  and  vesicant,
and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  such  actions,  or  counter-irritation,
are  demanded.

Ceratum  Resin^e.  (Unguenlum  Re  since  Albo2.)  Resin  Cerate.  Ba-
silicon Ointment.

Preparation. — Melt  together.  Rosinjf?«;e  ounces.  Lard  eight  ounces  ;  Yel-
low Wax  two  ounces;  then  strain  through  linen  to  remove  impurities  which
are  apt  to  be  present  in  the  rosin,  and  stir  the  mixture  constantly  until  cool.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  cerate  forms  a  gently  stimulant  applica-
tion to  blistered  surfaces,  indolent  ulcers,  burns,  scalds,  and  chilblains.

Ceratum  Sabin^e. Savine  Cerate.

Preparation. — Take  of  Savin,  in  powder,  two  ounces ;  Resin  Cerate  a
pound. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — Savine  Cerate  is  used  as  a  dressing  to  perpetual
blisters,  in  preference to the  fly  ointment,  as  it  has  no  tendency  to


Cerei  —  Cereoli.  1029

produce  strangury.  It  has  a  fine  deep-green  color,  with  the  odor  of  the
leaves,  and  as  exposure  impairs  its  properties,  it  should  be  kept  in
closely  covered  vessels.  The  white  coat  which  forms  upon  the  blistered
surface  during  the  use  of  this  cerate,  should  be  occasionally  removed,
as  it  prevents  its  contact  with  the  surface.

Ceratum  Simplex. Simple  Cerate.

Preparation. — Melt  together,  Lard  eight  ounces,  White  Wax  four
ounces ;  and  stir  constantly  until  cool.

Properties  and  Uses. — Simple  Cerate  is  a  very  mild  application  to
irritated  surfaces,  and  is  used  for  dressing  blisters,  wounds,  etc.;  and
also  improperly  employed  as  a  vehicle  for  many  substances  to  be  applied
by  inunction.  The  lard  employed  in  its  preparation  should  be  perfectly
free  from  rancidity,  and  the  heat  should  be  as  gentle  as  possible,  so  as  not
to  produce  the  least  decomposition.  It  should  be  put  up  in  small  jars,
and  closely  covered  with  tin  foil,  in  order  to  exclude  the  air.


CEREI.  CEREOLI.
Bougies.
Preparation. — Bougies  are  made  by  dipping  strips  of  soft  linen  cloth,
rather  wider  at  one  end  than  at  the  other,  into  certain  emplastic  or  elas-
tic compositions,  folding  them  closely,  and  rolling  them  firmly  on  a
smoo'h  slab.  For  elastic  bougies,  pieces  of  catgut,  bundles  of  thread,
etc.,  are  sometimes  used.  The  following  are  some  of  the  compositions
held  in  most  repute  : — ■

1.  Bell's. — Lead  plaster  four  ounces;  Yellow  Wax  one  ounce  and  a
half; Olive  Oil  three  drachms.

2.  Hunter's. — Olive  Oil  three  pounds;  Yellow  Wax  one  pound ;  Red
Lead  one  pound  and  a  half ; boil  together  over  a  slow  fire  till  combined.

3.  Swediaur's  While.  —  White  Wax  one  pound;  Spermaceti  three
drachms;  Acetate  of  Lead  from  two  drachms  to  one  ounce;  boil  together
slowly.

4.  Piderit's  Wax. — Yellow  Wax  six  parts ;  Olive  Oil  one  part.

5.  Goulard's. — Yellow  Wax  six  ounces;  melted  and  mixed  by  stir-
ring with  Goulard's  Extract  of  Lead  from  two  drachms  to  two  ounces.-

6.  Elastic. — Boiled  Linseed  0\\  twelve  ounces  ;  Amber  four  ounces;
Oil  of  Turpentine  four  ounces,  in  which  is  dissolved  Caoutchouc  five
drachms.  Melt  and  Mix  the  articles  well  together,  and  spread  the  com-
pound at  three  successive  intervals  upon  a  silk  cord  or  web.  Place  the
pieces,  so  coated,  in  a  stove-oven  heated  to  150°  F.,  and  leave  them  in
it  for  twelve  hours  adding  fifteen  or  sixteen  fresh  layers  in  succession,
until  the  instruments  have  acquired  the  proper  size.  Polish  first  with
pumice-stone,  and  finally  smooth  with  tripoli  and  oil.


1030  Pharmacy.

Bougies  are  usually  employed  for  dilating  strictures,  as  of  the  urethra,
vagina,  neck  of  the  uterus,  and  rectum.  The  largest  size  that  can  be
conveniently  introduced  is  first  used,  and  the  size  gradually  increased  as
the  treatment  progresses.  The  wax  bougie  is  often  employed  for  obtain-
ing the  form  of  an  urethral  stricture,  its  location  and  distance  from  the
external  orifice.


CONFECTIONES.
Confections  or  Conserves.

Confectio  Ros^e. Conserve  of  Roses. Confection  of  Roses.

Preparation. — Rub  Red  Roses,  in  powder,  four  ounces,  with  Rose
Water  eight  fluidounces,  heated  to  150°;  then  gradually  add  Refined
Sugar,  in  powder,  thirty  ounces  ;  Clarified  Honey  six  ounces.  Beat  the
whole  together  in  a  marble  mortar,  until  thoroughly  mixed.  An  iron
mortar  will  not  answer.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  confection  is  slightly  astringent,  but  is
almost  exclusively  used  as  a  vehicle  of  other  medicines,  or  to  impart
consistence  to  the  pilular  mass.

Confectio  Senn^e.  Confection  of  Senna.  Electuary  of  Senna.  Leni-
tive Electuary.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Senna  eight  ounces ;  Coriander  [seed],  four
ounces ;  Liquorice  Root,  bruised,  three  ounces  ;  Figs  a  pound;  Pulp  of
Prunes,  Pulp  of  Tamarinds,  Pulp  of  Purging  Cassia  each  half  a  pound;
Sugar  [refined],  two  pomids  and  a  half;  Water  four  pints.  Rub  the
senna  and  coriander  together,  and  separate  ten  ounces  of  the  powder
with  a  sieve.  Boil  the  residue  with  the  figs  and  liquorice  root,  in  the
water,  to  one-half;  then  press  out  the  liquor  and  strain  it.  Evaporate
the  strained  liquor  by  means  of  a  water-bath  to  a  pint  and  a  half;  then
add  the  sugar  and  form  a  syrup.  Lastly,  rub  the  pulps  gradually  with
the  syrup,  and  having  thrown  down  the  sifted  powder,  beat  the  whole
together  till  they  are  thoroughly  mixed. — U.  S.

History. — The  confection  of  Senna,  when  properly  made,  is  an  elegant
preparation.  The  pulp  of  purging  cassia  is  most  conveniently  obtained
by  boiling  the  bruised  pods  in  water,  straining  the  decoction,  and  evapor-
ating to  the  consistence  of  an  electuary.  The  pulp  of  prunes  may  be
prepared  by  boiling  the  fruit  in  a  small  quantity  of  water  to  soften  it,
then  pressing  it  through  a  hair  sieve,  and  evaporating  to  a  proper  con-
sistence. The  tamarinds,  when  too  dry  for  immediate  use,  may  be
treated  in  the  same  manner.  In  each  case,  the  evaporation  should  be
completed  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  in  order  to  prevent  the  pulps  from
being  burnt.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  one  of  our  best  and  most  pleasant  laxa-
tives, being  admirably  adapted  to  cases  of  habitual  costiveness,  especially


Decocta.  1031

in  pregnant  women  and  persons  affected  with  piles.  It  is  also  very  use-
ful in  the  constipation  which  is  apt  to  attend  convalescence  from  fevers
and  other  acute  diseases.  The  mean  dose  is  two  drachms,  to  be  taken
at  bed  time. —  U.  S.  Disp.

Of.  Prep. — Confectio  Sennaa  Composita.

Confectio  Senn^e  Composita.  Compound  Electuary  of  Senna.  Pile
Electuary.

Preparation. — Take  of  Cream  of  Tartar  and  Pulverized  Jalap  of  each
one  ounce;  Confection  of  Senna  two  ounces;  Flowers  of  Sulphur  and
Nitrate  of  Potassa,ofeach,Aa//'ara  ounce;  Molasses,  sufficient  to  make  a
thick  pill  mass.

Properties  and  Uses. — Excellent  for  the  blind  and  bleeding  piles,  and
constipation.  Half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm  may  be  taken  every  night
dissolved  in  water;  or  it  may  be  made  into  four-grain  pills,  of  which  four
may  be  taken  night  and  morning.


DECOCTA.
Decoctions.

Decoctions  are  solutions  of  the  medicinal  virtues  of  various  parts  of
plants,  obtained  by  boiling  these  parts  in  water.  The  soluble  principles
of  medicinal  plants  are  generally  more  readily  removed  by  water  main-
tained at  the  boiling  point,  than  at  a  lower  temperature ;  consequently
decoction,  in  many  instances,  is  preferred  as  a  method  of  extracting  the
greatest  degree  of  activity  of  the  medicinal  virtues  of  plants.  The  pro-
cess of  boiling  should  always  be  conducted  in  a  vessel  so  covered  as  to
confine  the  vapor  over  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  and  at  the  same  time,
prevent  the  access  of  atmospheric  air,  which  frequently  exerts  an  inju-
rious influence  upon  the  active  principle ;  and  as  a  general  rule,  the
boiling  should  not  be  long  continued,  as  the  various  principles  existing  in
the  plants  may  react  upon  each  other,  and  impair  their  therapeutical
influences.  Vegetables,  in  which  the  active  principle  is  volatile,  in
which  ebullition  would  produce  an  unfavorable  change  so  as  to  impair
its  activity,  or  in  which  it  exists  in  combination  with  some  inert  or  dis-
agreeable principles  not  required,  are  not  proper  subjects  for  decoction,
and  in  the  latter  instance,  especially  when  the  objectionable  principles
are  to  be  obtained  only  at  the  boiling  point.  Decoctions  should  always
be  strained  while  hot.

Dry  substances,  as  roots,  barks,  woods  etc.,  submitted  to  decoction,
should  be  powdered,  sliced,  or  bruised,  according  to  their  character,  and
the  purest  and  safest  water  should  be  selected  for  use.  Sometimes  pre-
vious maceration  will  be  found  beneficial  by  removing  the  cohesion  of
the  vegetable  fiber.  In  compound  decoctions,  where  several  articles  are
to  be  boiled  together,  the  various  ingredients  should  be  added  at  diffe-
rent  periods  of  the  process,  according  to  the  length  of  time  required  to


1032  Pharmacy.

extract  their  virtues;  and  should  any  of  them  possess  a  volatile  active
principle,  it  should  be  added  at  the  last  stage  of  the  boiling  to  the  hot
decoction,  which  should  be  allowed  to  cool  in  a  covered  vessel.

Tin  or  iron  vessels  are  most  commonly  preferred  in  the  preparation
of  decoctions;  but  iron  utensils  should  never  be  used  when  astringent
vegetables  are  employed.  In  some  cases,  glass  or  earthenware  vessels
are  the  best,  as  those  made  of  metals  are  frequently  corroded  by  the
ingredients  of  the  decoction.

Decoctions  are  very  seldom  ordered  from  the  apothecary,  but  almost
always  arc  made  a  matter  of  domestic  management,  hence,  a  list  of
decoctions  is  omitted  as  unnecessary,  an  explanation  of  the  general  rules
relative  to  them  being  deemed  sufficient.  The  ordinary  mode  of  pre-
paring decoctions,  among  Eclectics,  is  to  allow  one  ounce  of  the  article
used  to  one  pint  of  water,  and  the  dose  of  which  is  from  one  to  four
fluidounces,  depending  on  the  activity  of  the  agent,  or  the  physiological
effect  which  is  required.  Where  the  proportions  are  different  from
these,  it  will  be  referred  to  in  the  description  of  the  properties  and  uses
of  the  article.

From  various  influences,  decoctions  are  very  liable  to  speedy  change
or  decomposition  ;  consequently  they  should  be  prepared  only  when
required  for  use,  and  should  not  be  kept,  especially  in  warm  weather,
for  a  longer  period  than  forty-eight  hours.


EMPLASTRA.
Plasters.

Plasters  are  employed  as  external  applications.  They  usually  possess
an  amount  of  solidity  requiring  the  aid  of  heat  to  spread  them,  and  aro
adhesive  at  the  usual  temperature  of  the  body.

Jn  the  formation  of  plasters,  the  application  of  too  much  or  too  long-
continued  heat  must  be  sedulously  avoided,  lest  decomposition  of  one  or
more  of  the  articles  entering  into  their  composition  ensues,  or  perhaps
some  volatile  principle,  necessary  to  their  activity,  be  driven  off.
After  the  ingredients  composing  them  have  been  properly  combined,  it
is  usual  to  form  them  into  cylindrical  rolls  or  long  square  sticks,  and
cover  them  with  paper,  so  as  to  exclude  the  air,  the  action  of  which  is
apt  to  change  their  color,  and  render  them  hard  and  brittle;  when  this
condition  takes  place,  it  may,  in  a  great  degree,  be  remedied  by  melting
the  plaster  with  a  moderate  heat,  and  then  a  sufficient  quantity  of  oil  to
impart  to  it  the  proper  consistence.  Plasters  should  be  neither  too  soft
nor  too  hard  ;  at  ordinary  temperatures  they  should  be  firm,  should  spread
easily  when  moderately  heated,  and  after  being  spread,  should  remain
soft,  pliable,  and  adhesive,  without  melting  at  the  temperature  of  the  body.

Plasters  are  spread  upon  various  articles  according  to  the  particular
purposes  they  are  intended  to  fulfill ;  when  they  are  to  be  applied  to  the


Emplastra.  1033

sound  skin,  leather  is  generally  preferred  ;  and  when  used  as  a  dressing
to  ulcerated  or  abraded  surfaces,  or  for  the  purposes  of  approximating
and  retaining  in  contact  the  sides  of  wounds,  cither  linen  or  muslin  are
employed.  Sometimes  oil-silk  or  India-rubber  cloth  is  employed,  and
where  economy  is  desired,  they  are  spread  on  stout  paper.  The  leather
generally  used  for  spreading  plasters  is  white  sheep-skin.  After  having
cut  the  leather  to  the  required  shape  and  size,  the  plaster  is  spread
thinly  and  evenly  upon  it,  leaving  a  margin  from  a  quarter  of  an  inch
to  half  an  inch  uncovered,  in  order  to  prevent  the  edges  from  soiling  the
clothing  which  may  come  in  contact  with  it,  as  well  as  to  facilitate  its
removal.  This  margin  is  accurately  obtained  by  pasting  strips  of  paper
along  the  edges  of  the  leather,  of  the  desired  width,  leaving  a  space  of
the  required  dimensions  in  the  center,  and  then  removing  them  after  the
spreading  has  been  effected.  Or  the  same  object  may  frequently  be
accomplished  by  employing  two  narrow  rules  of  sheet  tin,  graduated  in
inches,  and  so  shaped  that  each  of  them  may  form  two  sides  of  a  rec-
tangle, being  somewhat  similar  in  shape  to  a  carpenter's  square,  but
much  smaller.  These  may  be  applied  so  as  to  inclose  any  given  rectan-
gular space,  and  may  be  fixed  upon  the  leather  while  spreading  the
plaster  by  means  of  weights.  When  other  shapes  are  required,  as  in
the  instance  for  plasters  on  the  breast,  or  behind  the  ears,  pieces  of  tin,
having  a  vacuity  within  corresponding  to  the  required  outline,  may  be
employed.  A  plaster  may  be  spread  by  means  of  a  common  spatula,
but  the  most  convenient  method  is  by  means  of  a  peculiar  iron  instru-
ment made  expressly  for  the  purpose.  This  is  heated  by  means  of  a
spirit  lamp,  care  being  taken  that  its  temperature  be  not  so  elevated  as
to  discolor  or  decompose  the  plaster,  or  drive  off  any  of  its  volatile
ingredients.  A  sufficient  quantity  of  the  plaster  should  be  first  melted
by  the  heated  instrument,  and  received  on  a  piece  of  coarse,  stiff  paper,
and,  when  nearly  cool,  should  be  transferred  to  the  leather,  and  applied
evenly  over  its  extended  surface.  This  method  prevents  the  melted
plaster  from  penetrating  the  leather,  which  it  is  apt  to  do  when  applied
too  hot.  When  linen  or  muslin  is  employed,  and  the  plaster  is  to  be  of
large  dimensions,  it  is  recommended  to  pass  the  cloth  "on  which  the
plaster  has  been  laid,  through  a  machine  formed  of  a  spatula  fixed  by
screws  at  a  proper  distance  from  a  plate  of  polished  steel."  When  it  is
desired  to  obtain  quantities  of  plasters,  they  are  spread  by  a  machine
made  for  the  purpose,  for  an  account  of  which  the  reader  is  referred  to
"  Pharmacy,  by  Mohr,  Redwood  and  Procter."

Plasters  are  used  for  the  purposes  of  affording  mechanical  support  or
pressure  to  the  parts  to  which  they  are  applied;  for  binding  up  wounds;
for  preventing  atmospheric  contact,  and  as  anodyne,  discutient,  stimu-
lant, or  epispastic  applications.

Emplastrum  Belladonna. Plaster  of  Belladonna.


1034  Pharmacy.

Preparation. — Take  of  Extract  of  Belladonna  one  ounce  and  a  half ;
Resin  Plaster  three  ounces  ;  place  the  plaster  in  an  earthenware  mortar,
and  put  this  in  hot  water.  When  the  plaster  commences  to  melt,  add
the  Extract  of  Belladonna,  and  rub  the  ingredients  well  together.  Then
take  the  mortar  from  the  water-bath,  and  continue  the  trituration  till  the
mixture  cools.  Before  the  Belladonna  is  added  to  the  plaster,  it  must
first  be  brought  into  solution  with  water,  so  as  to  form  a  uniformly  soft
mass,  and  then  while  the  evaporation  of  the  water  is  going  on,  the  mix-
ture must  be  constantly  stirred  ;  without  these  precautions  the  extract
cannot  be  made  to  diffuse  uniformly  through  the  plaster.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  forms  a  useful  anodyne  application  in
rheumatic,  neuralgic  and  syphilitic  pains  ;  and  if  too  long  used  is  apt  to
produce  the  constitutional  effects  of  the  belladonna.

Emplastrum  Belladonna;  Compositum.  Compound  Plaster  of  Bel-
ladonna.

Preparation. — Take  of  Resin  Plaster  five  ounces  ;  Extract  of  Bella-
donna one  ounce  and  a  half ;  Extract  of  Conium  Maculatum  one  ounce
and  a  half ;  Pulverized  Iodine  two  scruples.  Place  the  plaster  in  an
earthenware  mortar,  and  put  this  in  hot  water.  When  the  plaster  com-
mences to  melt,  add  the  Extracts  of  Belladonna  and  Conium,  and  rub
the  ingredients  well  together  ;  then  take  the  mortar  from  the  water-
bath,  continuing  the  trituration,  and  when  nearly  cool,  add  the  Iodine.

N.  B.  The  inspissated  juices  of  the  above  narcotics  are  preferable  to
the  ordinary  extracts  in  preparing  this  plaster.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plaster  may  be  used  for  the  same  pur-
poses as  the  Belladonna  Plaster,  and  is  also  an  excellent  application  over
scrofulous  and  other  tumors,  white-swelling,  and  goitre  ;  and  may  like-
wise be  applied  over  the  region  of  the  liver  and  spleen  for  chronic  affec-
tions of  these  organs,  and  over  the  lumbar  vertebrae  in  severe  dysmen-
orrhea.— J.  K.

Emplastrum  Capsici  Compositum.  Compoxind  Capsicum  Plaster.
Common  Strengthening  Plaster. Sear  Cloth  Plaster.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rosin  one  pound ;  Beeswax  four  ounces  ;  Cap-
sicum four  ounces  ;  Spirit  one  quart.  Simmer  the  pepper,  inclosed  in  a
linen  bag,  in  the  spirit  for  one  hour,  then  strain.  Melt  the  other  articles
together,  and  add  the  tincture  ;  simmer  till  the  spirit  is  nearly  evapo-
rated. Then  take  it  from  the  fire,  and  when  nearly  cold,  add  Powdered
Camphor  two  ounces  ;  Oil  of  Sassafras  three  drachms. Stir  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  gently  stimulating  and  strength-
ening plaster,  and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where,  artificial  support,  pre-
vention of  the  contact  of  atmospheric  air,  or  mild  stimulation  is  required.

Emplastrum  Extracti  Aconiti  Radicis.  Plaster  of  Extract  of
Aconite  Root.


Emplastra.  1035

Preparation. — Take  of  Aconite  Root,  in  coarse  powder,  four  ounces  ;
alcohol,  sp.  gr.  0.835,  a  sufficient  quantity  ;  Adhesive  Plaster  three  ounces
and  a  half.  Moisten  the  powdered  Aconite  root  with  six  ounces  of  Alco-
hol, and  permit  it  to  macerate  twenty-four  hours,  then  put  it  in  a  perco-
lator, and  when  properly  packed,  pour  on  gradually  sufficient  Alcohol  to
make  a  pint  of  tincture.  Distil  off  three-fourths  of  the  Alcohol,  evapo-
rate the  residue  on  a  water-bath  to  a  thick,  syrupy  consistence,  then  add
the  Plaster,  previously  liquefied,  and  stir  constantly,  until  it  is  property
incorporated  with  the  soft  resinous  extract,  and  cools.

History. — This  formula  is  recommended  by  Wm.  Procter,  Jr.,  as  supe-
rior to  that  in  which  only  the  aconitia  enters,  being  more  uniform  in  its
strength  and  of  equal  efficacy.  It  has  a  brown  color,  and  homogeneous
consistence,  and  weighs  about  four  Troy  ounces.  It  should  be  spread  in
a  thin  layer  on  skin  or  oiled  silk,  and  may  be  used  several  times  when
its  application  has  not  been  too  long  continued  at  first.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  anodyne,  and  may  be  used  as  an
application  to  painful  and  inflamed  parts.  It  has  been  found  decidedly
beneficial  in  neuralgia  of  the  head,  and  in  painful  tumors  of  the  breast.

Emplastrum  Myric^e. Bayberry  Plaster. Green  Salve.

Preparation. — Take  of  White  Gum  Turpentine  and  Bayberry  Wax,
of  each  half  a  pound.  Melt  together,  strain,  and  stir  till  cold.  In
winter  a  small  quantity  of  Olive  Oil  may  be  added.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  very  valuable  and  efficacious  appli-
cation to  scrofulous  and  other  ulcers,  also  to  many  cutaneous  affections.
It  is  often  prepared  of  the  consistence  of  an  ointment  for  these  purposes.
See  Bayberry  Ointment.

Emplastrum  Picis  Compositum.  Compound  Tar  Plaster.  Irritating/
Plaster.

Preparation. — Boil  Tar  three  pounds,  for  half  an  hour  ;  then  add  Bur-
gundy Pitch  one  pound  and  a  half ;  White  Gum  Turpentine  one  pound,
(having  previously  melted  them  together,  and  strained).  Stir  them
together,  remove  from  the  fire,  and  add  finely  powdered  Mandrake  root,
Blood  root,  Poke  root,  Indian  Turnep,  of  each  ten  ounces.  Incorporate
well  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plaster  is  irritant,  rubefacient  and  suppu-
rative. It  is  used  extensively  in  all  cases  where  counter-irritation  or
powerful  revulsion  is  indicated,  in  neuralgia,  rheumatism,  and  in  all
painful  chronic  diseases.  It  acts  more  efficiently,  and  is  much  more
adhesive  when  spread  quite  thin,  on  soft  leather,  than  when  spread  on
any  kind  of  cloth  ;  though  it  may  be  spread  on  oil-silk,  india-rubber
cloth,  or  other  substance  that  will  not  absorb  its  moisture.  When  applied
to  a  part  of  the  body,  it  must  be  removed  daily,  for  the  purpose  of  thinly
respreading  the  same  leather  with  the  plaster,  which  is  to  be  immedi-
ately reapplied. This  course  is  to  be  continued  until  the  surface  to


103G  Pharmacy.

which  it  is  applied  commences  discharging  matter,  after  which  it  should
be  removed  two  or  three  times  a  day,  wiping  it  quite  dry  each  time
before  respreading  it,  and  likewise  carefully  drying  the  sore  as  much  as
possible.  This  latter  is  best  accomplished  by  laying  a  dry,  soft  cloth
upon  the  sore,  pressing  it  down  lightly  for  a  few  minutes,  so  as  to  absorb
all  the  pus  or  matter.  The  practitioner  must  bear  in  mind  that  he  is
never,  under  any  circumstances  whatever,  to  wet  the  sore,  as  it  will
cause  it  to  become  irritable  and  inflamed,  to  cease  suppurating  healthily,
and  in  the  majority  of  instances,  to  require  rapid  healing.

Whenever  the  application  of  this  plaster  becomes  so  irritating  and
painful  as  to  disturb  the  patient's  sleep,  or  cause  him  to  complain  loudly,
it  must  be  removed,  and  a  slippery  elm  poultice  substituted  ;  otherwise,
its  longer  employment  will  be  apt  to  aggravate  the  local  disease  for
which  it  is  applied.  Many  practitioners  consider  the  distuibance  of  sleep
alone,  as  an  indication  for  its  removal.  As  soon  as  the  elm  poultice  has
relieved  all  the  local  irritation,  the  plaster  may  be  reapplied,  if  it  is
required  to  maintain  the  suppurative  discharge  for  a  longer  period  of
time.  If  this  is  not  required,  the  sore  may  be  healed  by  some  simple
application,  as  an  ointment  made  of  beeswax  and  mutton  tallow,  which
is,  probably,  better  than  any  other,  as  it  does  not  stop  the  discharge  too
suddenlv  ;  in  some  instances,  the  black-salve  will  be  found  an  elegant
healim--  application.  Whenever  the  plaster,  poultice,  or  healing  applica-
tion is  removed,  the  sore  should,  each  and  every  time,  be  cleansed  from
matter,  in  the  manner  referred  to  above.  The  active  principles  of  the
ingredients  entering  into  the  composition  of  this  plaster,  are,  undoubt-
edly, absorbed  into  the  system  and  exert  an  alterative  influence,  as  their
peculiar  odors  may  be  readily  detected  in  the  excretions.  The  Irritating
Plaster  is  especially  an  Eclectic  agent,  not  being  used  by  the  practition-
ers of  other  schools. — T.  V.  M.

Emplastrum  Plumbi  Oxidi  Rubrum.  Red  Oxide  of  Lead  Plaster.
Black  Salve.

Preparation. — Take  of  Olive  Oil  three  quarts  ;  Rosin,  Beeswax,  of
each  three  ounces.  Melt  together,  and  raise  the  mixture  nearly  to  the
boiling  point  ;  then  gradually  add  Pulverized  Red  Lead  two  pounds  and
a  quarter.  Stir  constantly,  and  when  the  lead  is  taken  up  by  the  oil,  the
mixture  becomes  brown,  or  a  shining  black;  then  remove  from  the  fire,
and  when  nearly  cold  add  of  Pulverized  Camphor  half  an  ounce.  It
should  remain  on  the  fire  till  it  forms  a  proper  consistence  for  spreading,
and  which  may  be  known  by  dipping  a  spatula  or  knife  into  it  from  time
to  time,  and  allowing  it  to  cool.  In  the  preparation  of  this  plaster,  it
must  be  remembered  that  the  oil  will  require  a  heat  of  about  600°  for
ebullition  ;  and  should  bubbles  be  observed  when  the  heat  is  only  212°,
it  will  probably  be  owing  to  the  presence  of  water.  If  the  oil,  itself,  is
not  brought  to  the  boiling  point,  the  red  lead  will  not  be  acted  upon;


Emplastra.  1037

hence,  the  operator  should  not  add  it  until  the  oil  has  been  so  far  heated
as  to  scorch  a  feather  when  dipped  into  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  also  another  agent  peculiar  to  Eclectic
practice,  and  forms  a  valuable  application  in  burns,  many  cutaneous
affections,  and  in  syphilitic,  scrofulous,  fistulous,  and  all  other  species  of
ulcers.

A  preparation  similar  to  the  above  is  employed  by  many  practitioners
in  preference ;  it  is  made  as  follows  :  Boil  two  quarts  of  linseed  oil  until
it  will  scorch  a  feather,  then  gradually  add  one  pound  of  red  lead  in
powder,  when  the  red  lead  is  taken  up  by  the  oil,  and  the  mixture  is
black,  remove  from  the  fire,  and  when  nearly  cold  add  two  ounces  of  oil
of  turpentine,  and  stir  until  the  mixture  is  cold.

Emplastrum  Plumbi. Lead  Plaster. Litharge  Plaster.

Preparation. — Take  of  Semivitrified  Oxide  of  Lead,  in  very  fine  pow-
der, five  pounds;  Olive  Oil  a  gallon;  Water  two  pints.  Boil  them
together  over  a  gentle  fire,  stirring  constantly  until  the  oil  and  oxide  of
lead  unite  in  a  plaster.  It  will  be  proper  to  add  a  little  boiling  water,
if  that  employed  at  the  commencement  be  nearly  all  consumed  before
the  end  of  the  process. —  U.  S.

When  the  plaster  is  formed  it  should  be  removed  from  the  fire,  and
after  a  short  time  cold  water  should  be  poured  upon  it;  portions  should
then  be  detached  from  the  mass,  and,  having  been  well  knea-led  under
water,  in  order  to  separate  the  viscid  liquid  contained  in  the  interior,
should  be  formed  into  cylindrical  rolls,  and  wrapped  in  paper.

History. — In  the  preparation  of  this  plaster,  there  ensues  a  reaction
between  the  oil  and  water,  which  gives  rise  to  a  sweetish  substance,
glycerin,  and  to  the  development  of  oleic  and  margaric  acids,  and,  when
animal  fat  is  substituted  for  the  olive  oil,  to  a  third  acid,  the  stearic.  The
union  of  these  acids  with  the  oxide  of  lead,  forms  the  plaster,  which  is
a  true  oleo-margarate  of  lead.  The  glycerin  becomes  mixed  with  the
plaster,  or  remains  dissolved  in  the  water.  According  to  recent  chemi-
cal views  it  is  the  oxide  of  glyceryle  which  exists  in  the  oil,  and  which  is
developed  with  the  fatty  acids  in  the  above  process  ;  this  becomes  gly-
cerin by  taking  an  equivalent  of  water.  Glyceryle  is  a  hypothetical
compound  of  carbon  and  hydrogen,  (Co  Ht  )  and  forms  oxide  of  glyce-
ryle on  uniting  with  five  equivalents  of  oxygen,  (C6  Ht  0  ),  likewise  a
hypothetical  compound,  and  with  an  additional  equivalent  of  water  it
forms  glycerin  (Oe  H:  Oi  +HO).

In  preparing  lead  plaster  it  is  very  important  that  the  oil  employed  be
pure  and  free  from  rancidity,  otherwise  an  imperfect  product  only  will
be  obtained.  A  good  plaster  has  been  made  by  substituting  lard  for  the
oil,  in  the  proportion  of  eight  pounds  of  lard  to  five  of  litharge.  The
only  oily  matters  which  can  be  substituted  for  olive  oil,  are  animal  fats,
and  the  only  substitutes  for  the  litharge  are  massicot,  and  minium,  but


1038  Pharmacy.

these  require  a  much  longer  time  to  perfect  the  process,  than  when  the
officinal  formula  is  followed. In  making  lead  plaster  first  introduce  the
oil  into  a  vessel  capable  of  holding  twice  the  quantity  of  oil  used,  and
then  by  means  of  a  fine  sieve,  sprinkle  in  the  litharge,  and  constantly
stir  the  mixture  ;  this  course  prevents  the  oxide  of  lead  from  cohering
in  small  masses,  and  allows  the  oil  to  easily  penetrate  it,  thus  facilitating
the  process. The  water  not  only  exerts  an  important  agency  chemically
considered,  but  prevents  too  high  a  temperature,  which  would  decompose
the  oil,  and  reduce  the  oxide  to  the  metallic  state. It  must,  therefore,
be  supplied by  fresh  additions  of  boiling  water,  from  time  to  time,  as
directed  in  the  formula;  cold  water  would  not  only  delay  the  process,
but  might  cause  a  dangerous  explosion. The  articles  should  be  con-
stantly stirred  during  the  process  of  boiling,  and  care  taken  to  prevent
the  oxide  from  sinking  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel ;  and  as  soon  as  the
articles  have  completed  their  union  the  boiling  should  cease. This  may
be  known  by  the  litharge  gradually  becoming  paler,  until,  when  the  pro-
cess is  complete,  the  mixture  is  nearly  Avhite. In  the  early  part  of  the
boiling  the  materials  swell  up  considerably,  owing  partly  to  the  evapora-
tion of  the  water,  and  partly  to  the  escape  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  wddch  is
set  free  by  the  action  of  the  oily  acids  upon  carbonate  of  lead  which  is
generally  contained  in  greater  or  less  quantity  in  the  litharge. The  con-
sistence of  the  mass  increases  with  the  boiling,  and  toward  its  termi-
nation, or  when  the  mass  is  sufficiently  thick,  a  portion  of  it  may  be
removed  by  means  of  a  spatula,  and  cooled,  when  it  will  be  found  pos-
sessed of  sufficient  firmness  not  to  adhere  to  the  fingers. When  per-
fected the  plaster  will  present  no  red  points  of  uncombined  litharge  ;  and
should these  exist  they  must  be  broken  down  by  trituration,  and  the
boiling  continued  until  they  have  all  disappeared. Too  much  heat  must
not  be  employed  in  the  operation,  lest  the  plaster  become  burned.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  plaster  is  more  commonly  known  by  the
name  of  Diachylon,  and  is  chiefly  used  in  the  preparation  of  other
plasters.  It  is  likewise  employed  as  an  application  to  slight  wounds,
blistered  and  chafed  surfaces,  and  occasionally  to  some  ulcers,  all  of
which  it  serves  to  protect  from  atmospheric  influence.  The  sedative
character  of  the  lead  entering  into  its  formation,  probably,  assists  its
beneficial  action.

An  ointment  is  in  considerable  use  as  a  dressing  for  burns,  scalds,
chilblains,  and  various  cutaneous  affections  accompanied  with  a  burning
or  smarting  sensation.  It  is  prepared  as  follows  :  Take  of  Lead  Plaster
one  found  and  a  half ;  melt  it  by  a  gentle  heat,  and  when  melted,  add
to  it,  Oil  of  Turpentine  nine  fluidounces  ;  Linseed  Oil  three  fluidounces  ;
Oil  of  Origanum  one  pound;  Tincture  of  Opium  three  fluidounces.  Stir
the  articles  constantly  until  the  mass  has  sufficiently  cooled.  This  is
applied  by  completely  and  thickly  covering  the  affected  part  with  the
ointment,  over  which  a  layer  of  raw  cotton  is  to  be  placed,  and  allowed


Emplastra.  1039

to  remain  until  the  part  is  well.  In  the  case  of  deep  burns,  should  the
pain  return  after  a  few  hours,  the  ointment  should  be  removed,  softening
it  with  some  warm  oil,  and  a  cataplasm  of  elm  bark,  or  flaxseed,  be
applied. It  is  said  to  afford  prompt  relief.

Emplastrum  Resin^e. Resin  Planter. Adhesive  Plaster.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Rosin  half  a  pound;  Lead  Plaster  three
pounds.  Melt  the  Lead  Plaster  over  a  gentle  fire,  add  the  Rosin,  and
mix  them. —  U.  S.

History. — This  preparation  is  the  common  adhesive  plaster  of  the
shops,  and  is  usually  spread  upon  muslin,  by  means  of  a  machine  made
for  the  purpose.  Long  exposure  to  the  air  lessens  its  adhesiveness,  in
consequence  of  which  the  supply  should  be  frequently  renewed.  Soap
is  sometimes  added  to  the  mixture,  which  increases  its  pliability  without
impairing  its  adhesiveness,  beside  lessening  its  liability  to  crack  during
cold  weather.  The  following  formula  is  stated  to  give  an  elegant  plaster
of  this  kind;  take  of  Resin  Plaster  three  ounces;  Lead  Plaster  thirteen
drachms  and  a  half;  Soap,  sliced,  two  drachms  and  a  half.  Melt  together
and  spread  on  linen.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  more  stimulating  than  the  lead  plaster,
and  also  more  adhesive.  It  is  generally  employed  for  retaining  the
sides  of  wounds  in  contact,  and  likewise  for  dressing  ulcers,  drawing
the  edges  toward  each  other,  and  giving  a  firm  support  to  the  granula-
tions. The  additions  of  turpentine  or  Burgundy  pitch  to  it,  are  objection-
able, as  they  increase  its  tendency  to  irritate,  which  should  always  be
avoided  as  much  as  possible.

An  adhesive  plaster  is  prepared  by  Pettenkofer,  which  contains  no
oxide  of  lead  ;  it  is  made  by  decomposing  a  solution  of  soap  by  means
of  a  solution  of  chloride  of  calcium.  The  precipitate  is  expressed,
dried,  and  powdered  with  half  its  weight  of  turpentine  dried  by  heat  ;
and  the  mixture  is  then  melted  along  with  an  eighth  part  of  suet,  in
boiling  water.  The  boiling  is  continued,  aintil  the  mass  melts  into  a
homogeneous  fluid,  when  it  is  worked  by  the  hand,  in  the  ordinary
manner,  in  cold  water.  Should  portions  of  the  above  precipitate  of
calcareous  soap  not  melt,  they  should  be  separated  by  straining  through
flannel.

Emplastrum  Resins  Compositum.  Compound  Resin  Plaster.  Ad-
hesive and  Strengthening  Plaster.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  White  Rosin  three  pounds ;  Beeswax  four
ounces;  Burgundy  Pitch  four  ounces ;  Mutton  Tallow  four  ounces.
Melt  these  together,  and  add,  Olive  Oil,  Pulverized  Camphor,  and
Sassafras  Oil,  of  each  half  an  ounce;  West  India  Rum  four fluidounces .
Incorporate  well  together,  and  then  pour  the  whole  into  cold  water,  and
Work  it  in  the  hands  till  cold,  forming  it  into  rolls  or  sticks.


1040  Pharmacy.

Dr.  W.  P.  Watrous,  of  Mount.  Sterling.  Ky.,  prefers  the  following : —
Melt  together,  Rosin  three  pound* ;  Bees  wax  four  ounces ;  take  from
the  fire,  and  when  nearly  cold  add,  gradually,  Campbor  half  an  ounce,
dissolved  in  Oil  of  Hemlock,  Oil  of  Sassafras,  and  Olive  Oil,  of  each
one  ounce,  Oil  of  Turpentine  half  an  ounce. Work  in  water  as  above.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  adhesive  and  stren«thenino-
plaster  useful  in  rheumatism,  weakness  of  the  joints,  wounds,  ulcers,
etc.  It  is  possessed  of  considerable  stimulating-  property,  and  has  been
frequently  used  by  Eclectic  practitioners  ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  it  is  an
unscientific  preparation,  as  the  Rum  and  Tallow  will  not  be  found  to
unite  readily.  The  Emplastrum  Capsici  Compos,  is  a  much  be.ter  article
to  use  for  the  same  purposes.  The  formula  of  Dr.  Watrous,  will  be
found  a  good  one,  forming  an  elegant  plaster.


ENEMATA.
Injections  or  Clysters.

Injections  are  liquid  substances,  sometimes  containing  powdered
ingredients,  and  which  are  intended  to  be  thrown  into  the  rectum  either
for  the  purpose  of  effecting  a  speedy  evacuation  from  the  bowels,  for
producing  the  impression  of  a  particular  agent  upon  the  inferior  portion
of  the  alimentary  canal  and  the  adjacent  tissues  and  organs,  or  for
effecting  an  influence  generally  upon  the  system,  through  the  medium
of  the  surface  to  which  they  are  applied.  They  are  also  thrown  into
the  vagina  to  aid  in  restoring  the  normal  condition  of  its  walls,  to  remove
vaginal  leucorrhea,  to  aid  in  the  cure  of  excoriation  or  ulceration  of  the
cervix,  etc.

When  thrown  up  the  rectum,  they  are  frequently  employed  to  assist
the  action  of  remedies  taken  by  the  mouth,  or  to  act  as  a  substitute  for
them  when  the  stomach  rejects  them,  or  is  not  susceptible  to  their  influ-
ence, and  are  also  used  when  the  rectum  or  its  vicinity  is  the  seat  of
disease.  As  a  general  rule,  about  double  the  quantity  of  an  agent  may
be  used  as  an  injection  per  rectum,  as  would  be  required  to  produce  an
effect  when  taken  into  the  stomach  ;  yet  with  regard  to  very  active
remedies,  this  rule  should  be  acted  upon  with  caution.  Again,  it  must
be  borne  in  mind  that  the  impression  of  an  agent  upon  the  stomach  may
be  very  much  diminished  by  its  frequent  use,  while  the  rectum  will  con-
tinue to  preserve  its  ordinary  susceptibility  to  the  action  of  such  agent
when  used  in  enema.

When  an  evacuation  of  the  bowels  is  designed,  the  quantity  of  fluid
administered  by  injection,  should  be  very  large  ;  thus,  for  an  adult,  a
pint  or  even  a  quart,  may  be  employed,  and  which  in  some  instances,
as  in  bilious  colic,  will  require  a  repetition  of  this  quantity  in  the  course
of  ten  or  fifteen  minutes ;  for  a  child  from  nine  to  twelve  years  of  age,


Enemata.  1041

half  that  quantity  may  be  used;  and  for  infants  less  than  a  year  old,
from  one  to  three  rluidounces.

When  the  peculiar  impression  of  the  remedy  upon  the  parts,  or  upon
the  system  generally  is  intended,  it  should  be  given  in  as  little  quantity
of  fluid  as  is  compatible  with  its  activity  or  character,  and  should  be
retained  within  the  rectum  as  long  as  possible.  Any  immediate  desire
to  discharge  the  injected  fluid,  should  in  all  cases  be  resisted  by  the
patient ;  and  it  may  frequently  be  required  on  the  part  of  the  nurse  or
physician  to  aid  its  retention,  by  making  a  moderately  firm  pressure
upon  the  fundament,  with  a  warm  compress  of  linen  or  muslin.

Injections  are  a  very  valuable  mode  of  treatment  in  many  diseases;
indeed  some  affections  cannot  be  readily  nor  permanently  cured  without
them.  They  are  found  especially  beneficial  in  bilious  colic,  in  bilious,
typhus,  yellow,  and  congestive  forms  of  fever,  in  dysentery  and  diarrhea,
etc.  In  infants,  life  has  often  been  preserved  by  their  timely  applica-
tion; and  the  pains  and  dangers  of  the  parturient  woman,  have  frequently
been  very  materially  lessened  by  their  use.  And  yet,  notwithstanding
their  value  and  importance,  there  are  hundreds  of  families,  especially  in
country  places,  who  do  not  supply  themselves  with  the  articles  necessary
for  their  administration,  but  who  depend  entirely  upon  the  physician,
or  perhaps  a  neighbor,  for  the  use  of  a  syringe.  This  is  a  verv  repre-
hensible omission,  and  although  not  exactly  within  the  province  of  this
work,  yet,  from  the  evil  results  which  I  have  seen  depending  upon  a
negligence  of  the  above  character,  I  cannot  refrain  from  making  a  few
brief  advisory  remarks.  Every  individual,  and  more  especially  every
family,  is  liable  to  sickness  which  may  require  the  use  of  a  syringe,  and
to  depend  upon  the  physician  for  its  supply  is  certainly  bad  policy,  for
very  few,  especially  among  those  practicing  in  the  country,  furnish
themselves  with  a  quantity  sufficient  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  various
families  under  their  professional  care;  beside,  very  few  physicians  carry
an  article  of  this  kind,  and  in  some  diseases,  the  delay  occasioned  by
sending  for  it,  may  be  death  to  the  patient.  No  doubt,  an  immense
number  of  patients,  and  more  particularly  among  those  residing  in  the
country,  die  yearly  solely  from  the  want  of  an  instrument  with  which  to
administer  an  injection.  It  is  therefore  a  matter  of  duty  with  the  prac-
titioner, both  to  himself  and  to  his  patients,  to  strongly  impress  these
facts  upon  those  who  patronize  him  professionally,  and  urge  them  by  all
means  to  make  the  necessary  provision.  A  metallic  syringe  capable  of
holding  a  pint,  and  a  smaller  one  of  three  or  four  fluidounces,  should
be  found  in  the  possession  of  every  family,  as  these  can  be  adapted  to
meet  any  emergency  requiring  their  use.

Injections  are  emollient,  stimulant,  anodyne,  purgative,  antispasmodic,
emergency  of  the  case,  without  regard  to  officinal  directions. For  pur-
poses  of  nutrition,  as  well as to reduce inflammation of  the  lower
66


1042  Pharmacy.

intestines,  infusions  of  starch,  of  elm  bark,  of  flaxseed,  and  of  corn  meal,
are  usually  injected  into  the  rectum,  with  a  portion  of  laudanum  added
when  inflammation  is  present ;  and  in  cases  where  the  stomach  rejects
all  food  and  medicine,  and  when  this  condition  is  accompanied  with
prostration,  a  proper  quantity  of  wine,  brandy,  or  some  similar  stimu-
lant may  be  added  to  the  nutrient  clyster,  and  repeated  as  often  as  the
circumstances  require.  The  following  are  among  the  agents  of  this  class,
in  more  common  use.

Enema  Aloes  Composita. Compound  Clyster  of  Aloes.

Preparation. — Take  of  Aloes  two  scruples ;  Carbonate  of  Potassa^teew
grains;  Tincture  of  Assafetida  three  fluidrachms ;  Infusion  of  Boncset
half  a  'pint. Mix,  and  rub  them  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  stimulant,  cathartic,  and  vermifuge
clyster,  and  may  be  used  with  advantage  in  cases  of  ascarides  in  the
rectum,  and  of  amenorrhea  attended  with  constipation. — J.  K.

Enema  AssAFCETiDiE  Composita. Compound  Clyster  of  Assafetida.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Mandrake  root  two  drachms  ;  Balmony  four
drachms ;  Water  half  a  pint.  Make  a  decoction,  strain,  and  add  to  it
Tincture  of  Assafetida  three  fluidrachms.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  used  with  children  troubled  with
ascarides  in  the  rectum.  To  a  child  two  or  three  years  old,  about  one
half  of  the  quantity  may  be  used  at  a  time,  and  repeated  according  to
circumstances. — J.  K.

Enema  Catharticum. Cathartic  Clyster.

Preparation. — Take  of  Common  Salt  half  an  ounce,  or  a  tahlespoonful;
Olive  or  Castor  Oil  a  fluidounce,  or  two  tablespoonfuls ;  Molasses  a  fluid-
ounce  ;  Warm  Water  a  pint. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  a  very  common  laxative  clyster,  and
possesses  the  advantage  of  consisting  of  materials  which  are  always  at
hand  in  families.  It  is  generally  employed  in  cases  of  constipation,  or
where  a  speedy  evacuation  of  the  bowels  is  desired.  An  injection  is
sometimes  used  for  the  above  purposes,  and  in  diarrhea  and  dysentery,
and,  indeed,  in  almost  every  case  where  one  is  indicated,  composed  as
follows:  Take  of  Sweet  Milk  half  a  pint;  Infusion  of  Elm  Bark  half  a
pint;  Olive  Oil  two  fluidounces  ;  Molasses  four  fluidounces ;  Bicarbonate
of  Potassa  half  an  ounce.  Mix  these  articles  together.  When  there  are
pains  and  gripings  in  the  lower  intestines,  laudanum  half  a  fluidrachm,
may  be  added  to  each  injection.

Enema  Cimicifug^;  Composita. Compound  Clyster  of  Black  Cohosh.

Preparation.— Hake  of  Black  Cohosh  root,  in  powder,  two  ounces;
Cranesbill  root,  in  powder,  two  ounces;  Water  four  pints.  Mix  them
together,  make  a  decoction,  and  strain.


Emplastra.  1043

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  an  astringent  preparation,  combining
with  it  a  peculiar  influence  on  the  vaginal  walls  and  cervix  uteri,  and  is
much  employed  in  leucorrhea,  prolapsus  uteri,  relaxation  of  the  vaginal
walls,  etc.  It  should  be  used  with  a  female  syringe,  and  repeated  three
or  four  times  a  day;  the  patient  being  placed  in  a  recumbent  position  on
her  back,  with  the  hips  elevated,  so  as  to  retain  the  injection  some  ten
or  fifteen  minutes,  each  time. — T.  V.  M.

Enema  Lobelia  Composita.  Compound  Clyster  of  Lobelia.  Anti-
spasmodic Clyster.

Preparation. — Take  of  Water  half  a  fiuidounce  ;  Compound  Tincture
of  Lobelia  and  Capsicum  half  afluidrachm. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  a  relaxant  and  antispasmodic  clyster,
and  is  used  in  cases  of  tetanus,  convulsions,  rigidity  of  the  os  uteri,  and
whenever  its  peculiar  actions  are  indicated.  The  proportions  as  given  in
the  above  formula,  are  adapted  to  an  infant  from  several  weeks  to  a  year
old,  laboring  under  an  attack  of  convulsions  ;  for  adults,  half  a  fluid-
ounce,  or  even  more  of  the  tincture,  may  be  added  to  a  sufficient  quan-
tity of  water  ;  and  so  in  proportion.

Enema  Opii. Clyster  of  Opium.

Preparation. — Take  of  Decoction  of  Starch,  or  Infusion  of  Elm  Bark
one  fiuidounce,  Tincture  of  Opium  twenty  minims. Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  clyster  is  useful  in  obstinate  vomiting,
strangury  from  blisters,  painful  affections  of  the  kidneys,  bladder,  and
uterus,  and  in  the  tenesmus  of  dysentery.  It  should  be  retained  in  the
rectum  as  long  as  possible,  and  may  be  repeated  every  one,  two,  or
three  hours,  and  in  severe  cases,  even  oftener,  according  to  the  urgency
of  the  symptoms.  If  frequently  employed  it  will  produce  the  constitu-
tional effects  of  the  opium.

Enema  Senn^e  Composita. Compound  Clyster  of  Senna.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Senna  and  Boneset,  of  each,  four  ounces;
Boiling  Water  one  quart.  Pour  the  water  on  the  herbs  and  macerate
them  by  a  moderate  heat  for  about  ten  minutes  ;  then  strain,  and  add
while  yet  hot,  Molasses  four  ftuidounces ;  Common  Salt,  and  Powdered
Lobelia  Seed,  of  each  two  drachms ;  Powdered  Bayberry  Bark  two  ounces ;
Powdered  Capsicum  two  drachms.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  one  of  the  best  clysters  that  can  be
used  in  bilious  colic ;  it  should  be  given  as  warm  as  the  patient  can
bear,  one-half  the  above  quantity  at  a  time,  and  may  be  repeated  in  fifteen
minutes ;  of  course,  in  connection  with  this,  the  internal  administration
of  a  decoction  of  Dioscorea  Villosa,  and  local  applications  of  cloths  wet
with  hot  water  are  to  be  employed. — J.  K.

Enema  Terebinthin^:  Composita. Compound  Clyster  of  Turpentine.


1044  Pharmacy.

Preparation. — Take  of  Castor  Oil  half  a  fluidounce ;  Oil  of  Turpentine
two  fuidrachms  ;  Camphorated  Tincture  of  Opium  one  Jluidrachm.  Mix
together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  injection  is  principally  employed  in  flatu-
lency, and  tympanitic  tension  of  the  abdomen,  especially  during  an
attack  of  peritonitis.  It  may  be  repeated  two,  three,  or  four  times  a
day.  It  may  likewise  be  used  in  ascarides,  obstinate  constipation,  and
amenorrhea.

Enema  Xanthoxyli. Clyster  of  Prickly  Ash.

Preparation. — Take  of  Water  one  fluidounce ;  Tincture  of  Prickly  Ash
Berries  one  fluidrachm ;  Tincture  of  Opium  twenty  minims ;  mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  clyster  will  be  found  very  beneficial  in
tympanitic  distension  of  the  abdomen  from  any  cause.  It  will  likewise
be  found  efficacious  in  Asiatic  cholera,  and  in  diarrhea;  in  these  last
diseases  it  should  be  given  and  repeated  immediately  after  each  opera-
tion from  the  bowels,  and  should  be  retained  in  the  rectum  as  long  as
possible.  I  have  also  used  it  with  much  benefit  in  the  tympanitic
abdomen  of  children,  which  so  generally  proves  fatal,  and  which  attends
or  follows  an  attack  of  diarrhea  or  summer  complaint. — J.  K.


EXTRACTA.

Extracts.
Extracts,  in  medicine,  are  solid  or  semi-fluid  substances  obtained  by
evaporation  of  the  decoction,  infusion,  tincture,  or  juice  of  vegetable
principles.  The  object  in  preparing  them  is  to  obtain  as  large  an  amount
of  the  active  principles  of  a  remedy,  with  as  little  of  its  inert  constituents
as  possible.  Sometimes  it  becomes  necessary  to  separate  these  active
principles  from  each  other,  especially  when  their  influences  upon  the
system  vary  considerably ;  and  this  is  generally  accomplished  by  means
of  a  menstruum  which  dissolves  the  principle  required,  leaving  the
others  untouched.  Extracts  vary  very  much  in  their  composition,  and
which  is  owing  to  the  peculiar  character  of  the  remedies  from  which
they  are  obtained,  to  the  nature  of  the  menstruum  employed  in  dissolving
their  active  principles,  and  to  the  process  pursued  for  preparing  them.
The  principles  of  plants  most  generally  obtained  by  means  of  water,  are
gum,  starch,  sugar,  tannin,  extractive,  coloring  matter,  various  salts,
together  with  certain  principles  peculiar  to  each  plant;  when  alcohol  is
employed,  resins,  fatty  matters,  essential  oil,  and  other  principles  not
soluble  in  water  are  also  obtained.  And  among  these  principles  only
such  are  selected  as  contain  the  active  medicinal  properties  of  the  plant
employed.  The  principles  of  plants  are  obtained  either  in  a  liquid  state
by  expression  of  the  plant,  or  by  the  agency  of  a  proper  solvent.  When
by  expression,  the  plant  must  be  fresh,  cut  into  pieces,  and  bruised  in


EXTRACTA.  1045

a  stone  mortar  or  mill,  till  brought  to  a  pulpy  consistence ;  and  if  it  be
not  very  succulent,  a  little  water  must  be  added  to  dilute  the  juice.
The  pulp  is  then  introduced  into  a  linen  or  canvas  bag,  and  the  liquid
expressed.  After  filtering,  it  should  be  evaporated  by  a  very  gentle
heat  to  the  proper  consistence.  Should  the  juice  hold  in  solution  starch,
or  other  inert  principles  which  may  be  removed  by  heat  without  injuring
its  medicinal  properties,  it  may  be  heated  to  about  160°  previous  to
filtration,  which  will  precipitate  the  inert  substances.  Extracts  thus
prepared  are  sometimes  called  Inspissated  Juices  (Sued  Sj)issati).
When  obtained  by  solution,  dried  vegetable  agents  are  commonly  used,
though  occasionally  they  require  to  be  recent,  and  the  menstruum
employed  is  either  water,  alcohol,  or  a  mixture  of  the  two,  depending  on
the  solubility  of  the  active  principles  in  these  fluids,  ether,  or  acetic  acid.
Extracts  obtained  by  the  agency  of  water,  are  called  Watery  or  Aqueous
extracts ;  those  by  means  of  alcohol,  Alcoholic  extracts;  those  in  which
both  water  and  alcohol  are  employed,  Hydro-alcoholic  extracts;  and  those
obtained  by  means  of  ether,  Ethereal  extracts.  Wine  and  acetic  acid  as
solvents,  yield  vinous  and  acetic  extracts.  In  the  preparation  for  an
extract,  the  operator  should  previously  acquaint  himself  with  the  nature
of  the  principles  contained  in  the  drug,  their  solubility,  their  relations
to  heat  and  air,  their  volatility,  etc.,  so  that  he  may  adopt  the  men-
struum best  calculated  to  remove  the  greatest  amount  of  active  matter,
and  control  the  evaporation,  so  that  this  may  not  be  injured  by  heat,
nor  lost  by  volatilization.

In  forming  the  solution  for  aqueous  extracts,  rain,  river,  or  distilled
water  only  should  be  used,  and  the  vegetable  should  be  thoroughly
bruised,  or  reduced  to  the  state  of  coarse  powder ;  if  too  finely  pulve-
rized a  precipitate  of  the  inert  or  undissolved  portions  is  apt  to  readily
take  place.  Boiling  water  should  then  be  poured  on,  and  a  gentle  heat
maintained  for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes,  according  to  the  greater  or  less
degree  of  solubility  of  the  active  principles,  the  vessel  inclosing  the  arti-
cles being  covered.  Successive  portions  of  water  must  be  employed
until  the  whole  of  the  active  matter  is  extracted.  Filter  the  solutions,
and  evaporate  in  a  sand  or  Water-bath,  until  the  proper  consistence  is
attained.  The  evaporation  should  be  conducted  as  quickly  as  the  nature
of  the  solution  will  admit,  using  a  broad,  shallow-dish,  and  toward  the
end  of  the  process,  it  should  be  constantly  stirred  with  a  spatula.  Long
boiling  and  even  the  boiling  temperature,  causes  the  decomposition  of
many  vegetable  principles,  or  at  least  so  modifies  them  as  to  render  them
inert ;  it  is,  therefore,  recommended  to  substitute  for  decoction,  the  pro
cess  of  maceration  in  which  the  liquid  acts  without  heat,  which  may  be
employed  where  the  matter  is  readily  soluble  in  cold  water ;  that  of
digestion  in  which  the  action  of  the  liquid  upon  the  vegetable  principles
is  assisted  by  a  moderately  increased  temperature,  sustained  for  a  length
of  time  ;  or  that  of  infusion,  where  the  water  is  poured  boiling  hot  upon


1046  Pharmacy.

the  plants,  and  allowed  to  stand  for  a  short  time  in  a  covered  vessel,  and
which  is  used  where  the  virtues  of  the  plant  are  not  readily  yielded  to
cold  water.  Long  continued  evaporation  injures  an  extract  more  or  less,
hence  it  is  always  desirable  to  obtain  the  solution  at  first,  as  concen-
trated as  possible,  in  order  to  avoid  this  result.  And  in  those  instances
where  successive  portions  of  water  are  used,  those  which  are  the  least
impregnated  should  be  evaporate-d  first,  and  brought  to  the  strength  of
the  stronger  solution  before  mixing  them,  so  that  the  latter  may  not  be
exposed  to  unnecessary  heat.

Alcoholic  Extracts  are  made  from  tinctures  of  vegetables,  the  alcohol
being  either  distilled  off,  or  evaporated  in  the  open  air.  Hydro-ulcoholic
Extracts  should  be  prepared  by  exhausting  the  vegetable  with  each  fluid
separately,  evaporate  separately,  and  then  combine  the  two  extracts
while  hot.  When  the  active  principle  of  a  plant  is  soluble  in  water,  an
Aqueous  extract  is  commonly  prepared ;  when  it  depends  upon  a  resin,
oil,  or  other  substance  insoluble  in  water,  an  Alcoholic  extract  is  pre-
pared ;  and  a  Hydro-alcoholic  extract,  when  both  of  these  liquids  are
required  to  take  it  up.  And  whatever  mode  may  be  employed  in  pre-
paring the  extract,  occasional  agitation  or  stirring,  will  always  be  re-
quired.

Ether  is  much  employed  in  the  preparation  of  extracts,  and  is  espe-
cially adapted  to  those  articles  whose  medicinal  properties  are  contained
in  a  volatile  oil  or  resin,  or  in  both  combined.  An  Ethereal  tincture  is
first  prepared  by  displacement,  and  the  ether  is  then  distilled  off  at  a
very  moderate  heat,  or  allowed  to  escape  by  spontaneous  evaporation.
Mr.  W.  S.  Merrell  has  invented  an  instrument,  by  means  of  which  as  the
percolated  tincture  falls  into  the  receiver,  the  ether  is  driven  off  to  pass
again  through  the  articles,  and  thus  continue  until  all  their  strength  is
exhausted  ;  the  whole  process  of  tincturing  and  forming  an  extract  being
thus  performed  at  the  same  time.  These  ethereal  extracts  are  generally
of  a  semifluid  consistence.

In  the  preparation  of  extracts,  the  employment  of  "  Smith's  Patent
Vapor  Displacement  Apparatus,"  or  an  apparatus  upon  a  similar  prin-
ciple, is  decidedly  the  best  that  can  be  used,  both  for  obtaining  all  the
active  principles  of  plants  in  solution,  and  for  procuring  extracts  of  supe-
rior quality;  and  when  largely  manufactured,  this  apparatus  cannot  well
be  dispensed  with.  It  is  to  the  employment  of  an  improved  apparatus
invented  by  himself,  and  embracing  this  principle,  that  the  various  syrups,
extracts,  etc.,  of  our  Pharmaceutist,  William  S.  Merrell,  owe  their
superiority  to  all  others.  Although  Mr.  Smith  has  patented  this  mode,
yet  we  have  understood  that  it  was  in  operation  many  years  ago,  and  is
not  a  new  discovery.  In  order  to  keep  well,  extracts  should  be  placed
in  glass,  stone,  or  porcelain  jars,  and  completely  prote  ;ed  from  the
access  of  the  air  ;  and  the  application  of  alcohol  to  the  surface,  while  it
does  not  injure  the  extract,  has  a  tendency  to  prevent  moldiness.


EXTRACTA.  1047

Extractum  Aconiti  Alcoholicum. Alcoholic  Extract  of  Aconite.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Aconite  Root,  or  recently  dried  Leaves,  a
pound;  Diluted  Alcohol  four  pints.  Moisten  the  Aconite  with  half  a
pint  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol,  and,  having  allowed  it  to  stand  for  twenty-
four  hours,  transfer  it  to  an  apparatus  for  displacement,  and  add  gradu-
ally the  remainder  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol.  When  the  last  portion  of
this  shall  have  penetrated  the  Aconite,  pour  in  sufficient  Water  from
time  to  time  to  keep  the  powder  covered.  Cease  to  filter  when  the  liquid
which  passes  begins  to  produce  a  precipitate,  as  it  falls,  in  that  which
has  already  passed.  Distil  off  the  Alcohol  from  the  filtered  liquor,  and
evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence. —  U.  S.

History. — Care  must  be  taken  in  the  evaporation,  that  the  heat  be  not
greater  than  that  produced  by  a  vapor-bath,  otherwise  decomposition
will  be  apt  to  ensue  ;  a  water-bath  is  preferable  on  this  account,  to  heat
directly  applied.  The  addition  of  water  in  the  latter  part  of  the  displace-
ment, is  for  the  purpose  of  expelling  the  spirituous  solution  which  has
been  absorbed  by  the  Aconite ;  and  as  a  precipitate  ensues  as  soon  as
the  water  passes  off,  the  filtration  is  directed  to  cease  as  soon  as  the  pre-
cipitate appears.  When  the  process  is  properly  performed,  the  extract
procured  is  much  better  and  more  active  than  the  inspissated  juice ;  it  is
the  only  extract  of  this  drug  which  should  be  used.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Aconite  possesses  the  properties  of
the  plant  in  a  powerful  degree  ;  it  may  be  used  in  rheumatism,  neuralgia,
gout,  scrofula,  cutaneous  diseases,  inflammatory  and  febrile  diseases,  and
in  all  cases  in  which  the  use  of  aconite  is  admissible.  The  dose  is  from
half  a  grain  to  a  grain,  to  be  repeated  two  or  three  times  a  day,  and
gradually  increased  if  necessary.

The  extract  prepared  as  above,  from  the  root,  is  said  to  be  more  ener-
getic than  that  from  the  leaves,  and  is  to  be  given  in  doses  of  one-sixth
or  one- quarter  of  a  grain,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  and  gradually
increased.

Extractum  Aletris  Alcoholicum.  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Unicorn
Root. Aletridin.

Preparation. — Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Unicorn  Root,  two  pounds  ;
Alcohol,  ninety  per  cent.,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Unicorn  root
with  two  pints  of  Aleohol,  and  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours  ;  then
transfer  it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until
it  passes  off  without  any  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of
the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the
proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Aletris.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling
point,  strain,  and  evaporate  by  a  gentle  heat  to  the  proper  consistence.


1048  Pharmacy.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir  con-
stantly until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  very  elegant  and  useful  prepara-
tion of  Unicorn  Root.  It  may  be  used  as  a  tonic  in  cases  of  debility  of
the  digestive  organs,  and  will  be  found  valuable  in  uterine  difficulties,  as
prolapsus,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  half  a
grain  to  two  grains,  three  times  a  day. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Anthemidis. Extract  of  Chamomile.

Preparation. — Take  of  Chamomile  Flowers,  bruised,  a  pound;  Diluted
Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Chamomile  Flowers  with  Diluted
Alcohol,  and  let  them  stand  twenty-four  hours  ;  then  transfer  to  a  per-
colator, and  add  gradually  Diluted  Alcohol  until  the  liquid  passes  without
the  taste  of  the  Chamomile.  Distil  off  the  Alcohol  from  the  filtered
liquor,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence,  by  a  heat
below  the  boiling  point.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Chamomile  is  a  tonic,  and  may  be
used  in  all  cases  where  the  crude  article  is  indicated.  It  may  be  bene-
ficially combined  with  other  extracts,  as  of  scullcap,  cramp-bark,  black-
cohosh,  golden-seal,  ladies'  slipper,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five
grains,  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Apocyni  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro- alcoholic  Extract
of  Bitter  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Bitter  Root,  (Apocynum
Cannabinum,)  two  pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the
Bitter  Root  with  two  pints  of  Alcohol ;  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  and
then  transfer  it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol
until  it  passes  off  without  the  taste  of  the  Root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part
of  the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the
proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Bitter  Root.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the
boiling  point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  purgative,  and,  either  alone  or
in  combination  with  leptandrin,  is  much  employed  in  affections  of  the
liver  and  stomach,  in  intermittents  and  in  the  low  stage  of  typhoid
fevers.  It  has  also  been  employed  with  advantage  as  a  diuretic  and
emmenagogue.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  ten  grains,  two  or  three  times
a  day  .—  IT.  S.  M.

Extractum  Arctii. Extract  of  Burdock.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Root  of  Burdock,  in  coarse  powder  or  pieces,
a  pound;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity. Mix  the  root  with  a  pint  of  the


EXTRACTA.  104:9

Water,  and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,
introduce  it  into  f.  displacement  apparatus,  and  pour  Water  upon  it  gra-
dually, until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties
of  the  Burdock.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,
and  carefully  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Extract  of  Burdock  is  used  principally  as  an
alterative,  in  scrofula,  syphilis,  cutaneous  affections,  etc.  The  dose  is
from  five  to  twenty  grains,  repeated  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Asclepijs  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract
of  Pleurisy  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Pleurisy  Root  two  pounds ;
Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Pleurisy  Root  with  two  pints
of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  displace-
ment apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off  without  the
taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from  this
filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.
To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  sufficient
quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with
the  properties  of  the  Pleurisy  Root.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the
boiling  point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Pleurisy  Root  is
expectorant,  tonic,  laxative,  and  antispasmodic.  It  will  be  found  useful
in  chronic  and  acute  catarrhal  coughs,  rheumatic  affections,  dysentery,
etc.  From  its  peculiar  action  upon  the  ligaments  of  the  uterus,  it  proves
highly  beneficial  in  prolapsus,  and  other  displacements  of  this  organ.
The  dose  is  from  three  to  ten  or  fifteen  grains  three  times  a  day. —
W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Baptisi^  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro- alcoholic  Extract
of  Wild  Indigo.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Bark  of  Wild  Indigo  Root,  in  coarse  pow-
der, two  pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Bark  with
two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a
displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off
without  the  taste  of  the  bark.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol
from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper
consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Wild  Indigo  Bark.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid
to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.


1050  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  antiseptic,  with  purgative  and
emetic  properties  when  taken  in  large  doses.  It  is  especially  advanta-
geous in  typhoid  conditions  of  the  system,  in  malignant  ulcerations  of
the  mouth  and  throat,  in  scarlatina,  and  in  all  cases  where  there  is  a
tendency  to  putrescency  or  gangrene.  It  exerts  a  powerful  stimulant
effect  on  the  glandular  and  nervous  systems,  and  will  be  found  useful  in
scrofula,  obstinate  hepatic  torpor,  etc.  Its  virtues  are  increased  by  com-
bination with  leptandrin,  podophyllin,  or  cimicifugin.  The  dose  is  one-
fourth  of  a  grain  gradually  increased  to  one  or  two  grains,  and  repeated
three  times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Belladonn.e  Alcoholicum.  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Bel-
ladonna.

Preparation. — Take  of  Belladonna  Leaves,  in  coarse  powder,  a  pound ;
Diluted  Alcohol  four  pints.  Moisten  the  Belladonna  with  half  a  pint
of  the  Diluted  Alcohol,  and,  having  allowed  it  to  stand  for  twenty-four
hours,  transfer  it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  add  gradually  the
remainder  of  the.  Alcohol.  When  the  last  portion  of  this  shall  have
penetrated  the  Belladonna,  pour  in  sufficient  Water  from  time  to  time  to
keep  the  powder  covered.  Cease  to  filter  when  the  liquid  which  passes
begins  to  produce  a  precipitate,  as  it  falls,  in  that  which  has  already
passed.  Distil  off  the  Alcohol  from  the  filtered  liquor,  and  evaporate
the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.  (See  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Aconite.)
The  heat  in  the  evaporation  should  not  be  greater  than  that  produced
by  a  vapor-bath,  otherwise  decomposition  will  be  apt  to  ensue.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  possesses  all  the  virtues  of  Bella-
donna, which  see,  and  is  the  most  usual  form  of  administration.  The
dose  is  from  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  half  a  grain,  or  even  a  grain,  to
be  repeated  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Caulophylli  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Blue  Cohosh.

Preparation. — Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Blue  Cohosh  Root  two
pounds;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Cohosh  with  two
pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  dis-
placement apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off  without
the  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from
this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Cohosh.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boil-
ing point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Blue  Cohosh  is
antispasmodic  and  parturient. It  may  be  advantageously  combined  with


EXTRACTA.  1051

dioscorein  in  bilious  colic,  flatulency,  and  griping  pains  arising  from  the
use  of  drastic  purgatives ;  with  xanthoxylin,  hydro-alcoholic  extracts  of
cimicifu"a,  or  Scutellaria,  in  rheumatic  affections ;  and  with  senecin,
cimicifugin,  aletridin,  asclepidin,  or  extract  of  cramp  bark  in  uterine  dis-
eases. It  will  be  found  very  useful  in  amenorrhea  and  dysmenorrhea ;
and  forms  with  hydrastin  an  elegant  remedy  for  deranged  conditions  of
the  stomach,  dyspepsia,  etc.  It  has  also  been  found  serviceable  in  after-
pains. The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  grains,  three  times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Cimicifug.*:  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Black  Cohosh.

Preparation. — Take  of  Black  Cohosh  Root,  in  moderately  fine  powder,
two  pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Cohosh  with  two
pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  dis-
placement apparatus,  and  gradually  add  alcohol  until  it  passes  off  without
the  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from  this
filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus  add  gradually  a  sufficient
quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  off  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Cohosh.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boil-
ing point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Black  Cohosh  pos-
sesses all  the  virtues  of  the  root,  and  in  nervous  derangements,  as
chorea,  epilepsy,  etc.,  is  much  superior  to  the  cimicifugin  in  action  and
efficacy ;  it  is  decidedly  more  narcotic  and  antispasmodic  than  this  resi-
noid.  I  make  extensive  and  successful  use  of  it  in  epilepsy,  chorea,
delirium  tremens  (in  which  I  combine  it  with  quinia),  nervous  excita^
bility,  and  many  spasmodic  affections.  Persons  subject  to  cramps  will
be  speedily  and  permanently  relieved  by  the  employment  of  this  extract
combined  with  the  extract  of  cramp  bark.  The  hydro-alcoholic  extract
of  black  cohosh  may  be  used  in  all  instances  where  the  employment  of
the  root  is  indicated.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  or  ten  grains,  three
times  a  day. — /.  K.

Extractum  Colocynthidis. Extract  of  Colocynth.

Preparation. — Take  of  Colocynth,  sliced  and  deprived  of  its  seeds,
three  pounds;  Diluted  Alcohol  half  a  gallon.  Macerate  the  Colocynth
in  the  Diluted  Alcohol  for  thirty-six  hours,  occasionally  pressing  it  with
the  hand.  Express  the  liquor  strongly  and  strain.  Finally,  evaporate
to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  cathartic,  and  may  be  used  in
the  dose  of  from  five  to  thirty  grains.

Extractum  Cclocynthidis  Compositum.  Compound  Extract  of  Colo-
cynth.


1052  Pharmacy.

Preparation. — Take  of  Colocynth,  deprived  of  the  seeds  and  sliced,
six  ounces;  Aloes,  in  powder,  twelve  ounces ;  Scammony,  in  powder,  four
ounces;  Cardamom,  in  powder,  two  ounces ;  Castile  Soap  three  ounces ;
Diluted  Alcohol  a  gallon.  Macerate  the  Colocynth  in  the  Diluted  Alco-
hol, with  a  gentle  heat,  for  four  days.  Express  and  filter  the  liquor,  and
add  to  it  the  Aloes,  Scammony  and  Soap ;  then  evaporate  to  the  proper
consistence,  and,  near  the  end  of  the  process,  mix  the  Cardamom  with
the  other  ingredients.

History. — Diluted  Alcohol  is  a  much  better  solvent  of  colocynth  than
water,  hence  it  is  directed  in  the  above  formula.  The  soap  is  added  to
improve  the  consistence  of  the  extract,  to  render  it  more  soluble  in  the
fluids  of  the  stomach,  and  to  qualify  the  irritating  action  of  the  aloes
and  scammony.  By  exposing  thin  layers  of  this  extract  to  dry  air  for  a
few  days,  it  will  be  evaporated  to  dryness,  in  which  state  it  may  be
powdered  for  admixture  with  other  substances.

Properties  and  Uses. — Compound  Extract  of  Colocynth  is  an  active
cathartic,  and  may  be  employed  in  all  cases  where  catharsis  is  indicated.
From  the  difficulty  with  which  pure  scammony  can  be  obtained  in  this
country,  I  would  suggest  as  a  substitute  for  it,  in  the  above  formula,
Podophyllin,  in  powder,  two  ounces,  and  which  will  by  no  means  lessen
the  value  or  efficacy  of  the  preparation.  This  extract  may  be  especially
used  in  obstinate  constipation,  and  congestion  of  the  liver  or  portal  sys-
tem. The  dose  is  from  five  to  thirty  grains.

Extractum  Conii  Alcoholicum.  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Poison  Hem-
lock.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  the  recently  dried  and  coarsely  powdered
Leaves  of  Conium  Maculatum  half  a  pound ;  Diluted  Alcohol  four  pints.
Moisten  the  Leaves  with  half  a  pint  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol,  and  having
allowed  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  transfer  it  to  a  per-
colator, and  add  gradually  the  remainder  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol.  When
the  last  portion  of  this  shall  have  penetrated  the  powder,  pour  in  suffi-
cient water  from  time  to  time  to  keep  the  mass  covered.  Cease  to  filter
when  the  liquid  which  passes  begins  to  produce  a  precipitate,  as  it  falls,
in  that  which  has  already  passed.  Distil  off  the  Alcohol  from  the  filtered
liquor,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.  (See  Alco-
holic Extract  of  Aconite.)  The  heat  in  the  preparation  of  this  extract
must  be  very  moderate,  or  decomposition  will  ensue.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  narcotic,  and  may  be  used  in
all  cases  where  its  peculiar  influence  is  desired.  The  dose  is  from  one-
eighth  of  a  grain,  to  one,  two,  or  three  grains,  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Cornus  Florida. Extract  of  Dogwood.

Preparation. — Take  of  Dogwood  Bark,  in  coarse  powder,  a  pound ;
Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Bark  with  a  pint  of  the  Water,  and,
after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  introduce  it


EXTEACTA.  1053

into  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  pour  Water  upon  it  gradually  until
the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties  of  the
Dogwood.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  care-
fully evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Dogwood  is  tonic  and  antiperiodic,
and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  quinia,  in  all  cases.  It  will  be  found
useful  in  dyspepsia,  debility  of  the  stomach,  and  as  a  tonic  in  dropsical
affections  after  the  water  has  been  evacuated.  The  dose  is  from  one  to
five  grains,  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Corydalis  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract
of  Turkey  Corn.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  coarsely  powdered  Root  of  Turkey  Corn
two  pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  powdered  Root,
with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer
it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes
off  without  the  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alco-
hol from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper
consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  suf-
ficient quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Corydallis.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the
boiling  point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  tonic  and  alterative,  and  may
be  employed  in  all  cases  where  tonics  are  indicated.  It  is  useful  in  all
scrofulous  affections  ;  and  in  syphilitic  diseases,  both  primary  and  secon-
dary, it  will  be  found  among  our  most  efficient  agents.  The  dose  is  from
one  to  five  grains,  three  times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Cypripedii  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Yellow  Ladies'  Slipper.

Preparation. — Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Yellow  Ladies'  Slipper  Root
two  pounds;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Root  with
two  pints  of  Alcohol;  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a
percolator,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off  without  the  taste
of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered
tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of
Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  off  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  pro-
perties of  the  Cypripedium.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  nearly  the  boil-
ino-  point,  strain,  and  evaporate to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.


1054  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  tonic  and  antispasmodic,  and
may  be  used  to  fulfill  all  the  indications  of  the  crude  root  in  hysteria,
chorea,  nervous  headache,  and  nervous  irritability.  It  may  be  combined
wfth  the  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Scullcap,  in  many  cases  advan-
tageously. Its  dose  is  from  one  to  five  grains,  two  or  three  times  a
day.—  W..S.  M.

Extbactum  Dulcamara. Extract  of  Bittersweet.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bark  of  the  Root,  and  Twigs  of  Solanum  Dul-
camara a  pound;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Dulcamara  with  a
pint  of  the  Water,  and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty- four
hours,  introduce  it  into  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  pour  Water  upon
it  gradually  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the
properties  of  the  Dulcamara.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling
point,  strain,  and  carefully  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Extract  of  Bittersweet  possesses  the  active
properties  of  the  plant,  and  may  be  beneficially  employed  in  scrofula,
syphilis,  cutaneous  diseases,  and  wherever  the  plant  is  indicated.  The
dose  is  from  two  to  ten  grains,  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Eupatorii. Extract  of  Boneset.

Preparation. — Tahe  of  the  Tops  and  Leaves  of  Boneset  a  pound ;
Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Boneset  with  a  pint  of  the  Water,
and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  introduce
it  into  a  percolator,  and  pour  Water  upon  it  gradually  until  the  liquid
passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties  of  the  Boneset.
Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  carefully  evapo-
rate to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Boneset  is  tonic  and  aperient,  and
may  be  given  with  advantage  in  convalescence  from  exhausting  diseases,
intermittent  fever,  dyspepsia,  debility  of  the  digestive  organs,  and  gene-
ral debility.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  ten  grains,  two  or  three  times  a
day.

Extractum  Gentians. Extract  of  Gentian.

Preparation. — Take  of  Gentian,  in  coarse  powder,  a  pound ;  Water  a
sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Gentian  with  a  pint  of  Water,  and,  after
allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  introduce  it  into  a
displacement  apparatus,  and  pour  Water  upon  it  gradually  until  the  liquid
passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties  of  the  Gentian.

History. — Extract  of  Gentian  is  of  a  shining  dark-brown  color,  nearly
black,  inodorous,  very  bitter,  and  tenacious.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  extract  is  a  tonic,  and  may  be  used
wherever  this  indication  is  present,  either  alone  or  in  conjunction  with
other  tonics. The  dose  is  from  one  to  ten  grains.

Extractum  Gosstpii. Extract  of  Cotton  Bark.


ExTRACTA.  1055

Preparation. — Take  of  the  inner  Bark  of  the  Root  of  the  Cotton  Plant,
in  coarse  powder,  a  pound ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Bark
with  a  pint  of  the  Water,  and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  introduce  it  into  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  pour
Water  upon  it  gradually  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Cotton  Bark.  Filter  the  liquid,  and  heat  it  to
the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  carefully  evaporate  to  the  proper  con-
sistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Cotton  Bark  is  emmenagogue  and
abortivant.  It  will  be  found  useful  in  amenorrhea  and  dysmenorrhea,
combined  with  belladonna  and  quinia.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  or
ten  grains,  three  times  a  day. —  J.  K.

Extractum  H^ematoxtli. Extract  of  Logwood.

Preparation. — Take  of  Logwood,  rasped,  a  pound;  Water  a  gallon.
Boil  down  to  four  pints,  and  strain  the  liquor  while  hot ;  then  evaporate
to  the  proper  consistence.

History. — The  evaporation  of  this  extract  should  be  carried  to  the
extent  of  making  it  dry  and  brittle  when  cold.  One  hundred  weight  of
logwood  is  said  to  yield  about  twenty  pounds  of  extract.  It  is  of  a
deep  red  color,  and  a  sweetish  astringent  taste,  and  if  made  into  pills
and  kept  any  length  of  time,  it  becomes  so  hard  that  the  pills  pass
through  the  bowels  unchanged.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Logwood  is  astringent  and  tonic,  and
will  be  found  useful  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,  relaxed  conditions  of  the
bowels  succeeding  cholera  infantum,  and  in  chronic  laryngitis  or  bron-
chitis accompanied  with  considerable  mucous  expectoration.  The  dose
is  from  five  to  thirty  grains,  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Helenii  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract
of  Elecampane.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Elecampane  Root  two
pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Root  with  two  pints
of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,
and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off  without  the  taste  of  the
root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tinc-
ture, and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.  To  the  pow-
der in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Water,  until
the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties  of  the
Elecampane.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and
evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  stimulant  and  tonic,  and  is  very
useful  in  chronic  pulmonary  affections,  debility  of  the  digestive  organs,


1056  Pharmacy.

torpor  of  the  liver,  dyspepsia,  and  chronic  cough. The  dose  is  from  one
to  ten  grains,  three  times  a  day. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Hydrastis  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro- alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Golden  Seal.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Root  of  Golden  Seal,  in  powder,  two  pounds ;
Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  powdered  Root  with  two  pints
of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,
and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off  without  the  taste  of  the
Root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tinc-
ture, and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of
Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  proper-
ties of  the  Golden  Seal.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,
strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  possesses  all  the  tonic  virtues  of
the  root,  and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  that  is  indicated.  In  many
instances  it  will  be  preferable  to  hydrastin,  on  account  of  the  insolubility
of  the  latter.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  five  grains,  three  times  a
day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Hyoscyami  Alcoholicum. Alcoholic  Extract  of  Henbane.

Preparation. — Take  of  recently  dried  Henbane  Leaves,  in  coarse  pow-
der, a  pound ;  Diluted  Alcohol  four  pints.  Moisten  the  Henbane  with
half  a  pint  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol,  and,  having  allowed  it  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  add  gradually  the
remainder  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol.  When  the  last  portion  of  this  shall
have  penetrated  the  Henbane,  pour  in  sufficient  water  from  time  to  time
to  keep  the  powder  covered.  Cease  to  filter  when  the  liquid  which
passes  begins  to  produce  a  precipitate,  as  it  falls,  in  that  which  has
already  passed.  Distil  off  the  Alcohol  from  the  filtered  liquor,  and  evap-
orate the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.  The  heat  in  the  evapora-
tion should  not  be  greater  than  that  produced  by  a  vapor-bath,  otherwise
decomposition  will  be  apt  to  ensue. (See  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Aconite.)

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  contains  all  the  medicinal  virtues
of  the  Henbane,  and  may  be  administered  whenever  this  drug  is  indi-
cated. The  dose  is  from  one-fourth  of  a  grain,  to  two  or  three  grains,
three  times  a  day.  The  smallest  do?e  must  first  be  given,  and  the
quantity  gradually  increased  until  the  desired  influence  is  obtained.

Extractum  Iridis  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of
Blue  Flag.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  coarsely  powdered  Root  of  Iris  Versicolor
two  pounds;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity. Moisten  the  Blue  Flag  with


ExTRACTA.  1057

two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a
displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off
without  the  taste  of  the  Root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol
from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  con-
sistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  sufficient
Water  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties
of  the  Blue  Flag.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,
and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Blue  Flag  is  a
valuable  cathartic  and  alterative.  In  doses  of  from  one  to  five  grains
or  more,  it  will  be  found  a  useful  purgative  in  cases  of  obstinate  consti-
pation, hepatic  torpor,  indigestion,  amenorrhea,  etc.  In  larger  doses  it
will  produce  hydragogue  results,  and  may  be  given  with  advantage  in
chronic  pulmonary  affections,  dropsy,  worms,  etc.  In  doses,  to  fall
short  of  catharsis,  it  becomes  a  valuable  alterative,  and  will  be  found
especially  useful  in  rheumatic  diseases,  scrofula,  syphilis,  etc.,  and  will
frequently  cause  ptyalism.  A  few  grains  of  ginger  or  capsicum  will
prevent  any  harshness  of  action.  As  an  alterative,  the  dose  is  from  one-
fourth  of  a  grain  to  one  grain,  three  times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  sive  Resina  Jalap^e. Extract  or  Resin  of  Jalap.

Preparation. — Take  of  Jalap,  in  moderately  fine  powder,  two  pounds  ;
mix  it  thoroughly  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Rectified  Spirit  to  moisten
it  well,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  and  then  transfer  it  to  a  percola-
tor, and  gradually  add  Rectified  Spirits  until  it  passes  off  without  any
of  the  taste  of  the  Jalap.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from
this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  over  a  vapor-bath,  to  the
proper  consistence.

History. — This  resin  is  dark-colored,  brittle  and  of  a  shining  fracture;
and  is  sufficiently  pure  for  practical  purposes.  The  pure  resin  of  jalap
is  white  as  flour,  and  is  an  active  cathartic  in  doses  of  from  three  to  five
grains.  Jalap  resin  may,  according  to  G.  A.  Kaiser,  be  known  from  all
other  resins  by  its  gradual  solution  in  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  and
subsequent  deposition  of  a  brown,  soft,  viscid  matter,  on  standing  for  a
few  hours.  Guaiacum  resin  is  frequently  added  to  it ;  this  fraud  may
be  detected  by  making  an  alcoholic  solution  of  the  suspected  resin,  and
adding  to  it  a  few  drops  of  chloride  of  soda,  or  of  lime  ;  if  guaiac  be
present,  it  produces  a  green  color.

Properties  and Uses. — The purgative  principle of Jalap depends
entirely  on  its  resin,  and  its  diuretic  properties  on  its  gummy  extractive.
The  resin  prepared  as  above  is  an  active  cathartic  in  the  doses  of  from
67


1058  PllAR.MACT.

four  to  fen  grains,  with  much  pain  and  griping,  but  which  may  be  obvi-
ated by  trituration  with  Castile  soap,  caulopliyllin,  or  loaf  sugar.

Extractum  Juglandis. Extract  of  Butternut.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Inner  Bark  of  the  Root  of  Juglans  Cinerea
a  pound ;  Diluted  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Bark  with  a
pint  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol,  and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  introduce  it  into  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  pour
diluted  Alcohol  upon  it  gradually  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  im-
pregnated with  the  properties  of  the  Butternut.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid
to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  carefully  evaporate  to  the  proper  con-
sistence.

History. — Extract  of  Butternut  is  of  a  black  color,  sweetish  odor,  and
bitter,  astringent  taste.  The  extract  prepared  by  the  country  people  is
of  an  inferior  kind,  and  should  never  be  purchased  by  the  apothecary.
It  is  usually  made  with  water,  which  does  not  extract  all  the  medicinal
virtue  of  the  bark,  and  is  likewise  apt  to  be  more  or  less  injured  by  the
improper  application  of  heat.  Hence,  many  practitioners,  having  used
the  country  prepared  extract,  and  found  it  uncertain  in  its  effects,  decry
all  other  extracts.  In  preparing  the  extract,  the  bark  of  the  root  should
be  collected  in  May  or  June,  and  used  while  fresh.

Properties  and  Uses. — A  mild  cathartic,  acting  upon  the  bowels  with-
out disposing  them  to  subsequent  constipation.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to
thirty  grains.

Extractum  Krameri^. Extract  of  Rhatany.

Preparation. —  Take  of  the  Bark  of  Rhatany  Root,  in  moderately  fine
powder,  a  pound ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Bark  of  the  Root
with  a  pint  of  the  Water,  and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for
twenty- lour  hours,  introduce  it  into  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  pour
Water  upon  it  gradually  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Rhatany.  Rapidly  evaporate  the  tillered
liquid  to  such  a  consistence,  that  when  cold  the  extract  may  be  dry.

History. — Good  Extract  of  Rhatany  is  of  a  reddish-brown  color,  with  a
smooth,  shining  fracture,  very  astringent  taste,  and  is  almost  completely
soluble  in  water.  In  the  above  formula  for  preparing  this  extract,  the
evaporation  should  be  conducted  rapidly,  or  in  a  vacuum,  because,
when  the  infusion  is  exposed  for  a  length  of  time  to  the  action  of  the
air,  there  is  an  absorption  of  oxygen,  and  the  production  of  insoluble
apotheme.  The  extract  made  by  alcohol,  or  by  decoction,  is  inferior
to  that  made  by  the  above  process;  the  former  containing  from  twenty
to  thirty  per  cent,  less  of  the  active  principle  than  the  officinal,  and  the
latter  containing  nearly  fifty  per  cent,  of  insoluble  matter.  By  the  for-
mula given,  the  wood  of  the  root  yields  6.8  per  cent,  of  extract,  and  the
bark  33  per  cent.  Much  of  the  Extract  of  Rhatany  found  in  the  shops  is
of  an  inferior  quality.


ExTRACTA.  1059

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Rhatany  may  be  used  whenever  an
astringent  is  required  ;  in  some  cases  it  will  be  found  preferable  to  any
other  agent  of  this  class.  The  soft  extract  may  be  advantageously  used
as  a  local  application  to  ulcers,  hemorrhoids,  and  fissures  of  the  anus.
The  dose  is  from  five  to  twenty  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Extractum  Leonuri  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract
of  Motherwort.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  herb  Leonurus  Cardiaca,  in
coarse  powder,  two  pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the
Motherwort  with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,
then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes
off  without  the  taste  of  the  herb.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alco-
hul  from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper
consistence,  by  means  of  a  very  moderate  heat.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  Motherwort.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to
nearly  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  carefully  evaporate  to  the  proper
consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Motherwort  is  emmenagogue,  ner-
vine, and  antispasmodic,  and  may  be  used  with  advantage  in  all  forms
of  disease  in  which  the  cold  infusion  of  the  herb  is  recommended.  The
dose  is  from  three  to  six  grains,  every  two  or  four  hours.  It  may  be
advan'ageously  combined  with  asclcpidin,  or  the  hydro-alcoholic  extracts
of  black  cohosh,  nerve-root,  cramp-bark,  scullcap,  etc. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Leptandr^e  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Blavkroot.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  root  of  Leptandra  Virginica,
in  coarse  powder,  two  pounds;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten
the  Blackroot  with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,
then  transfer  it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol
until  it  passes  off  without  the  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater
part  of  the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue
to  the  proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of
Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  pro-
perties of  the  Blackroot.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,
strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  possesses  all  the  medicinal  proper-
ties of  the  Blackroot,  and  may  be  used  wherever  that  is  indicated. The


1060  Pharmacy.

dose  is  from  one  to  ten  grains.  It  may  be  beneficially  combined  with
the  hydro-alcoholic  extract  of  Wild  Indigo,  in  typhoid  diseases,  and
where  an  action  upon  the  liver  is  desired  without  active  catharsis.

Extractum  Lupulin^. Extract  of  Lupulin.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Commercial  Lupulin  four  ounces;  Alcohol
eight  fluidounces .  Place  the  Lupulin  loosely  in  a  percolator,  cover  with
Alcohol,  and  allow  it  to  stand  an  hour.  Then  gradually  add  Alcohol
until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.  Pour  this  liquor  in  a
shallow  dish  and  set  aside  to  evaporate  spontaneously.

History. — Commercial  lupulin  is  more  or  less  mixed  with  hops,  and
consequently  varies  in  its  activity.  The  above  extract  contains  the  me-
dicinal principles  of  the  hops  unimpaired,  is  of  uniform  strength,  and  is
in  a  form  convenient  for  pills.  In  making  larger  quantities  of  extract,
it  would  be  economical  to  distil  off  about  three-fourths  of  the  alcohol,
previous  to  spontaneous  evaporation.  Commercial  lupulin  yields  about
two  scruples  of  extract  to  a  drachm  of  the  grains.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  possesses  the  active  properties  of
the  hops  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where
lupulin  is  admissible.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  ten  grains  three  times
a  day.

Extractum  Mitchells. Extract  of  Partridge  Berry.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  herb  Mitchella  Repens,  in
coar.se  powder,  a  pound ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  herb  with
a  pint  of  the  Water,  and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-
four  hours,  introduce  it  into  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  pour  Water
upon  it  gradually  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with
the  properties  of  the  plant.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,
strain,  and  carefully  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  an  invaluable  preparation,  and
possesses  the  active  medicinal  virtues  of  the  plant.  It  is  employed  more
especially  on  account  of  its  tonic  influence  upon  the  uterus ;  and  in
diseases  of  this  organ,  it  may  be  usefully  combined  witli  cimicifugin,
caulophyllin,  aletridin,  senecin,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  ten  grains
three  times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Nucis  Vomicae  Alcoholicum.  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Xux
Vomica.

Preparation. —  Take  of  Nux  Vomica  a  pound ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient
quantity.  Expose  the  Nux  Vomica  to  steam  till  it  is  softened  ;  then
having  sliced  and  dried  it,  grind  it  into  powder.  Introduce  it  into  a
displacement  apparatus,  and  pour  Alcohol  upon  it  gradually,  until  the
liquid  passes  without  bitterness.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the
Alcohol  from  the  filtered  liquor,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper
consistence.


ExTRACTA.  ]  061

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  active  preparation  of  mix  vomica,  but
owing  to  the  variable  proportion  of  strychnia  in  the  seeds,  it  is  not  always
of  uniform  strength.  It  may  be  employed  in  cases  where  the  action  of
this  agent  is  required.  It  is  very  useful  in  cases  of  obstinate  constipa-
tion, and  may  be  employed  in  the  following  combination  :  Take  Extract
of  Butternut  two  gruins  ;  Podophyllin  one  sixteenth  of  a  grain.;  and  Al-
coholic Extract  of  Nux  Vomica  one-fourth  of  a  grain;  mix  thoroughly
together  and  form  a  pill,  which  is  a  t'ose,  and  may  be  repeated  two  or
three  times  daily,  or  until  the  desired  effect  is  produced.  The  dose  of
the  above  extract  of  nux  vomica  is  from  one-fourth  of  a  grain  to  two
grains,  repeated  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Phytolacca Alcoholicum. Alcoholic  Extract  of  Pvht.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  the  recently  dried  Leaves  of  Poke,  in  coarse
powder,  a  pound ;  Diluted  Alcohol  four  jnnts.  Moisten  the  leaves  with
half  a  pint  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol,  and  having  allowed  it  to  stand  for  twen-
ty-four hours,  transfer  it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  add  gradually
the  remainder  of  the  Diluted  Alcohol.  When  the  last  portion  of  this
shall  have  penetrated  the  Poke,  pour  in  sufficient  water  from  time  to
time  to  keep  the  powder  covered.  Cease  to  filter  when  the  liquid  which
passes  begins  to  produce  a  precipitate,  as  it  falls,  in  that  which  has
already  passed.  Distil  off  the  Alcohol  from  the  filtered  liquor,  and
evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence,  by  means  of  a  gentle
heat. (See  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Aconite.)

History  — Extract  of  Poke  prepared  in  this  manner,  is  superior  to  that
prepared  in  the  ordinary  way  with  water.  The  leaves  employed  in  the
preparation  of  the  extract  should  be  gathered  immediately  previous  to
the  ripening  of  the  berries,  at  which  period  they  are  the  most  active.  An
extract  may  be  prepared  from  the  Poke-root  in  the  same  manner,  but  it
is  somewhat  doubtful  whether  it  is  as  energetic  as  that  from  the  leaves.
An  extract  formed  by  evaporating  the  expressed  juice  of  the  recent  ripe
berries  is  frequently  employed,  but  it  is  presumed  to  be  inferior  in  point
of  efficacy  to  that  from  the  leaves.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  various  extracts  of  Poke,  are  emetic  and
purgative  in  large  doses ;  in  medicinal  doses  they  are  alterative  and  are
especially  useful  in  syphilitic,  mercurio-syphilitic,  and  rheumatic  dis-
eases, and  particularly  in  the  osteocopic  pains  of  mercurio-syphilis.  They
lose  their  virtues  by  age,  and  should  be  freshly  prepared  every  year.
The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  grains,  or  more,  three  times  a  day.

The  inspissated  juice  of  Poke-berries,  (Succus  Inspissatus  Phytolacca?,
Bacca>.)  is  frequently  employed  as  a  valuable  agent  in  rheumatism  ;  it  is
milder  than  the  extract  prepared  from  the  root,  or  leaves.

Extractum  Plantaginis  Cordate  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alco-
holic Extract  of  Water  Plantain.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  Root  of  Water  Plantain,  in
coarse  powder,  two  pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity. Moisten  the


1 062  Pharmacy.

Root  with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  trans-
fer it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it
passes  off  without  the  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of
the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the
proper  consistence.  To  the  powder  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a
sufficient  quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impreg-
nated with  the  properties  of  the  Water  Plantain  root.  Heat  the  filtered
liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Water  Plantain  is
astringent,  and  has  been  used  with  much  success  in  Asiatic  cholera,
diarrhea,  and  dysentery.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  ten  grains,  repeated
every  one,  two,  or  three  hours,  as  the  urgency  of  the  case  requires. —
W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Polygoni. Extract  of  Water  Pepper.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  herb  of  Water  Pepper,  in
coarse  powder,  a  pound ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity .  Mix  the  herb  with
a  pint  of  the  Water,  and  after  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-
four  hours,  introduce  it  into  a  percolator,  and  pour  Water  upon  it  gradu-
ally until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties,
of  the  Water  Pepper.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,
strain,  and  carefully  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Water  Pepper  is  stimulant,  diuretic,
and  emmenagogue,  and  is  especially  useful  in  amenorrhea,  and  chronic
affections  of  the  kidneys.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  ten  grains,  three  or
four  times  a  day.

Extractum  Ptele^e  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of
Shrubby  Trefoil.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  Bark  of  the  Root  of  Ptelea
Trilbliata,  in  coarse  powder,  two  pounds;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.
Moisten  the  Bark  with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  for  twenty-four
hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it
passes  off  without  the  taste  of  the  bark.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of
the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the
proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of
Water  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties
of  the  Ptelea.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and
evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  an  elegant  preparation,  and  may
be  used  in  all  cases  where  the  Ptelea  is  indicated. Its  use  is  at  the


EXTRACTA.  1063

present  time  superseded  by  that  of  the  Ptelein.  The  dose  is  from  two
to  ten  grains. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Rhei. Extract  of  Rhubarb.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rhubarb,  in  coarse  powder,  a  pound ;  Diluted
Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Rhubarb  with  an  equal  quantity
of  coarse  sand,  moisten  it  thoroughly  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  and  allow  it
to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  displacement  appa-
ratus, and  add  Diluted  Alcohol  gradually  until  four  pints  of  filtered
liquor  are  obtained.  Evaporate  this  to  the  proper  consistence  by  means
of  a  water-bath. —  U.  S.

History. — As  the  purgative  principle  of  rhubarb  is  injured  to  a  greater
or  less  extent  by  heat,  the  above  process  must  be  performed  with  much
care,  employing  only  a  moderate  degree  of  heat.  When  the  drug  is
boiled  in  water,  the  tannin  and  starch,  which  form  a  part  of  its  composi-
tion, combine  and  give  rise  to  a  compound  insoluble  in  cold  water,  and
which,  probably  carries  with  it  a  portion  of  the  purgative  principle.  It
is  supposed,  also,  that  this  principle  is  volatilizable  by  heat,  and  that  a
portion  of  it  escapes  with  the  vapor.

Properties  and  Uses. — Extract  of  Rhubarb  possesses  virtues  similar  to
the  drug  itself,  and  has  the  advantage  of  smallness  of  dose,  and  its  capa-
bility of  being  given  in  solution. The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty  grains.

Extractum  Rumecis  Htdro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract
of  Yellow  Dock.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Yellow  Dock  Root  two
pounds ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Yellow  Dock  Root
with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer
it  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes
off  without  the  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol
from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  con-
sistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of
Water  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  proper-
ties of  the  Yellow  Dock.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling  point,
strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  is  tonic  and  alterative,  and  is  effica-
cious in  scrofula,  and  cutaneous  diseases.  It  is  most  generally  given  in
combination  with  some  other  alterative,  as  extract  of  Poke,  Cimicifuga,
Dulcamara,  Corydallis,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  grains,  three
times  a  day. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Sanguinary  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Bloodroot.

Preparation. —  Take of coarsely powdered Bloodroot two  pounds;


10G4  Pharmacy.

Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Bloodroot  with  two  pints  of
Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  displacement
apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off  without  the  taste
of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered
tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  consistence.  To  the
powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity
of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  pro-
perties of  the  Cohosh ;  then  evaporate  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  proper
consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot  and  stir
constantly.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  of  Bloodroot  is  expectorant,
alterative,  and  emmenagogue,  and  may  be  used  with  benefit  in  pulmo-
nary and  hepatic  diseases,  jaundice,  and  amenorrhea.  Externally,  it
forms  a  mild  caustic,  and  may  be  advantageously  applied  to  indolent
ulcers  and  fistula-in-ano.  It  possesses  the  virtues  of  the  root.  The  dose
is  from  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  a  grain. — J.  K.

Extractum  Scutellariae  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Scullcap.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  the  recently  dried  Herb,  Scullcap,  in  coarse
powder,  two  pounds  ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Scullcap
with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it
to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes
off  without  the  taste  of  the  root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alcohol
from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper  con-
sistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  sufficient
quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with
the  properties  of  the  Scullcap.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling
point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  The  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Scullcap  is
tonic,  nervine,  and  antispasmodic.  It  has  been  used  with  advantage  in
cases  of  nervous  excitability,  chorea,  wakefulness,  and  restlessness  ;  it
may  be  used  alone  or  in  combination  with  the  hydro-alcoholic  extracts
of  cimicifuga,  cypripedium,  or  asclcpias  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five
grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Stillingi.e  Hydro- alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Ex-
tract of  Queen's  Hoot.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recent  Root  of  Stillingia,  cut  into  small
pieces,  two  pounds  ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Stillingia
with  two  pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it
to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes


ExTRACTA.  1065

off  without  the  taste  of  the  Root.  Distil  off  the  greater  part  of  the  Alco-
hol from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper
consistence.  To  the  root  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient
quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated  with
the  properties  of  the  Stillingia.  Heat  the  filtered  liquid  to  the  boiling
point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  In  large  doses  the  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of
Stillingia  is  emetic  and  cathartic,  for  which  actions  it  is  but  little  em-
ployed in  medicine,  on  account  of  the  nausea,  prostration,  and  burning
sensation  at  the  stomach  caused  by  it.  In  small  doses  it  is  a  valuable
alterative,  peculiar  to  Eclectic  practice,  and  may  be  efficaciously  used  in
all  diseases  requiring  alterative  remedies.  It  is  usually  given  in  combi-
nation with  other  alteratives,  the  virtues  of  which  it  appears  to  increase.
The  Compound  Syrup  of  Stillingia  is  now  more  generally  used  in  prac-
tice, but  this  extract  will  be  found  useful  in  cases  where  pills  are  pre-
ferred to  fluid  preparations.  The  dose  is  one,  two,  or  three  grains,  three
times  a  day. —  W.  S.  M.

Extraotum  Stramonii  Alcoholicum.  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Stramonium.

Preparation. — Take  of  recently  dried  Leaves  of  Stramonium  a  pound ;
Diluted  Alcohol  four  pints.  Moisten  the  leaves  with  half  a  pint  of  the
Diluted  Alcohol,  and,  having  allowed  it  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,
transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  add  gradually  the  remainder  of  the
Diluted  Alcohol.  When  the  last  portion  shall  have  pentrated  the  Stra-
monium, pour  in  sufficient  water  from  time  to  time  to  keep  the  powder
covered.  Cease  to  filter  when  the  liquid  which  passes  begins  to  produce
a  precipitate,  as  it  falls,  in  that  which  has  already  passed.  Distil  off  the
Alcohol  from  the  filtered  liquor,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the  proper
consistence.  The  heat  in  the  evaporation  should  not  be  greater  than
that  produced  by  a  vapor-bath,  otherwise  decomposition  will  be  apt  to
ensue. [See  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Aconite.)

An  Alcoholic  Extract  may  be  also  made  by  substituting  the  Stramo-
nium Seed,  ground  into  powder,  for  the  Leaves.  The  seeds  are  sup-
posed to  furnish  a  more  energetic  preparation.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Stramonium  is  pre-
ferrable  either  to  an  aqueous  extract  of  the  leaves,  or  their  inspissated
juice.  It  Is,  in  large  doses,  a  narcotic  poison  ;  in  medicinal  doses  it  is
anodvne  and  antispasmodic,  and  may  be  administered  with  benefit  in
painful  and  periodic  diseases,  nervous  excitability  or  irritability,  gastritis,
enteritis,  peritonitis,  dysmenorrhea,  rigidity  of  the  os  uteri,  etc.,  etc.  It
may  also  be  applied  externally  in  rheumatic  and  neuralgic  pains,  and  to
reduce  local  inflammations.  The  dose  is  from  an  eighth  of  a  grain  to  a
grain,  three  times  a  day.


1066  Pharmacy.

Extractum  Taraxaci. Extract  of  Dandelion.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recent  Root  of  Dandelion,  gathered  in  Sep-
tember, five  pounds.  Cut  the  root  into  small  slices,  and  place  it  in  a
stone  mortar;  sprinkle  on  it  a  little  water,  and  bruise  it,  until  it  is
reduced  to  a  pulp;  then  express  the  juice,  strain,  and  evaporate  in  a
vacuum,  or  in  a  shallow  dish  over  a  water-bath,  constantly  stirring,  until
it  is  of  the  proper  consistence.

History. — In  the  evaporation  of  this  extract,  too  much  heat  or  too
long  an  exposure  to  the  action  of  the  air,  causes  the  extract  to  lose  part
of  its  bitterness  and  become  sweetish,  which  is  a  sign  of  inferiority.  To
be  good,  the  extract  must  be  bitter  and  entirely  free  from  any  sweetness.
The  roots  furnish  a  thin,  watery,  feeble-flavored  juice  when  collected  in
the  spring;  while  those  gathered  in  autumn  yield  a  thick,  cream-colored,
and  bitter  juice,  amounting  frequently  to  one-half  the  weight  of  the
root.  Age  deteriorates  this  extract,  hence,  it  should  be  freshly  made
annually.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Extract  of  Dandelion  is  tonic,  diuretic,  and
aperient.  It  is  much  recommended  in  affections  of  the  liver,  spleen,
and  kidneys,  in  dropsical  diseases,  etc.  I  have  made  much  use  of  vari-
ous preparations  of  dandelion,  and  the  effects  are  far  from  being  so
decided  and  beneficial  as  the  testimony  of  writers  led  me  to  suppose;
we  have  several  agents  vastly  superior  to  it  in  medicinal  efficacy,  in  the
grains  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Viburni  Hydro-alcoholicum.  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract
of  High  Cranberry  Bark. Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Cramp  Bark.

Preparation. — Take  of  coarsely  powdered  Bark  of  Viburnum  Opulus
two  pounds;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Bark  with  two
pints  of  Alcohol,  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours,  then  transfer  it  to  a  dis-
placement apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol  until  it  passes  off  with-
out the  taste  of  the  High  Cranberry  Bark.  Distil  off  the  greater  part
of  the  Alcohol  from  this  filtered  tincture,  and  evaporate  the  residue  to  the
proper  consistence.

To  the  powder  in  the  displacement  apparatus,  add  gradually  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  slightly  impregnated
with  the  properties  of  the  High  Cranberry  Bark.  Heat  the  filtered
liquid  to  the  boiling  point,  strain,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  extracts  while  each  are  hot,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  High  Cranberry
bark  is  tonic  and  antispasmodic,  and  may  be  used  in  all  cases  in  which
the  High  Cranberry  bark  is  indicated.  In  uterine  difficulties  it  may  be
advantageously  combined  with  some  uterine  tonic,  as  cimicifugin,  aletri-
din,  senecin,  caulophyllin,  etc. In  bilious  and  flatulent  colic,  and  spas-


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  1C67

modic  pains  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  it  will  be  found  very  efficacious
in  combination  with  dioscorein.  The  dose  of  it  is  from  one  to  ten  grains,
three  times  a  day. — J.  K.


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.

Fluid  Extracts.

These  are  concentrated  medicinal  principles,  not  reduced  to  a  solid  or
nearly  semifluid  consistence  as  with  extracts,  and  have  the  advantao-e
over  ordinary  extracts  in  being-  prepared  with  less  evaporation,  and  con-
sequently less  heat,  whereby  their  activity  is  not  so  liable  to  impairment.
With  some  medicines,  as  for  instance,  Calebs,  in  which  the  medicinal
virtue  depends  entirely  upon  a  fluid  substance,  and  cannot  be  reduced  to
a  solid  extract,  the  Fluid  Extract  presents  a  valuable  mode  of  administra-
tion. The  menstruum  employed  in  the  preparation  of  fluid  extracts
varies  according-  to  the  character  of  the  constituents  comprising  the  vir-
tues of  the  plant;  thus,  many  agents  require  only  Water,  and  those
containing  oil  and  resin  require  Alcohol  or  Ether,  according  to  the  decree
of  solubility  in  these  menstrua,  and  their  action  upon  non-medicinal
principles  which  may  exist  in  the  substance  under  operation.  One
great  difficulty  relative  to  fluid  extracts  is  their  liability  to  spontaneous
decomposition;  this  may  be  counteracted  to  a  great  extent  by  the  addi-
tion of  loaf-sugar,  in  the  proportion  of  one  ounce  to  every  fluidounce
of  the  extract;  or  other  preservative  agents  may  be  employed  in  some
cases,  as  alcohol,  etc.  When  prepared  by  means  of  ether,  these  extracts
generally  keep  well  and  for  a  long  time,  without  any  material  unfavor-
able change.

Fluid  Extracts.

BY W. S. MERRELL.

In  our  article  on  the  "  Progress  of  Pharmacy,"  it  was  observed  that
the  Fluid  Extract  was  a  new  and  very  eligible  form,  in  the  present  state
of  the  science,  of  exhibiting  many  valuable  remedies.  The  medical
powers  of  vegetables,  as  has  been  stated,  depend  on  certain  proximate
principles,  as  acids,  essential  oils,  resinoids,  alkaloids,  etc.,  and  to  obtain
these  in  their  separate  and  pure  state,  constitutes  the  climax  of  phar-
maceutical progress ;  but  there  are  many  valuable  plants  of  which  the
requisite  analysis  has  not  been  made;  others,  in  which  the  principle  in
which  the  chief  medical  activity  resides  is  combined  with  some  native
acid,  or  with  other  principles  of  an  extractive  or  mucilaginous  character,
which  modifies  their  pathogenetic  action;  and  in  other  cases  again,  we
wish  to  obtain,  in  combination,  the  medical  properties  of  several  articles,
of  which  the  proximate  principles  are  diverse,  and  to  obtain  them  pure
would  require  separate  and  dissimilar  processes.  Now,  as  nearly  all
medical  principles  are  soluble  in  alcohol,  either  pure  or  dilute,  all  these


10G8  Pharmacy.

properties  of  an  article  or  a  compound,  may  be  extracted  by  this  men-
struum, and  presented  together  in  their  native  state  and  proportions;
and  although  such  extracts  are  not  as  concentrated  nor  as  definite  in
their  strength  as  the  pure  proximate  principles,  yet,  if  skillfully  pre-
pared, they  are  sufficiently  so  for  use  in  most  cases.

The  strength  and  quantity  of  Alcohol  may  properly  be  varied,  as  the
ingredients  are  more  or  less  resinous  in  their  character.  But  the  follow-
ing  formula  will  be  found  sufficiently  definite  in  most  cases:

J}c Ingredients  to  be  extracted, one  pound.

Alcohol,  76  per  cent., four  pints.

White  Sugar, four  ounces.

Water, a  sufficient  quantity.

Add  to  the  ingredients,  in  a  convenient  close  vessel,  enough  Alcohol
to  thoroughly  wet  them,  and  digest  with  as  much  warmth  as  can  be  used
without  distilling  off  the  Spirit  for  twenty-four  hours.  Then  transfer  the
whole  to  a  percolator  or  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  the
rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of  the  first  that  comes  through,  till
it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first  or  strongest  running,  four
fluidounces  ;  evaporate  the  remaining  Alcoholic  Tincture  that  comes
through  to  four  fluidounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside.  Then  pour  hot
water  on  the  residuum  in  the  percolator,  until  the  liquid  that  comes
through  has  very  little  of  the  color  or  taste  of  the  medicine;  evaporate
this  latter  solution  to  half  a  pint,  then  add  the  Sugar,  continue  the  eva-
poration until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight  fluidounces,  and  while  warm
mix  in  the  reserved  Tincture  and  Extract,  and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid
Extract.  If  necessary,  from  ten  to  twenty  drops  of  any  desired  essential
oil,  as  cloves,  mint,  or  caraway,  may  be  added  to  cover  the  taste  and
prevent  nausea  or  griping.

This  process  is  believed  to  be  the  best  that  can  be  pursued  with  the
apparatus  usually  accessible  to  physicians  and  apothecaries.  But  the
method  pursued  by  me  in  preparing  these  Extracts,  Syrups,  etc. ;  in  larger
quantities,  secures  the  object  in  every  respect  more  perfectly.  This  con-
sists in  placing  the  ingredients,  previously  ground,  and  in  some  cases
macerated,  into  an  appropriate  vessel,  in  form  like  a  common  displace-
ment apparatus  or  percolator,  and  driving  the  Alcohol,  Water,  or  other
menstruum,  in  the  state  of  Vapor,  downward  through  them.

Steam  or  the  Vapor  of  Alcohol,  penetrates  everv  fiber  of  vegetable
substances  much  more  readily  and  perfectly  than  liquids,  and  brings  all
their  proximate  principles,  especially  the  Resinoids,  into  a  soluble  state;
but  dry  steam  has  no  solvent  power,  it  may  soften,  and  expand,  and  fuse,
but  it  cannot  dissolve  and  carry  out  those  principles,  without  a  liquid  as
a  vehicle.  Therefore,  to  render  the  process  perfect,  we  must  obtain  the
combined  action  of  Vapor  and  Liquid.  Of  Vapor  to  penetrate  and  soften,
and  of  Liquid  to  dissolve  and  carry  out.


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  10C9

The  steam  displacement  apparatus,  patented  by  Mr.  C.  Augustus
Smith,  is  designed  to  attain  this  object,  but  unless  the  process  is  con-
ducted slowly  and  with  much  skill,  it  is  done  very  imperfectly.  For  if
the  vapor  be  condensed  at  the  top  of  the  apparatus,  which  will  be  the
case  if  the  surrounding  condenser  be  kept  full  of  cold  water  as  directed,
the  menstruum  will  only  percolate  through  in  the  state  of  liquid,  and
will  effect  no  more  than  if  poured  on  in  the  state  of  warm  liquid.  On
the  other  hand,  if  the  steam  be  not  condensed  above,  but  passes  on
through  the  ingredients  dry,  it  affords  no  vehicle  to  carry  with  it  the
soluble  substances.  My  mode  perfects  the  process  by  obtaining  the  con-
tinually combined  action  of  the  solvent  in  Vapor  and  in  Fluid.  A  full
description  of  the  apparatus  and  all  the  steps  of  the  process  in  using  it,
cannot  be  given  here  without  too  greatly  extending  this  article,  nor
could  they  be  readily  understood  without  the  aid  of  appropriate  draw-
ings, and  must,  therefore,  be  omitted.

The  lower  end  of  the  displacement  vessel  is  connected  with  a  worm,
so  that  the  liquid  is  fully  condensed  and  cooled  before  it  comes  to  the
air.  If  the  process  be  properly  conducted  the  first  portions  displaced
by  the  vapor  will  be  very  strong,  and  contain  most  of  the  Aroma  and
Essential  Oils  belonging  to  the  ingredients.

Therefore,  to  prepare  a  Fluid  Extract  by  this  process,  of  the  standard
strength  of  one  Fluidounce  from  one  Avoirdupois  ounce  of  the  substance,
we  displace  with  the  Vapor  of  Alcohol,  combined  with  sufficient  Alcohol
to  serve  as  a  vehicle.  Of  the  first  and  strongest  solution  or  tincture  thus
obtained,  set  aside  a  portion  equal  in  weight  to  half  the  ingredients  that
are  acted  on.  This  contains  a  large  portion  of  the  strength,  and  nearly
all  the  essential  oil  and  aroma,  and  is  not  to  be  submitted  to  heat  at  all.
Continue  the  process  until  the  strength  is  exhausted,  and  the  liquid
comes  through  but  little  impregnated  with  the  flavor  of  the  substance.
Then  turn  on  the  steam  of  water,  until  the  alcohol  remaining  in  the  sub-
stance can  be  driven  out  and  condensed.  From  this  second  portion  of
solution  distil  off,  at  a  low  heat,  in  vacuo.

If  the  root  or  other  substance  is  believed  to  contain  any  medicinal
virtues  not  soluble  in  alcohol,  then  continue  the  operation  with  steam
of  water  till  these  are  extracted,  and  evaporate  this  watery  solution
to  a  semifluid  extract.  Mix  this  and  the  residuum  from  which  the  alco-
hol has  been  distilled,  and  add  refined  sugar  equal  to  one-fourth  of  the
ingredients  used,  and  with  a  moderate  heat  evaporate  the  syrup  to  half
the  number  of  pints  that  there  were  pounds  avoirdupois  of  the  substance
operated  upon.  To  this,  while  simply  warm,  add  the  first  solution  that
was  obtained  and  set  aside,  and  mix  the  two  thoroughly.  Then,  if  it
be  necessary,  add  a  few  drops  of  any  Essential  Oil,  as  before  stated,  to
cover  the  taste,  etc.  Thus  making  from  every  pound  of  ingredients  one
pint  of  the  fluid  extract.

It  may  be asked,  why  so  particular to  use  very  moderate  heat,


1070  Pharmacy.

or  distil  in  vacuo,  to  reduce  the  liquid  to  the  proper  quantity,  after
having-  acted  on  it  by  steam  during  the  process  of  obtaining  it.  The
reply  is :  1st,  that  the  temperature  of  the  Vapor  of  Alcohol  is  not  so  high,
by  many  degrees,  as  that  of  Boiling  Water;  and  2d,  it  is  not  the  heat
itself  that  destroys  these  delicate  substances,  but  it  is  by  the  combined
action  of  heat  and  water,  and  in  most  cases,  of  air  also,  that  the  more
easily  destructible  proximate  principles  are  oxidized  and  rendered  inert.
It  is  not,  therefore,  heat  alone,  but  long  boiling  in  water  that  dissipates
all  the  volatile  principles,  as  the  essential  oils,  and  decomposes  others,
and  thus  renders  extracts  prepared  in  the  ordinary  way  comparatively
worthless.

All  Fluid  Extracts  are  not  made  according  to  the  above  standard  of
concentration.  In  the  Fluid  Extract  of  Lobelia,  all  the  Alcohol  is  evapo-
rated off,  and  only  the  oil  and  extractive  left ;  this  is,  therefore,  con-
densed only  two  or  three  ounces  from  the  pound,  according  to  the
quality  of  the  seed.

In  the  Fluid  Extract  of  Stillingia,  on  the  other  hand,  the  concentration
is  less  than  half  that  of  the  above-named  standard,  as  the  medicine  is  so
powerful  that  a  greater  degree  of  concentration  is  not  thought  expedient.

(In  the  preparation  I  now  make  under  the  name  of  '  Concentrated
Fluid  Extracts,'  I  use  Alcohol  only,  having  become  satisfied  that  all  the
medical  virtues  of  every  plant  are  extracted  by  that  menstruum,  if
properly  managed.  And  by  thus  rejecting  the  starch,  gum,  and  extrac-
tive that  are  dissolved  by  the  water,  we  are  able  to  make  a  preparation
four  times  the  above  strength  and  still  retain  its  fluidity.  In  most  of
our  fluid  extracts,  therefore,  each  ounce  contains  the  virtues  of  a  quarter
of  a  pound  of  the  ingredients — and  some  contain  much  more. —  W.  S.  M.)

Medical  Syrups  are  prepared  after  the  same  method  as  the  fluid
extracts,  with  the  exception  that  they  are  less  concentrated,  and  less
alcohol  and  more  sugar  is  employed  in  their  composition.  For,  as  they
are  taken  in  proportionably  larger  doses,  the  presence  of  spirit  in  them
would  be  more  appreciable  and  injurious."

Extractum  Anthkmidis  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Chamomile.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  bruised  Chamomile  Flowers  twelve  ounces;
Alcohol,  Water,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Chamomile  with
a  sufficient  quantity  of  Alcohol,  and  allow  it  to  stand  for  twenty-four
hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator  and  pour  Alcohol  gradually  upon
it  until  a  pint  and  a  half  of  filtered  liquid  is  obtained.  Place  this  in  an
evaporating  dish,  and  allow  it  to  evaporate  spontaneously  until  reduced
to  six  fluidounces.

To  the  Flowers  in  the  percolator,  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of
Water  until  it  passes  without  any  of  the  taste  of  the  Chamomile.  Evap-
orate this  portion  in  a  wnter-bath  to  six  fluidounces.

Mix  together  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  solutions.


ExTKACTA FlUIDA.  1071

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Fluid  Extract  of  Chamomile  Flowers  is
tonic,  and  possesses  all  the  properties  of  the  crude  article.  Each  fluid-
ounce  of  the  Extract  represents  a  fiuidounce  of  the  Flowers;  hence  the
dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm  three  times  a  day.  It
may  be  advantageously  combined  with  the  fluid  extracts  of  cimicifuga,
valerian,  cypripedium,  Scutellaria,  etc.

Extractum  Buchu  Fluidum. E 'laid  Extract  of  Buchu.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  coarsely  powdered  Leaves  of  Buchu  eight
ounces ;  Ether  four  fluidounces ;  Alcohol  twelve  fluid  ounces  ;  Diluted
Alcohol,  or  good  Holland  Gin,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Ether  and
Alcohol,  and  having  incorporated  the  Buchu  with  one-half  of  the  mix-
ture, introduce  it  into  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pour  in  the  remainder.
Then  add  Diluted  Alcohol  or  good  Holland  Gin,  until  the  Avhole  liquid
which  has  passed  shall  amount  to  a  pint.  Put  the  Ethereal  Liquid  thus
obtained  into  a  shallow  vessel,  and  allow  it  to  evaporate  spontaneously
until  reduced  to  five  fluidounces.  Upon  the  mass  in  the  percolator  pour
gradually  Diluted  Alcohol  or  good  Holland  Gin  until  ten  fluidounces  of
Tincture  have  passed.  With  this  mix  the  five  fluidounces  left  after  the
spontaneous  evaporation,  taking  care  to  dissolve  in  a  little  Alcohol  any
oleo-resinous  matter  which  may  have  been  deposited,  and  to  add  it  to
the  rest.  Allow  the  mixture  to  stand,  with  occasional  agitation,  for  four
hours,  and  then  filter.  The  resulting  Fluid  Extract  should  measure  a
pint;  and  if  it  be  less  than  that  quantity,  the  deficiency  should  be  sup-
plied by  the  addition  of  good  Holland  Gin.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fluid  Extract  of  Buchu  is  a  gently  stimulating
diuretic,  and  may  be  used  in  chronic  catarrh  of  the  bladder,  gravel,
morbid  irritation  of  the  bladder  and  urethra,  and  other  affections  of
the  urinary  organs.  The  dose  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms,  three  times
a  day.

Extractum  Cimicifug^e  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Black  Cohosh.

Preparation. — Take  of  recently  dried  Black  Cohosh  Root,  in  moder-
ately fine  powder,  sixteen  Troy  ounces ;  Alcohol  one  pint ;  Ether  half  a
pint;  Diluted  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quuntity.  Mix  the  Cohosh  with  an
equal  weight  of  Sand,  moisten  it  with  a  portion  of  the  Alcohol,  transfer  it
to  a  displacement  apparatus  for  volatile  liquids,  and  pour  on  the  remain-
der of  the  Alcohol  and  the  Ether.  When  the  liquid  commences  to  pass,
close  the  orifice  so  that  its  passage  shall  be  by  drops  ;  and  when  the
menstruum  disappears  above,  immediately  add  Diluted  Alcohol  until  the
filtered  tincture  measures  a  pint  and  a  half.  Set  this  aside  in  a  capsule
in  a  warm  place  until  it  is  reduced  to  half  a  pint,  and  has  lost  its  ethereal
odor.

Meanwhile,  continue  the  percolation  with  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two
pints  more  tincture  are  obtained.  Evaporate  this  in  a  water-bath  to
eight  fluidounces,  and  mix  it  gradually  with  the  first  product  so  as  to


1072  Pharmacy.

avoid  as  much  as  possible  the  precipitation  of  the  resin  from  the  latter.
After  standing  a  few  hours  the  Fluid  Extract  should  be  filtered,  and  if  it
does  not  measure  a  pint  add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Alcohol  to  make  that
measure.

If  the  amount  of  resin  precipitated  is  considerable,  it  may  be  separated
by  a  cloth-strainer,  redissolved  in  a  little  Alcohol,  and  added  to  the  solu-
tion, which  should  then  be  filtered.

History. — This  Fluid  Extract  is  prepared  after  the  manner  of  W.
Procter,  Jr.  It  has  a  dark-reddish  brown  color  like  laudanum,  is  trans-
parent, and  possesses  the  bitter,  disagreeable  taste  of  the  root  in  a
marked  degree.  Its  flavor  may  be  improved  by  the  addition  of  one
pound  Avoirdupois  of  white  sugar,  and  a  small  portion  of  some  aro-
matic essence.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  The  Fluid  Extract  of  Black  Cohosh  possesses
tonic,  narcotic,  antispasmodic,  alterative,  and  emmenagogue  properties.
It  may  be  used  with  advantage  in  rheumatism,  neuralgia,  scrofula,
syphilis,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  chorea,  and  all  diseases  in  which
the  Root  is  indicated.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two
fluidrachms.

Exteactum  Cinchona  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Cinchona.

Preparation. — Take  of  Calisaya  Bark,  in  a  uniform  coarse  powder,
eight  troy  ounces,  moisten  it  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  and  after  standing
twelve  hours,  pack  the  moist  Bark  properly  in  a  percolator,  and  pour
Diluted  Alcohol  on  it  gradually  until  four  pints  of  tincture  have  passed,
or  until  its  bitterness  is  exhausted.  Evaporate  the  tincture  in  a  water-
bath  (or  a  still),  to  nine  fluidounces ;  then  add  of  Sugar  fourteeen  troy
ounces,  continue  the  heat  until  it  is  dissolved,  and  strain  while  hot.

Properties  and  Uses. — Same  as  Peruvian  bark,  and  may  be  used  alone
or  in  combination  with  other  agents.  Dose,  one  fluidrachm. — A.  B.
Taylor.

Extractum  Cornus  Florida  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Dogwood.

Preparation. — Take  of  Dogwood  Bark,  in  coarse  powder,  one  pound ;
Alcohol  76  per  cent.,  four  'pints;  White  Sugar  six  ounces;  Water  a  suffi-
cient quantity.  Moisten  the  Bark  thoroughly  with  Alcohol  and  let  it
stand  for  twenty-four  hours ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradu-
ally add  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of  the  first  that
passes,  till  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first  running,  four
fluidounces  ;  evaporate  the  remaining  alcoholic  tincture  thaf  comes
through  to  four  fluidounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside.  To  the  Powder
in  the  percolator  add  gradually  cold  Water  a  sufficient  quantity,  until  the
liquid  that  passes  is  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties  of  the
Dogwood  ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  half  a  pint,  then  add  the
Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight  fluid-


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  1073

ounces,  and  while  warm,  mix  in  the  reserved  tincture  and  extract,  and
make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fluid  Extract  of  Dogwood  is  tonic,  stimulant,
and  slightly  astringent.  It  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  tonics  are
indicated,  and  will  be  found  beneficial  in  female  debility,  leucorrhea,  etc.
The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms.
Extractum  Cubeb^e  Fluidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Cubebs.
Preparation. — "Take  of  Cubebs,  in  powder,  a  pound;  Ether  a  sufficient
quantity.  Put  the  Cubebs  into  a  percolator,  and,  having  packed  it  care-
fully, pour  Ether  gradually  upon  it  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained ;  then  distil  off  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  at  a  gentle  heat,  a
pint  and  a  half  of  the  Ether,  and  expose  the  residue  in  a  shallow  vessel,
until  the  whole  of  the  Ether  has  evaporated." — U.  S.

History. — This  preparation  consists  principally  of  the  volatile  oil  and
resin  of  the  Cubebs,  with  some  cubebin  and  waxy  matter.  Its  consis-
tence varies  according  to  the  amount  of  volatile  oil  existing  in  the
Cubebs,  and  its  color  is  brownish,  with  more  or  less  of  a  greenish  tint,
according  to  the  quantity  of  chlorophylle  present.  On  long  standing,
waxy  matter  and  crystals  of  cubebin  are  deposited.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  possesses  the  virtues  of  Cubebs,
and  may  be  given  in  the  dose  of  from  five  to  thirty  minims,  suspended
in  water  or  emulsion,  and  repeated  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Cypripedii  Fluidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Yellow  Ladies'
Slipper  Root.

Preparation.- — Take  of  Yellow  Ladies' Slipper  Root,  in  coarse  powder,
one  pound ;  Alcohol  76  per  cent.,  four  pints  ;  White  Sugar  six  ounces;
Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Root  thoroughly  with  some  of
the  Alcohol,  and  let  it  stand  for  twenty-four  hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a
percolator,  and  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little
of  the  first  that  passes,  until  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the
first  running,  four  fluidounces;  evaporate  the  remaining  Alcoholic  tincture
that  comes  through  to  four  fluidounces ;  and  likewise  set  it  aside.  To
the  Powder  in  the  percolator  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of  cold
Water,  until  the  liquid  that  passes  is  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the
properties  of  the  Cypripedium ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  half  a
pint,  then  add  the  Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is
reduced  to  eight  fluidounces,  and  while  warm,  mix  in  the  reserved
tincture  and  extract,  and  make  one  pint  of  fluid  extract.

Properties  and,  Uses. — The  Fluid  Extract  of  Cypripedium  is  tonic,
nervine,  and  antispasmodic,  and  may  be  beneficially  employed  in  chorea,
hysteria,  nervous  headache,  and  all  cases  of  nervous  irritability  and
excitability.  A  few  drops  of  oil  of  anise  may  be  added  to  it  to  improve
its  flavor.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm  three
times  a  day. — J.  K.
68


107-A  Pharmacy.

Extractum  Epig&m  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Trailing  Arbutus.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  Leaves  of  Epigaea  Repens,
in  coarse  powder,  one  pound  ;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  four  pints  ;  White
Sugar  six  ounces;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Leaves
thoroughly  with  some  of  the  Alcohol,  and  let  it  stand  for  twenty-four
hours ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  the  rest  of
the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of  the  first  that  passes,  until  it  runs  clear.
Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first  running,  four  fluidounces ;  evaporate  the
remaining  Alcoholic  tincture  that  comes  through  to  four  fluidounces,  and
likewise  set  it  aside.  To  the  Powder  in  the  percolator  add  gradually  a
sufficient  quantity  of  cold  Water,  until  the  liquid  that  passes  is  but
slightly  impregnated  with  the  taste  of  the  Leaves;  evaporate  this  latter
solution  to  half  a  pint,  then  add  the  Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation
until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight  fluidounces,  and  while  warm,  mix
in  the  reserved  Tincture  and  Extract,  and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Fluid  Extract  of  Trailing  Arbutus  possesses
diuretic  and  astringent  properties,  and  will  be  found  superior  to  the
preparations  of  uva  ursi,  buchu,  etc.,  in  gravel,  and  various  other  dis-
orders of  the  urinary  organs.  It  may  likewise  be  used  in  chronic  diar-
rhea and  summer  complaint ;  the  dose  is  one  fluidrachm,  three  or  four
times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Ergot^e  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Ergot.

1  reparation. — Take  of  fresh  Ergot  in  powder,  eight  ounces;  Ether
four  fluidounces  ;  Alcohol  twelve  fluidounces ,  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.
Moisten  the  Ergot  with  some  of  the  Ether,  let  it  stand  for  twenty -four
hours,  and  then  transfer  to  a  percolator,  and  add  gradually  the  remain-
der of  the  Ether.  When  all  has  passed  through,  allow  the  Ethereal
tincture  to  evaporate  spontaneously.  To  the  Powder  in  the  percolator
add  gradually  the  Alcohol,  and  when  all  has  passed,  evaporate  the
filtered  tincture  to  four  fluidounces.  Again  add  gradually  to  the  Powder
in  the  percolator,  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes
without  the  taste  of  the  Ergot ;  evaporate  this  liquid  to  four  fluidounces
and  add  to  it  six  ounces  of  White  Sugar,  and  again  evaporate  to  four
fluidounces.

Mix  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous  solutions  while  hot,  and  when  cold
add  the  residuum  of  the  evaporated  Ethereal  Tincture,  and  thoroughly
incorporate  by  agitation.

History. — The  ether  in  this  preparation  takes  up  a  portion  of  the  active
principle  in  combination  with  the  inert  fixed  oil;  while  the  other  agents,
undoubtedly,  take  up  certain  proportions  of  the  active  principle  not
touched  by  the  ether.  The  spontaneous  evaporation  of  the  ether  gives
the  oil  and  active  principle  combined,  and  which  must  be  well  mixed  with
the  other  solutions.  The  heat,  in  evaporating  the  alcoholic  and  aqueous
solutions,  should  be  below  212°. As  there  is  yet  some  doubt  in  relation


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  1075

to  the  active  principle  of  Ergot,  a  preparation  which  will  represent  the  drug-
in  its  natural  form,  is  desirable,  and  which  is  had  in  this  fluid  extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Fluid  Extract  may  be  used  as  a  substitute
for  ergot  in  all  cases,  it  is  pleasant  to  the  taste,  is  always  ready  for  use,
requires  a  small  dose,  and  acts  promptly  without  nausea.  The  dose  is
from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm ;  the  latter  dose  is  about  equal  to
two  doses  of  powdered  ergot.

Extractum  Gentians  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Gentian.

Preparation. — Take  of  Gentian,  in  coarse  powder,  sixteen  Troy  ounces;
French  Brandy  six  fluidounces ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Macerate
the  Gentian  in  two  and  a  half  pints  of  Water  for  twelve  hours,  and
having  introduced  it  into  a  percolator,  allow  the  infusion  to  pass  slowly,
adding  gradually  Water  until  five  pints  of  liquid  have  passed.  Evapo-
rate this  to  ten  fluidounces  by  means  of  a  water  bath,  add  the  Brandy,
and  strain  through  cotton  flannel.

History. — This  extract  has  a  thin  syrupy  consistence,  a  dark  brown
color,  free  from  sediment,  and  transparent  in  thin  strata.  With  water
it  forms  a  clear  mixture.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic,  and  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  half
a  fluidrachm  to  a  drachm,  which  represent  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm
of  Gentian  Root.  It  may  be  variously  combined  with  other  agents  to
meet  particular  indications.  For  instance,  should  an  aperient  tonic  with
antacid  properties  be  desired,  the  following  form  may  be  used :  Take  of
Fluid  Extract  of  Gentian,  two  fluidounces ;  Fluid  Extract  of  Rhubarb,
two  fluidrachms ;  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  one  drachm;  Tincture  of  Ginger
two  fluidrachms.  Mix.  One  fluidrachm  of  this  mixture  will  be  equal  to
about  forty  grains  of  gentian,  six  of  rhubarb,  and  three  of  bicarbonate
of  potassa.

If  a  chalybeate  tonic  is  desired,  the  following  may  be  employed  :
Take  of  Citrate  of  Iron  and  Quinia  one  drachm;  Water  six  fluidrachms ;
dissolve  and  add  Fluid  Extract  of  Gentian  two  fluidounces.  A  fluid
drachm  of  this  mixture  will  represent  about  forty -five  grains  of  gentian,
and  three  grains  of  citrate  of  iron  and  quinia.  —  Wm.  Procter,  Jr.

Extractum  Gentians  Fluidum  Compositum.  Compound  Fluid
Extract  of  Gentian.

Preparation. — Take  of  Gentian,  in  coarse  powder,  sixteen  Troy  ounces;
Bitter  Orange  Peel,  Coriander  Seeds,  of  each,  in  coarse  powder,  four
ounces;  Water,  Alcohol,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Macerate  the
Gentian  in  two  and  a  half  pints  of  water  for  twelve  hours,  and  introduce
it  into  a  percolator  ;  allow  the  infusion  to  pass  slowly,  adding  Water  at
intervals  until  five  pints  of  liquid  have  passed.  Evaporate  this  to  ten
fluidounces.

Macerate  the  Orange  Peel  and  Coriander  Seeds  in  a  mixture  of  eight
fluidounces  of  Alcohol,  and  four  fluidounces  of  Water  for  twelve  hours


1076  Pharmacy.

introduce  them  into  a  percolator,  and  add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity
of  Diluted  Alcohol  to  displace  twelve  fluidounces  of  tincture.  Evapo-
rate this  to  six  fluidounces  by  a  gentle  heat,  (120°  F.)  add  it  to  the
solution  of  Gentian  while  hot,  and  strain.  When  finished,  the  Fluid
Extract  should  measure  a  pint. —  Wm.  Procter,  Jr.

History. — The  Compound  Fluid  Extract  of  Gentian  is  a  colored,  thin,
syrupy  liquid.  In  the  preparation  of  it  I  should  prefer  Prickly  Ash  Ber-
ries to  the  Coriander,  both  on  account  of  their  flavor,  and  well  known
influence  on  mucous  tissues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic  and  carminative,  and  may  be  given  in
doses  of  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm.

Extractum  Hyoscyami  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Henbane.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  the  recently  dried  Leaves  of  Henbane,  in
coarse  powder,  eight  Troy  ounces  ;  Diluted  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity ;
Sugar  eight  Troy  ounces.  Macerate  the  Henbane  in  a  pint  of  Diluted
Alcohol  for  twenty-four  hours,  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  add  gra-
dually Diluted  Alcohol,  until  three  pints  of  tincture  have  passed.  Evap-
orate the  tincture  to  ten  fluidounces,  and  dissolve  the  Sugar  in  it  while
hot;  when  cold  add  Alcohol,  sp.  gr.  0.835,  two  fluidounces,  or  sufficient  to
make  a  pint  of  Fluid  Extract,  and  strain  through  fine  muslin.

History. — This  forms  an  elegant  and  durable  preparation  of  Hyo-
scyamus.  In  percolation  the  fluid  should  be  allowed  to  pass  very  slowly,
that  thorough  exhaustion  of  the  leaves  may  take  place.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  extract  possesses  all  the  virtues  of  Hyo-
scyamus,  and  may  be  given  wherever  the  influence  of  the  plant  is  desired.
The  dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  minims. —  C.  A.  Smith.

Extractum  Iridis  Fluiuum. Fluid  Extract  of  Blue  Flag.

Preparation. — Take  of  recently  dried  Blue  Flag  Root,  in  coarse  pow-
der, eight  ounces;  Ether  four  fluidounces  ;  Alcohol  twelve  fluidounces ;
Diluted  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Ether  and  Alcohol,  and
having  incorporated  the  Blue  Flag  with  one-half  of  the  mixture,  intro-
duce the  mass  into  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pour  in  the  remainder,
Tli en  add  Diluted  Alcohol  until  the  whole  liquid  which  has  passed  shall
amount  to  a  pint.  Put  the  Ethereal  liquid  thus  obtained  into  a  shallow
vessel,  and  allow  it  to  evaporate  spontaneously  until  reduced  to  five  fluid-
ounces.

Upon  the  mass  in  the  percolator  pour  gradually  Diluted  Alcohol  until
ten  fluidounces  of  tincture  have  passed,  and  evaporate  to  five  fluid-
ounces.  With  this  mix  the  five  fluidounces  left  after  spontaneous  evapo-
ration, taking  care  to  dissolve  in  a  little  Alcohol  any  oleo-resinous  matter
which  may  have  been  deposited,  and  to  add  it  to  the  rest.  Allow  the
mixture  to  stand,  with  occasional  agitation,  for  four  hours,  and  filter.
The  resulting  Fluid  Extract  should  be  ten  fluidounces  ;  and  if  it  be  less


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  1077

than  that  quantity,  the  deficiency  should  be  supplied  by  the  addition  of
Alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  holds  the  virtues  of  Blue  Flag  in  a  con-
centrated state,  and  may  be  used  in  syphilis,  dropsy,  scrofula,  and  all
diseases  in  which  the  crude  article  is  indicated.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to
thirty  minims. — J.  K.

Extbactum  Leptandb^e  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Black  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  Root  of  Leptandra  Virgin-
ica,  in  coarse  powder,  one  pound ;  Alcohol,  80  per  cent.,  four  pints ;
White  Sugar  four  ounces  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Add  to  the  Root,
in  a  convenient  close  vessel,  enough  Alcohol  to  thoroughly  moisten  them,
and  let  the  mixture  stand  for  twenty-four  hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a
percolator,  and  add  gradually  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little
of  the  first  that  comes  through,  till  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of
the  first  running,  four  fluidounces  ;  evaporate  the  remaining  Alcoholic
Tincture  that  comes  through  to  four  fluidounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside.
Then  pour  Hot  Water  on  the  residuum  in  the  percolator,  until  the  liquid
that  passes  has  very  little  of  the  color  or  taste  of  the  Blackroot ;  evapo-
rate this  latter  solution  to  half  a  pint,  then  add  the  Sugar,  continue  the
evaporation  until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight  fluidounces,  and  while
warm  mix  in  the  reserved  Tincture  and  Extract,  and  make  one  pint  of
Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Extract  is  laxative,  cholagogue,  and  tonic,
and  may  be  advantageously  substituted  for  the  Root  in  all  cases.  The
dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  minims,  one,  two,  or  three  times  a  day.  As  a
laxative  it  is  preferable  to  Leptandrin. — J.  K.

Extbactum  Lobelia  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Lobelia.

Preparation. — Mr.  Procter  employs  the  following  process  in  preparing
a  Fluid  Extract  of  Lobelia  Herb:  Macerate  for  twenty-four  hours,  Lobelia,
finely  bruised,  in  Diluted  Alcohol  one  pint  and  a  half,  and  Acetic  Acid
one  fluidounce  ;  introduce  the  mixture  into  an  earthen  displacer,  and  pour
on  slowly  Diluted  Alcohol  one  pint  and  a  half,  and  afterward  Water  until
three  pints  of  tincture  are  obtained  ;  evaporate  this  in  a  water-bath  to
ten  fluidounces,  strain,  add  Alcohol  six  fluidounces,  and  when  mixed  filter
through  paper.  This  process  is  based  on  the  fact,  that  in  the  presence
of  an  excess  of  acid,  the  lobelina  of  the  natural  salt,  which  gives  activity
to  the  drug,  is  not  decomposed  and  destroyed  by  the  heat  used.  A
fluidrachm  of  this  extract  is  equal  to  half  a  fluidounce  of  the  tincture.

That  which  is  commonly  used  by  Eclectics  is  prepared  according  to
the  previous  instructions  by  W.  S.  Merrell.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Fluid  Extract  of  Lobelia  possesses  all  the
properties  of  the  plant  in  a  concentrated  degree.  It  may  be  used
wherever  lobelia  is indicated. The dose is from five minims  to  a


1078  Pharmact.

fluidrachm,  according  to  the  effect  required  ;  and  which  are  equivalent
to  five  grains  or  a  drachm  of  the  powder.

Extractum  Lobelia  Fluidum  Compositum.  Compound  Fluid  Ex-
tract of  Lobelia.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  Bloodroot,  Skunkcabbage
Root,  and  Lobelia  Seeds  and  Leaves,  of  each,  coarsely  powdered,  fivo
ounces  and  a  half;  Alcohol,  80  per  cent.,  four  pints  ;  White  Sugar  four
ounces  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  articles  mixed  together
with  sufficient  Alcohol,  and  let  them  stand  for  twenty-four  hours  ;  then
transfer  the  mixture  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the
Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of  the  first  that  passes,  till  it  runs  clear.  Re-
serve, by  itself,  of  the  first  or  strongest  running,  four  fluidounces  ;  evap-
orate the  remaining  Alcoholic  tincture  that  comes  through  to  four  fluid-
ounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside.  Then  pour  Hot  Water  on  the  residuum
in  the  percolator,  until  the  liquid  that  comes  through  has  very  little  of
the  color  or  taste  of  the  medicine  ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  half
a  pint,  by  a  heat  considerably  below  the  boiling  point,  then  add  the
Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight  fluid-
ounces,  and  while  warm  mix  in  the  reserved  tincture  and  extract,  and
make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  fluid  extract  is  emetic,  expectorant,  and
antispasmodic,  and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  the  Acetated  Tinc-
ture of  Bloodroot.  A  fluidrachm  of  the  extract  is  equivalent  to  about  a
drachm  of  the  powder ;  the  dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  minims  according
to  the  desired  effect. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Polygoni  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Water  Pepper.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  Leaves  of  Water  Pepper,  in
coarse  powder,  one  pound ;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  four  pints;  White
Sugar  four  ounces ;  Water  a.  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  Leaves
thoroughly  with  Alcohol,  and  let  them  stand  for  twenty-four  hours ;  then
transfer  them  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,
returning  a  little  of  the  first  that  comes  through,  till  it  passes  clear.
Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first  running,  four  fluidounces ;  evaporate  the
remaining  Alcoholic  tincture  that  passes  to  four  fluidounces,  and  likewise
set  it  aside.  Then  gradually  add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Water  to  the
residuum  in  the  percolator,  until  the  liquid  that  comes  through  has  very
little  of  the  color  or  taste  of  the  Water  Pepper ;  evaporate  this  latter
solution  to  half  a  pint,  then  add  the  Sugar ;  continue  the  evaporation
until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight  fluidounces,  and  while  warm,  mix  in
the  reserved  tincture  and  extract,  and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fluid  Extract  of  Water  Pepper  possesses  the
properties  of  the  herb  in  a  concentrated  form,  and  may  be  given  when-
ever that  is  indicated.  It  is  especially  useful  in  uterine  diseases.  The
dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  minims,  three  or  four  times  a  day.


EXTRACTA FtUIDA.  1079

Extractum  Rhei  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Rhubarb.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rhubarb,  in  coarse  powder,  eight  ounces  ;  Sugar
jive  ounces  ;  Tincture  of  Ginger  Italf  a  jiuidounce ;  Oil  of  Fennel,  Oil  of
Anise,  each  four  minims  ;  Diluted  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  To  the
Rhubarb,  previously  mixed  with  an  equal  bulk  of  coarse  Sand,  add  twelve
fluidounces  of  Diluted  Alcohol,  and  allow  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twenty-
four  hours.  Transfer  the  mass  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pour  upon
it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  the  liquid  which  passes  has  little  of  the  odor  or
taste  of  Rhubarb.  Evaporate  the  tincture  thus  obtained,  by  means  of  a
water-bath,  to  five  fluidounces  ;  then  add  the  Sugar,  and,  after  it  is  dis-
solved, mix  thoroughly  with  the  resulting  Fluid  Extract,  the  Tincture  of
Ginger  holding  the  oils  in  solution. —  U  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  good  preparation  of  Rhubarb,  the
root  being  nearly  exhausted  by  the  menstruum,  and  the  active  principles
not  being  injuriously  affected,  if  the  evaporation  be  carefully  conducted,
without  too  o-reat  a  degree  of  heat.  The  dose  is  half  a  fluidrachm  for
an  adult,  which  is  equivalent  to  half  a  drachm  of  rhubarb.  This  is
inapplicable  to  acute  inflammatory  affections,  on  account  of  the  stimulus
it  contains,  in  the  alcohol  and  oils.

Extractum  Rhei  et  Potassa  Fluidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Rhubarb
and  Potassa. Fluid  Neutralizing  Extract.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Root  of  the  best  India  Rhubarb,  and  Bi-
carbonate of  Potassa,  of  each,  two  pounds  Avoirdupois  ;  Cassia  or  Cinna-
mon, and  Golden  Seal,  of  each  one  pound ;  good  French  Brandy,  fourth
proof,  one  gallon;  Oil  of  Peppermint  one  Jiuidrachm  ;  Refined  Sugar
three  pounds  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Grind,  or  coarsely  bruise  the
Rhubarb,  Cassia,  and  Golden  Seal,  and  mix  them.  Macerate  them  for
twenty-four  hours,  or  longer  in  the  Brandy  ;  then  express  the  tincture
with  strong  pressure,  and  add  to  it  the  Oil  of  Peppermint  previously  dis-
solved in  a  little  Alcohol.  Break  up  the  cake,  or  compressed  residue
from  the  press,  place  it  in  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  warm  Water,
until  the  strength  of  the  articles  is  exhausted.  Evaporate  this  solution
to  four  pints,  and  while  the  liquor  is  still  hot,  dissolve  in  it  the  Bicarbo-
nate of  Potassa  and  Refined  Sugar.  Continue  the  evaporation,  if  neces-
rary,  until,  when  added  to  the  tincture  first  obtained,  it  will  make  one
gallon  and  a  half  of  Fluid  Extract,  and  mix  the  two  solutions  together.
In  adding  the  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  the  liquid  must  not  be  too  hot  else
it  will  be  converted  into  the  sesquicarbonate.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  elegant  and  superior  preparation,
being  an  improvement  upon  the  Neutralizing  Cordial.  It  is  used  for  the
same  diseases  as  the  Compound  Powder  of  Rhubarb,  and  is  a  more  eli4
gible  form  of  administration.  Two  fluidrachms  of  this  Fluid  Extract  are
equivalent  to  one  drachm  of  the  powder. —  W.  S.  M.


-X


1080  Pharmacy.

Extractum  Rhus  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Sumach.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  the  recently  dried  Bark  of  Rhus  Glabrum,  in
coarse  powder,  one  pound;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  four  pints ;  White
Sugar  four  ounces ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Add  sufficient  Alcohol
to  the  Bark  to  thoroughly  moisten  it,  and  let  it  macerate  for  twenty-four
hours  ;  then  transfer  the  mixture  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  the
rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of  the  first  that  passes,  till  it  runs
clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first  running,  four  fluiduunces  ;  evapo-
rate the  remainder  of  the  Alcoholic  tincture  that  passes,  to  four  fluid-
ounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside.  Then  pour  Hot  Water  on  the  residuum
in  the  percolator,  until  the  liquid  that  comes  through  has  very  little  of
the  taste  of  the  Sumach  ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  half  a  pint,
then  add  the  sugar ;  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is  reduced
to  eight  fluidounces,  and  while  warm  mix  in  the  reserved  tincture  and
extract,  and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Fluid  Extract  of  Sumach  is  tonic,  astringent,
and  antiseptic.  It  will  be  found  beneficial  in  scrofula,  gonorrhea,  diar-
rhea, dysentery,  and  in  mercurial  sore  mouth  and  salivation.  The  dose
is  from  half  a  fiuidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm,  three  times  a  day.

Extractum  Sarsaparilla  Fluidum  Compositum.  Compound  Fluid
Extract  of  Sarsaparilla.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Sarsaparilla  Root,  sliced  and  bruised,  sixteen
ounces ;  Liquorice  root,  bruised,  Bark  of  Sassafras  Root,  bruised,  of  each,
two  ounces ;  Mezereon,  sliced,  six  drachms;  Diluted  Alcohol  eight  pints;
White  Sugar  twelve  ounces.  Macerate  all  the  articles  together,  excepting
the  Sugar,  for  fourteen  days  ;  then  express  and  filter.  Evaporate  the
tincture,  by  means  of  a  water  bath,  to  twelve  fluidounces,  and  add  the
Sugar  to  it  while  hot.  Remove  from  the  bath  as  soon  as  the  Sugar  is
dissolved.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  fluid  extract  is  alterative,  and  may  be
used  in  scrofula  and  secondary  syphilis.  The  dose  is  a  fluidrachm,
which  is  equivalent  to  a  drachm  of  the  root,  three  or  four  times  a  day.
With  the  exception  of  the  omission  of  Guaiacum  Wood,  this  formula  is
the  one  proposed  by  W.  Hodgson,  Jr.

Extractum  Scutellaria  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Scullcap.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  dried  Leaves  of  Scullcap,  in  coarse
powder,  one  pound;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  four  pints;  White  Sugar
four  ounces;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Add  a  sufficient  quantity  of
the  Alcohol  to  the  Scullcap  to  thoroughly  moisten  it,  and  allow  the
mixture  to  macerate  for  twenty-four  hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  perco-
lator, and  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of
the  first  that  comes  through,  till  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of
the  first  running,  four  fluidounces  ;  evaporate  the  remaining  Alcoholic
tincture  that  passes  to  four  fluidounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside. Then


"EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  1081

pour  gradually  on  the  residuum  in  the  percolator  a  sufficient  quantity  of
Hot  Water,  until  the  liquid  that  passes  is  but  slightly  impregnated  with
the  properties  of  the  Scullcap  ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  half  a
pint,  then  add  the  Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is
reduced  to  eight  fluidounces,  and  while  warm  mix  in  the  reserved  tinc-
ture and  extract,  and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fluid  Extract  of  Scullcap  is  tonic,  nervine,  and
antispasmodic,  and  is  a  very  convenient  and  eligible  form  of  administering
the  active  principles  of  the  plant.  It  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  the
herb  is  indicated.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm,
three  or  four  times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Senecii  Fluidum. Fluid }.  Extract  of Life-root.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  the  recently  dried  Herb  Senecio  Aureus,  in
coarse  powder,  one  pound ;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  four  pints;  White
Sugar  four  ounces;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Add  a  sufficient  quan-
tity of  the  Alcohol  to  the  Herb  to  thoroughly  moisten  it,  and  allow  the
mixture  to  macerate  for  twenty  four  hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  perco-
lator, and  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of  the
first  that  passes,  till  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first  running,
four  fluidounces  ;  evaporate  the  remaining  Alcoholic  tincture  that  passes
to  four  fluidounces,  and  likewise  set  that  aside.  Then  pour  gradually  on
the  residuum  in  the  percolator  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Hot  Water,  until
the  liquid  that  passes  is  but  slightly  impregnated  with  the  properties  of
the  Life-root  Herb  ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  half  a  pint,  then  add
the  Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight
fluidounces,  and  while  warm  mix  in  the  reserved  tincture  and  extract,
and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Fluid  Extract  possesses  the  medical  vir-
tues of  the  Life-root,  and  forms  a  useful  agent  in  amenorrhea,  either
alone,  or  in  combination  with  the  fluid  extracts  of  black  cohosh,  water-
pepper,  etc.  It  may,  likewise,  be  used  advantageously  in  the  other  diseases
in  which  the  root  is  found  efficient.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm
to  a  fluidrachm,  three  or  four  times  a  day. — J.  K.

Extractum  Senn^e  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Senna.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Senna,  in  coarse  powder,  two  pounds  and  a
half;  Sugar  twenty  ounces;  Oil  of  Fennel  a  fluidrachm ;  Hoffman's  Ano-
dyne two  fluidrachm  s  ;  Diluted  Alcohol  four  pints.  Macerate  the  Senna
with  the  Diluted  Alcohol  for  twenty-four  hours,  then  introduce  the  mix-
ture into  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  Water  mixed  with  one-third
of  its  bulk  of  Alcohol,  until  a  gallon  and  a  half  of  liquid  shall  have
passed.  Evaporate  the  liquid  by  means  of  a  water-bath  to  twenty  fluid-
ounces  ;  filter,  add  the  Sugar  while  the  Fluid  is  hot,  and  when  it  is  all
dissolved,  add  the  Oil  of  Fennel  dissolved  in  Hoffman's  Anodyne,


1082  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  forms  a  neat  preparation  of  Senna  ;  the
addition  of  Hoffman's  Anodyne  is  to  prevent  fermentation.  The  dose
for  an  adult  is  half  a  fluidounce. — Duhamel.

Extractum  Senn.e  et  Jalap^e  Fluidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Senna  and
Jalap. Fluid  Extract  of  Antibilious  Physic.

Preparation. — Take  of  Senna,  in  coarse  powder,  one  pound ;  Jalap
Root,  in  coarse  powder,  half  a  pound;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  six  pints;
Carbonate  of  Potassa  six  drachms;  White  Sugar  eight  ounces ;  Diluted
Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity;  Oil  of  Cloves  forty  minims ;  Hoffman's
Anodyne  one  fuidrachm  and  a  half.  Mix  the  Senna  and  Jalap  together,
and  add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Alcohol  to  thoroughly  moisten  them,  and
let  the  mixture  stand  for  twenty-four  hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  perco-
lator, and  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little  of
the  first  that  passes,  till  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first
running,  six  fluidounces  ;  evaporate  the  remaining  Alcoholic  tincture
that  comes  through  to  six  fluidounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside.  Then
add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Diluted  Alcohol  to  the  residuum  in  the
percolator,  until  the  liquid  passes  but  very  little  impregnated  with  the
properties  of  the  medicines ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  twelve
fluidounces,  then  add  the  Sugar,  and  continue  the  evaporation  until  the
syrup  is  reduced  to  twelve  fluidounces,  and  while  warm  add  the  Car-
bonate of  Potassa,  the  Oil  of  Cloves  previously  dissolved  in  Hoffman's
Anodyne,  also  the  reserved  tincture  and  extract,  and  make  one  pint  and
a  half  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  concentrated  form  of  the  Compound
Powder  of  Jalap,  and  may  be  given  with  safety  in  all  cases  where  a
purgative  is  required.  Should  any  resinous  matter  be  deposited,  it  must
be  dissolved  in  Alcohol  and  combined  with  the  extract ;  the  addition  of
the  Carbonate  of  Potassa  is  to  enable  the  resinous  matter  deposited
during  evaporation,  to  be  dissolved,  also  to  aid  in  counteracting  the
griping  property  of  the  medicine.  The  dose  for  an  adult  is  a  fluidrachm,
which  is  about  equivalent  to  one  drachm  of  the  powder. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Senn^e  et  Rhei  Fluidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Senna  and
Rhubarb.

Preparation. — Take  of  Senna,  in  coarse  powder,  twelve  ounces  (Troy);
Rhubarb,  in  coarse  powder,  four  ounces  ;  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  half  an
ounce;  Sugar  eight  ounces;  Tincture  of  Ginger  a  fluidounce ;  Oil  of
Cloves  eight  minims ;  Oil  of  Anise  sixteen  minims ;  Alcohol,  and  Water,
of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Senna  and  Rhubarb  together,
pour  upon  them  two  pints  of  Diluted  Alcohol,  and  allow  them  to  mace-
rate for  twenty-four  hours ;  then  introduce  the  mixture  into  a  percolator
furnished  below  with  a  stop-cock  or  cork  to  regulate  the  flow.  A  mix-
ture of  one  part  of  Alcohol  and  three  of  Water  should  now  be  gradually
added,  so  as  to  keep  a  constant  but  slow  displacement  of  the  absorbed


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  1083

menstruum,  until  one  gallon  of  tincture  has  passed.  Evaporate  this  in
a  water-bath  to  eleven  fiuidounces,  dissolve  in  it  the  Sugar  and  Bicar-
bonate of  Potassa,  and  after  straining,  add  the  Tincture  of  Ginger
holding  the  Oils  in  solution,  and  mix.  When  finished  the  whole  should
measure  a  pint.

History. — If  the  percolation  has  been  properly  conducted,  the  ingre-
dients will  have  been  sufficiently  exhausted  when  six  pints  of  fluid  have
passed.  As  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  soluble  matter  passes  in  the
first  two  pints,  it  is  well  to  set  these  aside  and  evaporate  them  separately
to  six  fiuidounces,  subsequently  adding  it  to  the  other  liquid  when  it  has
been  reduced  to  five  fiuidounces.  As  the  cathartic  principles  of  senna  and
rhubarb  are  very  susceptible  to  injury  from  heat,  especially  in  contact
with  the  air,  the  propriety  of  using  the  best  available  means  for  con-
ducting the  evaporation  need  not  be  urged.  When  the  evaporation  is
conducted  in  open  vessels,  some  advantage  is  gained  by  adding  the
sugar  to  the  tincture  and  continuing  the  process  until  it  measures  fifteen
fiuidounces.  The  sugar  protects  the  extractive  matter  from  oxidation,
and  more  completely  suspends  or  dissolves  the  resinous  part  of  the  rhu-
barb contained  in  the  tincture.  The  bicarbonate  of  potassa  should  not
be  added  to  the  extract  while  it  is  above  140°  F.,  and  should  be  reduced
to  powder  previously.

Properties  and  Uses. — Senna  has  little,  if  any,  tonic  influence  on  the
alimentary  surfaces;  an  overdose  has  a  depleting  effect,  often  inconve-
nient, and  its  exhibition  is  frequently  attended  with  griping.  Rhubarb,
on  the  other  hand,  possesses  both  a  purgative  and  astringent  property,
the  latter  coming  into  play  after  the  former  has  manifested  itself,  and
thus  repairing,  as  it  were,  its  effects.  This  astringent  or  tonic  action  of
rhubarb  is  so  strongly  marked,  that,  in  most  cases,  when  a  simple  cathartic
is  needed,  it  becomes  necessary  to  combine  this  drug  with  some  other
cathartic  to  overcome  or  modify  this  peculiarity.  By  the  union  of  senna
and  rhubarb  in  the  concentrated  form  presented  by  a  fluid  extract,  and  in  a
due  proportion,  a  resulting  cathartic  is  obtained  which  is  safe,  unattended
by  unpleasant  symptoms,  and  not  followed  by  constipation  when  the
dose  has  been  properly  graduated.  The  association  of  alkalies  and  alka-
line salts  with  rhubarb  and  senna,  has  a  tendency  to  prevent  their
griping,  and  in  the  case  of  senna,  to  increase  its  activity.  The  dose  of
this  fluid  extract,  for  an  adult,  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluid
drachm. —  Wm.  Procter,  Jr.

Extkactum  Serpentarije  Fluidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Virginia
Snakeroot.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Virginia  Snakeroot,  in  coarse  powder,  twelve
ounces  ;  Alcohol  and  Water,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Ser-
pentaria  with  twelve  ounces  of  Alcohol,  and  allow  it  to  stand  for  twenty-
four  hours ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator  and  gradually  add  Alcohol


1084  Pharmacy.

until  a  pint  and  a  half  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.  Place  this  in  an
evaporating  dish,  and  allow  it  to  evaporate  spontaneously  until  reduced
to  six  fluidounces.  To  the  root  in  the  percolator,  exhausted  by  alcohol,
add  gradually  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Water,  until  it  is  exhausted,  or  until
about  three  pints  have  passed;  (to  which,  if  required,  Sugar  six  ounces
may  be  added  and  dissolved).  Evaporate  this  last  aqueous  solution  in
a  water-bath,  to  six  fluidounces,  and  while  warm,  add  the  six  fluidounces
obtained  by  spontaneous  evaporation  of  the  alcoholic  tincture,  mix
together,  and  strain.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  fluid  extract  forms  a  useful  tonic,  which
may  be  used  in  cases  where  the  root  is  admissible.  Each  ounce  of  it
represents  an  ounce  of  the  root.  The  dose  is  from  fifteen  to  forty-five
minims,  three  or  four  times  a  day. — A.  B.  Taylor.

Extractum  Spigeli^e  et  Senn^e  Fluidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Spige-
lia  and  Senna.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Pink  Root,  in  coarse  powder,  one  pound;
Senna,  in  coarse  powder,  six  ounces  ;  Sugar  one  pound  and  a  half ;  Car-
bonate of  Potassa  six  drachms ;  Oil  of  Caraway,  Oil  of  Anise,  of  each,
half  a  fluidrachm ;  Diluted  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Macerate  the
Pink  Root  and  Senna  for  two  days,  with  Diluted  Alcohol  two  pints;  then
transfer  the  mixture  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  Diluted  Alcohol,
until  half  a  gallon  of  liquid  has  passed.  Evaporate  the  tincture  thus
obtained,  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  to  a  pint;  then  add  the  Carbonate
of  Potassa,  and  after  it  has  dissolved  the  resinous  sediment,  add  the
Sugar  previously  triturated  with  the  Oils,  effecting  its  solution  by  a
gentle  heat. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  fluid  extract  combines  the  cathartic  pro-
perties of  senna,  with  the  anthelmintic  virtues  of  pink  root;  it  is  not
offensive  to  the  taste,  and  is  generally  acceptable  to  the  stomach.  The
dose  is  half  a  fluidounce  for  an  adult;  a  fluidrachm  for  a  child  two
years  old.

Extractum  Stilling^  Fmjidum.  Fluid  Extract  of  Queen's  Boot.
Bronchial  Elixir.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently  gathered  Root  of  Stillingia,  cut
into  small  pieces,  one  pound;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  four  pints;  White
Sugar  eight  ounces;  Oil  of  Caraway  a  fluidrachm ;  Water  a  sufficient
quantity.  Cover  the  Root  with  Alcohol,  and  let  the  mixture  stand  for
twenty-four  hours;  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  so  packed  as  to  admit
of  a  slow  running,  and  add  gradually  the  remainder  of  the  Alcohol,
returning  a  little  of  the  first  that  passes,  till  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by
itself,  of  the  first  running,  four  fluidounces ;  evaporate  the  remainder  of
the  Alcoholic  tincture  that  comes  through  to  four  fluidounces,  and  like-
wise set  it  aside.  Then  pour  Hot  Water  on  the  residuum  in  the  percola-
tor, until  the  liquid  that  comes  through  is  but  slightly  impregnated  with


EXTRACTA FLUIDA.  1085

the  properties  of  the  Stillingia;  evaporate  this  solution  to  half  a  pint,
then  add  the  Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is  reduced
to  eight  fiuidounces,  and  while  warm,  mix  in  the  reserved  tincture  and
extract,  and  then  the  Oil  of  Caraway,  and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.
Properties  and  Hues. — This  fluid  extract  possesses  all  the  active  pro-
perties of  the  Queen's  Root,  in  a  concentrated  form,  one  fluidrachm
being  equal  to  one  drachm  of  the  root.  On  account  of  its  great  activity
it  is  never  used  in  scrofula,  syphilis,  etc.,  in  which  the  more  agreeable
and  sufficiently  active  and  efficacious  Compound  Syrup  of  Stillingia  is
preferred.  It  has  been,  however,  found  very  efficient  in  bronchitis,
laryngitis,  and  various  pulmonary  affections.  The  dose  is  from  two  to
five  or  ten  drops,  to  be  placed  upon  the  tongue,  and  allowed  to  pass  very
slowly  into  the  stomach. —  W.  S.  M.

Extractum  Taraxaci  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Dandelion.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recently-dried  Root  of  Dandelion,  in  coarse
powder,  four  pounds ;  Alcohol  twelve  fiuidounces ;  Sugar  two  pounds ;
Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten  the  root  with  Cold  Water,  and  let  it
stand  for  twenty-four  hours;  then  express,  filter,  add  the  Alcohol,  and
set  the  liquid  aside.  Break  up  the  cake  produced  by  the  pressure,
cover  it  with  Cold  Water,  and  let  it  stand  twenty-four  hours ;  again  ex-
press, filter,  and  add  the  Sugar  to  the  liquid.  Evaporate  in  shallow
vessels  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  to  a  quantity  that  shall  just  make
forty-eight  fiuidounces  on  the  addition  of  the  first  reserved  solution,  and
mix  the  two  liquors.

History.  —  Dandelion  is  very  much  injured  in  its  medicinal  properties
by  heat,  hence,  the  importance  of  employing  as  little  heat  in  makino-
the  above  fluid  extract  as  possible.  Mr.  Wm.  Procter,  Jr.,  offers  the  fol-
lowing mode  of  obtaining  the  virtues  of  dandelion,  by  which  the  natural
juice  may  be  preserved  unimpaired:  Take  of  fresh  Dandelion  Roots
(collected  in  September  or  October)  twenty  pounds,  Avoirdupois;  Alco-
hol, sp.  gr.  0.835,  four  pints.  Slice  the  roots  transversely  in  short
sections,  and  by  means  of  a  mill  or  mortar  and  pestle  reduce  them  to  a
pulpy  mass;  then  add  the  Alcohol  and  mix  them  thoroughly.  The
mixture  thus  far  prepared  at  the  season  when  the  root  is  proper  for
collection,  may  be  set  aside  in  suitable  vessels;  stoneware  jars  are
appropriate ;  and  extracted  as  the  preparation  is  needed  through  the
other  seasons.  After  having  stood  a  week,  or  until  a  convenient  time,
the  pulpy  mass  is  subjected  to  powerful  pressure,  until  as  much  as  pos-
sible of  the  fluid  is  removed.  This  is  then  filtered  and  bottled  for  use.
It  is  necessary  that  sufficient  time  should  elapse  after  the  pulp  is  set
aside,  for  the  alcohol  to  penetrate  the  fibrous  particles  and  commingle
with  the  natural  juices,  as  well  as  for  the  Avoody  structure  of  the  root  to
lose  its  elasticity,  that  it  may  yield  the  juice  more  completely  on  pres-
sure. When  the  pulp  has  stood  six  months  in  this  manner  it  yields  the


1086  Pharmacy.

juice  with  great  readiness,  and  is  possessed  of  the  sensible  properties  of
the  dandelion  in  a  marked  degree.  When  eight  pounds,  Avoirdupois,
of  the  root  is  thus  treated,  after  standing  several  months,  the  practical
result  is  about  six  pints  of  fluid,  with  an  ordinary  screw-press.  This
yield  will  vary  in  amount  with  the  condition  of  the  root  when  collected,
and  the  length  of  time  it  is  exposed  afterward,  as  well  as  the  power  of
the  press  used.  Should  the  alcohol  in  this  preparation  be  contra-indi-
cated, it  might  be  partially  removed  by  exposure  in  a  water-bath  until
the  juice  was  reduced  to  five-sixths  of  its  bulk,  and  then  for  every  pint
of  the  residue,  eight  ounces,  Troy,  of  Sugar  may  be  added  and  dis-
solved in  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fluid  Extract  of  Dandelion  may  be  administered
in  all  cases  when  the  influence  of  this  drug  upon  the  system  is  desired.
The  dose  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms  three  times  a  day.  Some  practi-
tioners speak  very  highly  of  the  therapeutical  influence  of  dandelion  ;
others,  myself  among  the  number,  do  not;  probably,  in  the  latter
instances,  the  cause  may  exist  in  using  preparations  rendered  inert  by
the  heat  employed  in  their  manufacture.

Extractum  Valerianae  Fluidum. Fluid  Extract  of  Valerian.

Preparation.  —  "Take  of  Valerian,  in  coarse  powder,  eight  ounces;
Ether  four  fluidounces ;  Alcohol  twelve  fluidounces ;  Diluted  Alcohol  a
sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Ether  and  Alcohol,  and  having  incorporated
the  Valerian  with  one  half  of  the  mixture,  introduce  the  mass  into  a
percolator,  and  gradually  pour  in  the  remainder.  Then  add  Diluted
Alcohol  until  the  whole  liquid  which  has  passed  shall  amount  to  a  pint.
Put  the  ethereal  liquid  thus  obtained  into  a  shallow  vessel,  and  allow  it
to  evaporate  spontaneously  until  reduced  to  five  fluidounces.  Upon  the
mass  in  the  percolator  pour  gradually  Diluted  Alcohol  until  ten  fluid-
ounces  of  tincture  have  passed.  With  this  mix  the  five  fluidounces  left
after  the  spontaneous  evaporation,  taking  care  to  dissolve  in  a  little
Alcohol  any  Oleo-resinous  matter  which  may  have  been  deposited,  and  to
add  it  to  the  rest.  Allow  the  mixture  to  stand,  with  occasional  agita-
tion, for  four  hours,  and  then  filter.  The  resulting  Fluid  Extract  should
measure  a  pint;  and  if  it  be  less  than  that  quantity,  the  deficiency
should  be  supplied  by  the  addition  of  alcohol."  —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  holds  the  virtues  of  Valerian  in  a  con-
centrated state,  and  may  be  used  when  desired  to  obtain  the  influence
of  that  agent.  It  may  also  be  combined  with  various  other  fluid  extracts,
as  of  cimicifuga,  cypripedium,  senecio,  etc.  The  dose  is  one  or  two
fluidrachms,  three  times  a  day,  or  oftener  if  required.

Extractum  Xanthoxyli  Fluidum. Fluid  extract  of  Prickly  Ash.

Preparation. — Take  of  Prickly  Ash  Bark,  in  coarse  powder,  one
pound;  Alcohol,  76  per  cent.,  four  pints;  White  Sugar  four  ounces  ;  Di-
luted Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity. Moisten  the  bark  thoroughly  with


Ferrum.  1087

Alcohol,  and  let  it  stand  twenty -four  hours ;  then  transfer  the  mixture  to
a  percolator,  and  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the  Alcohol,  returning  a  little
of  the  first  that  passes,  till  it  runs  clear.  Reserve,  by  itself,  of  the  first
running  four  fiuidounces ;  evaporate  the  remaining  Alcoholic  tincture
that  comes  through  to  four  fiuidounces,  and  likewise  set  it  aside.  Then
add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Diluted  Alcohol  to  the  residuum  in  the  per-
colator, until  the  liquid  that  comes  through  has  very  little  of  the  taste
of  the  medicine  ;  evaporate  this  latter  solution  to  half  a  pint,  then  add
the  Sugar,  continue  the  evaporation  until  the  syrup  is  reduced  to  eight
fiuidounces,  and  while  warm  mix  in  the  reserved  tincture  and  extract,
and  make  one  pint  of  Fluid  Extract.

Properties  and  Uses. — Fluid  Extract  of  Prickly  Ash  Bark  is  a  stimu-
lant, tonic,  alterative,  and  sialogogue,  and  may  be  used  in  all  cases
where  the  bark  is  indicated  or  desired.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty
minims,  three  times  a  day. — J.  K.


FERRUM.
Preparations  of  Iron.

Ferri  Acetas. Acetate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Iron  one  ounce;  Acetic  Acid  six
ounces. Digest  for  three  days,  and  filter.

History. — This  solution  has  a  deep  red  color,  and  an  acid  and  strongly
chalybeate  taste.  It  is  incompatible  with  alkalies  and  their  carbonates,
the  strong  acids,  and  vegetable  astringent  infusions.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tonic  and  astringent,  and  possesses  the  general
medical  properties  of  the  preparations  of  iron.  A  diluted  solution  of  it,
with  a  few  drops  of  creosote,  will  be  found  a  valuable  injection  in  leu-
corrhea.  Dose,  five  to  twenty  drops,  in  water.  (See  Tinclura  Ferri
Acetatis.)

Ferri  Carbonas  Saccharatum. Saccharine  Carbonate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  four  ounces  ;  Carbonate  of
Soda  four  ounces  and  a  quarter;  Sugar  two  ounces;  Boiling  Distilled  Water
four  pints,  Imperial  measure.  Dissolve  separately  the  Sulphate  of
Iron,  and  Carbonate  of  Soda,  each  in  two  pints  of  the  Water.  Mix  the
solutions  while  still  hot,  and  set  the  mixture  aside,  that  the  Carbonate
of  Iron  may  subside.  Then,  having  poured  off  the  supernatant  liquor,
wash  frequently  the  precipitated  Carbonate.  To  this  add  the  Sugar,
dissolved  in  two  fiuidounces  of  Water,  and  evaporate  the  mixture  by
means  of  a  water-bath  until  the  powder  is  dry.  Keep  this  in  a  well
stopped  bottle.— Lond.

History.  — When  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron  is  mixed  with  a  solu-
tion of  carbonate  of  potassa,  a  double  decomposition  ensues,  resulting
in  a  precipitate  of  carbonate  of  protoxide  of  iron,  which  falls  of  a  pale-
bluish color,  and  sulphate of  soda,  which  remains  in  solution. The


1088  Pharmacy.

precipitate  formed  by  this  action,  absorbs  oxygen  very  rapidly  when
exposed  to  the  air,  and  soon  changes  into  the  sesquioxide  of  iron,  which
together  with  its  preparations  are  not  so  much  esteemed  in  medicine  as  I  he
protoxide  and  its  preparations.  The  sesquioxide  formed  from  this  preci-
pitate usually  retains  some  of  the  carbonate  of  the  protoxide  which  has
remained  unchanged.  As  saccharine  matter  prevents  the  absorption  of
oxygen,  and  consequently  preserves  the  carbonate  of  the  protoxide  of
iron  from  passing  into  sesquioxide,  sugar  is  added  to effect  this  object.

Saccharine  Carbonate  of  Iron  is  of  a  grayish-green  color,  with  a
sweet  and  strongly  chalybeate  taste,  is  permanent  in  the  air,  and  readily
dissolves  in  muriatic  acid  with  effervescence.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  excellent  chalybeate  tonic,  and
is  superior  to  the  subcarbonate  of  iron,  but  inferior  to  Vallet's  Ferru-
ginous mass,  which  has  the  advantage  of  being  prepared  with  the  anti-
oxidizing  influence  of  sugar  from  the  commencement.  (See  Piluloe  Ftrri
Carbonatis.)  The  stools  are  rendered  greenish-black  by  its  use.  The
dose  is  live  to  thirty  grains,  in  the  form  of  pill.

Ferri  Citras. Citrate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Citric  Acid  five  ounces  and  a  half;  Distilled
Water  five  Jiuidounces;  moist  Hydrated  Oxide  of  Iron  (prepared  accord-
ing to  the  formula  given  hereafter),  a  sufficient  quantity.  Dissolve  the
Acid  in  the  Water,  in  a  platinum  capsule  ;  heat  the  Solution  to  about
150°,  maintain  it  at  this  temperature,  and  gradually  add  the  Hydrated
Oxide,  in  its  moist  and  recent  state,  as  long  as  any  is  dissolved,
and  until  the  Acid  is  fully  saturated.  Filter  the  liquid,  and  evaporate
it  to  the  consistence  of  thick  molasses.  Then  spread  it  out  thinly  on
glass  or  porcelain  plates,  where  it  speedily  dries  in  thin  layers,  which
are  to  be  detached  from  the  plates,  and  broken  into  fragments.

History. — In  this  process,  the  temperature  directed  promotes  the
solution  of  the  sesquioxide  ;  while  a  higher  temperature  would  lessen
its  solubility.  Citrate  of  Iron,  is  of  a  beautiful  garnet-red  color,  un-
crystallizable,  slowly  soluble  in  cold  water,  but  readily  soluble  in  boiling
water,  with  an  acid,  not  unpleasant  chalybeate  taste.  It  consists  of  one
equivalent  of  Citric  Acid  165,  and  one  of  Sesquioxide  of  Iron  80=245.

When  the  excess  of  acid  in  this  salt  is  neutralized  by  adding  Solution
of  Ammonia  to  its  solution,  the  double  salt,  called  Ammonio-citrate  of
Iron  (Ferri  Ammonio-  Citras),  is  formed  in  solution.  By  evaporating  this
to  the  consistence  of  syrup,  pouring  it  in  thin  layers  on  earthenware
plates,  and  drying  with  a  gentle  heat,  the  salt  is  obtained  in  scales.
The  heat,  however,  drives  off  a  great  portion  of  the  Ammonia.  Ammo-
nio-citrate of  Iron  is  in  scales  of  a  garnet-red  color,  much  more  readily
soluble  in  cold  water  than  the  Citrate  of  Iron,  and  possesses  an  acidu-
lous, slightly  chalybeate  taste.  Potassa  and  lime-water  decompose  it,
with  evolution  of  ammonia,  and  a  precipitate  of  the  sesquioxide  of  iron;
ferrocyanuret  of  potassium  does  not  render  it  blue.


Ferrum.  1089

Properties  and.  Uses. — These  salts  are  pleasant  chalybeate  tonics,  and
may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  four  to  ten  grains  of  either,  in  pill  or  solu-
tion, and  repeated  four  or  five  times  a  day.  The  citrate  is  best  given  in
the  form  of  pill.

Fkrri  et  Quinine  Citras. Citrate  of  Iron  and  Quinia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Citrate  of  Iron  fioe  ounces  ;  recently  precipi-
tated Quinia  one  ounce  ;  Citric  Acid  two  drachms ;  Distilled  water  twelve
fiuidounces.  Mix  these  together  in  a  capsule,  and  apply  heat,  but  not
sufficient  to  produce  ebullition;  stir  constantly.  When  the  articles  are
all  dissolved,  evaporate  the  solution  carefully  to  the  consistence  of  syrup,
and  spread  it,  in  thin  layers  on  glass,  to  dry.

History. — Citrate  of  Iron  and  Quinia  is  in  the  form  of  scales,  which
are  shining,  and  of  a  more  or  less  deep  garnet-color.  It  may  also  be
made  in  the  following  manner;  Dissolve  Citrate  of  Iron  four  parts,
Citrate  of  Quinia,  one  part ',  in  Distilled  Water,  and  evaporate  the  solution
to  dryness,  as  directed  for  Citrate  of  Iron.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  A  valuable  tonic.  Dose,  five  to  ten  grains,
three  times  a  day,  either  in  solution  or  pill.

Ferri  et  Morphine  Tartras.  Ferrotartrate  of  Morphia.  Tartrate  of
Iron  and  Morphia.

Preparation. — Take  of  crystallized  Tartaric  Acid,  Distilled  Water,
each,  by  weight,  two  ounces ;  moist  Hydrated  Sesquioxide  of  Iron,  pure
Morphia,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Boil  the  Tartaric  Acid  and  the
Distilled  Water  together,  in  a  glass  or  platina  vessel  ;  as  soon  as  the
Acid  is  dissolved,  add  the  Iron  until  the  fluid  will  dissolve  no  more.
Heat  the  mixture  until  the  deep  blood-red  fluid  becomes  clear,  and  then
add  the  Morphia  until  the  fluid  ceases  to  dissolve  it.  Evaporate  the
solution  by  means  of  gentle  heat,  to  the  consistence  of  thick  syrup,  and
spread  it  in  thin  layers  on  glass,  to  dry.

History. — Tins  salt  was  first  prepared  by  Professor  J.  Milton  Sanders,
formerly  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Eclectic  Medical  Institute  of
Cincinnati,  and  previously  my  colleague  in  the  Memphis  Institute.  It  is
in  pellicles  of  a  deep  crimson  color,  and  belongs  to  that  class  of  non-
crystallizable  or  factitious  salts,  as  the  Ferro-citrate  of  Iron  and  Quinia,
so  popular  with  the  Medical  profession  for  the  last  eight  or  ten  years;
on  account  of  its  ready  solubility  and  promptness  of  action  it  is  much
employed  among  Eclectics,  with  whom  it  constitutes  a  valuable  agent.
It  is  incompatible  with  astringent  vegetable  infusions,  strong  acids,  alka-
lies, and  their  carbonates.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  salt  is  an  active  and  efficient  tonic  and
sedative,  and  may  be  employed  in  all  cases  of  debility,  chlorosis,  anemia,
etc.,  connected  with  an  irritable  or  excitable  condition  of  the  system.  In
the  intermission  or  remission  of  fevers,  it  may  be  used  with  much  advan-
tage, assisting  materially  in  lessening  the  severity  of  the  subsequent
69


1090  Pharmacy.

febrile  exacerbations,  or  breaking  them  up  entirely.  Professor  Z.  Free-
man, myself,  and  various  other  practitioners  have  administered  it  with
much  benefit.  The  dose  for  an  adult  is  from  half  a  grain  to  a  grain,
every  two  or  three  hours,  or  until  its  sedative  influence  is  fully  obtained.

Ferri  kt  Quinine  Tartras.  Ferrotartrate  of  Quinia.  Tartrate  of
Iron  and  Quinia.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Crystallized  Tartaric  Acid,  Distilled  Water,
each,  by  weight,  tioo  ounces  ;  moist  Hydrated  Sesquioxide  of  Iron,  pure
Quinia,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity .  Boil  the  Tartaric  Acid  and  the  Dis-
tilled Water  together,  in  a  glass  or  platina  vessel ;  as  soon  as  the  Acid
is  dissolved,  add  the  Iron  as  long  as  the  fluid  will  dissolve  it.  Heat  the
mixture  until  the  deep  blood-red  fluid  becomes  clear,  and  then  add  the
Quinia  until  the  fluid  ceases  to  dissolve  it.  Evaporate  the  solution  by
means  of  gentle  heat,  to  the  consistence  of  thick  syrup,  and  spread  it  in
thin  layers  on  glass,  to  dry.

History. — This  salt  was,  likewise,  first  prepared  by  Professor  J.  Milton
Sanders,  and  is  superior  to  the  Citrate  of  Iron  and  Quinia,  on  account
of  its  greater  solubility,  and  its  activity  as  a  remedial  agent.  It  forms
into  scales  of  a  beautiful  crimson  color.  It  is  incompatible  with  astrin-
gent vegetable  infusions,  strong  acids,  alkalies,  and  their  carbonates.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Ferrotartrate  of  Quinia  !%  a  valuable  tonic,
and  may  be  used  with  benefit  in  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  debility,  anemia,
and  during  the  remissions  or  intermissions  from  fever;  also  in  scrofula,
and  wherever  the  union  of  quinia  with  a  chalybeate  is  indicated.  The
dose  is  from  three  to  five  grains,  three  times  a  day,  either  in  solution,  or
in  the  form  of  pill.

Ferri  et  Salicini^;  Tartras.  Ferrotartrate  of  Salicin.  Tartrate
of  Iron  and  Salicin.

Preparation. — Take  of  Crystallized  Tartaric  Acid,  Distilled  Water,
each,  by  weight,  two  ounces  ;  moist  Hydrated  Sesquioxide  of  Iron,  pure
Salicin,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Boil  the  Tartaric  Acid  and  the  Dis-
tilled Water  together  in  a  glass  or  platina  vessel;  as  soon  as  the  Acid  is
dissolved,  add  the  Iron  as  long  as  the  fluid  will  dissolve  it.  Heat  the
mixture  until  the  deep  blood-red  fluid  becomes  clear,  and  then  add  the
Salicin  until  the  fluid  ceases  to  dissolve  it.  Evaporate  the  solution  by
means  of  gentle  heat,  to  the  consistence  of  thick  syrup,  and  spread  it  in
thin  layers  on  glass,  to  dry.

History. — This  salt  wras  first  prepared  by  Professor  J.  M.  Sanders.
Although  Salicin  appears  to  be  a  neutral  substance,  still,  prepared  ac-
cording to  the  above  process,  it  enters  into  combination  with  the  other
agents,  forming  a  compound  which  possesses  the  active  virtues  of  the
Salicin  in  a  remarkable  degree.  It  is  incompatible  with  astringent  vege-
table infusions,  strong  acids,  alkalies,  and  their  carbonates.


Ferrum.  1091

Properties  and  Uses. — Similar  to  those  of  the  Ferrotartrate  of  Quinia.
In  the  hands  of  several  physicians  of  the  South,  this  preparation  has  been
found  equal  to  the  analogous  one  of  Quinia  in  intermittent  fevers.  The
dose  is  from  three  to  ten  grains,  three  times  a  day,  either  in  solution  or
in  the  form  of  pill.

Ferri  Ferrocyanuretum.  Ferrocyanuret  of  Iron.  Pure  Prussian
Blue. Prussiate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron,  four  ounces  ;  Sulphuric  Acid
three  fluidrachms  and  a  half ;  Nitric  Acid  six  fiuidrachms  or  a  sufficient
quantity  ;  Ferrocyanuret  of  Potassium  four  ounces  and  a  half ;  Water  two
pints.  Dissolve  the  Sulphate  of  Iron  in  a  pint  of  the  Water,  and  having
slowly  and  carefully  added  the  Sulphuric  Acid,  boil  the  solution.  Pour
into  it  the  Nitric  Acid  gradually  and  in  small  portions,  boiling  the  liquid
for  a  minute  or  two  after  each  addition,  until  a  dark  color  is  no  longer
produced ;  then  allow  it  to  cool.  Dissolve  the  Ferrocyanuret  of  Potas-
sium in  the  remaining  pint  of  Water,  and  add  this  solution  gradually  to
the  first  liquid,  agitating  the  mixture  after  each  addition  ;  then  pour  it
upon  a  filter.  Wash  the  precipitate  with  boiling  water  until  the  wash-
ings pass  tasteless. Lastly,  dry  it  and  rub  it  into  powder. —  U.  S.

History. — In  the  above  process,  the  Sulphate  of  Iron  (protoxide)  is
acidulated  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  then,  on  the  addition  of  nitric  acid  is
changed  into  the  tersulphate  of  iron  (sesquioxide).  The  saturating
power  of  the  sesquioxide  over  the  protoxide,  is  increased  by  the  addition
of  ihe  sulphuric  acid,  and  thus  a  precipitate  of  the  subsulphate  of  the
sesquioxide  is  prevented.  By  the  addition  of  the  solution  of  the  ferro-
cyanuret of  potassium  to  that  of  the  tersulphate  of  the  sesquioxide  of
iron,  a  decomposition  ensues ;  three  equivalents  of  the  former,  and  two
of  the  latter  are  mutually  decomposed,  giving  rise  to  one  equivalent  of
Prussian  blue,  which  precipitates,  and  six  equivalents  of  sulphate  of
potassa,  in  solution.  Prussian  blue  contains  the  elements  of  six  equiva-
lents of  water,  and  the  salt  is  decomposed  when  these  are  separated.  It
may  therefore,  as  a  hydroferrocyanate  of  the  sesquioxide  of  iron,  be  rep-
resented by  the  formula  3  Cfy  H2,  Fei  Oo;  and  the  anhydrous  com-
pound, which  contains  nine  equivalents  of  cyanogen,  and  seven  of  iron,
by  3  Cfy,  4  Fe.  Gregory  gives  as  the  true  formula  of  Prussian  blue,
Cfy 3  Ke  +  Fet  Clo  =  6  K  CI  +  Cfya  Fe4.

When  manufactured  on  a  large  scale,  it  is  obtained  by  fusing  in  an
iron  vessel,  animal  matter,  as  dried  blood,  horn,  hair,  etc.,  with  equal
parts  of  carbonate  of  potassa;  throwing  the  mass  when  cold,  gradually
into  twelve  or  fifteen  times  its  weight  of  water,  and  constantly  stirring
for  half  an  hour ;  then  filtering  through  linen,  and  adding  to  the  clear
solution,  a  mixture  of  two  parts  of  alum  and  one  of  the  sulphate  of  pro-
toxide of  iron,  in  solution.  Carbonic  acid  is  evolved  with  effervescence,
and  a  blackish-brown  precipitate  is  thrown  down  in  abundance,  which  is


1092  Pharmacy.

washed  by  means  of  a  large  quantity  of  water,  every  twelve  hours.
These  washings  last  for  nearly  a  month,  and  the  precipitate  changes
successively  to  greenish-brown,  bluish,  and  deep  blue.  It  is  then  drained
upon  a  cloth,  divided  into  cubical  masses  and  dried.  As  prepared  in
this  manner,  it  is  impure,  and  unfit  for  medicinal  purposes.  It  always
contains  a  portion  of  alumina,  uncombined  sesquioxide  of  iron,  and  ferro-
cyanide  of  potassium.

Pure  Prussian  Blue  is  of  a  rich  deep  blue  color,  tasteless,  and  insolu-
ble in  water  and  alcohol.  Diluted  acids  do  not  act  on  it,  but  the  strong
acids  decompose  it,  with  a  variety  of  phenomena.  The  alkalies  also
decompose  it,  forming  ferrocyanates.  At  a  red  heat  it  takes  fire,  burn-
ing slowly,  and  yielding  sesquioxide  of  iron.  When  Prussian  blue  is
boiled  with  diluted  muriatic  acid,  filtered,  and  ammonia  added  to  it,  no
precipitate  takes  place  if  the  drug  be  pure — should  one  ensue  however,
the  article  is  impure.

Properties  and  Uses. — Prussian  Blue  is  tonic,  sedative,  and  febrifuge,
and  is  much  employed  in  febrile  diseases,  by  Eclectics,  in  conjunction
with  sulphate  of  quinia  ;  it  was  introduced  to  the  profession  for  this  pur-
pose, by  Professor  I.  G.  Jones,  formerly  one  of  my  colleagues  in  the
Eclectic  Medical  Institute,  Cincinnati,  who  has  used  it  with  immense  suc-
cess, and  who  does  not  regard  febrile  or  inflammatory  symptoms  in  its
administration,  provided  the  disease  be,  in  the  least  degree,  of  a  peri-
odica] character.  It  is  now  successfully  used  in  intermittent,  congestive,
bilious,  and  typhoid  fevers,  especially  during  the  remissions,  and  also  in
typhoid  pneumonia;  the  dose  is  three  or  four  grains,  combined  with  the
same  quantity  of  sulphate  of  quinia,  and  which  is  to  be  repeated  every
three,  four,  or  rive  hours,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case.  Prussian
blue,  or  as  more  commonly  called  among  physicians,  Prussiate  of  Iron,
has  likewise  been  successfully  used  in  diarrhea,  summer  complaint  of
children,  pertussis,  dyspepsia,  epilepsy,  hysteria,  chorea,  and  facial
neuralgia. The  dose  is  usually  from  one  to  five  grains,  three  times  a  day.

Ferri  Iodidum. Iodide  of  Iron.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Iodine  two  ounces;  Iron  Filings  one  ounce;
Distilled  Water  a  pint  and  a  half.  Mix  the  Iodine  with  a  pint  of  the
Distilled  Water,  in  a  porcelain  or  glass  vessel,  and  gradually  add  the
Iron  Filings,  stirring  constantly.  Heat  the  mixture  gently,  until  the
liquid  acquires  alight  greenish  color;  then  filter,  and  after  the  liquid
has  passed,  pour  upon  the  filter  he  remainder  of  the  Distilled  Water
boiling  hot.  When  this  has  passed,  evaporate  the  filtered  liquor  at  a
temperature  not  exceeding  212°,  in  an  iron  vessel,  to  dryness.  Keep
the  dry  Iodide  in  a  closely  stopped  bottle. —  U.  S.

History. — In  this  process,  iron  is  made  to  combine  with  iodine  by
means  of  water ;  when  the  iron  is  added  to  the  liquid,  it  is  at  first  red
or  orange-colored,  but  as  soon  as  all  the  iodine  has  united  with  the  iron
by  the  application  of  heat,  it  changes  to  a  greenish  color,  which  is  a  solu-


Ferrum.  1093

tion  of  the  iodide  of  iron,  and  yields  the  salt  by  evaporation.  The  iodine
unites  with  about  half  its  weight  of  iron.  In  its  preparation  according
to  the  above  formula,  the  iron  is  rapidly  oxidated  at  the  expense  of  the
water,  the  protoxide  being  formed;  while  the  hydrogen  of  the  water
combines  with  the  iodine  to  form  hydriodic  acid.  The  result  is  a  solu-
tion of  hydriodate  of  protoxide  of  iron,  or,  according  to  some  chemists,
a  solution  of  protiodide  of  iron,  which  is  believed  to  be  the  best  prepa-
ration for  medicinal  use.  It  is  very  difficult  to  procure  this  salt  perfectly
pure,  on  account  of  the  tendency  of  the  solution  to  absorb  oxygen,  which
partly  converts  it  into  an  iodide  of  the  sesquioxide  instead  of  the  protox-
ide of  iron ;  this  action  is  nearly  overcome  by  the  evaporation  to  dryness
being  effected  in  an  iron  vessel.

Iodide  of  iron  has  a  crystalline  or  irregularly  foliated  texture,  accord-
ing to  its  method  of  preparation,  is  sometimes  of  a  dark  grayish-black
metallic  appearance,  but,  when  made  according  to  the  above  formula,  is
greenish -black,  and  has  a  strong  styptic,  chalybeate  taste.  When  ex-
posed to  the  air,  it  deliquesces  rapidly,  sesquioxide  of  iron  separating.
At  a  moderate  heat  it  fuses,  and  becomes,  on  cooling,  an  iron-gray,
opake,  crystalline  mass,  having  a  metallic  luster.  If  the  heat  be  higher
the  protiodide  parts  with  iodine  in  violet  fumes,  until  the  sesquioxide  of
iron  alone  remains.  Iodide  of  Iron  is  very  soluble  in  Water  or  Alcohol.
If  the  solution  be  evaporated  over  quicklime,  with  as  little  contact  of
air  as  possible,  and  without  artificial  heat,  large,  transparent,  tabular
crystals  of  a  pale  yellowish-green  color  may  be  obtained.  The  anhy-
drous salt  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  Iodine  126.3,  and  one  of  iron
28=154.3.  The  crystallized  salt  contains  in  addition  five  equivalents
of  water  45=199.3.  The  formula  of  the  anhydrous  salt  is  Fe  I,  that
of  the  crystallized  Fe  I+5HO.  It  is  incompatible  with  alkalies  and  their
carbonates,  lime-water,  and  with  all  other  substances  by  which  sulphate
of  iron  is  decomposed.  Its  solution  may  be  kept  from  decomposition,
by  placing  in  it  a  coil  of  iron  wire.

Properties  and  Uses. — Iodide  of  Iron  is  a  tonic,  alterative,  diuretic  and
emmenagogue,  and  influences  the  system  more  like  the  ferruginous  salts
than  those  of  iodine.  It  improves  the  appetite,  invigorates  the  digestive
organs,  blackens  the  alvine  evacuations  with  a  diminution  of  their  fetor.
Sometimes  it  acts  as  a  laxative,  but  more  generally  as  a  diuretic.  It
has  been  efficaciously  used  in  scrofula,  chlorosis,  secondary  syphilis,
amenorrhea,  chronic  rheumatism,  chronic  cutaneous  diseases,  leucorrhea,
asthenic  dropsy,  old  visceral  engorgements,  atonic  dyspepsia,  and  in  all
cases  where  there  is  torpor  in  the  system  of  nutrition,  where  there  is
paucity  of  red  globules  in  the  blood,  and  the  fluid  is  too  thin.  On
account  of  its  tendency  to  decomposition  when  exposed  to  the  air,  it
should  always  be  given  in  solution.  (See  Liquor  Ferri  Iodidi.)  It  has,
however,  been  given  in  pill  form,  being  protected  from  deleterious
agencies  by  the use of  honey  and tragacanth. The Liquor Ferri


1094  Pharmacy.

Iodidi,  evaporated  to  a  proper  consistence  for  making  pills,  would  proba-
bly form  a  better  mode  of  administering  this  salt  in  a  solid  state,  than
when  made  by  the  above  process.  (See  Pilulce  Ferri  Iodidi.)  The
dose  of  Iodide  of  Iron  is  three  grains,  three  times  a  day,  gradually
increased  to  eight  or  ten  grains.

Ferri  Lactas. Lactate  of  Protoxide  of  Iron. Lactate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lactate  of  Lime  twelve  and  a  half  ounces  ;  pure
Crystallized  Sulphate  of  Protoxide  of  Iron  eight  and  a,  half  ounces ;  Boil-
ing Water,  cold  Distilled  Water,  of  each,  sixty  two  and  a  half  ounces  by
weight ;  Lactic  Acid  a  sufficient  quantity.  Dissolve  the  Lactate  of  Lime
in  the  Boiling  Water ;  also  dissolve  the  Sulphate  of  Iron  in  the  cold
Distilled  Water ;  then  filter  each  of  these  solutions,  mix  them  in  a
matrass,  acidulate  slightly  with  Lactic  Acid,  and  heat  in  a  salt-water
bath,  stirring  frequently  until  the  double  decomposition  is  completed.
Then  filter  to  separate  the  Sulphate  of  Lime,  which  precipitates,  and
evaporate  rapidly  to  one-half,  either  in  an  iron  vessel,  or  in  a  porcelain
capsule  containing  a  few  Turnings  of  Iron.  Filter  again,  and  set  aside  to
crystallize ;  and  having  washed  the  Crystals  of  Lactate  of  Iron  in  a
funnel  with  a  little  Alcohol,  dry  them  on  bibulous  paper.

History.  —  Lactic  Acid,  according  to  the  experiments  of  Bernard  and
Barreswil,  exists  in  a  number  of  the  secretions  of  the  human  body,  and
especially  in  the  gastric  juice  ;  it  has  therefore  been  supposed  by  medical
men,  that  as  this  acid  in  its  action  on  the  salts  of  iron  taken  into  the
stomach,  may  convert  them  into  a  lactate,  this  salt  already  formed
might  prove  a  valuable  agent ;  hence  the  preparation  of  Lactate  of  Iron,
introduced  to  the  profession  by  Gelis  and  Conte.  When  pure,  lactate
of  iron  is  in  very  white,  crystalline  plates,  nearly  permanent  in  the
air,  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  and  its  solution  quickly  changing  to
yellow,  from  higher  oxidation  of  the  iron.  It  has  an  acid  reaction,  and
a  mild  chalybeate  taste,  and  dissolves  in  forty  parts  of  boiling  water.
If  the  powder  is  yellowish  or  greenish-white  it  is  impure.  It  is  liable  to
adulteration,  and  on  this  account  should  always  be  purchased  in  crys-
talline plates,  and  in  no  other  form.

The  Lactate  of  Lime  used  in  the  above  process,  may  be  made  as
follows :  Add  to  two  pints  of  Skim-milk,  diluted  with  twice  its  bulk  of
Water,  and  contained  in  an  earthen  pan,  sixty-four  drachms  of  Powdered
Lactin,  (sugar  of  milk,)  and  fifty-one  drachms  of  Powdered  Chalk.
Allow  the  whole  to  ferment  for  eleven  or  twelve  days,  at  a  temperature
of  from  80°  to  90°,  supplying  water  as  it  evaporates.  Transfer  the  liquor
to  a  capsule,  heat  it  gradually  to  boiling,  and  stir  it  constantly.  Boil  for
a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  coagulate  casein,  allow  the  insoluble  matters  to
subside,  and  strain  the  liquid  through  flannel.  The  clear  liquid  is  a
solution  of  Lactate  of  Lime — which  may  be  concentrated  to  dryness.
The  casein  of  the  milk,  in  this  operation,  acting  as  a  ferment,  converts


Ferrttm.  1095

the  Lactin  of  the  Milk,  and  the  Lactin  which  has  been  added,  into
Lactic  Acid.  This  result  would  not  ensue,  were  it  not  for  the  addition
of  Chalk,  which  saturates  the  Lactic  Acid  as  it  becomes  formed,  and
prevents  it  from  uniting  with  the  casein,  whereby  the  power  of  the  latter
as  a  ferment  would  be  destroyed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Lactate  of  Iron  is  considered  a  valuable  chaly-
beate tonic.  Its  use  effects  a  decided  improvement  in  the  appetite,  and
in  chlorosis,  and  anemic  conditions  it  has  been  found  very  efficacious.
The  dose  is  one  or  two  grains,  repeated  at  intervals  and  gradually  in-
creased. As  much  as  twelve  or  even  twenty  grains  have  been  given  in
the  course  of  the  day,  with  good  results.  It  may  be  used  in  the  form
of  lozenge,  pill,  or  solution.  The  lozenge  may  be  made  of  one  grain  of
the  Lactate  to  twelve  of  Sugar;  the  pill,  of  one  grain  to  the  same  weight
of  Liquorice  Root,  and  sufficient  Honey.  A  syrup  is  made  by  rubbing
Lactate  of  Iron  a  drachm,  with  White  Sugar  six  ounces,  until  it  is  all  in
fine  powder  ;  then  dissolve  the  mixture  quickly  in  Boiling  Water,  dis-
tilled, six  and  a  half  fuidounces.  Pour  the  solution  into  a  matrass
placed  on  a  sand-bath,  and  add  to  it  six  and  a  half  ounces  of  White
Sugar,  in  small  pieces.  When  the  Sugar  is  dissolved,  filter,  and  as  soon
as  cold,  pour  the  syrup  into  bottles  and  keep  them  well  closed.  The
syrup  is  of  a  light  amber  color,  and  contains  about  four  grains  of  the
salt  to  the  fluidounce. The  dose  is  from  two  to  four  fluidrachms.

Ferri  Oxidum  Ha-dratum.  Hydrated  Sesquioxide  of  Iron.  Hydrated
Peroxide  of  Iron. Hydrated  Oxide  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  four  ounces  ;  Sulphuric  Acid
three  fluidrachms  and  a  half;  Nitric  Acid  six  fluidrachms,  or  a  sufficient
quantity ;  Solution  of  Ammonia  a  sufficient  quantity ;  Water  two  pints.
Dissolve  the  Sulphate  of  Iron  in  the  Water,  and,  having  added  the  Sul-
phuric Acid,  boil  the  solution  ;  then  add  the  Nitric  Acid  in  small  por-
tions, boiling  the  liquid  for  a  minute  or  two  after  each  addition,  unlil  the
Acid  ceases  to  produce  a  dark  color.  Filter  the  liquid,  allow  it  to  cool,
and  add  Solution  of  Ammonia  in  excess,  stirring  the  mixture  briskly.
Wash  the  precipitate  with  Water  until  the  washings  cease  to  yield  a
precipitate  with  Chloride  of  Barium,  and  keep  it  in  close  bottles  with
sufficient  Water  to  cover  it. —  U.  S.

History. — In  the  above  process,  the  Sulphate  of  Protoxide  of  Iron  is
first  converted  into  the  tersulphate  of  the  sesquioxide,  the  same  as  in
the  preparation  of  pure  Prussian  Blue  ;  the  addition  of  ammonia  in  ex-
cess, after  this  change  has  been  effected,  causes  the  sesquioxide  just
formed  to  be  precipitated  in  the  hydrated  state,  and  which  is  freed  from
any  adhering  sulphate  of  ammonia,  by  the  washings,  repeated  until  the
barytic  salt  no  longer  causes  a  precipitate.  The  preparation  should  then
be  kept  under  water  in  close  bottles,  as  the  most  convenient  method  for
use  when  required.


1096  Pharmacy.

Hydrated  Oxide  of  Iron,  as  prepared  by  the  formula  given,  is  a  soft,
moi.st,  reddish-brown  magma.  When  dried  at  a  heat  not  exceeding
180°,  and  then  pulverized,  a  reddish-brown  powder  is  obtained,  not
influenced  by  the  magnet,  and  which  is  the  sesquioxide  in  the  form  of
hydrate,  containing  about  18  per  cent,  of  water,  and  which  is  soluble  in
muriatic  acid  without  effervescence.  A  red  heat  drives  off  the  com-
bined water,  and  it  then  becomes  the  anhydrous  sesquioxide,  which  is
not  so  readily  soluble  in  acids,  and  having  no  antidotal  effect  becomes
unfit  for  medical  use.  The  hydrated  oxide  of  iron  consists  of  one  equiv-
alent of  sesquioxide  80,  and  two  of  water  18=98,  and  is  represented  by
the  formula  Fea  O3  +  2HO.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation,  as  with  other  Chalybeates,
possesses  tonic  properties.  But  it  is  principally  used  in  cases  of  poison-
ing by  arsenic,  in  which  it  proves  a  valuable  antidote.  When  this
hydrated  oxide  of  iron  is  placed  into  an  aqueous  solution  of  arsenic,  it
removes  the  arsenious  acid  so  thoroughly,  forming  an  insoluble  substance,
that  even  sulphureted  hydrogen  will  not  indicate  the  presence  of  the
poison.  This  insoluble  substance,  formed  by  a  transfer  of  oxygen  from
the  oxide  to  the  acid,  is  subarseniate  of  protoxide  of  iron.  The  hydrate
should  be  used  in  the  moist  or  pulpy  state,  and  in  doses  of  a  tablespoon-
ful  to  an  adult,  or  a  dessert  spoonful  to  children,  which  must  be
repeated  every  five  or  ten  minutes,  until  relief  is  obtained.  Twelve
times  the  amount  of  arsenic  swallowed,  should  be  given  of  this  prepara-
tion of  iron,  and  as  it  is  a  harmless  article,  even  more  may  be  advanta-
geously administered.  Of  course,  the  sooner  it  is  given  after  the  poison
has  been  taken,  the  more  prompt  and  efficacious  will  be  its  action.
Amorphous  hydrated  oxide  of  iron,  when  long  kept  in  water,  becomes
crystalline,  loses  half  its  water  of  crystallization,  and  is  much  less  easily
soluble  in  weak  acids  ;  consequently,  it  is  of  some  importance  in  cases
of  poisoning  by  arsenic,  that  it  be  recently  made.  It  is  recommended
to  remake  it  every  six  months  from  the  old  oxide,  by  dissolving  it  in
muriatic  acid,  and  re-precipitating  it  with  ammonia.  The  dry  hydrate
rubbed  up  with  water,  is  much  less  efficient  than  the  moist.  As  a  tonic,
it  may  be  employed  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  grains.

In  relation  to  this  uniformly  successful  antidote  to  poisoning  by
arsenious  acid,  Prof.  W.  Procter,  Jr.,  has  recently  furnished  a  formula
which  is  easily  executed,  and  which  furnishes  a  concentrated  solution  of
the  ter-sesquisulphate  of  iron  of  known  strength,  so  that  the  operator
can  graduate  the  precise  quantity  of  oxide  by  means  of  his  measure
glass.  The  formula,  together  with  Prof.  P.'s  remarks  are  given  entire  :
Take  of  Proto-sulphate  of  Iron,  well  crystallized,  sixty-four  ounces,  Troy ;
Sulphuric  Acid  seven  fluidounces  ;  Nitric  Acid,  sp.  gr.  1.38,  twelve  fluid-
ounces  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.


Ferrum.  1097

Reduce  the  Sulphate  of  Iron  to  moderately  fine  powder  in  an  iron
mortar,  mix  together  the  Acids  and  five  fluidounces  of  Water,  put  the
mixture  in  a  large  porcelain  capsule  on  the  sand-bath  or  other  regular
source  of  heat,  and  add  the  powdered  Sulphate,  about  two  ounces  at  a
time,  stining  after  each  addition,  till  the  effervescence  ceases,  until  all
has  been  added,  and  the  elimination  of  nitrous  fumes  has  ceased.  In
the  absence  of  a  porcelain  capsule  and  sand-bath,  the  operator  may  use
a  gallon  glass  jar,  supported  in  a  vessel  of  Boiling  Water  ;  in  either  case,
the  vessel  should  be  large  enough  to  allow  for  active  effervescence,  and
it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  operation  should  be  performed
under  a  chimney-hood,  or  in  the  open  air,  to  avoid  the  noxious  fumes  of
Nitrous  Acid.  The  dense  solution  thus  obtained  should  then  be  diluted
with  Water  until  it  measures  four  and  a  half  pints,  (wine  measure,)  and
then  filtered  through  thick  muslin.

Solution  of  Ter-sulphate  of  Iron  thus  prepared,  has  a  dark,  reddish-
brown  color  in  quantity,  the  specific  gravity  of  1.587  at  60°  F.,  but  little
if  any  odor,  a  powerful  styptic  taste,  and  mixes  readily  with  Water,  so
as  to  form  a  solution  with  more  color  in  proportion  to  its  dilution  than
the  strong  liquid.  Each  fluidounce  of  this  solution  contains  a  fraction
more  than  120  grains  of  Sesquioxide  ;  each  fluid lachm  15  grains,  and
each  minim  a  quarter  of  a  grain  ;  and  as  it  is  equally  applicable  for  pre-
paring the  Oxide  for  chemical  as  for  antidotal  purposes,  this  correspond-
ence of  weights  with  measures  gives  great  facility  in  calculating  any
precise  quantity  desired.

It  is  this  solution  which  I  have  proposed  should  be  kept  by  every
apothecary  as  the  source  of  Hydrated  Sesquioxide  of  Iron.  Its  strength
is  such  that  it  requires  about  an  equal  measure  of  commercial  solution
of  Ammonia  (sp.  gr.  .940,)  to  decompose  it.  The  apothecary  who  is
suddenly  called  upon  for  the  antidote  will  proceed  in  the  following-
manner  :

Take  of  Solution  of  Ter-sulphate  of  Iron  half  a  pint ;  Solution  of
Ammonia  half  a  pint  (or  a  sufficient  quantity)  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quan-
tity. Pour  the  Solution  of  Iron  into  a  half  gallon  jar,  add  two  pints  of
Water,  and  then  add  the  Ammonia,  stirring  constantly  until  in  slight
excess.  This  is  known  when,  after  displacing  the  air  in  the  jar  by  blow-
ing, it  continues  to  smell  slightly  of  Ammonia.  The  contents  of  the  jar
are  then  thrown  on  a  piece  of  strong  muslin,  previously  well  moistened,
and  the  liquid,  holding  in  solution  Sulphate  of  Ammonia,  expressed  from
it  as  quickly  as  possible,  until  the  Oxide  remains  in  the  cloth  of  a  pasty
consistence.  The  cloth  is  then  opened  on  a  dish,  Water  added  and  incor-
porated with  the  Oxide  by  means  of  a  spatula,  and  then  again  expressed.
If  the  demand  is  urgent,  the  Oxide  may  be  sent  without  further  wash-
ing, if  not  urgent,  the  washing  may  be  repeated  twice  more.  It  is  then
quickly  removed  by  a  spatula  from  the  cloth  to  a  quart  mortar,  and


1098  Pharmacy.

Water  mixed  with  it  by  trituration,  until  it  measures  a  pint,  when  it
should  be  poured  into  a  wide-mouthed  bottle,  corked,  and  the  following
label  attached,  viz  :


HYDRATED  SESQUI0X1DE  OF  IRON.

(Ferri  Oxidum  Ilyiiiutnm  l.S.  Pbarni.)

Antidote to Arsenic.

This  preparation  consists  of  Hyd  rated  Sesquioxide  of  Iron  and  Water,
in  such  proportion  that  each  tablespoonful  contains  thirty  grains  of
the  dry  Oxide ;  and  is  intended  to  neutralize  the  poisonous  effects  of
Arsenious  Acid,  or  common  White  Arsenic,  when  taken  into  the  sto-
mach. It  is  well  to  precede  the  administration  of  this  antidote  by  an
active  emetic  of  Ipecacuanha  or  of  Mustard,  so  that  any  undissolved
arsenic  may  be  thus  mechanically  removed,  if  possible.  If,  however,
this  has  not  been  done  before  obtaining  the  antidote,  no  time  should  be
lost  in  giving  it.  The  patient  should  take  a  tablespoonful  for  a  dose
every  five  or  ten  minutes,  but  if  vomiting  should  intervene,  let  a  dose
be  given  immediately  after  each  attack,  unless  otherwise  directed  by
the  physician  in  attendance.

When  the  poisoning  has  been  caused  by  Arsenite  of  Potassa,  (Fowl-
er's Mineral  Solution)  Soda,  or  Ammonia,  or  by  the  Salts  of  Arsenic
Acid,  after  giving  the  first  dose  add  six  tablespoonfuls  of  Vinegar  to
the  contents  of  the  bottle,  and  shake  it  a  few  minutes,  until  the  acidity
is  neutralized,  and  then  give  it  as  above.


When  the  Oxide  is  intended  for  other  ferruginous  preparations,  as,  for
instance,  Citrate  of  Iron,  it  should  be  washed  by  displacement  on  a  cloth
filter,  till  the  washings  cease  to  precipitate  Chloride  of  Barium.  The
small  amount  of  Sulphate  of  Ammonia  remaining  in  the  Oxide,  when
prepared  hurriedly  as  above,  is  of  no  account  in  a  case  of  poisoning.
The  detail  in  the  above  label  is  not  objectionable,  as  it  will  be  often  of
use  even  to  the  experienced  physician,  not  to  speak  of  the  very  many
who  have  had  little  if  any  experience  in  poisoning  cases,  and  will  like-
wise enable  any  person  of  ordinary  ability  to  administer  the  antidote
without  loss  of  time.  When  it  is  so  easy  to  be  prepared  for  these  occa-
sions, every  apothecary  who  has  a  proper  regard  for  his  reputation  and
duty,  will  provide  the  means  above  detailed,  and  be  ever  ready.

Ferri  Oxidum  Nigrum. Black  Oxide  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  six  ounces;  Sulphuric  Acid
(commercial)  two  fiuidrachms  and  two  fluid  scruples;  Pure  Nitric  Acid
four  jluidrachms  and  a  half;  Stronger  Aqua  Ammonite  four  fiuidrachms
and  a  half;  Boiling  Water  three  pints  (Imperial  measure).  Dissolve
half  the  Sulphate  in  half  the  Boiling  Water,  and  gradually  add  the  Sul-
phuric Acid ;  boil ;  add  the  Nitric  Acid  by  degrees,  boiling  the  liquid  after
each  addition  briskly  for  a  few  minutes.  Dissolve  the  rest  of  the  Sul-
phate in  the  remainder  of  the  Boiling  Water;  mix  the  two  solutions
thoroughly  ;  and  immediately  add  the  Ammonia  in  a  full  stream,  briskly
stirring  the  mixture  at  the  same  time.  Collect  the  black  powder  on  a
calico  filter ;  wash  it  with  Water  till  the  water  is  scarcely  precipitated.


Ferrum.  1099

by  a  solution  of  Nitrate  of  Baryta,  and  dry  it  at  a  temperature  not
exceeding  180°.

History. — In  the  above  process,  the  first  half  of  the  sulphate  of  iron,
after  its  solution  in  the  water  and  acidulation  with  sulphuric  acid,
becomes,  on  the  addition  of  the  nitric  acid,  changed  into  the  tersulpbate
of  the  sesquioxide  of  iron.  The  sulphuric  acid  is  added  for  the  same
purpose  as  mentioned  under  Ferri  Ferrocyanuretum,  which  see.  The
remaining  half  of  the  sulphate,  dissolved  in  the  balance  of  the  water,
forms  a  solution  of  the  sulphate  of  the  protoxide  of  iron.  On  mixing
these  two  solutions,  a  compound  one  is  formed,  of  sulphate  of  protoxide
and  sulphate  of  sesquioxide  of  iron;  ammonia  added  to  this,  precipitates
simultaneously  the  protoxide  and  sesquioxide,  which  chemically  com-
bine and  form  the  Black  Oxide.

The  Black  Oxide  of  Iron  is  of  a  dark  grayish-black  color,  presenting
a  shining  fracture,  when  a  piece  dried  in  mass  is  broken,  is  permanent
in  the  air,  and  is  strongly  attracted  by  the  magnet.  It  dissolves  without
effervescence  in  muriatic  acid,  from  which  it  may  be  precipitated  by
ammonia.  Heated  in  close  vessels  it  parts  with  water,  undergoing  no
other  change ;  but  heated  in  open  vessels,  it  absorbs  oxygen,  and  soon
passes  entirely  to  the  state  of  a  brownish-red  sesquioxide.  It  is  com-
posed of  two  equivalents  of  protoxide  and  one  of  sesquioxide  of  iron,
and  two  of  water,  its  formula  being  2  Fe  0+Fe2  03-f-2  HO.

The  scales  which  are  struck  from  red-hot  iron  by  the  blacksmith's
hammer,  the  ^Ethiops  Martis  of  the  old  Materia  Medicas,  consist  of
chemical  combinations  of  the  protoxide  and  sesquioxide  of  iron  in  vari-
able proportions.  They  are  prepared  for  medicinal  use  by  washing
them,  freeing  them  from  impurities  by  the  magnet;  triturating  them,
and  separating  the  fine  powder  by  the  method  directed  for  making  pre-
pared chalk.  It  is,  however,  inferior  in  medicinal  virtue  to  the  black
oxide  prepared  as  above.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  valuable  chalybeate,  possessing  the
advantages  of  uniformity  of  composition  and  unchangeableness  when
exposed  to  air  and  moisture.  Its  dose  is  from  five  to  twenty  grains,  two
or  three  times  a  day.

Ferri  Phosphas. Phosphate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  five  ounces;  Phosphate  of
Soda  six  ounces ;  Water  a  gallon.  Dissolve  the  Sulphate  of  Iron  and
Phosphate  of  Soda,  each  separately,  in  four  pints  of  the  Water;
then  mix  the  solutions,  and  set  the  mixture  aside,  that  the  powder
may  precipitate ;  lastly,  having  poured  off  the  supernatant  liquor,
wash  the  Phosphate  of  Iron  with  hot  water,  and  dry  it  with  a  gentle
heat.—  U.  S.

History. — In  the  above  process  a  double  decomposition  takes  place,
the  sulphuric  acid  of  the  sulphate  of  iron  is  set  free,  and  combines  with


1100  Pharmacy.

the  soda,  forming  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  soda;  while  at  the  same
time,  the  phosphoric  acid  of  the  phosphate  of  soda,  also  being  set  free,
unites  with  the  protoxide  of  iron,  forming  a  precipitate  of  phosphate
of  iron.

Phosphate  of  Iron,  when  prepared  from  a  perfect  sulphate  of  the
protoxide,  is  at  first  of  a  white  color,  but  from  absorption  of  oxygen,
it  soon  becomes  bluish-white.  It  is  usually  met  with  in  the  form  of  a
powder,  of  a  bright  slate-color,  insoluble  in  water,  but  soluble  in  dilute
muriatic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Phosphate  of  Iron  is  a  valuable  chalybeate
tonic.  It  has  been  recommended  as  a  remedy  in  cancer,  to  be  used
internally,  and  also  applied  to  the  diseased  part;  likewise  to  restore  and
invigorate  the  virile  powers.  Professor  Z.  Freeman  prefers  it,  in  many
instances,  to  the  prussiate  of  iron  in  febrile  diseases,  and  has  derived
marked  advantage  from  it  in  this  class  of  maladies.  The  dose  is  from
one  to  ten  grains,  three  times  a  day.

Dr.  Routh  has  met  with  much  success  in  some  cases  of  anemia  and
debility,  brought  on  by  venereal  or  other  excesses,  over-study,  and
depressing  diseases,  by  the  use  of  a  new  preparation  of  Phosphate  of
Iron,  which  he  has  found  better  adapted  for  a  speedy  cure  than  other
preparations  of  iron;  it  has  likewise  been  of  much  benefit  in  cases  of
virile  weakness  from  onanism,  or  other  causes.  It  is  prepared  by  add-
ing as  much  phosphate  of  iron  as  the  monobasic  phosphoric  acid  in  a
boiling  state  would  take  up,  and  allowing  it  to  cool.  The  proportions
will  be  found  nearly  two  of  acid  to  one  of  the  phosphate.  The  solution
obtained  is  of  a  semitransparent,  greenish  or  slaty  hue,  which  hardens  on
exposure  to  the  air  for  a  day  ;  but  mixed  with  liquorice  powder  or  flour,  it
can  be  at  once  made  up  into  pills.  The  compound  is  soluble  in  any  pro-
portion of  water,  and  free  from  any  nauseous,  inky  taste.  It  is  not  yet
analyzed,  to  know  whether  it  is  a  superphosphate  of  iron,  or  a  mere  solu-
tion of  the  phosphate  in  the  acid.  It  does  not  gripe  or  constipate,  and
has  proved  beneficial  in  cases  of  debility,  where  there  is  a  prevalence  of
nervous  symptoms,  or  a  large  quantity  of  phosphates  voided  by  urine.
Dose,  one  or  two  grains,  three  times  a  day — in  some  instances  combined
with  an  equal  proportion  of  phosphate  of  quinia.

Ferri  Pulvis. Powder  of  Iron. Reduced  Iron. Iron  by  Hydrogen.

Preparation. — Take  of  Subcarbonate  of  Iron,  previously  calcined  in
an  open  vessel,  two  pounds  and  a  half,  or  a  convenient  quantity.  Into  a
wrought-iron  reduction  tube,  of  about  four  inches  in  diameter,  introduce
the  Subcarbonate,  contained  in  an  incomplete  sheet-iron  tube,  open  at
both  ends,  made  by  bending  the  iron  into  the  form  of  a  cylinder,  and
of  such  a  size  as  to  fill  loosely  about  seven-eighths  of  the  reduction-
tube.  Place  the  reduction-tube  longitudinally  in  an  oblong  charcoal-
furnace; and,  by  means  of  a  self-regulating  generator  of  Hydrogen,


Ferrum.  1101

pass  through  it  a  stream  of  that  gas,  previously  purified  by  bubbling
successively  through  solution  of  subacetate  of  lead,  diluted  with  three
times  its  volume  of  water,  and  through  milk  of  lime,  severally  contained
in  half-gallon  bottles,  about  one-third  filled.  Connect  with  the  further
extremity  of  the  reduction-tube  a  lead  tube  bent  so  as  to  dip  into  water.
Make  all  the  junctions  air-tight  by  appropriate  lutes;  and,  when  the
Hydrogen  has  passed  long  enough  to  fill  the  whole  of  the  apparatus  to
the  exclusion  of  atmospheric  air,  light  the  fire  and  bring  that  part  of  the
reduction-tube  occupied  by  the  Subcarbonate  to  a  dull-red  heat,  which
must  be  kept  up  so  long  as  the  bubbles  of  Hydrogen,  breaking  from  the
water  covering  the  orifice  of  the  lead  tube,  are  smaller  than  those  pass-
ing through  the  milk  of  lime.  When  the  reduction  is  completed,  remove
the  fire,  and  allow  the  whole  to  cool  to  the  ordinary  temperature,
keeping  up,  during  the  refrigeration,  a  moderate  current  of  Hydrogen
through  the  apparatus.  Lastly,  withdraw  the  reduced  Iron  from  the
reduction  tube,  detach  it  from  the  sheet-iron  tube,  and,  having  powdered
it,  keep  it  in  well-stopped  bottles.  When  two  pounds  and  a  half  of  Sub-
carbonate  of  Iron  are  operated  on,  the  process  occupies  from  five  to
eight  hours. — U.  S.

History. — This  preparation  is  a  fine  powder  of  metallic  iron,  procured
by  reducing  the  sesquioxide  of  iron  by  hydrogen,  at  a  dull-red  heat.
The  subcarbonate  of  iron  is  calcined,  which  removes  its  water,  and  is
then  subjected  to  the  reducing  influence  of  hydrogen,  purified  in  the
manner  named.  The  oxygen  of  the  sesquioxide  unites  with  the  hydro-
gen, forming  water,  and  the  iron  is  left  in  its  metallic  state.  Much  care
is  necessary  in  preparing  this  article.  If  the  subcarbonate  of  iron  has
not  been  freed  from  sulphate  of  soda  by  thorough  washings,  a  sulphuret
of  sodium  will  be  formed,  and  the  pulverized  iron  spoiled ;  if  the  heat
be  below  dull  redness,  some  of  the  oxide  will  escape  reduction  ;  if  it
exceed  that  point,  the  reduced  iron  will  agglutinate  and  be  difficult  to
powder.  Souberain  and  Dublanc  have  given  full  directions  for  the
manufacture  of  powder  of  iron,  including  the  purifying  of  the  hydrogen,
the  construction  of  the  furnace,  regulation  of  the  heat,  avoiding  explo-
sions, etc.,  and  which  may  be  found  in  the  American  Journal  of  Phar-
macy, Vol.  XVIII,  page  303.  Prof.  Procter,  in  Vol.  XIX,  page  11  of
the  same  journal,  has  made  known  some  valuable  improvements  in  their
process. To  both  of  which  the  manufacturer  is  referred.

Powder  of  Iron,  when  fully  deoxidized,  is  of  an  iron-gray  color,  and
tasteless.  When  black  it  is  imperfect,  and  should  be  rejected.  Dilute
acids  cause  with  it  an  evolution  of  hydrogen  with  effervescence.  Placed
on  an  anvil  and  struck  with  a  smooth  hammer,  a  brilliant  metallic  scale
is  formed.  It  oxidizes  rapidly,  and  hence  should  be  kept  in  dry  and
well-closed  bottles.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  A  valuable  tonic,  and  is  considered  to  be  the
best  form  of  metallic  iron  for  medicinal  employment. It  may  be  used


1102  Pharmacy.

in  chlorosis,  anemia,  and  all  diseases  in  which  the  coloring  matter  of
the  blood  is  deficient.  The  dose  is  from  three  to  six  grains,  four  or  five
times  a  day,  and  is  best  given  in  the  form  of  pill.

Ferri  Sesquioxidum. Sesquioxide  of  Iron. Red  Oxide  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Expose  Sulphate  of  Iron  to  heat,  until  the  water  of
crystallization  is  expelled.  Then  roast  it  by  an  intense  fire  so  long  a's
acid  vapors  arise.  Wash  the  Sesquioxide  until  the  washings,  when
examined  by  litmus,  appear  free  from  acid.  Lastly,  dry  it  on  bibulous
paper.

History. — Sesquioxide  of  Iron  is  a  reddish-brown,  tasteless,  insoluble
powder,  called  Colcothar.  It  is  an  anhydrous  sesquioxide  of  iron,  and  is
soluble  in  muriatic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — It  possesses  tonic  and  somewhat  styptic  proper-
ties, and  is  used  principally  in  strumous  and  neuralgic  affections,  in  com-
bination with  extract  of  conium.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  eight  grains,
three  or  four  times  a  day.

The  Bed  or  Styptic  Powder  is  prepared  by  merely  submitting  sulphate
of  iron  to  a  red-heat,  and  continuing  it  until  a  reddish  substance  is
formed  ;  it  undoubtedly  contains  a  portion  of  acid.  It  is  powerfully  as-
tringent and  styptic,  and  is  used  as  an  application  to  bleeding  piles,  and
external  hemorrhages  ;  it  is  usually  applied  in  the  form  of  ointment,  and
may  also  be  given  internally  for  the  same  purposes.

Ferri  Subcarbonas.  Subcarbonate  of  Iron.  Precipitated  Carbonate
of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  eight  ounces  ;  Carbonate  of
Soda  nine  ounces;  Boiling  Water  a  gallon.  Dissolve  the  Sulphate  of
Iron,  and  Carbonate  of  Soda,  each,  separately,  in  four  pints  of  the  Water ;
then  mix  the  solutions ;  and  having  stirred  the  mixture,  set  it  by  that
the  powder  may  subside.  Lastly,  having  poured  off  the  supernatant
liquor,  wash  the  Sub-carbonate  of  Iron  with  hot  water,  wrap  it  in  bibu-
lous paper,  and  dry  it  with  a  gentle  heat. —  U.  S.

History. — In  the  above  process  a  double  decomposition  takes  place ;
the  sulphuric  acid  of  the  sulphate  of  iron  unites  with  the  soda  forming  a
solution  of  sulphate  of  soda  ;  while  the  carbonic  acid  of  the  carbonate  of
soda,  at  the  same  time,  unites  with  the  iron,  forming  a  precipitated
hydrated  carbonate  of  protoxide  of  iron.  During  the  washing  and
drying,  the  precipitate  absorbs  oxygen  and  parts  with  nearly  all  its
carbor.ic  acid,  and  forms  a  sesquioxide  of  iron  with  a  small  portion  of
carbonic  acid  present.  Hence  the  name,  Subcarbonate  of  Iron,  is  given
to  it,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  sesquioxide,  made  by  calcining  sulphate
of  iron  until  all  its  acid  is  removed.  If  carbonate  of  potassa  be  used
instead  of  soda,  the  sulphate  of  potassa  formed  will  be  found  less  solu-
ble, and  not  so  easily  removed  by  washing.


Fekrum.  1103

The  powder  of  subcarbonate  of  iron,  is  of  a  reddish  color,  and  has  an
unpleasant,  slightly  styptic  taste  ;  it  is  insoluble  in  water,  but  readily
soluble  in  muriatic  acid,  evolving  carbonic  acid  with  effervescence.  Am-
monia or  potassa  precipitates  the  sesquioxide  of  iron  from  its  solution  in
muriatic  acid,  and  when  properly  prepared,  sulphureted  hydrogen,  or
ferrocyanuret  of  potassium  added  to  the  supernatant  liquor,  should
give  no  signs  of  the  presence  of  any  metal  in  solution.  Subcarbonate  of
iron,  is  a  liydrated  sesquioxide,  containing  a  small  amount  of  protoxide
and  carbonic  acid. It  is  incompatible  with  acids  and  acidulous  salts.

Properties  and  Uses. — Subcarbonate  of  iron  is  tonic,  alterative,  and
emmenagogue.  In  large  doses  it  may  produce  a  sense  of  weight  or
fullness  at  the  stomach,  or  a  slight  nausea,  but  no  other  unpleasant  effects.
The  stools  are  colored  black  by  its  use.  It  is  one  of  our  best  chaly-
beates,  and  has  been  successfully  used  in  neuralgia,  especially  when
connected  with  functional  derangement  of  the  stomach,  chorea,  chloro-
sis, and  those  leucophlegmatic  states  of  the  system  in  which  the  blood  is
deficient  in  coloring  matter.  Sometimes  used  in  intermittent  fever,  when
connected  with  an  anemic  condition  or  where  the  nutritive  functions  are
deranged.  In  chronic  diarrhea  and  dysentery,  enlargement  of  the  liver
and  spleen,  epilepsy,  dropsy,  cancer,  scrofula,  and  diseases  of  the
urinary  organs,  connected  with  debility,  it  has  been  successfully  used.
The  dose  is  from  five  grains  to  two  drachms,  three  times  a  day ;  no
nicety  need  be  observed  in  the  dose.

It  is  not  so  powerful  an  antidote  in  poisoning  by  arsenic,  as  the
hydrated  sesquioxide  of  iron  in  the  form  of  magma,  yet  it  should  always
be  used,  until  the  latter  can  be  obtained.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Ferri  Chloridi.

Ferri  Sulphas.  Sulphate  of  Iron.  Sulphate  of  Protoxide  of  Iron.
Green  Vitriol. Copperas.

Preparation. — Take  of  Iron  Wire,  cut  in  pieces,  twelve  ounces  ;  Sul-
phuric Acid  eighteen  ounces;  Water  one  gallon.  Mix  the  Sulphuric  Acid
and  Water,  and  add  the  Iron  Wire  ;  then  heat  the  mixture  until  effer-
vescence ceases.  Pour  off  the  solution,  and  having  added  half  a  drachm
of  Sulphuric  Acid,  filter  through  paper,  allowing  the  lower  end  of  the
funnel  to  touch  the  bottom  of  the  receiving  vessel.  Evaporate  the
filtered  liquor  in  a  matrass  until  sufficiently  concentrated,  then  set  it
aside  in  a  covered  vessel  to  crystallize.  Drain  the  crystals  in  a  funnel,
dry  them  on  bibulous  paper,  and  keep  them  in  closely  stopped  bottles. —

u.  s.

History. — When  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  is  in  contact  with  iron,  it
does  not  readily  act  upon  it;  but  if  it  be  diluted  with  water,  the  oxygen
of  the  water  changes  the  iron  into  a  protoxide ;  the  sulphuric  acid  unites
with  this,  forming  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  protoxide  of  iron,  and
hydrogen  is  set  free. An  excess  of  iron  is  advantageous,  as  it  secures


1104  Pharmact.

a  perfect  sulphate.  The  addition  of  a  small  portion  of  sulphuric  acid
previous  to  filtering  the  solution,  is  for  the  purpose  of  holding  in  solution
any  sesquioxide  that  may  have  been  formed,  and  thereby  enabling  the
salt  to  crystallize  on  evaporation,  entirely  free  from  the  sesquioxide  ;  and
the  direction  to  have  the  funnel  come  in  contact  with  the  bottom  of  the
receiving  vessel,  is  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding,  as  much  as  possible,  the
contact  of  air,  which  favors  the  conversion  to  sesquioxide.  For  the  same
reason,  after  concentration  of  the  solution  by  evaporation,  the  vessel  in
which  it  crystallizes  should  be  kept  covered.

Sulphate  of  iron  is  an  efflorescent  salt,  forming  transparent,  pale
bluish-green  crystals,  with  the  shape  of  oblique  rhombic  prisms.  It
possesses  a  strong  acid,  astringent  taste,  and  an  acid  reaction.  Exposed
to  the  air,  it  absorbs  oxygen,  and  becomes  finally  covered  with  an  efflo-
rescence of  a  yellow  color,  which  is  the  insoluble  subsulphate  of  the
sesquioxide.  When  the  salt  is  entirely  green,  or  approaches  green  more
than  blue,  it  is  an  indication  of  the  presence  of  some  sesquioxide.  It  is
soluble  in  water,  but  is  insoluble  in  alcohol.  Twice  its  weight  of  cold,
and  three-fourths  its  weight  of  boiling  water  are  required  to  dissolve  it,
and  the  solution  is  bluish-green  ;  but  it  soon  becomes  green  and  then
reddish,  when  exposed  to  the  air,  in  consequence  of  the  absorption  of
oxygen,  which  precipitates  a  small  amount  of  sesquisulphate  of  the  ses-
quioxide of  iron.  A  few  drops  of  sulphuric  acid  added  to  the  solution
prevents,  or  greatly  retards  this  change.  Exposed  to  a  moderate  heat,
it  fuses  in  its  water  of  crystallization,  six-sevenths  of  which  passes  off,
leaving  a  grayish-white  anhydrous  salt.  If  the  temperature  be  increased
to  a  red  heat,  it  parts  with  its  acid,  and  is  changed  into  the  anhydrous
sesquioxide  of  iron,  called  Colcothar.  It  is  incompatible  with  the  alkalies,
and  their  carbonates,  soaps,  lime-water,  the  chlorides  of  barium  and
calcium,  the  borate  and  phosphate  of  soda,  nitrate  of  silver,  acetate  and
subacetate  of  lead,  and  astringent  vegetable  infusions  ;  with  the  latter  of
which,  it  forms  with  their  tannic  and  gallic  acids,  a  black  substance  of
an  inky  nature.  The  impure  commercial  sulphate  of  iron  is  unfit  for
medicinal  purposes.  Crystallized  sulphate  of  iron,  consists  of  one  equiv-
alent of  acid  40,  one  of  protoxide  36,  and  seven  of  water  63=139;  its
formula  is  Fe  O+S  0;  +7  HO.

Copper  and  Zinc  are  sometimes  present  in  sulphate  of  iron  ;  copper
may  be  detected  by  dipping  into  the  solution  a  bright,  polished  plate  of
iron,  which  becomes  covered  with  a  brown  cupreous  crust,  deposited
from  the  solution.  If  a  solution  of  the  salt  be  sesquioxidated  by  boiling
with  nitric  acid,  and  the  iron  be  precipitated  by  an  excess  of  ammonia,
and  then  filtered,  it  will  be  of  a  blue  color  if  copper  be  present;  but
if  zinc  be  present,  the  white  oxide  will  separate  in  flakes,  on  apply-
ing heat  to  the  solution  and  boiling  to  drive  off  the  ammonia.  Pure
sulphate  of  iron  is  precipitated  from  its  solution  by  ferrocyanuret  of
potassium,  of  a  white  color,  which  in  the  impure  kinds  is  more  or  less


Ferrum.  1105

blue, according to the proportion of sesquioxide of  iron  which ia
present.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sulphate  of  Iron  is  irritant,  tonic,  and  astrin-
gent. Nausea  and  vomiting,  and  gripings  of  the  bowels,  are  apt  to
follow  the  administration  of  large  doses ;  and  the  stomach  is  more  or
less  injured  by  a  long  continued  use  of  it.  It  has  been  used  as  a  tonic
in  scrofula,  dyspepsia,  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  and  in  debility  following
protracted  diseases.  In  phthisis  pulmonalis  the  following  preparation
has  been  found  very  serviceable  ;  it  relieves  cough,  assists  expectoration,
improves  the  appetite  and  digestive  functions,  and  invigorates  the  whole
system : — Take  of  commercial  sulphate  of  iron  six  drachms  ;  Whisky
or  good  Holland  Gin,  half  a  pint ;  mix  together.  The  dose  is  half  a
fluidrachm  every  two  hours.  As  an  astringent,  sulphate  of  iron  is  given
in  diseases  attended  with  immoderate  discharges,  as  passive  hemor-
rhages, colliquative  sweats,  diabetes,  chronic  mucous  catarrh,  leucor-
rhea,  gleet,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  grains  in  the  form  of  pill.
In  an  overdose,  it  acts  as  a  poison.  Externally,  the  solution  is  used  in
eruptions  of  the  face,  chronic  ophthalmia,  and  gleet,  of  various  strengths,
from  one  or  two,  to  eight  or  ten  grains  of  the  salt  to  the  fluidounce  of
water.

Off.  Prep.  —  Ferri  Carbonas  Saccharatum ;  Ferri  Citras;  Ferri  et
Quinise  Citras  ;  Ferri  Ferrocyanuretum  ;  Ferri  Oxidum  Hydratum  ;  Ferri
Oxidum  Nigrum;  Ferri  Phosphas ;  Ferri  Subcarbonas ;  Ferri  Sulphas
Exsiccatum ;  Ferri  Valerianas ;  Pilulae  Ferri  Carbonatis ;  Pilulse  Ferri
Compositae  ;  Tinctura  Ferri  Acetatis.

Ferri  Sulphas  Exsiccatum. Dried  Sulphate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Expose  any  convenient  quantity  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  to  a
moderate  heat,  in  a  porcelain  or  earthenware  vessel,  not  glazed  with
lead,  till  it  is  converted  into  a  dry,  grayish-white  mass,  which  is  to  be
reduced  to  powder.

History. — By  this  process  about  six-sevenths  of  the  water  of  crystal-
lization of  the  sulphate  of  iron  is  expelled.  If  the  heat  used  should
exceed  400°,  the  salt  would  become  decomposed,  hence  it  must  not
extend  beyond  it.

Properties  and  Uses.  — Same  as  Sulphate  of  Iron  ;  to  be  used  in  pill
form.  Three  grains  of  the  dried  sulphate  of  iron  are  equivalent  to
five  of  the  crystallized  sulphate.  Externally,  in  solution,  as  an  astrin-
gent lotion  for  indolent  ulcers,  and  as  an  injection  in  leucorrhea,  and
gonorrhea  of  females.

Off.  Prej). — Lotio  Hydrastis  Composita  ;  Pilulse  Polygoni  Compositae.

Ferri  Sulphuretum. Sulphuret  of  Iron.

Preparation. — The  best  Sulphuret  of  Iron  is  made  by  heating  an  iron
rod  to  a  full  white-heat  in  a  forge,  applying  a  stick  of  sulphur  to  the  end
70


1106  Pharmacy.

of  the  rod,  and  allowing  the  fused  globules  of  Sulphuret  which  form  to  fall
into  a  deep  vessel  filled  with  water.  These  should  be  freed  of  sulphur
and  kept  in  a  close  vessel.

An  inferior  kind,  but  sufficiently  good  for  pharmaceutic  purposes,
may  be  obtained  by  mixing  thoroughly  together,  Sublimed  Sulphur  one
part,  and  Iron  Filings  three  parts.  Heat  the  mixture  in  a  covered  cruci-
ble till  it  becomes  red-hot,  then  remove  the  crucible  from  the  fire,  still
keeping  it  covered,  and  allow  the  action  to  go  on  without  any  furthei
heat.

History. — There  are  a  number  of  Sulphurets  of  Iron,  among  the  most
important  of  which  are  the  Proto-sulphuret,  or  Sulphuret  of  the  protox-
ide; the  Sesquisulphuret,  or  Sulphuret  of  the  Sesquioxide,  the  Bisulphu-
ret  or  Cubic  Pyrites,  and  the  Magnetic  Pyrites,  which  consists  of  five
equivalents  of  protosulphuret,  and  one  of  bisulphuret;  this  last  dissolves
in  acids,  yielding  sulphureted  hydrogen  and  a  residue  of  sulphur.  The
protosulphuret,  however,  is  the  one  more  generally  used  in  Pharmacy
for  the  production  of  hydrosulphuric  acid  gas,  (sulphureted  hydrogen).
When  solid  sulphur  is  applied  to  a  rod  of  iron  heated  to  a  full  white
heat,  the  product  is  similar  to  magnetic  pyrites ;  but  when  the  proto-
sulphuret is  obtained  by  heating  Flowers  of  Sulphur  with  Iron  Filings
in  excess,  it  always  contains  an  excess  of  iron.  In  the  first  instance,
when  sulphur  is  applied  to  white-hot  iron,  the  metal  apparently  becomes
hotter,  the  two  bodies  combine  with  the  emission  of  brilliant  sparks,  the
protosulphuret  is  instantly  formed,  and  falls  down  in  a  fused  and  incan-
descent state,  and  on  being  received  in  the  water,  brownish-yellow  glo-
bules are  obtained,  having  a  somewhat  crystalline  texture.  When  pure,
the  officinal  sulphuret  of  iron  furnishes  a  yellow  powder,  and  is  easily
dissolved  in  diluted  sulphuric  or  muriatic  acid,  evolving  sulphureted
hydrogen,  and  not  leaving  a  residue  of  sulphur.  As  ordinarily  prepared,
however,  it  is  not  completely  soluble  in  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  and  leaves
a  residue  of  uncombined  sulphur.  Pure  protosulphuret  of  iron  consists
of  one  equivalent  of  iron  28,  and  one  of  sulphur  16.12=44.12;  its  for-
mula is  Fe  S.  The  fused  globules  have  the  composition  of  5  Fe  S+Fe
S2,  or  according  to  some,  5  Fe  S+Fe  a  Si.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  employed  in  Pharmacy  only
for  the  production  of  hydrosulphuric  acid  gas,  (sulphureted  hydrogen).
Diluted  sulphuric  or  muriatic  acid  is  added  to  it,  in  a  proper  vessel,  and
the  sulphureted  hydrogen  is  disengaged  as  a  gas,  and  may  be  collected
over  warm  water,  or  solution  of  salt.  In  this  process  water  is  decom-
posed, and  its  hydrogen  forms  hydrosulphuric  acid,  by  uniting  with  the
sulphur,  while  the  oxygen  changes  the  iron  into  a  protoxide,  which  com-
bines with  the  sulphuric  acid.  Sulphureted  Hydrogen  is  a  transparent
and  colorless  gas,  having  a  very  offensive  and  peculiar  smell,  similar  to
that  of  putrid  eggs. When  respired,  even  although  much  diluted  with


Ferrum.  1107

air,  it  is  highly  deleterious.  It  is  combustible,  burning  with  a  bluish
flame,  and  producing  sulphurous  acid  gas  and  water.  Its  specific  gravity
is  1.178.  Water  absorbs  two  or  three  times  its  volume  of  the  gas,  and
acquires  its  smell,  and  a  nauseous  sweetish  taste ;  the  action  of  the  air
upon  the  solution,  gradually  decomposes  it,  with  the  formation  of  water
and  deposit  of  sulphur.  Hence,  the  solution  should  always  be  kept  in
small  vials,  quite  full  and  closely  stopped.  Hydrosulphuric  acid  satu-
rates bases,  forming  salts  known  as  Hydrosulphates,  Sulphohydrates,  or
Hydrosulphurets.  It  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  sulphur  16,  and  one
of  hydrogen  1=17  ;  its  formula  is  HS.

The  following  has  cured  several  cases  of  syphilis :  Heat  a  piece  of
Steel  to  a  welding  heat,  apply  a  roll  of  Sulphur  to  it,  and  let  the  drops  fall
in  Cold  Water.  Pulverize  these  globules  or  drops,  and  add  one  table-
spoonful  to  a  pint  of  Whisky.  Let  the  mixture  macerate  for  a  few  days.
The  dose  is  a  tablespoonful  five  or  six  times  a  day.

Ferri  Tannas. Tannate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  pure  Tannic  Acid  nine  ounces ;  Precipitated
Subcarbonate  of  Iron  forty  -four  ounces  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Dis-
solve the  Tannic  Acid  in  sufficient  water,  and  boil  the  solution,  tc  which,
while  boiling,  add  gradually  the  Subcarbonate  of  Iron,  moderately  dried  ;
agitate  the  solution  till  effervescence  ceases.  Evaporate  the  solution  in
a  porcelain  vessel,  at  a  temperature  of  176°  F.,  until  it  becomes  thick  ;
then  spread  it  on  glass  or  porcelain  to  dry  in  a  stove  at  95°.

History. — Thus  prepared,  Tannate  of  Iron  is  in  fiat  pieces,  of  a  crim-
son color,  tasteless,  and  insoluble  in  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tannate  of  Iron  possesses  tonic  and  astringent
properties.  It  has  been  used  with  benefit  in  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,
chronic  diarrhea,  and  in  the  diarrhea  accompanying  some  febrile  dis-
eases, etc.  The  dose  is  two  or  three  grains,  made  into  pills,  and
gradually  increased,  so  that  in  the  course  of  a  day  thirty  grains  may  be
given.

Ferri  Valerianas. Valerianate  of  Iron.

Preparation.  — To  clean  Iron  Filings,  in  a  Wedgewood  mortar,  add
gradually  an  equal  iveight  of  Valerianic  Acid,  and  stir  constantly.  In
an  hour,  add  Distilled  Water ;  gently  warm  the  whole  in  a  flask,  and
filter.  The  surface  in  contact  with  the  air  becomes  covered  over  with
a  crystalline  layer  of  the  Valerianate;  collect  this,  and  expose  as  before,
repeating  the  process  as  long  as  it  continues  to  yield  crystals.  Or,  it
may  be  prepared  by  adding  a  cold  solution  of  Valerianate  of  Soda  to  a
solution  of  three  parts  of  Scsquichloride  of  Iron  in  one  hundred  of  Water.
The  solution  of  Valerianate  of  Soda,  proper  for  the  reaction,  is  made
by  saturating  five  parts  of  oily  Valerianic  Acid  in  sixty  of  Water  with
Carbonate  of  Soda,  and  then  boiling  the  liquid  to  expel  all  the  Carbonic


1108  Pharmacy.

Acid. The  precipitated  Valerianate  of  Iron  is  washed  with  a  little  Cold
Water,  and  dried  at  a  temperature  not  exceeding  68°.

The  Dublin  Pharmacopoeia  of  1850,  gives  the  following  process  for
obtaining  this  salt:  Take  of  Valerianate  of  Soda  five  ounces  and  three
drachms,  (Dublin  weight);  Sulphate  of  Iron,  four  ounces,  (avoirdupois);
Distilled  Water  one  pint,  (Imperial  measure).  Convert  the  Sulphate  of
Iron  into  a  tersulphate  of  the  sesquioxide,  (as  directed  in  the  formula
for  Prussian  blue),  and  add  Distilled  Water  until  the  solution  be  aug-
mented to  the  bulk  of  eight  fluidounces,  (Imperial  measure).  Dissolve
the  Valerianate  of  Soda  in  ten  fluidounces  of  the  Water,  and  mix  the
two  solutions  cold;  then,  having  placed  the  precipitate  which  forms,
upon  a  filter,  and  washed  it  with  the  remainder  of  the  Water,  dry  it,  by
wrapping  it  in  bibulous  paper,  and  allowing  it  to  stand  on  a  porous  brick
for  some  days. When  dried,  it  should  be  kept  in  well  stopped  bottles.

History.  — In  this  latter  process  after  having  converted  the  sulphate
of  protoxide  of  iron  into  the  tersulphate  of  sesquioxide,  a  double  decom-
position is  effected  between  this  latter  salt  and  the  valerianate  of  soda,
in  which  sulphate  of  soda  is  formed,  and  remains  in  solution,  while  the
tervalerianate  of  sesquioxide  of  iron  is  precipitated.  Or,  three  equiva-
lents of  valerianate  of  soda,  reacting  on  one  of  tersulphate  of  sesquiox-
ide of  iron,  result  in  three  equivalents  of  sulphate  of  soda,  and  one  of
tervalerianate  of  sesquioxide  of  iron.

Valerianate  of  Iron  is  in  the  form  of  a  loose,  amorphous  powder  of  a
dark  tile-red  color,  and  having  a  slight  taste  and  odor  of  valerianic  acid.
It  is  insoluble  in  cold  water,  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  is  decomposed  by
boiling  water,  which  removes  its  acid  and  leaves  the  sesquioxide  of  iron
remaining.  A  fraudulent  article  is  sometimes  sold,  consisting  of  tartrate
or  citrate  of  iron,  to  which  oil  of  valerian  has  been  added.  It  may  be
detected,  by  observing  that  the  genuine  salt  gives  off  an  odor  of  valeri-
anic acid  when  treated  with  dilute  muriatic  acid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Valerianate  of  Iron  is  a  nervo-tonic,  and  will  be
found  serviceable  in  nervous  disorders,  hysteria,  chorea,  neuralgia,
chlorosis,  and  anemic  conditions  with  excitability  or  irritability  of  the
nervous  system.  The  dose  is  one  or  two  grains,  in  pill  form,  repeated
three  or  four  times  a  day.

INFUSA.

Infusions.

Infusions  are  solutions  of  vegetable  principles  in  water,  effected  with-
out boiling,  and  to  which,  when  not  contra-indicated,  some  kinds  of  Spirit
are  occasionally  added  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  them.  The  addi-
tion of  any  Alcoholic  mixture  is,  however,  only  made  in  cases  where  the
medicinal  action  of  the  liquor  itself  is  desired.  The  almost  universal
method  of  preparing  infusions  is  by  pouring  water  on  the  vegetable


Inflsa.  1109

substances,  previously  cut  or  bruised,  and  macerating  in  a  close  vessel  till
cool.  Sometimes  a  prolonged  application  of  a  low  heat,  by  the  side  of
a  fire  or  otherwise,  is  required,  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  certain
principles  not  so  readily  soluble  by  other  means.  When  the  active  prin-
ciple is  volatile  or  impaired  by  heat,  or  when  the  vegetable  contains  a
substance  not  readily  soluble  at  a  low  temperature,  and  which  it  is  re-
quired to  avoid  in  the  infusion,  Cold  Water  will  be  found  preferable  to  Hot.

Infusions  form  a  very  convenient  mode  of  administering  vegetable
medicines,  as  the  greater  part  of  them  are  easily  exhausted  of  their
active  principles  in  this  way,  without  requiring  to  be  very  finely  divided.
The  principal  objection  to  them,  is  the  difficulty  of  keeping  them  for  any
length  of  time,  in  consequence  of  which  they  require  to  be  prepared
extemporaneously,  and  in  small  quantities  at  a  time.  Mr.  Alsop,  how-
ever, states,  that  they  may  be  preserved  for  months,  by  pouring  them
while  boiling  hot  into  bottles,  up  to  the  top,  and  forcing  in  corks  of  good
quality.  The  water  employed  in  making  infusions  should  be  pure,  as
fresh  river,  rain,  or  distilled  water,  instead  of  water  from  pumps,  springs,
or  holding  in  solution  saline  principles.  For  the  preparation  of  infusions,
Mr.  Alsop  has  introduced  a  mug  or  jar,  having  a  perforated  diaphragm
about  one-third  way  from  the  top  of  the  pot,  on  which  are  placed  the
solid  ingredients.  The  diaphragm  is  movable,  and  is  supported  on  ledges
placed  on  the  inside  of  the  vessel ;  it  may  be  used  to  prepare  infusions
by  Hot  or  Cold  Water,  or  where  digestion  is  required  for  some  time.  As
the  water  in  the  jar  becomes  impregnated,  the  increased  specific  gravity
it  acquires  causes  it  to  descend,  and  its  place  is  immediately  supplied  by
fluid  of  less  specific  gravity,  so  that  a  continual  circulation  takes  place
until  the  whole  of  the  soluble  principles  are  extracted.

In  making  infusions  with  Boiling  Water,  starch  and  other  principles  are
often  taken  up,  whose  presence  disposes  to  acidity  or  moldiness,  or  per-
haps favors  reactions  which  materially  impair  the  infusions ;  on  this
account  percolation  by  Cold  Water  is  preferable,  as  it  avoids  these  incon-
veniences, beside  which  these  infusions  have  a  less  tendency  to  decay  than
those  made  at  a  boiling  temperature.  The  process  of  percolation  or  dis^
placement  by  Cold  Water,  affords  infusions  of  very  great  strength,  and
is  preferred  to  any  other  mode  ;  it  requires,  however,  that  the  articles
should  be  more  finely  powdered,  as  a  general  thing,  than  is  customary
in  preparing  infusions  in  the  ordinary  way.  When  of  too  much  strength,
the  infusion  may  be  reduced  by  dilution  with  water.

The  usual  rule  for  preparing  infusions  is,  to  add  from  half  an  ounce
to  an  ounce  of  the  coarsely  bruised  herb  or  root  to  a  pint  of  water,
of  which,  when  prepared,  the  dose  is  from  one  to  two  fluidounces.
They  are  better  when  prepared  in  glazed  earthenware  or  porcelain
vessels  fitted  with  covers,  than  when  prepared  in  metallic  vessels,  on
account  of  a  liability  to  chemical  alteration  from  metallic  influence,  and
which  frequently  impairs  the  preparation. Infusions  containing  acids,


1110  Pharmacy.

or  saline  substances  should  always  be  prepared  and  kept  in  glass  or
china  vessels.

In  the  preparation  of  infusions,  the  reactions  of  agents  should  always
be  kept  in  view.  Thus  —  Infusion  of  Chamomile  flowers  yields  pre-
cipitates with  nitrate  of  silver,  sulphate  of  iron,  gelatin,  yellow  Peru-
vian bark,  tincture  of  chloride  of  iron,  corrosive  sublimate,  and  the
acetates  of  lead.  Infusion  of  horse-radish  becomes  turbid  from  depo-
sition of  vegetable  albumen,  and  speedily  runs  into  the  putrefactive
fermentation  in  warm  weather.  It  likewise  gives  precipitates  with  infu-
sions of  galls,  and  Peruvian  bark,  with  nitrate  of  silver,  corrosive  subli-
mate, and  the  alkaline  carbonates.  Infusion  of  cloves  affords  precipitates,
with  the  soluble  salts  of  antimony,  iron,  lead,  silver,  and  zinc,  and  also
with  lime-water.  Infusion  of  Gascarilla,  yields  precipitates  with  acetate
and  subacetate  of  lead,  sulphate  of  iron,  sulphate  of  zinc,  lime-water,
nitrate  of  silver,  acetates  of  lead,  and  infusion  of  galls.  Infusion  of
Yellow  Peruvian  bark  is  incompatible  with  the  alkalies,  alkaline  earths,
vegetable  astringents,  tartaric  acid,  oxalic  acid,  and  the  soluble  tartrates
and  oxalates.  It  also  affords  precipitates  with  other  agents,  which,
however,  do  not  always  injure  its  efficacy  or  active  principle,  as  corro-
sive sublimate,  arsenious  acid,  tartar  emetic,  gelatinous  solutions,  soluble
salts  of  iron,  silver,  and  zinc,  and  many  vegetable  solutions,  as  those
of  cloves,  chamomile,  columbo,  cascarilla,  galls,  horse-radish,  catechu,
digitalis,  senna,  orange  peel,  rhubarb,  valerian,  and  simaruba.  Infusion
of  Colombo  is  best  prepared  by  exhausting  with  cold  water,  which  leaves
the  starch  behind,  and  then  heating  the  infusion  to  the  boiling  point  in
order  to  coagulate  the  albumen,  and  strain.  Infusion  of  digitalis  affords
precipitates  with  the  acetate  of  lead,  sulphate  of  iron,  and  infusion  of
Peruvian  bark,  etc.

As  nearly  all  vegetable  medicines  are  occasionally  administered  in  the
form  of  infusion,  it  would  be  useless  to  enter  into  an  especial  relation
of  them,  further  than  already  explained  in  the  above  general  rules ;
and  are  left  for  the  nurse  or  family  to  prepare.  However,  there  are  a
few  compound  infusions,  some  of  which  are  of  a  spirituous  nature,
employment,  and  superior  efficacy  in  the  diseases  for  which  they  are
recommended.

Infusum  Apii  Compositum.  Compound  Infusion  of  Parsley.
Preparation. — Take  of  Parsley  Roots  and  Seeds,  coarsely  bruised,
Subcarbonate  of  Iron,  each,  four  ounces  ;  Horse-radish  Root,  in  small
pieces,  two  ounces;  Juniper  Berries,  Squill,  White  Mustard-seed,  Man-
drake Root,  and  Queen  of  the  Meadow,  of  each,  finely  bruised,  one
ounce;  Good  Cider  six  quarts.  Boil  the  Cider  and  pour  it  on  the  rest  of
the  articles  mixed  together,  in  an  earthen  vessel ;  cover  the  vessel,  and
digest  with  a  gentle  heat  for  twenty-four  hours.


Infusum.  1111

The  cider  should  not  be  hard,  nor  too  new,  but  sparkling  and  pleasantly-
tart,  and  after  digestion  by  heat,  it  should  be  allowed  to  remain  upon
the  articles,  without  straining  it  off.  By  this  course,  the  liquid  becomes
still  further  impregnated  with  the  properties  of  the  medicines.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  most  excellent  preparation  in  several
varieties  of  dropsy,  for  which  alone  it  is  used  ;  it  increases  the  action  of
the  kidneys,  regulates  the  bowels,  improves  the  digestive  functions,  and
promotes  activity  of  the  absorbent  vessels.  The  dose  is  one  or  two
fluidounces,  three  times  a  day.  In  the  summer  season,  half  the  above
quantity  may  be  made  at  one  time,  as,  otherwise,  it  becomes  very  sour
and  moldy.  It  should  always  be  used  immediately  after  its  prepara-
tion.— J.  K.

Infusum  Epig^e^e  Compositum.  Compound  Infusion  of  Trailing  Arbu-
tus. Diuretic  Compound.  /

Preparation. — Take  of  Trailing  Arbutus,  Queen  of  the  Meadow  Root,
Dwarf  Elder  Bark,  Marsh-mallow  Root,  each,  coarsely  bruised,  half  an
ounce  ;  Boiling  Water,  good  Holland  Gin,  of  each,  one  pint ;  Honey  a.
sufficient  quantity.  Pour  the  Boiling  Water  and  Gin,  on  the  plants,  and
digest  them  with  gentle  heat,  in  a  close  covered  vessel,  for  six  hours ;
then  remove  from  the  fire,  strain,  and  add  sufficient  Honey  to  render  it
pleasantly  sweet.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  valuable  remedy  in  gravel,  sup-
pression of  urine,  high  colored  or  scalding  urine,  inflammation  of  the
urethra,  and  other  disorders  of  the  urinary  organs.  In  oxalic  deposits,
however,  it  is  of  no  utility.  The  dose  is  about  two  fluidounces,  three
or  four  times  a  day ;  in  severe  cases,  this  dose  may  be  given  every
hour  until  relief  is  obtained,  after  which  every  three  or  four  hours.
In  cases  of  gravel,  a  corresponding  quantity  of  Wild  Carrot  Root  and
Seed  may  be  advantageously  added  to  the  articles. — J.  K.

Infusum  Geranii  Compositum. Compound  Infusion  of  Cranesbill.

Preparation. — Take  of  Cranesbill,  Witch  Hazel,  Black  Cohosh,  and
Golden  Seal,  each,  coarsely  bruised,  half  an  ounce;  Boiling  Water  two
pints.  Mix  the  articles  together,  and  digest  with  a  gentle  heat,  in  a
close  vessel,  for  two  hours ;  remove  from  the  fire,  and  strain.  If
required,  alum  one  drachm,  may  be  added.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  efficacious  astringent  wash  in
aphthous  and  other  diseases  of  the  mouth  and  throat,  when  unaccom-
panied with  inflammation  ;  and  is  also  useful  as  an  injection  in  leucor-
rhea,  prolapsus  ani,  and  prolapsus  uteri. — J.  K.

Infusum  Hydrastis  Compositum. Compound  Infusion  of  Golden  Seal.

Preparation. — Take  of  Golden  Seal,  Blue  Cohosh,  Witch  Hazel,  of
each 'in  powder,  half  an  ounce;  Boiling  Water  one  pint;  pulverized  Alum
one  drachm;  Honey  a  sufficient  quantity.  Add  the  plants  to  the  Boiling
Water,  and  digest  with  a  gentle  heat,  in  a  close  vessel,  for  half  an  hour,


1112  Pharmacy.

remove  from  the  fire,  strain,  add  the  Alum,  and  sufficient  Honey  to
thoroughly  sweeten  the  infusion.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  infusion  is  very  valuable  as  a  wash  or
gargle  in  various  forms  of  sore  mouth,  and  ulcerated  sore  throat. — J.  K.

Infusum  Salvia  Compositum. Compound  Infusion  of  Sage.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sage  Leaves,  Hyssop  Leaves,  of  each,  one
ounce;  Boiling  Water  two  pints;  pulverized  Borax  one  drachm.  Place
the  Herbs  in  the  Boiling  Water,  allow  them  to  digest  for  half  an  hour,
then  strain  and  add  the  Borax.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  infusion  is  employed  as  a  wash  and  gargle
in  aphthae,  sore  throat,  and  quinsy,  when  accompanied  with  inflam-
mation.


LINIMENTA.

Liniments.

These  preparations  are  designed  for  external  application,  and  should
always  be  of  a  consistence  which  will  enable  them  to  be  applied  to  the
skin  by  gentle  friction  with  the  naked  hand,  or  flannel.  They  are  usu-
ally composed  of  Oily,  Spirituous,  Gummy,  or  Saponaceous  substances,
are  thinner  than  ointments,  more  consistent  than  water,  and  at  the
temperature  of  the  body  are  always  liquid.  The  benefit  derived  from
them,  depends  either  upon  their  counter-irritating  influences,  or  from
extemporaneously  by  physicians,  each  having  a  preference  ;  yet  it  is
absolutely  necessary  that  there  be  some  established  rule  in  relation  to
them,  and  that  the  officinal  preparation  be  generally  known.

Linimentum  Aconiti. Linimentum  Aconiti  Radicis. Aconite  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Aconite  Root,  in  powder,  four  ounces;  Glycerin
two  fluidrachms ;  Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Macerate  the  Aconite
with  half  a  pint  of  Alcohol  for  twenty-four  hours,  then  pack  it  in  a
small  displacer,  and  add  Alcohol  gradually  until  a  pint  of  tincture  has
passed.  Distil  off  twelve  fluidounces,  and  evaporate  the  residue  until  it
measures  twelve  fluidrachms.  To  this  add  Alcohol  two  fluidrachms,  and
the  Glycerin,  and  mix  them.

History. — This  preparation  is  offered  by  W.  Procter,  Jr.,  as  a  substi-
tute for  aconitia  as  an  external  anaesthetic  application.  It  is  twice  the
strength  of  the  root,  and  is  exceedingly  active.  The  Glycerin  is  added
for  the  purpose  of  retarding  evaporation  after  application  of  the  liniment
to  the  skin,  and  which  may  be  further  secured  by  using  oiled  silk.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  liniment  may  be  used  in  all  cases  in  which
aconitia  would  prove  useful,,  as  in  gout,  neuralgia,  and  rheumatism.  It
is  to  be  used  as  follows  :  Cut  a  piece  of  lint  or  muslin  of  the  size  and
form  of  the  part  to  be  treated,  lay  it  on  a  plate  or  waiter,  and  by  means


LlNIMENTA.  1113

of  a  camel's  hair  brush,  saturate  it  with  the  liniment.  Thus  prepared  it
should  be  applied  to  the  surface,  a  piece  of  oiled  silk  laid  over  and  kept
in  place  by  an  adhesive  edge,  or  by  a  bandage.  Care  should  be  taken
not  to  apply  it  to  an  abraded  surface,  and  in  its  use  the  patient  should
be  informed  of  its  character,  and  avoid  bringing  it  in  contact  with  the
eyes,  nostrils,  or  lips.

Linimentum  ^Eruginis. Mel  JEgypticum. Verdigris  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Verdigris  (Subacetate  of  Copper),  in  powder,
one  ounce;  Vinegar  seven  fluidounces  ;  Honey  fourteen  ounces.  Dissolve
the  Verdigris  in  the  Vinegar,  and  strain  through  linen ;  then  gradually
add  the  Honey,  and  boil  down  to  the  proper  consistence.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  external  stimulant  and  escbarotic,
and  is  sometimes  employed  to  repress  or  destroy  fungous  growths.  It
may  be  used  undiluted  or  rubbed  up  with  some  unirritable  ointment,  in
which  latter  state  it  forms  an  excellent  stimulant  to  indolent  ulcers.
When  diluted  with  water  it  has  been  applied  to  venereal  ulcers  in  the
mouth  and  throat,  by  means  of  a  camel's  hair  brush,  or  used  as  a
gargle. —  U.  S.

Linimentum  Ammonite.  Liniment  of  Ammonia.  Common  or  Volatile
Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Solution  of  Ammonia  a  fuidounce;  Olive  Oil
two  fluidounces. Mix  them. —  XJ.  S.

History. — In  this  liniment  a  soap  is  formed  by  the  union  of  the  oil  and
ammonia,  which  is  but  imperfectly  dissolved,  and  a  white,  opake  emul-
sion is  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  used  as  a  rubefacient  in
rheumatic  pains,  inflammatory  diseases  of  the  throat,  and  catarrhal  and
other  pectoral  affections  of  children.  The  skin  is  to  be  gently  rubbed
with  it,  or  it  may  be  applied  over  the  part  on  a  piece  of  flannel  mois-
tened with  it.  If  it  becomes  too  active,  it  must  be  diluted  with  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  oil.

Linimentum  Ammonite  Compositum.  Compound  Liniment  of  Am-
monia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Stronger  Solution  of  Ammonia  five  fuidounces  ;
Tincture  of  Camphor  two  fluidounces;  Spirit  of  Rosemary  one  fluidounce.
Mix  them  well  together.  This  liniment  may  also  be  made  weaker  for
some  purposes  with  three  fluidounces  of  Tincture  of  Camphor,  and  two
of  Spirit  of  Rosemary.

History. — This  liniment  of  the  two  strengths  given,  is  a  mere  dilution
of  the  stronger  Solution  of  Ammonia,  in  two  different  degrees;  the
ammonia  itself  being  too  powerful  for  use.  It  closely  resembles  Gran-
ville's Counter-irritant  Lotion.  The  camphor  and  rosemary  serve  but
little  other  purpose  here  than  that  of  diluting  agents.


1114  Pha&M4CT-

Properties  and  Uses. —  These  liniments  act  promptly  and  powerfully,
and  may  be  employed  as  rubefacients,  vesicatories,  or  escharotics.  For
mere  rubefaction  the  weaker  preparation  may  be  used,  and  even  for
vesication;  but  where  immediate  action  is  desired,  the  stronger  one  must
be  employed.  In  applying  them,  a  piece  of  linen  folded  two  or  three
times,  is  saturated  with  the  fluid,  applied  over  the  part,  and  prevented
from  evaporating  by  dry  cloths  placed  over  it ;  the  degree  of  action
depends  entirely  on  the  length  of  time  in  which  it  is  thus  kept  in  contact
with  the  skin.  A  very  good  plan  is  to  select  a  box  the  size  of  the  part
to  be  acted  upon,  introduce  patent  lint,  saturated  with  the  fluid,  into  the
box,  and  hold  it  firmly  upon  the  part.  In  from  one  to  five  or  eight
minutes,  rubefaction  is  produced ;  in  from  three  to  eight  or  ten,  vesi-
cation ;  and  somewhat  longer  for  its  escharotic  effect.  It  is  usually
employed  in  neuralgic,  gouty,  spasmodic,  rheumatic,  and  other  affections,
where  speedy  and  powerful  counter-irritation  is  demanded.

Linimentum  Cajuputi  Compositum. Compound  Cajeput  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oils  of  Sassafras,  Cajeput,  and  Hemlock,  each,
one  ounce;  Soap  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  them  together  and  form  a
liniment.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  valuable  stimulating  and  discu-
tient  application  ;  it  is  principally  used  in  indolent  scrofulous  tumors. —
J.  K.

Linimentum  Calcis. Liniment  of  Lime.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Lime-Water,  Linseed  Oil,  each,  a  Jluidounce.
Mix  them  together  and  form  a  liniment.

History. — The  Oil  and  Lime  unite  and  form  a  Soap ;  and  the  oil  being
in  excess  separates  upon  standing. This  is  also  called  Carron  Oil.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  useful  application  to  recent  burns
and  scalds  ;  it  is  best  applied  on  carded  cotton.  The  following  is  also
reputed  beneficial  in  burns  ;  take  of  Lime-Water  two  Jluidounces  ;  Oil  of
Turpentine,  Olive  Oil,  each,  one  Jluidounce.  Mix.  If  to  be  used  imme-
diately after  the  accident,  add  Oil  of  Pennyroyal  one  Jluidounce.

Linimentum  Camphors. Camphor  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Camphor  an  ounce  and  a  half;  Chloroform  two
Jluidrachms ;  Olive  Oil  two  Jluidounces.  Dissolve  the  Camphor  in  the
Oil  and  Chloroform  mixed  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  anodyne  application  in  sprains,
bruises,  rheumatic  and  neuralgic  pains,  as  well  as  other  local  pains.

Linimentum  Caoutchouc. Caoutchouc  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Caoutchouc,  in  fine  pieces,  a  convenient  quan-
tity; Oil  of  Origanum  a  sufficient  quantity.  Dissolve  the  Caoutchouc  in
the  Oil.

History. — In  this  manner  Caoutchouc  may  be  dissolved  in  any  of  the
stimulating  essential  oils. If  the  mixture  be  spread  on  paper,  allowed


LlNIMENTA.  1115

tc  dry,  and  again  spread,  a  valuable  stimulating  plaster  may  be  had.
A  stimulating  liniment  was  at  one  time  much  used  by  a  certain  class  of
practitioners,  prepared  as  follows  :  Take  of  Caoutchouc,  in  small  pieces,
four  ounces;  Linseed  Oil  one  pint.  Mix  together,  and  dissolve  the
Caoutchouc  by  means  of  a  charcoal  fire  ;  then  add  Tallow  three-fourths
of a  pound ;  Antispasmodic  Tincture,  Oil  of  Spearmint,  of  each,  two  fluid-
ounces  ;  Oils  of  Peppermint  and  Pennyroyal,  of  each,  one  fluidounce.
This  may  be  applied  with  much  friction,  or  spread  on  a  bladder.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  These  preparations  may  be  used  whenever
stimulating  applications  are  desired.  We  give  them  here,  because  they
are  sometimes  employed  by  physicians  of  various  schools.  Probably,
the  addition  of  the  Caoutchouc  increases  the  non-conducting  properties
of  these  liniments.

Linimentum  Capsict  Compositum. Compound  Capsicum  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tincture  of  Capsicum  hvo fluidounces  ;  Tincture
of  Opium,  and  Aqua  Ammoniae,  of  each,  three  fluidrachms  ;  Oil  of  Ori-
ganum, two  fluidrachms  ;  Oil  of  Cinnamon,  and  Tincture  of  Camphor,  of
each,  one  fluidrachm. Mix.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  a  very  efficacious  application  in  rheu-
matic, pleuritic,  neuralgic,  and  other  pains.

Linimentum  Crotonis. Croton  Oil  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Croton  Oil  one  fluidounce  ;  Oil  of  Turpentine
seven  fluidounces. Mix  together  with  agitation.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  acts  as  a  prompt  rubefacient ;  and  when
used  for  some  time,  produces  pustulation.  From  ten  to  thirty  minims
may  be  placed  upon  a  limited  surface,  and  rubbed  in  ;  and  when  pustu-
lation is  required,  this  should  be  repeated  two  or  more  times  every  day.

Linimentum  Nigrum. Black  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Olive  Oil  one  ounce  and  a  half;  Sulphuric  Acid
one  fluidrachm ;  mix  well  together,  and  then  add,  Oil  of  Turpentine  half
an  ounce.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  An  active  counter-irritant,  but  does  not  vesi-
cate. To  be  rubbed  on  the  part  with  a  piece  of  lint,  twice  a  day,  until
the  skin  becomes  tender  and  inflamed.  It  may  be  used  in  indolent
swellings  of  joints,  rheumatic  pains,  and  wherever  active  counter-irrita-
tion is  indicated. — Brodie.

Linimentum  Olei. Liniment  of  Oils.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oils  of  Cedar,  Cajeput,  Cloves,  and  Sassafras,
of  each,  one  fluidounce. Mix.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  forms  an  efficacious  application  to  rheu-
matic and  other  painful  affections  ;  it  should  be  rubbed  on  the  affected
part,  three  or  four  times  daily.


111G  Pharmacy.

Linimentum  Olei  Compositum.  Compound  Liniment  of  Oils.  Con-
centrated Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oils  of  Origanum,  Hemlock,  and  Cajeput,  and
Camphor,  each, /oar  ounces,  by  weight ;  Capsicum  two  ounces.  Mix  the
Oils  and  dissolve  the  Camphor  in  the  mixture ;  then  add  the  Capsicum,
and  let  it  macerate  for  fourteen  days,  frequently  agitating. Then  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  powerful  counter-irritant,  and  may  be
employed  with  advantage  in  indolent  tumors,  indurated  mammae,  rheu-
matic and  other  pains,  and  to  the  spine,  in  epilepsy,  nervous  debility,
etc. — J.  K.

Linimentum Opii. Liniment  of  Opium. Anodyne  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Castile  Soap  six  ounces;  Opium  an  ounce  and  a
half;  Camphor  three  ounces;  Oil  of  Rosemary  six  fluidrachms  ;  Rectified
Spirit  two  pints.  Macerate  the  Soap  and  Opium  in  the  Spirit  for  three
days  ;  filter,  add  the  Oil  and  Camphor,  and  agitate  briskly.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  anodyne  and  mild  rubefacient  appli-
cation in  sprains,  bruises,  rheumatic,  and  gouty  pains.

Linimentum  Saponis  Camphoratum.  Camphorated  Soap  Liniment.
Opodeldoc.

Preparation. — Take  of  Common  White  Soap  two  ounces;  Camphor  one
ounce;  Oil  of  Rosemary  three  drachms;  Oil  of  Origanum  two  drachms ;
Aqua  Ammonia  F  F  F,  one  ounce  ;  Alcohol  one  pint  and  a  half.  Digest
the  Soap  with  the  Alcohol,  by  means  of  a  sand-bath,  till  it  is  dissolved;
then  add  the  Camphor,  Oils,  and  Ammonia,  and  when  they  are  dissolved,
pour  the  liquor  into  broad-mouthed  bottles.  This  liniment  has,  when
cold,  the  consistence  of  a  soft  ointment.

History. — This  Liniment  is  prepared  with  White  Soap,  which  is  made
with  animal  fat,  while  Castile  Soap  is  made  with  Olive  Oil,  in  conse-
quence of  which,  when  the  Alcoholic  solution  cools,  the  liniment  assumes
an  appearance  of  solidity.  Under  the  name  of  Opodeldoc  it  is  placed
into  wide-mouthed  glass  vials,  holding  about  four  ounces  each,  and  is
extensively  employed  throughout  the  country.  It  forms  a  soft,  trans-
lucent, uniform,  yellowish-white  mass,  which  melts  at  the  temperature
of  the  body.  The  formula  above  given,  I  consider  to  be  much  preferable
to  the  one  ordinarily  followed  in  manufacturing  the  article.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Camphorated  Soap  Liniment  is  an  excellent
anodyne  embrocation  in  sprains,  bruises,  rheumatic  and  other  pains.

Linimentum  Stillingije  Compositum.  Compound  Liniment  of  Slil-
lingia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Stillingia  one  fluidounce ;  Oil  of  Cajeput
half  a  fuidounce  ;  Oil  of  Lobelia  two  fluidrachms  ;  Alcohol  twofuidounces.
Mix  together. — R.  S.  JV.


LlNIMENTA.  1117

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  peculiar  kind  of  Liniment,  pos-
sessing stimulant  and  relaxant  properties.  It  is  used  in  chronic  asthma,
croup,  epilepsy,  chorea,  etc.  In  asthma  and  croup,  the  throat,  chest
and  neck  is  to  be  bathed  with  it,  three  or  four  times  a  day.  In  chorea,
epilepsy,  and  spasmodic  diseases,  the  whole  vertebral  column  is  to  be
bathed  with  it.  In  rheumatism,  sprains,  and  painful  affections,  the
diseased  parts  are  to  be  bathed  with  it.  In  asthma  its  action  is  very
prompt  and  effectual,  relieving  and  ultimately  curing  the  most  obstinate
cases.  In  the  majority  of  instances,  when  applied  to  the  chest,  neck,
etc.,  the  patient  experiences  a  peculiar  taste  in  the  mouth,  somewhat
resembling  that  of  the  Lobelia  and  Stillingia  combined.  It  is  often  used
of  less  strength,  as  —  Take  of  Oil  of  Stillingia  half  a  fluidounce ;  Oil  of
Cajeput  half  a  fluidounce  ;  Oil  of  Lobelia  one  fluidrachm  ;  Alcohol  three
fluidounces.  Mix.  It  is  an  agent  peculiar  to  Eclectic  practice,  and  is
very  active  and  efficacious.

Limimentum  Succini  Compositum.  Compound  Liniment  of  Oil  of
Amber.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Stillingia,  Rectified  Oil  of  Amber,  each,
one  fluidounce ;  Oil  of  Lobelia  three  fluidrachms ;  Olive  Oil  two  fluid-
ounces. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — I  have  found  this  preparation  very  efficient  in
chronic  asthma,  croup,  pertussis,  chorea,  epilepsy,  rheumatism,  sciatica,
and  various  other  spasmodic  and  painful  affections  ;  in  many  instances
being  much  superior  to  the  Compound  Liniment  of  Stillingia.  Its  man-
ner of  application  is  the  same  as  recommended  for  the  preceding  Lini-
ment. In  very  severe  cases,  it  may  be  applied  every  hour,  or  half  hour,
and  continued  until  vomiting  ensues.  It  acts  as  a  stimulant,  relaxant,
and  antispasmodic.  In  many  of  the  above  diseases  it  will  effect  a  cure
without  the  exhibition  of  any  internal  medicine ;  and  is  especially  useful
among  children  to  whom  it  is  difficult  to  administer  remedies  by  mouth,
or  in  cases  where  the  stomach  rejects  all  medicines.  Care  must  be  taken
not  to  use  too  much  of  this  liniment  at  any  one  application. — J.  K.

Linimentum  Terebinthin^e  Compositum.  Compound  Liniment  of
Turpentine. White  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rose  Water  two  and  a  half  fluidounces ;  Yelk
of  Egg  one;  Oil  of  Turpentine  three  fluidounces ;  Oil  of  Lemon  half  a
fluidrachm ;  Pyroligneous  Acid,  (or  in  its  absence,  Acetic  Acid)  one
fluidounce.  To  the  Yelk  slowly  add  the  Rose  Water,  and  rub  together
in  a  mortar  ;  then  add  the  Turpentine  and  Oil  of  Lemon.  Pour  the
mixture  into  a  pint  bottle,  and  agitate  to  mix  thoroughly  ;  then  add  the
Acid,  and  agitate  quickly  and  briskly. It  must  be  kept  well  corked.

Properties  and  Uses. — Used  in  asthma  and  inflammation  of  the  lungs,
rubbin"-  it  on  the  throat  and  chest  with  a  sponge  or  cloth,  from  the  epi-
glottic region  to  the  epigastric ;  also  useful  wherever  a  counter-irritant
is  required.


1118  Pharmacy.

LIQUORES.
Liquors,  or  Solutions.

Liquor  Ferri  Iodidi. Solution  of  Iodide  of  Iron.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Iodine  two  ounces  ;  Iron  Filings  an  ounce;
Powdered  Sugar  twelve  ounces ;  Distilled  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.
Mix  the  Iodine  with  five  fluidounces  of  Distilled  Water,  in  a  porcelain
or  glass  vessel,  and  gradually  add  the  Iron  Filings,  stirring  constantly.
Heat  the  mixture  gently  until  all  the  Iodine  is  dissolved,  or  until  the
liquid  acquires  a  light-greenish  tint.  Then  filter  the  solution  into  a  glass
bottle,  containing  the  Sugar,  and,  after  it  has  passed,  pour  Distilled
Water  gradually  upon  the  filter,  until  the  filtered  liquor,  including  the
Sugar,  measures  twenty  fluidounces.  Lastly,  shake  the  bottle  until  the
Sugar  is  dissolved,  and  keep  it  closely  stopped. —  U.  S.

History. — By  this  process,  the  Solution  of  Iodide  of  Iron,  is  preserved
from  change  by  the  addition  of  sugar.  The  iodine  used  should  be  dry,
otherwise,  less  of  the  iodide  will  be  formed,  and  the  solution  will  be
weaker.  An  excess  of  iron  is  employed,  in  order  to  prevent  the  absorp-
tion of  oxygen  while  filtering,  from  producing  any  change,  previous  to
the  contact  of  the  liquor  with  the  sugar.  When  all  the  iodine  is  con-
verted into  iodide  of  iron,  the  solution  will  contain  seven  grains  and  a
half  of  the  dry  iodide  to  every  fluidrachm.

In  forming  the  solution,  the  iron  is  rapidly  oxidated  at  the  expense  of
the  water,  the  hydrogen  of  which  unites  with  the  iodine  to  form  hydrio-
dicacid.  This  unites  with  the  iron  forming  a  hydriodate  of  protoxide  of
iron,  or,  according  to  some  chemists,  a  solution  of  protiodide  of  iron.
This  solution,  however,  as  with  all  solutions  in  which  iron  is  united  with
one  equivalent  of  oxygen  or  chlorine,  is  exceedingly  subject  to  decom-
position by  exposure  to  air  and  light,  in  which  the  oxide  of  iron  passes
into  a  sesquioxide,  forming  a  solution  of  the  hydriodate  of  sesquioxide
of  iron.  To  obviate  this  tendency  to  sesquioxidation,  M.  Frederking  of
Riga,  and  Professor  Procter  of  Philadelphia,  proposed  the  addition  of
saccharine  matter,  which  they  found  to  exert  a  protective  action,  and
which  fact  has  since  been  amply  confirmed  by  many  eminent  chemists.
Hence,  the  sugar  is  added  to  protect  the  solution  of  iodide  of  protoxide
of  iron  from  becoming  converted  into  one  of  the  sesquioxide.

Solution  of  Iodide  of  Iron  is  of  a  transparent,  pale-green  color,  nearly,
if  not  quite,  destitute  of  any  sediment.  If  the  addition  of  starch
changes  it  to  a  blue  color,  it  is  not  perfect,  but  holds  free  iodine.  Sul-
phuric acid  added  to  it  changes  it  to  a  brown  color,  with  evolution  of
violent  vapors  on  being  heated.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  medical  properties  are  the  same  as  men-
tioned under  the  head  of  Iodide  of  Iron;  the  dose  is  from  twenty  to
forty  drops,  three  times  a  day. It  should  be  well  diluted  with  water,


LlQUORES.  1119

and  the  mouth  should  he  carefully  washed  after  each  dose,  in  order  to
protect  the  teeth.

Liquor  Ferri  Nitratis.  Solution  of  Nitrate  of  Iron.  Solution  of
Pernitrate  of  Iron. Solution  of  Ternitrate  of  Sesquioxide  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Iron  Wire,  cut  in  pieces,  an  ounce ;  Nitric
Acid,  (sp.  gr.  1.42)  three  fluidounces  ;  Distilled  Water  a  sufficient  quan-
tity. Mix  the  Acid  with  a  pint  of  Distilled  Water,  add  the  Iron,  and
agitate  occasionally  until  gas  ceases  to  be  disengaged  ;  then  filter  the
solution,  and  add  to  it  sufficient  Distilled  Water  to  make  it  measure  thirty
fluidounces. —  U.  S.

History. — This  preparation  was  introduced  to  the  profession  by  Mr.
William  Kerr,  of  Scotland,  in  1832.  It  is  a  very  astringent  liquid,  of  a
transparent  red  color,  and  is  apt  to  become  turbid  on  standing,  and  to
deposit  sesquioxide.  The  tendency  to  this  change  was  obviated  by  Mr.
Kerr,  by  adding  a  small  portion  of  muriatic  acid  to  it.  It  is  also  pro-
posed to  add  sugar  to  the  solution  for  the  same  purpose.  The  salt,  Ter-
nitrate of  Sesquioxide  of  Iron,  is  in  crystals  having  the  form  of  oblique
rhombic  prisms,  colorless,  or  of  a  delicate  lavender  color,  somewhat  deli-
quescent, soluble  in  water,  not  fully  soluble  in  nitric  acid,  and  consists
of  three  equivalents  of  nitric  acid  162.76,  one  of  sesquioxide  of  iron
80.03,  and  one  of  water  9=251.79.

On  account  of  the  great  liability  to  change  in  this  preparation,  various
suggestions  have  been  made  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  a  permanent
solution  ;  among  them  is  the  following,  offered,  by  W.  Procter,  Jr.,  of
Philadelphia  :  Take  of  Iron  Wire  (card-teeth)  cut  in  pieces,  an  ounce;
Nitric  Acid,  (sp.  gr.  1 .42)  three  fluidounces  ;  Water  thirteen  fluidounces ;
Sugar,  in  powder,  two  pounds.  Put  the  Iron  in  a  thin  wide-mouthed
bottle,  which  should  be  kept  cool  by  standing  in  cold-water,  and  pour
upon  it  three  fluidounces  of  Water.  Then  mix  the  Acid  with  ten  fluid-
ounces  of  Water,  and  add  the  mixture  in  portions  of  half  a  fluidounce
to  the  Iron,  agitating  frequently  until  the  Acid  is  saturated,  using  litmus
paper  to  determine  the  saturation.  When  all  the  Acid  has  been  com-
bined, filter  the  solution  into  a  bottle  containing  the  Sugar  and  marked
to  contain  thirty  fluidounces.  If  the  whole  does  not  measure  that  bulk,
pour  Water  on  the  filter  until  it  does.  When  all  the  Sugar  is  dissolved,
strain,  if  necessary,  and  introduce  the  syrup  into  suitable  vials  and  seal
them.  This  forms  a  syrup  of  the  Profonitratc  of  Iron.  Mr.  Joseph
Laidley,  of  Richmond,  Va.,  has  ascertained  the  formation  of  Oxalic
Acid  in  the  syrup  of  the  Sesquinitrate  of  Iron,  and  considers  it  an  un-
scientific and  ineligible  preparation  ;  for,  without  an  excess  of  Acid,  it  is
a  mixture  of  proto  and  pernitrate,  and  with  that  excess  the  Acid  gene-
rates Oxalic  Acid.  He  has  found  the  solution  of  the  protonitrate,  as
given  by  Prof.  Procter,  to  keep  perfectly  well,  even  without  the  addition
of  the  sugar,  which,  as  the  iron  salt  is  already  per  oxidized,  he  considers


1120  Pharmacy.

of  no  use  for  preventing  what  would  not  occur,  viz  :  the  further  absorp-
tion of  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere.

Properties  and  Uses. — Solution  of  Nitrate  of  Iron  is  tonic  and  astrin-
gent, and  has  been  used  successfully  in  chronic  mucous  diarrhea  not
attended  with  ulceration  of  the  intestines,  and  in  weak,  nervous  constitu-
tions, where  there  are  no  existing  indications  of  inflammation.  It  has
been  effectually  employed  in  menorrhagia ;  and  in  leucorrhea  it  may  be
administered  both  internally  and  by  injection.  In  the  colliquative  diar-
rhea of  tubercular  phthisis  it  has  afforded  much  benefit,  as  well  as  in
chronic  diarrhea  and  cholera  infantum  of  anemic  or  scrofulous  patients.
The  dose  is  seven  or  eight  drops,  sufficiently  diluted,  which  may  be
repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  gradually  increased  to  twenty  or
twenty-five  drops.  When  used  as  an  injection  into  the  vagina,  it  should
be  diluted  sufficiently  to  occasion  only  a  slight  heat  and  smarting.

W.  W.  D.  Livermore  offers  the  following  formula  for  the  preparation
of  a  permanent  solution  of  this  ferruginous  salt;  it  furnishes  nearly  the
same  result  as  obtained  by  Procter's  method  given  above  :  Take  of  Sul-
phate of  Iron  eight  ounces  ;  Carbonate  of  Soda  ten  ounces;  White  Sugar
twenty  ounces;  Nitric  Acid,  (sp.  gr.  1.42)  five  fiuidounces  and  five
fiuidrachms  ;  Boiling  Water,  Simple  Syrup,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity*
Dissolve  the  Sulphate  of  Iron  and  Carbonate  of  Soda,  each,  in  two  pints
of  the  Water,  filter,  and  add  to  each  solution  two  ounces  of  Simple
Syrup.  Mix  the  solutions,  and  allow  the  precipitate  to  subside.  Pour
off  the  supernatant  liquid,  and  wash  the  precipitated  carbonate  carefully
with  Sweetened  Water,  until  the  washings  have  no  longer  a  saline  taste.
Collect  the  Precipitate  upon  a  fine  muslin  strainer,  and  with  gentle  pres-
sure express  as  much  of  the  Water  as  possible.  Transfer  to  a  porcelain
capsule,  and  add  gradually  the  Nitric  Acid,  previously  diluted  with  an
equal  measure  of  Water.  Mix  the  Sugar  with  the  solution,  and  dissolve
over  a  water-bath,  stirring  from  time  to  time  with  a  glass  rod.  When
done,  the  syrup  should  be  made  to  measure  thirty  fiuidounces,  by  the
addition  of  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Water.  Each  fluidrachm  of  this
syrup  contains  ten  grains  of  Dry  Nitrate  of  Iron,  and  the  dose  varies
from  twenty  to  forty  drops.

Liquor  Iodini  Compositus. Compound  Solution  of  Iodine.

Preparation. — Take  of  Iodine  six  drachms  ;  Iodide  of  Potassium  an
ounce  and  a  half;  Distilled  Water  a  pint.  Dissolve  the  Iodine  and  the
Iodide  of  Potassium  in  the  Water. —  U.  S.

History. — Iodine  is  but  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  but  dissolves  freely
in  a  solution  of  Iodide  of  Potassium.  In  preparing  this  solution  two
parts  of  the  iodide  are  generally  added  with  one  of  iodine,  forming  a
concentrated  solution  of  iodine,  which  is  the  active  medicinal  agent  in
the  solution.  The  solution  loses  its  strength  by  exposure  to  the  air,  in
consequence  of  the  evaporation  of  the  iodine  ;  light  also  appears  to  exert


LlQUORES.  1121

a  deleterious  influence  upon  it.  It  should,  therefore,  be  kept  in  well
stopped  bottles,  and  in  a  dark  place.

Properties  and  Uses. — Compound  Solution  of  Iodine  possesses  all  the
virtues  of  iodine,  and  may  be  used  advantageously  in  scrofulous,  syph-
ilitic, and  all  tuberculous  diseases,  or  wherever  iodine  is  indicated.  The
dose  is  six  drops,  in  one  or  two  tablespoonfuls  of  sweetened  water,
repeated  three  times  a  day,  and  gradually  increased  to  twenty  or  thirty
drops. Twelve  drops  is  equal  to  about  half  a  grain  of  iodine.

Liquor  Magnesia  Citratis. Solution  of  Citrate  of  Magnesia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Magnesia  five  drachms  ;  Citric
Acid  seven  drachms  and  a  half ;  Syrup  of  Citric  Acid  two  fluidounces ;
Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Dissolve  the  Citric  Acid  in  four  fluidounces
of  Water,  and  add  to  the  solution  four  drachms  of  the  Carbonate  of
Magnesia,  previously  rubbed  with  three  fluidounces  of  Water.  When
the  reaction  has  ceased,  filter  the  solution  into  a  strong  glass  bottle,  of
the  capacity  of  twelve  fluidounces,  into  which  the  Syrup  of  Citric  Acid
has  been  previously  introduced.  Rub  the  remaining  Carbonate  of  Mag-
nesia with  two  fluidounces  of  Water,  and  pour  the  mixture  into  the  bottle,
which  is  then  to  be  tightly  corked,  and  secured  with  twine.  Lastly,
shake  the  mixture  occasionally  until  it  becomes  transparent. —  U.  S.

History. — This  preparation  is  an  aqueous  solution  of  Citrate  of  Mag-
nesia ;  it  contains  Citric  Acid  in  excess  to  the  quantity  of  about  fourteen
and  a  half  grains,  with  Carbonic  Acid  and  syrup  to  render  it  more  pal-
atable. If  the  magnesia  be  good,  it  will  be  wholly  dissolved  by  the
citric  acid;  if  it  be  impure  there  will  be  more  or  less  of  a  sediment  in
the  solution.  When  the  first  four-fifths  of  the  magnesia  are  dissolved
in  the  acid,  an  acid  citrate  of  magnesia  is  formed  ;  this  being  filtered
upon  the  syrup  of  citric  acid,  has  its  acidity  increased.  The  addition  of
the  remainder  of  the  magnesia  gives  rise  to  a  further  quantity  of  citrate
with  disengagement  of  carbonic  acid,  which  is  retained  within  the  bottle
by  immediately  corking  it.

It  forms  a  transparent  solution,  having  an  agreeable,  lemonade-like
taste,  and  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  citric  acid  and  three  of  magnesia.
It  is  not  permanent  in  its  character,  but  forms  a  deposit  on  keeping,  and
is  intended  as  an  extemporaneous  solution,  to  be  prepared  only  as
required.

Properties  and  Uses. — Solution  of  Citrate  of  Magnesia,  is  a  pleasant,
cooling  purgative,  acting  mildly  upon  the  bowels.  The  dose  as  a
cathartic  is  about  twelve  fluidounces  ;  as  a  laxative,  half  that  quantity.

Liquor  Potasses. Solution  of  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate of  Potassa  a  pound;  Lime  half  a

pound ;  Boiling Distilled  Water  a  gallon. Dissolve  the Carbonate  of

Potassa  in  half  a  gallon  of  the  Water. Pour  a  little  of  the  Water  on

the  Lime,  and  when  it  is  slaked  add  the  remainder. Mix  the  hot  liquors,

71


1122  Pharmacy.

and  boil  for  ten  minutes,  stirring  constantly  ;  then  set  the  mixture  aside,
in  a  covered  vessel,  until  it  becomes  clear.  Lastly,  pour  off  the  super-
natant liquor  and  keep  it  in  well  stopped  bottles  of  green  glass.  The
specific  gravity  of  this  solution  is  1.056. —  U.  S.

History. — In  this  process,  the  potassa  is  obtained  in  a  caustic  slate  by
means  of  the  hydrate  of  lime,  the  lime  of  which  unites  with  the  carbo-
nic acid  of  the  carbonate  of  potassa,  and  forms  a  precipitate  of  carbonate
of  lime ;  while  its  water  combines  with  the  potassa  forming  a  solution
of  potassa.  The  solution  should  not  be  strained,  on  account  of  the
tendency  to  absorb  carbonic  acid  by  prolonged  exposure  to  the  air,  and
which,  of  course,  would  deteriorate  its  strength  and  value.  The  reason
for  directing  it  to  be  kept  in  green  glass  bottles,  is,  that  the  solution
exerts  an  action  on  white  flint-glass.

Solution  of  Potassa  is  an  alkaline,  inodorous,  transparent,  colorless
liquid,  having  an  acrid,  caustic  taste.  It  dissolves  animal  and  vegetable
substances,  as  gum,  resins,  and  extractive  matter,  and  forms  soaps  with
fats  and  oils.  When  rubbed  between  the  fingers  it  produces  a  soapy
feeling,  owing  to  the  cuticle  being  partially  acted  upon  by  it.  When
prepared  for  medical  purposes  it  is  commonly  more  or  less  impure,  con-
taining either  some  free  lime,  undecomposed  carbonate,  or  other  foreign
matters  ;  for  chemical  purposes,  it  requires  to  be  pure.  When  exposed
to  the  air  it  absorbs  carbonic  acid,  for  which  it  has  a  strong  affinity,  and
should  therefore  always  be  preserved  in  thoroughly-stopped  bottles.
It  is  incompatible  with  all  salts  of  ammonia,  calomel,  corrosive  sublimate,
acids,  acidulous  salts,  and  acidulous  solutions  of  metallic  and  earthy
preparations.

Properties  and  Uses. — Solution  of  Potassa  is  employed  in  medicine  as
an  antacid,  antilithic,  and  diuretic.  Although  it  can  exert  no  solvent
influence  upon  calculi  once  formed  in  the  bladder,  yet  it  may  overcome
the  tendency  to  an  excess  of  uric  acid  or  the  insoluble  urates,  which  so
often  give  rise  to  gravel  and  stone.  For  this  purpose,  however,  it  is
inferior  to  solutions  of  the  carbonated  alkalies,  which  may  be  adminis-
tered for  a  longer  time  without  occasioning  any  injurious  influences.
The  long-continued  use  of  solution  of  potassa  debilitates  the  stomach,
and  otherwise  impairs  the  system.  As  an  antacid,  the  solutions  of  the
carbonates  are  preferable.  In  scalding  of  the  urethra  accompanying
gonorrhea,  combined  with  ten  or  twelve  drops  of  laudanum,  liquor
potassa  will  be  found  to  afford  prompt  relief.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to
thirty  minims,  repeated  two  or  three  times  a  day;  and  it  may  be  admin-
istered in  sweetened  water,  or  in  some  mucilaginous  liquid.  When
taken  in  quantities  to  injure  the  stomach,  or  in  an  undiluted  stat  ,  oils,
vinegar,  and  lemon-juice,  which  neutralize  the  alkali,  are  the  proper
antidotes.

Off.  Prep. — Potassa  cum  Calce.


LlQUORES.  1123

Liquor  Potass^  Citratis.  Solution  of  Citrate  of  Potassa.  Neutral
Mixture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Citric  Acid  half  an  ounce;  Oil  of  Lemons  two
minims;  Water  half  a  pint;  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  a  sufficient  quantity.
Rub  tbe  Citric  Acid  with  the  Oil  of  Lemons,  and  afterward  with  the
Water  till  it  is  dissolved ;  then  add  the  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  gradually
till  the  Acid  is  perfectly  saturated ;  lastly,  filter :  or,  Take  of  Fresh
Lemon-juice  half  a  pint ;  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  a  sufficient  quantity.
Add  the  Bicarbonate  gradually  to  the  Lemon-juice  till  it  is  perfectly
saturated  ;  then  filter. —  U.  S.

History. — In  these  formulae  the  citric  acid  combines  with  the  potassa
of  the  bicarbonate,  and  carbonic  acid  is  set  free,  forming  a  solution  of
Citrate  of  Potassa,  containing  free  carbonic  acid.  The  citric  acid  and
oil  of  lemon,  in  the  first  process,  are  intended  to  supply  the  absence  of
fresh  lemon-juice.  When  the  solution  is  made  with  citric  acid  it  is
colorless,  and  when  with  lemon-juice,  it  is  greenish.  Filtering  is  directed
for  the  purpose  of  removing  any  foreign  or  undissolved  substances.
The  point  of  saturation  may  be  known  by  the  liquid  effecting  no  change
in  blue  and  red  litmus  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  solution  is  a  refrigerant  diaphoretic,  and
may  be  used  in  all  fevers  attended  with  a  dry,  hot  skin ;  it  is  also  useful
in  allaying  irritability  of  the  stomach.  It  forms  a  very  grateful  draught
to  the  patient.  Spirits  of  Nitre,  Solution  of  Sulphate  of  Morphia,  Tinc-
ture of  Aconitum  or  Digitalis,  are  frequently  added  to  assist  in  fulfilling
required  indications.  The  dose  is  half  a  fluidounce,  or  an  ordinary
tablespoonful,  diluted  with  water,  and  repeated  every  one,  two,  or  three
hours  according  to  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms.  It  may  be  sweetened
with  sugar  if  desired.

Liquor  Sod^e  Chlorinate.  Solution  of  Chlorinated  Soda.  Lobar'
raque's  Disinfecting  Liquid.

Preparation. — Take  of  Chlorinated  Lime  (chloride  of  lime)  a  pound;
Carbonate  of  Soda  two  pounds ;  Water  a  gallon  and  a  half .  Dissolve
the  Carbonate  of  Soda  in  three  pints  of  the  Water,  with  the  aid  of  heat.
To  the  remainder  of  the  Water  add,  by  small  portions  at  a  time,  the
Chlorinated  Lime  previously  well  triturated ;  stirring  the  mixture  after
each  addition.  Set  the  mixture  by  for  several  hours  that  the  dregs  may
subside ;  then  decant  the  clear  liquid,  and  mix  it  with  the  solution  of
Carbonate  of  Soda.  Lastly,  decant  the  clear  liquor  from  the  precipi-
tated Carbonate  of  Lime,  pass  it  through  a  linen  cloth,  and  keep  it  in
bottles  secluded  from  the  light. —  U.  S.

History.  —  This  preparation  was  originally  introduced  by  a  Parisian
apothecary,  named  Labarraque,  as  a  disinfecting  agent.  By  the  above
process,  a  solution  of  carbonate  of  soda  is  decomposed  by  one  of  chlori-
nated lime; the  carbonic  acid  of  the  soda  unites  with  the  lime  and


1124  Pharmacy.

precipitates  as  carbonate  of  lime,  while  the  chlorine  of  the  chlorinated
lime  combines  with  the  soda,  forming  a  chlorinated  soda  in  solution ;  the
solution  is  rendered  more  permanent  by  the  excess  of  carbonate  of  soda,
which  is  present,  when  prepared  as  above.  Further  analyses  are
required  to  determine  the  exact  constitution  of  this  solution.

Properties  and  Uses. — Solution  of  Chlorinated  Soda  is  a  powerful  dis-
infectant, antiseptic,  stimulant,  and  resolvent.  Its  disinfectant  property
is  owing  to  its  absorption  of  carbonic  acid,  and  gradual  evolution  of
chlorine,  Avhen  exposed  to  the  air;  and  for  which  purpose  it  may  be
used  in  the  rooms  of  patients  with  infectious  diseases,  by  sprinkling  some
of  it  on  the  bed,  floor,  or  other  parts  of  the  room.

As  an  internal  agent  it  is  used  in  putrid  or  malignant  diseases,  as
scarlatina,  typhus,  small -pox,  etc.,  especially  when  attended  with  great
debility,  offensive  evacuations,  and  a  dry,  brown-furred  tongue ;  in  which
it  promotes  the  secretions  and  evacuations,  increasing  the  urine,  and  pro-
ducing gentle  diaphoresis,  with  a  beneficial  change  in  the  condition  of
the  tongue.  It  has  likewise  been  efficaciously  employed  in  dysentery,
and  diarrhea,  attended  with  very  offensive  evacuations,  in  dyspepsia
accompanied  with  eructations  of  a  fetid  nature,  also  in  glandular  enlarge-
ments, and  in  mucous  discharges  of  a  chronic  character.  In  asphyxia
caused  by  sulphureted  hydrogen,  it  is  an  efficient  antidote.  It  has  also
been  highly  recommended  in  various  other  diseases,  as  scrofula,  chronic
diseases  of  the  skin,  secondary  syphilis,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,
and  bilious  affections.  From  thirty  drops  to  half  a  fluidrachm,  in  a  cup-
ful of  water,  is  the  dose,  and  which  may  be  repeated  every  two  or  three
hours.  As  an  external  remedy,  it  forms  a  valuable  application  to  can-
cerous, scrofulous,  syphilitic,  and  gangrenous  ulcers,  and  other  affections
attendee!  with  fetor,  as  carbuncle,  ozcena,  ulceration  of  the  gums,  putrid
sore-mouth  and  throat,  mercurial  sore-mouth,  fetid  discharges  from  the
vagina,  uterus,  and  bladder;  and  has  been  successfully  applied  to  burns,
and  cutaneous  diseases,  as  tinea  capitis,  scabies,  herpes,  psoriasis,  etc.
Applied  frequently  to  sore  nipples,  it  is  a  superior  remedy.  When  used
externally,  it  may  be  diluted  with  from  five  to  thirty  parts  of  water,
according  to  circumstances.

LOTIONES.
Lotions,  or  Washes.

These  comprise  all  compounds  used  as  external  washes  and  collyria,
in  which  vegetable  or  mineral  substances  are  dissolved  in  water  or
spirits,  but  which  do  not  strictly  class  with  infusions,  liniments,  mix-
tures, or  tinctures.

Lotio  Alkalina. Alkaline  Wash.

Preparation.— Take  of  Carbonate  of  Soda  (Sal  Soda)  two  drachms;
Warm  Rain- Water  one  quart. Dissolve  :  or,

Make  a  weak  Ley  by  adding  Hard  Wood  Ashes  to  Hot  Water.


Lotiones.  1125

Properties  and  Uses. — This  wash  is  extensively  and  efficaciously  em-
ployed by  Eclectics,  as  an  application  to  the  surface  of  the  body  and
limbs  in  all  febrile  and  inflammatory  diseases,  and  in  chronic  affections.
In  the  former  cases  it  is  applied  several  times  a  day,  especially  when
the  acute  symptoms  run  high;  in  the  latter  affections  it  is  commonly
used  once  or  twice  a  week.  The  surface  should  always  be  well  rubbed
and  dried  immediately  after  each  application.  Frequently,  when  exter-
nal stimulus  is  also  required,  the  above  proportion  of  water  is  lessened
one-fourth  or  one-half,  and  the  balance  of  the  quantity  made  up  by  the
addition  of  whisky  or  other  spirit.

Lotio  ^Etheris  Composita.  Compound  Ethereal  Lotion.  Evaporating
Lotion.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Sulphuric  Ether,  Rectified  Alcohol,  Solution
of  Acetate  of  Ammonia,  each,  one  ounce  and  a  half;  Rose-Water  three
ounces  and  a  half. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  lotion  may  be  used  to  produce  a  refrige-
rant or  stimulant  influence  according  to  its  mode  of  employment.
Applied  to  a  surface  and  allowed  to  evaporate  by  free  exposure,  it  acts
as  a  refrigerant ;  but  if  the  evaporation  is  prevented  by  covering  the  part
to  which  it  is  applied  with  the  hand  or  a  cloth,  it  acts  as  a  stimulant.
The  Solution  of  Acetate  of  Ammonia,  largely  diluted,  (without  the  addi-
tion of  ether  or  alcohol),  is  a  superior  cooling  lotion  in  all  cases  of  fever
where  there  is  a  hot  and  dry  state  of  the  surface,  often  of  itself  inducing
diaphoresis.

Lotio  Boracis. Borax  Lotion. Cooling  Wash.

Prejiaration. — Take  of  Borax,  in  powder,  one  ounce  ;  Rain  Water  one
quart.  Dissolve.  In  this  preparation,  soft  River  Water  may  be  substi-
tuted for  Rain  Water,  when  this  latter  cannot  be  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  cooling  application,  and  mav  be
used  in  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  sore  and  inflamed  nipples,  aphthous
ulcerations  of  the  mouth  and  fauces,  and  other  irritated  or  inflamed  mu-
cous surfaces.

Lotio  Boracis  cum  Morphine. Borax  Lotion  with  Morphia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Borax,  in  powder,  half  an  ounce ;  Sulphate  of
Morphia  six  grains;  Decoction  of  Golden  Seal  eight  fiuidounces.  Dissolve
the  Borax  and  Morphia  in  the  Decoction.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  cooling  and  mild  anodyne  wash,
and  may  be  used  in  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  sore  and  inflamed  nipples,
pruritus  vulva,  aphthous  ulcerations  of  the  mouth  and  fauces,  and  other
irritated  or  inflamed  mucous  surfaces.

Lotio  Glycerini. Glycerin  Lotion.

Preparation. — Take  of  Glycerin  half  an  ounce  ;  Distilled  Water  half
a  pint.  Mix.


1126  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  lotion  Has  been  recommended  in  eczema,
lichen,  and  other  cutaneous  diseases ;  also  as  an  application  to  the
meatus  externus  in  cases  of  deafness  owing  to  a  want  of  secretion  of
cerumen.

Lotio  Hydrastis  Composita. Compound  Lotion  of  Golden  Seal.

Preparation. — Take  of  Strong  Decoctions  of  Green  Tea,  and  Golden
Seal,  each  one  pint;  Sulphate  of  Zinc,  Gunpowder,  dried  Sulphate  of
Iron,  of  each  two  drachms.  Mix  the  decoctions,  then  add  the  remainder
of  the  articles,  and  agitate  briskly.  After  solution  and  decomposition
have  ceased,  and  the  precipitate  has  subsided,  pour  off  the  supernatant
liquid.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  lotion  is  principally  employed  as  a  colly-
rium  in  chronic  ophthalmic  diseases,  but  it  may  be  advantageously
employed  in  all  chronic  affections  of  mucous  surfaces,  as  an  external
application.  The  affected  parts  are  to  be  bathed  with  it  several  times  a
day.

Lotio  Hydrastis  et  Aconiti. Lotion  of  Golden  Seal  and  Aconite.

Preparation. — Take  of  Golden  Seal,  in  powder,  four  drachms  ;  Boiling
Water  four  fuidounces  ;  Tincture  of  Aconite  one  fuidrachm.  Add  the
Golden  Seal  to  the  Water,  and  digest  for  three  hours  by  a  gentle  heat;
then  filter  and  evaporate  to  two  fluid  ounces,  to  which  add  the  Tincture
of  Aconite.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  forms  a  superior  application  to  the  eye
in  many  cases  of  disease  of  that  organ  ;  it  may  be  applied  by  means  of
a  camel's  hair  pencil,  or  by  dropping  a  minim  or  two  on  the  eyeball.  I
have  likewise  found  immense  benefit  in  these  cases,  by  substituting  for
the  Tincture  of  Aconite,  a  fiuidrachm  or  two  of  the  Saturated  Tincture
of  Black  Cohosh.  Some  physicians  employ  Hydrastin  in  preparing  the
above  formula,  but  as  this  is  insoluble  in  water,  it  can  effect  but  little
influence.  This  preparation  will  also  be  found  of  service  in  chronic
mucous  difficulties,  as  vaginal  leucorrhea,  etc.,  used  as  a  wash  or  injec-
tion.— J.  K.

Lotio  Juglandis. Walnut  Lotion.

Preparation. — Take  of  Extract  of  green  Walnut  Shells  six  grains;
Distilled  Water  fifty  grains. Mix  and  dissolve.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  recommended  as  an  efficacious  agent  in
enlargement  of  the  tonsils,  and  is  stated  to  be  very  prompt  in  its  effects.
It  is  applied  to  the  parts  by  means  of  a  camel's  hair  pencil.

Lotio  Lobelia  Composita.  Compound  Lobelia  Lotion.  Herpetic
Wash.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bayberry  Bark,  Lobelia  Leaves  and  Seed,  Yel-
low Dock  Root,  each,  in  powder,  two  drachms;  Vinegar  one  pint.  Mix
all  together,  and  allow  them  to  macerate  for  seven  days,  and  filter;  or
make  the  lotion  by  displacement.


LOTIONES.  11 27

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  forms  an  excellent  local  appli-
cation to  several  species  of  cutaneous  disease,  also  to  erysipelas  and
erysipelatous  inflammations.  It  is  frequently  prepared  with  Spirits
instead  of  Vinegar,  especially  where  more  active  stimulation  is  desired.
In  erysipelas,  half  a  pint  of  a  saturated  solution  of  Muriate  of  Ammonia,
may  be  added  to  the  above  quantity,  with  advantage.

Lotio  Myrrh^e  Composita.  Compound  Myrrh  Lotion.  Stimulating
Eyewater.

Preparation. — Take  of  Myrrh,  in  powder,  one  ounce  ;  Sulphate  of  Zinc,
Acetate  of  Lead,  of  each  half  an  ounce;  Boiling  Water  two  quarts.  Add
the  Myrrh  and  the  Salts  to  the  Water,  and  allow  them  to  macerate  for
seven  days,  and  then  filter.  In  the  preparation  of  this  lotion,  a  decom-
position necessarily  ensues.

Properties  and  Uses. — Compound  Myrrh  Lotion  is  chiefly  employed  in
cases  of  chronic  ophthalmia;  it  will,  however,  be  found  useful  in  all
chronic  mucous  diseases.  It  is  usually  applied  three  or  four  times  a  day,
and  must  not  be  used  during  the  presence  of  inflammation.  When  too
severe  it  may  be  diluted  with  water.

Lotio  Refrigerans. Cooling  Lotion. Saline  Wash.

Preparation.— Take  of  fine  Salt  an  ounce;  Spirits,  Vinegar,  and  Rain
Water,  of  each',  half  a  pint.  Mix  the  fluids  together,  and  then  add  the
Salt.  In  the  absence  of  Rain  Water,  clear  river  water  may  be  substi-
tuted.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Lotion  is  extensively  employed  as  a  cooling
application,  in  cases  of  pain  or  determination  to  the  head,  during  fevers,
inflammation  of  the  brain,  dropsy,  etc.  It  is  used  cold  or  tepid,  accoz'd-
ing  to  the  benefit  received  from  its  application  at  these  temperatures.

Lotio  Sassafras. Sassafras  Lotion.

Preparation. — Take  of  Pith  of  Sassafras  one  ounce;  Rose  Water  a
sufficient  quantity. Mix,  let  them  stand  for  an  hour  or  two  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  extemporaneous  preparation,  and  is
principally  used  in  acute  ophthalmia.  A  similar  preparation  of  Marsh
Mallow  Root,  Elm  Bark,  or  Buckhorn  Brake,  will  be  found  equally
available.

Lotio  Sodii  Composita. Compound  Soda  Lotion.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rock  Salt  three  ounces  ;  Sulphate  of  Zinc  one
ounce;  Red  Oxide  of  Iron  (Sesquicarbonate)  eig/d  grains;  Rain  Water,
or  clear  River  Water  one  pint.  Add  the  articles  together,  and  form  a
solution;  and  when  the  precipitate  formed,  has  subsided,  pour  off  the
supernatant  liquid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Used  as  a  stimulating  collyrium  in  chronic  oph-
thalmic diseases.


1123  Pharmacy.

Lotio  Zinci  Composita. Compound  Lotion  of  Zinc.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Zinc,  Rock  Alum,  each,  one  scru-
ple ;  Distilled  Water  two  pints. Mix,  and  when  dissolved  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  lotion  is  used  as  a  stimulating  application
to  the  eye  in  cases  of  films,  specks,  opacities,  etc.;  to  abnormal  growths
on  mucous  surfaces ;  to  indolent  ulcers  with  fungous  growths  ;  and  to
gangrene.


MISTUJLE.
Mixtures.

By  mixtures  is  meant  all  those  preparations,  containing  Oleaginous,
Mucilaginous,  Albuminous,  or  Saccharine  Substances,  which  are  used
internally,  and  cannot  properly  be  classed  with  infusions,  decoctions,
syrups,  tinctures,  etc.  ;  also  compounds  in  which  Insoluble  Substances,
whether  liquid  or  solid,  are  suspended  in  aqueous  fluids  by  the  interven-
tion of  some  viscid  matter.

Mistura  Camphors  Composita. Compound  Mixture  of  Camphor.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Camphor  Water,  Peppermint  Water,  and
Spearmint  Water,  each,  one  fuidounce ;  Camphorated  Tincture  of
Opium  two  fiuidrachms. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses.  • —  This  is  a  very  efficacious  agent  in  allaying
nausea  and  vomiting.  It  was  extensively  and  successfully  employed  by
the  Eclectics  in  the  nausea  and  vomiting  attending  Asiatic  cholera.  It
possesses  the  virtues  of  the  several  articles  entering  into  its  composition,
without  the  stimulating  influence  of  the  alcohol,  which  enters  into  their
tinctures,  upon  already  partially  inflamed  mucous  surfaces.  The  dose
is  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  every  five  minutes,  if  the  patient
be  vomiting  ;  and  every  ten  minutes  if  he  be  only  nauseated.

Mistura  Cajuputi  Composita.  Compound  Cajeput  Mixture.  HuniCs
Drops.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Oils  of  Cajeput,  Cloves,  Peppermint,  and
Anise,  each,  one  fiuidounce  ;  Rectified  Alcohol  four  ounces.  Dissolve
the  Oils  in  the  Alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  valuable  stimulant  and  antispas-
modic preparation,  and  has  been  successfully  used  in  colic,  cramp  of  the
stomach  or  elsewhere,  flatulence,  pains  in  the  stomach  or  bowels,  painful
diarrhea,  cholera-morbus,  Asiatic  cholera,  and  in  all  cases  where  stimu-
lant and  antispasmodic  action  is  desired.  During  the  cholera  of  1849-
50-51,  it  was  extensively  used  by  the  Eclectics  for  the  purpose  of  over-
coming violent  spasmodic  action,  in  the  doses  of  one  or  two  fiuidrachms,
every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  ;  one  or  two  doses,  generally  succeeded  in
relieving  the  pains  and  spasms  when  all  other  means  had  failed. The


MlSTUR.E.  1129

ordinary  dose  is  from  ten  drops  to  half  a  fluidrachm.  It  should  be  given
in  simple  syrup,  mucilage  of  slippery  elm,  or  in  hot  brandy  and  water,
sweetened.  Care  should  be  taken  not  to  introduce  too  much  of  this  pre-
paration into  the  stomach  at  any  one  time,  as  a  large  proportion  of  it
would  produce  inflammation  of  the  stomach.  It  is  a  very  valuable  agent,
when  properly  used,  and  should  always  be  kept  by  every  physician  and
druggist.

Mistura Chenopodii Composita. Compound Wbrmseed Mixture.
Worm  Mixture.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Castor  Oil  one  fluidounce;  Wormseed  Oil,
Anise  Oil,  and  Tincture  of  Myrrh,  of  each,  one  fluidrachm. Mix.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  excellent  vermifuge,  and  may  be
used  in  doses  of  one  teaspoonful  for  an  adult,  to  be  repeated  three  or
four  times  a  day,  and  after  having  been  taken  for  three  successive  days,
to  be  followed  by  a  cathartic.  This  somewhat  resembles  "Fahnestock's
Vermifuge,"  which  is  said  to  be  composed  of,  Castor  Oil  one  fluidounce ;
Oil  of  Wormseed  one  fluidounce ;  Oil  of  Anise  half  a  fluidottnce  ;  Tinc-
ture of  Myrrh  half  a  fluidrachm  ;  Oil  of  Turpentine  ten  minims  ;  Croton
Oil  one  minim.  Mix.  The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful  for  an  adult,  every  two
hours,  to  be  continued  for  ten  or  twelve  hours.

Mistura  Copaib^e  Composita.  Compound  Copaiba  Mixture.  Diuretic
Drops.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Spirit  of  Nitric  Ether  and  Oil  of  Almonds,
each  two  fluidounces  ;  Copaiba,  and  Oil  of  Turpentine,  of  each,  one  fluid-
ounce  ;  Camphor,  in  powder,  one  scruple.  Mix  together  the  liquids,  then
add  the  Camphor,  and  agitate  briskly.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  diuretic  mixture,  which  has  been
successfully  and  extensively  used  in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  scalding  of  urine,
and  urinary  affections.  The  dose  is  one  fluidrachm,  three  times  a  day,
in  some  tea  or  mucilage.  It  should  be  well  agitated  previous  to  taking
it.  There  are  various  mixtures  of  Copaiba  in  use  for  the  cure  of  gonor-
rhea, and  as  several  of  them  have  been  found  efficacious,  I  give  the  for-
mula for  preparing  them  : —

1.  Take  of  Copaiba,  Spirit  of  Nitric  Ether,  Compound  Spirits  of
Lavender,  Tincture  of  Muriate  of  Iron,  of  each,  one  fluidounce.  Mix.
The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful  three  times  a  day.

2.  Take  of  Oil  of  Cubebs,  Oil  of  Anise,  Copaiba,  Tincture  of  Opium,
Tincture  of  Muriate  of  Iron,  of  each,  one  fluidounce.  Mix.  The  dose
is  a  teaspoonful  three  times  a  day.  The  two  preparations  above  are  very
disagreeable  to  the  taste,  but  very  efficacious  in  gonorrhea,  after  the
active  symptoms  have  subsided.  They  must  be  agitated  thoroughly,
previous  to  taking  each  dose,  and  in  order  to  protect  the  teeth  from  the
injurious  action  of  the  acid  in  the  Tincture  of  Muriate  of  Iron,  it  is


1130  Pharmacy.

recommended  to  rinse  the  mouth  immediately  after  taking  each  dose,
with  a  solution  of  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa.

3.  Take  of  Solidified  Copaiba  two  ounces  ;  White  Wax  one  ounce;  Oil
of  Cubebs,  Oil  of  Spearmint,  of  each,  one  fluidrachm ;  Nitre,  finely
pulverized,  two  drachms.  Melt  the  Wax,  add  the  Oils,  and  then  the
Copaiba  ;  stir  all  well  together,  and  finally,  add  the  Nitre.  This  forms
a  paste  much  used  for  the  cure  of  gonorrhea.  The  dose,  is  a  quantity
about  the  size  of  a  small  chestnut,  three  times  a  day.

4.  Take  of  Alum,  in  powder,  one  drachm;  Precipitated  Carbonate  of
Iron  half  an  ounce;  Pulverized  Cubebs  one  ounce;  Copaiba  a  sufficient
quantity  to  form  a  kind  of  paste.  The  dose  is  the  same  as  in  the  pre-
ceding preparation.

Mistura  Glycyrrhiz^e  Composita. Compound  Liquorice  Mixture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Extract  of  Liquorice,  in  powder,  Gum  Arabic,
in  powder,  Sugar,  each,  half  an  ounce ;  Camphorated  Tincture  of  Opium
two  fiuidounces;  Tincture  of  Bloodroot  a  fiuidounce  ;  Spirit  of  Nitric
Ether  half  a  fiuidounce  ;  Water  twelve  fiuidounces.  Rub  the  Liquorice,
Gum  Arabic  and  Sugar  with  the  Water  gradually  poured  upon  them ;
then  add  the  other  ingredients,  and  mix.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  excellent  cough  mixture,  and
may  be  used  in  catarrhal  affections,  after  the  subsidence  of  the  more
active  symptoms,  and  when  expectoration  is  present.  For  an  adult  the
dose  is  a  tablespoonful ;  for  a  child  two  or  three  years  old  a  teaspoonful.
It  should  be  well  agitated  previous  to  taking  it.

Mistura  Olei  Camphorata. Camphorated  Mixture  of  Oils.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Oils  of  Cloves,  Cajeput  and  Amber,  (rec-
tified), and  Camphor,  each,  half  an  ounce.  Mix  the  Oils  together,  and
dissolve  the  Camphor  in  the  mixture.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  intended  for  the  relief  of  toothache.
The  decayed  portion  of  the  tooth  is  to  be  cleansed  and  dried,  and  then
a  few  drops  of  the  mixture  on  cotton  applied  to  the  part ;  continue  the
application  two  or  three  times  in  the  same  manner,  and  leave  the  last  in
the  tooth.  This  has  proved  very  efficacious,  and  has  been  extensively
sold  throughout  the  country  as  "  Parisen's  Vegetable  Specific."

It  will  not  be  amiss  to  give,  at  this  place,  another  preparation  for  tooth-
ache, which  I  have  found  of  service.  Take  of  Opium,  and  Nitre,  each,
two  ounces;  Camphor  an  ounce  and  a  half;  Galls,  in  powder,  four  ounces;
Alcohol  a  pint  and  a  half.  Place  the  articles  in  the  Alcohol,  macerate
for  fourteen  days,  and  filter.  To  be  applied  the  same  as  with  the  pre-
ceding mixture.  Various  other  agents,  as  Solution  of  Tannic  Acid,  or
Gallic  Acid  in  Alcohol,  etc.,  have  been  recommended  for  relieving
toothache,  but  the  above  will  be  found  to  answer  the  purpose  admirably.
(See  Carvacrol.)


Morphia,  1131

Mistura  Olei  Composita.  Compound  Mixture  of  Oils.  Vermifuge
Oil.

Preparation. — Take  of  Castor  Oil,  and  Wormseed  Oil,  each,  one  ounce;
Oil  of  Turpentine,  and  Oil  of  Anise,  of  each,  half  an  ounce.  Mix
together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  efficacious  remedy  for  worms,
and  may  be  given  in  teaspoonful  doses  to  an  adult,  and  repeated  every
two  hours.  After  its  employment  for  two  or  three  days,  a  purgative
must  be  administered. —  T.  V.  M.

Mistura  Sanguinary  Composita.  Compound  Mixture  of  Bloodroot.
Cough  Drops.

Preparation. — Take  of  Syrup  of  Ipecacuanha,  Syrup  of  Squill,  Tinc-
ture of  Bloodroot,  Syrup  of  Balsam  Tolu,  Camphorated  Tincture  of
Opium,  each,  one  ounce. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  efficacious  preparation  in  severe
cough  from  colds,  catarrhal  or  bronchial  irritations.  The  dose  is  from
half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm  whenever  the  fit  of  couo-hino-  is  severe.
I  have  used  it  for  many  years  in  practice,  with  much  benefit.  A  very
pleasant  preparation  for  cough,  is  composed  of  Oil  of  Anise,  Oil  of  Sweet
Almonds,  Tincture  of  Balsam  Tolu,  Canada  Balsam,  Madeira  Wine,
each,  one  ounce.  Mix.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  twenty  drops,  three
or  four  times  a  day,  in  a  little  elm  or  flaxseed  infusion.  It  assists
expectoration,  and  affords  great  relief  in  tickling  coughs. — J.  K.

Mistura  Spiritus  Vini  Gallici. Brandy  Mixture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Brandy,  Cinnamon  Water,  each,  four  fluid-
ounces ;  the  yelks  of  two  Eggs;  Refined  Sugar  half  an  ounce;  Oil  of
Cinnamon  two  minims. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  nutritive  and  stimulating  prepara-
tion, especially  adapted  to  the  stage  of  prostration  in  low  forms  of  fever,
and  in  cases  of  much  debility  from  various  other  causes.


MORPHIA.
Preparations  of  Morphia.
Morphia. Morphia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Opium,  sliced,  a  pound;  Solution  of  Ammonia
six  fluidounces  ;  Distilled  Water,  Alcohol,  and  Animal  Charcoal,  of  each,
a  sufficient  quantity.  Macerate  the  Opium  with  four  pints  of  Distilled
Water  for  twenty-four  hours,  and,  having  worked  it  with  the  hand,
digest  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  strain.  In  like  manner,  macerate  the
residue  twice  successively  with  the  same  quantity  of  Distilled  Water,
and  strain.  Mix  the  infusions,  evaporate  to  six  pints,  and  filter ;  then
add  firstly,  five  pints  of  Alcohol,  and  afterward  three  fluidounces  of  the


1132  Pharmacy.

Solution  of  Ammonia,  previously  mixed  with  half  a  pint  of  Alcohol.
After  twenty-four  hours,  pour  in  the  remainder  of  the  Solution  of  Am-
monia, mixed,  as  before,  with  half  a  pint  of  Alcohol ;  and  set  the  liquor
aside  for  twenty-four  hours,  that  crystals  may  form.  To  purify  these,
boil  them  with  two  pints  of  Alcohol  till  they  are  dissolved,  filter  the
solution,  while  hot,  through  Animal  Charcoal,  and  set  it  aside  to  crys-
tallize.—£7".  S.

History. — Water  will  extract  Morphia  from  Opium  as  well  as  Acetic
Acid,  especially  if  the  opium  be,  as  directed,  properly  comminuted
by  working  it  with  the  hand,  beside  which,  it  possesses  an  advantage
over  acids  in  taking  up  less  of  the  narcotina.  The  several  macerations
in  water,  assisted  each  time  by  kneading,  nearly,  if  not  quite,  exhaust
the  drug  of  its  morphia.  The  next  step  is  to  concentrate  the  infusions
after  having  mixed  them  together  ;  after  this  is  effected,  solution  of
ammonia  is  added  to  the  concentrated  infusion  for  the  purpose  of  decom-
posing the  meconate  or  other  salt  of  morphia  which  may  be  present  in
it.  The  ammoniacal  solution  unites  with  the  acid,  and  the  vegetable
alkali  is  precipitated  ;  but  as  it  usually  carries  with  it  a  large  proportion
of  coloring  matter,  which  is  very  troublesome  to  remove,  alcohol  is  pre-
viously added  to  the  infusion.  The  alcohol  dissolves  the  coloring  matter
as  soon  as  it  is  separated  by  the  ammonia,  in  consequence  of  which  a
much  purer  morphia  is  thrown  down.  By  adding  the  ammonia  in  two
portions,  and  at  different  stages  of  the  process,  the  morphia  is  more
slowly  separated,  and  its  impurities  can  be  more  readily  removed,  than
if  the  whole  were  disengaged  at  once.  Care  must  be  taken  to  add  no
more  ammonia  than  is  necessary  to  saturate  the  acid  present,  for  if  there
be  an  excess  of  ammonia,  it  will  dissolve  a  portion  of  the  morphia,  and
thus  lessen  the  product.  The  first  crystals  obtained  have  a  light-yel-
lowish color ;  these  are  boiled  in  alcohol,  and  the  solution  filtered  through
animal  charcoal,  which  removes  all  coloring  matter.

In  this  process  alcohol  at  25°  Baum6  (sp.  gr.  0.9032)  is  preferable  to
highly  rectified  spirit,  as  it  is  less  liable  to  hold  the  morphia  in  solution
when  cold  ;  and  likewise,  care  should  be  observed  in  using  a  solution  of
ammonia  of  the  officinal  standard.  Any  morphia  which  may  remain  in
the  alcohol  may  be  obtained  by  distillation  of  the  latter,  and  when  suf-
ficiently concentrated,  be  purified  by  a  separate  operation.

By  this  process,  the  morphia  obtained  always  contains  a  portion  of
narcotina,  which  may  be  removed  by  ether,  which  dissolves  the  latter
principle,  and  leaves  the  morphia  untouched.  Or  diluted  acetic  acid
may  be  added,  which  will  dissolve  the  morphia  and  leave  the  narcotina;
the  former  may  be  obtained  from  the  acetic  solution  by  saturation  of  the
acid  with  ammonia.  Or,  dissolve  the  morphia  in  dilute  muriatic  acid,  and
boil  the  solution  with  lime,  which  throws  down  the  narcotina,  and  holds
the  morphia  dissolved. The  liquid being  filtered  yields  the  morphia


Morphia.  1133

upon  the  addition  of  muriate  of  ammonia. Other  means  have  been  pur-
sued, but  it  is  not  necessary  to  name  them  here.

Various  other  processes  for  procuring  morphia  have  been  pursued
and  proposed,  but,  probably,  none  are  better  adapted  to  the  purpose,
especially  when  small  quantities  are  required,  than  the  one  given  above,
from  the  United  States  Pharmacopoeia.

As  opium  varies  in  quality,  so  likewise  does  it  vary  in  the  proportion
of  the  morphia  which  it  contains  ;  from  nine  per  cent,  to  fourteen,  is  most
commonly  obtained,  and  much  less  than  even  nine  per  cent,  when  the
drug  is  of  very  inferior  quality,  or  when  the  process  has  been  carelessly
pursued  and  the  opium  not  completely  exhausted.  The  average  amount
of  morphia  yielded  by  opium  may  be  stated  at  from  ten  to  twelve  per
cent.

Morphia  is  in  small,  colorless,  shining  crystals,  without  odor,  and  quite
bitter.  At  a  moderate  heat  it  parts  with  its  water  of  crystallization,
loses  its  crystalline  form,  and  becomes  opake  and  white;  if  the  temper-
ature be  increased,  it  melts  and  becomes  a  yellowish  fluid  from  partial
decomposition,  which,  upon  cooling,  assumes  a  white  and  crystalline
appearance.  When  heated  in  the  open  air,  it  burns  with  a  bright  flame,
and  is  wholly  dissipated  at  a  red-heat.  It  is  nearly,  if  not  quite,  inso-
luble in  cold  water  or  ether  ;  is  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  alcohol ;  is
soluble  in  somewhat  less  than  one  hundred  parts  of  boiling  water  ;  is
freely  soluble  in  boiling  alcohol,  which  deposits  it  on  cooling ;  and  is
also  partly  dissolved  by  the  fixed  and  vegetable  oils.  Its  alcoholic  solu-
tion changes  red  litmus  paper  to  blue,  and  yellow  turmeric  to  brown.  It
enters  into  combination  with  the  acids,  forming  salts  which  are,  for  the
most  part,  soluble,  and  decomposed  by  the  alkalies.  It  is  dissolved  by
solutions  of  potassa  and  soda,  which,  when  exposed  to  the  air,  slowly
precipitate  it  in  consequence  of  the  carbonic  acid  which  they  absorb.
Solution  of  ammonia  likewise  dissolves  it;  so  that  in  precipitating  mor-
phia by  ammonia,  great  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  adding  it  in  excess.
Nitric  acid  in  contact  with  morphia  or  its  salts,  changes  them  to  a  blood-
red  color  which  finally  becomes  yellow.  A  solution  of  iodic  acid,  or  an
acidulous  iodate  is  reddened  by  them,  with  evolution  of  iodine.  With
sesquichloride  of  iron,  or  the  salts  of  the  sesquioxide,  morphia,  its  ace-
tate and  oxalate,  form  a  fine  blue  color,  which  is  destroyed  upon  the
addition  of  a  large  quantity  of  water,  or  by  acids  or  alkalies.  Pseudo-
morphia,  a  principle  discovered  by  Pellelier,  and  which  is  not  possessed
of  poisonous  properties,  also  becomes  red  under  the  action  of  nitric  acid,
and  produces  a  blue  color  with  the  salts  of  sesquioxide  of  iron,  so  that
these  results  are  not  positive  indications  of  the  presence  of  morphia.
The  terchloride  of  gold  precipitates  morphia  at  first  yellow,  then  bluish,
and  finally  violet.  Potassa  or  soda  precipitates  morphia  from  its  solu-
tions, but  redis^olves  it,  when  added  in  excess.  Infusion  of  galls,  and  all
vegetable  solutions  containing  tannic  acid  precipitate  morphia,  forming  a


1134  Pharmacy.

tannate  of  morphia  soluble  in  acetic  acid.  Pure  gallic  acid,  according  to
Dublanc,  does  not  precipitate  it.  The  solutions  of  chlorine  and  morphia
when  mixed,  become  of  a  dark-brown  color  on  the  addition  of  ammonia,
which  is  removed  by  a  fresh  addition  of  chlorine.  Anhydrous  morphia
is  stated  to  consist  of  one  equivalent  of  nitrogen  14,  thirty -five  of  car-
bon 210,  twenty  of  hydrogen  20,  and  six  of  oxygen  48=292.  The
crystals  contain  about  5.8  per  cent.,  or  two  additional  equivalents  of
water  18=310.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Morphia  is  the  narcotic  principle  of  opium,
somewhat  differing  from  this  drug,  however,  in  its  effects  upon  the  sys-
tem, and  which  difference  is,  probably,  owing  to  its  peculiar  combination
with  other  principles  existing  in  the  opium.  From  its  insolubility  in
water,  it  is  less  certain  in  its  effects  than  some  of  its  salts,  as  its  manner
and  extent  of  action  depend  greatly  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  acid
in  the  stomach,  as  well  as  on  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  acid.  Hence,
its  salts  are  always  preferred,  among  which,  the  principal  ones  employed
are  the  acetate,  muriate,  and  sulphate.  All  these  are  soporific,  anodyne,
and  diaphoretic,  but  differ  from  the  actions  of  opium,  in  being  less  stim-
ulating, less  inclined  to  effect  constipation,  and  less  liable  to  produce  the
subsequent  symptoms  of  headache,  nausea,  etc.  Their  principal  em-
ployment is  to  abate  pain,  promote  sleep,  and  tranquilize  the  system
when  in  a  state  of  restlessness  from  nervous  irritation,  or  other  cause.
Opium,  however,  is  more  efficient  in  low  forms  of  disease,  as  a  stimulant,
and  also  for  the  suppression  of  morbid  discharges.  In  delirium  tremens
they  are  especially  useful,  and  I  have  found  more  benefit  in  these  cases,
from  the  following  preparation,  than  any  other.  Take  of  Sulphate
of  Quinia  twelve  grains ;  Sulphate  of  Morphia  one  grain  ;  mix,  and
divide  into  six  powders.  Of  these  give  one  powder  every  hour,  until  the
patient  sleeps.  Generally  but  two  or  three  powders  are  required  before
the  patient  falls  into  a  quiet  sleep,  with  considerable  moisture  of  the
surface.  Morphia  and  its  salts  are  more  acceptable  to  the  stomach,  in
many  cases,  than  opium  or  its  tincture,  and  where  they  cannot  be  em-
ployed internally,  from  whatever  cause,  they  may  be  applied  upon  a
vesicated  surface  from  which  the  cuticle  has  been  removed,  in  double  or
triple  the  internal  dose,  and  will  exert  the  same  influence  upon  the  sys-
tem as  when  received  into  the  stomach.  Thus  applied,  they  are  very
effectual  in  relieving  severe  neuralgic  pains,  and  in  overcoming  obstinate
sickness  of  the  stomach.  The  proper  way  is  to  apply  them  as  near  the
affected  part  as  possible,  or,  when  it  is  desired  to  bring  the  system  under
its  influence,  to  the  epigastric  region.  Given  in  doses  not  sufficient  to
cause  sleep,  they  frequently  occasion  troublesome  cerebral  symptoms,
almost  approximating  delirium,  but  which  gradually  pass  off  sponta-
neously, or  disappear  upon  the  administration  of  another  dose.

Given  in  large  non-medicinal  doses,  morphia,  as  well  as  its  salts,  acts
as  a  narcotic  poison,  requiring  the  same  toxicological  treatment  as  in  the


Morphia.  1135

case  of  poisoning  by  opium. Strong  coffee  has  been  used  as  an  antidote,
and  with  apparent  benefit.

The  dose  of  morphia  and  its  salts,  is  from  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  a
quarter ;  and  one-sixth  of  a  grain  is  about  equivalent  to  a  grain  of  ordi-
nary opium.

Off.  Prep. — Morphias  Acetas;  Morphias  Murias;  Morphias  Sulphas;
Ferri  et  Morphias  Tartras ;  Quinias  et  Morphias  Tartras.

Morphia  Acetas. Acetate  of  Morphia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Morphia,  in  powder,  (freed  from  narcotina  by
boiling  with  Sulphuric  Ether),  an  ounce  ;  Distilled  Water  half  a  pint;
Acetic  Acid  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Morphia  with  the  Water ;  then
carefully  drop  in  the  Acid,  constantly  stirring,  until  the  Morphia  is  satu-
rated and  dissolved.  Evaporate  the  solution,  by  means  of  a  water-bath,
to  the  consistence  of  syrup.  Lastly,  dry  the  Acetate  with  a  gentle  heat,
and  rub  it  into  powder.  It  should  be  kept  in  a  darkened  vial,  as  light
gradually  decomposes  it — changing  it  to  a  dark  color. —  U.  S.

History. — In  this  process,  morphia  is  saturated  with  acetic  acid,  which
is  preferred  to  vinegar,  on  account  of  leaving  no  impurity  in  the  acetate.
The  solution  of  the  morphia  in  the  water,  upon  the  addition  of  a  suffi-
cient quantity  of  acetic  acid,  is  evidence  of  its  saturation;  but  a  slight
excess  of  acid  is  of  no  importance,  as  it  is  expelled  during  the  evaporat-
ing process.  The  employment  of  too  great  a  degree  of  heat  must,  how-
ever, be  avoided,  lest  the  salt  become  decomposed  by  losing  a  part  of  its
acetic  acid,  and  leaving  a  corresponding  portion  of  its  morphia  undis-
solved. Crystals  of  acetate  of  morphia  may  be  obtained  provided  the
evaporation  be  checked  at  a  certain  point;  but  as  it  is  always  a  matter
of  more  or  less  difficulty,  it  is  preferred  to  continue  the  evaporation  to
dryness.  One  advantage  accruing  from  the  use  of  diluted  acetic  acid
of  sp.  gr.  1.004,  in  the  preparation  of  the  acetate,  is,  that  while  it  dis-
solves the  morphia,  it  leaves  the  narcotina,  should  any  be  present,
untouched.

Acetate  of  morphia  is  in  the  form  of  a  snowy  white,  obscurely  crys-
talline powder,  or  if  crystallized,  it  is  in  slender  acicular  and  fasciculated
crystals.  It  is  inodorous,  but  possesses  an  intense,  peculiar,  bitter
taste.  Water  dissolves  it  readily,  though  not  entirely, — this  is  owing  to  a
loss  of  some  of  its  acid  during  evaporation  to  dryness,  so  that  there  is
not  enough  present  to  hold  the  morphia  in  solution.  Consequently,
when  it  is  required  to  use  the  acetate  in  solution,  a  few  drops  of  distilled
vinegar  added,  will  render  it  completely  soluble.  It  is  not  so  readily
soluble  in  alcohol  as  in  water.  A  strong  heat  decomposes,  and  entirely
dissipates  it.  Its  aqueous  solution,  moderately  concentrated,  is  affected
by  heat,  nitric  acid,  and  sesquichloride  of  iron,  in  the  same  manner  as
morphia;  and  the  alkalies  or  alkaline  earths  precipitate  morphia  from  it,
but  redissolve  it  if  added  in  excess. Diluted  sulphuric  acid  added  to


1.136  Pharmacy.

the  salt,  disengages  acetic  fumes,  and  imparts  an  acetous  odor  to  the
solution.  It  is  supposed  to  consist  of  one  equivalent  of  base  296.35,
one  of  acid  51.48,  and  one  of  water  9=356.83.

Owing  to  unskillful  preparation  it  may  be  adulterated  with  coloring
matter,  which  maybe  known  by  the  want  of  its  proper  whiteness;  but
it  may  likewise,  be  adulterated  with  various  white  powders.  In  addition
to  the  above  tests  of  its  purity,  the  following  formula  of  the  Edinburgh
College  will  be  found  generally  sufficient  to  detect  the  most  part  of  adul-
terations :  "  One  hundred  measures  of  a  solution  of  ten  grains  in  a  half
a  fluidounce  of  water  and  five  minims  of  acetic  acid,  heated  to  near
212°,  and  decomposed  by  a  faint  excess  of  ammonia,  yield  by  agitation
a  precipitate  which  in  24  hours  occupies  15.5  measures  of  the  liquid."

Properties  and  Uses. — Acetate  of  Morphia  exerts  a  similar  influence
upon  the  system  as  the  other  salts  of  Morphia,  and  is  preferred  by  some
practitioners  to  them ;  but  I  have  not  found  the  combination  of  any  acid
to  appreciably  affect  the  therapeutical  influence  of  the  morphia.  It  may
be  substituted  for  opium,  as  a  general  rule,  or  for  any  of  the  other  salts
of  morphia.  The  dose  to  produce  an  anodyne  or  soporific  effect  is  from
one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  one-quarter ;  but  under  certain  excitable  con-
ditions of  the  system,  even  more  may  be  required.  One-sixth  of  a
grain  is  about  equivalent  to  a  grain  of  opium.  It  is  sometimes  used
externally,  applied  to  vesicated  surfaces,  for  the  purpose  of  affecting  the
system.  Internally,  it  may  be  given  either  in  the  form  of  pill  or  solu-
tion. A  solution  (Liquor  Morphia}  Acetatis)  may  be  formed  by  adding
ten  grains  of  Acetate  of  Morphia  to  one  fluidounce  and  a  half  of  Distilled
Water,  to  which  add  half  an  ounce  of  proof  Spirit  and  five  minims  of
Diluted  Acetic  Acid.  The  dose  of  this  is  from  ten  to  fifteen  drops.  The
alcohol  is  added  to  prevent  spontaneous  decomposition.  ( See  Ferri  et
Mo  rph  ice  Ta  rtras . )

Morphine  Murias.  Morphia  Hydrochloras.  Muriate  of  Morphia.
Hydrochlorate  of  Morphia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Morphia,  in  powder,  an  ounce;  Distilled  Water
half  a  pint;  Muriatic  Acid  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Morphia  with
the  Water;  then  carefully  drop  in  the  Acid,  constantly  stirring,  till  the
Morphia  is  saturated  and  dissolved.  Evaporate  the  solution  by  means
of  a  water-bath,  so  that  it  may  crystallize  upon  cooling.  Dry  the  crys-
tals upon  bibulous  paper. —  JJ.  S.

History. — By  the  above  process,  Morphia  is  saturated  with  muriatic
acid,  of  which  saturation  its  complete  solution  in  the  water  is  an  indica-
tion. An  excess  of  acid  may  be  known  by  litmus  paper,  which  becomes
reddened  if  such  be  the  case.

Muriate  of  Morphia  is  usually  met  with  in  the  form  of  a  pure-white
powder ;  but  when  crystallized  it  forms  beautifully  radiated  tufts  of  deli-
cate feathery  or  satiny  needles. It  is  inodorous,  intensely  bitter,  perma-


Morphia.  1137

nent  in  the  air,  soluble  in  sixteen  parts  of  water  at  60°,  and  in  its  own
weight  at  212°,  and  is  also  soluble  in  alcohol.  A  concentrated  boiling
solution  forms,  on  cooling,  almost  a  firm  crystalline  mass.  Muriate  of
Morphia  is  decomposed  by  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  with  disengagement
of  muriatic  acid;  strong  nitric  acid  forms  a  deep-yellow  solution  with  it;
spirit  of  nitric  ether  slowly  communicates  a  yellow  color  to  its  solution ;
the  alkalies,  especially  potassa,  and  lime-water  precipitate  morphia  from
the  solution,  but  redissolve  it  when  added  in  excess.  Heat,  and  ses-
quichloride  of  iron  affect  it  in  the  same  manner  as  they  do  morphia.
Nitrate  of  silver  added  to  its  solution  gives  rise  to  a  precipitate  of  chlo-
ride of  silver.  It  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  base  292,  one  of  muriatic
acid  36.42,  and  six  of  water  54=382.42.  According  to  Christison,  the
pure  salt,  dried  at  150°,  contains  12.7  per  cent,  of  water.

Muriate  of  Morphia  prepared  by  the  above  process  is  free  from  narco-
tina  or  other  impurity,  and  the  formula  is  sufficient  for  its  preparation
on  a  small  scale;  but  when  to  be  manufactured  on  a  large  scale,  the
process  of  Dr.  Wm.  Gregory  will,  probably,  be  found  the  most  economi-
cal, by  which  a  large  and  pure  product  may  be  obtained.  By  his
process,  the  meconate  of  morphia  existing  in  the  opium  is  decomposed
by  chloride  of  calcium,  which  forms,  through  double  affinity,  a  precipi-
tate of  meconate  of  lime,  leaving  muriate  of  morphia  in  solution,  which
is  obtained  in  crystals  by  evaporation ;  these  are  purified  by  repeated
solution,  concentration,  and  crystallization,  and  lastly  decolorization  with
animal  charcoal.  It  is  important  to  exhaust  the  opium  with  as  little
water  as  possible,  so  as  to  avoid  protracted  heat  while  evaporating.
Other  methods  have  been  advised,  but  the  one  above  given  is  sufficient
for  all  practical  purposes  of  the  physician  or  apothecary.

White  sugar  is  said  to  enter  into  muriate  of  morphia  as  an  adultera-
tion ;  it  may  be  detected  by  the  test  of  fermentation.  The  principal
impurities,  however,  that  are  met  with,  are  coloring  matter  and  mois-
ture, the  result  of  carelessness  in  its  preparation.  According  to  the
Edinburgh  College,  muriate  of  morphia  should  be  snow-white,  entirely
soluble  in  water,  giving  a  colorless  solution;  its  loss  of  weight  at  212°
should  not  exceed  thirteen  per  cent.  ;  and  one  hundred  measures  of  a
solution  of  ten  grains  in  half  a  fluidounce  of  water,  heated  nearly  to
212°,  and  decomposed  with  agitation  by  a  faint  excess  of  ammonia,
should  yield  a  precipitate  which  in  twenty-four  hours  occupies  12.5
measures  of  the  liquid.

Properties  and  Uses. — Muriate  of  Morphia  possesses  properties  similar
to  the  other  salts  of  morphia,  having  essentially  all  the  actions  of  opium.
It  is  much  more  extensively  used  in  Great  Britain  than  in  this  country;
and  may  be  employed  as  a  substitute  for  opium,  or  the  acetate,  or  sul-
phate of  morphia.  Its  dose  is  from  an  eighth  of  a  grain  to  a  half;  one-
sixth  of  a  grain  is  about  equivalent  to  one  grain  of  opium.  A  solution
of  the  Muriate  of  Morphia  [Liquor  Morphiae  Hydrochloras)  is  made  by
72


1138  Pharmacy.

dissolving  one  drachm  and  a  half  of  Hydrochlorate  of  Morphia,  in  a
mixture  of  Rectified  Spirit  five  fluidounces;  Distilled  Water  fifteen
fluidounces ;  aided  by  a  gentle  heat.  Eighteen  minims  are  equivalent
to  a  grain  of  opium.  The  dose  is  from  twenty  to  forty  drops.  The
alcohol  is  added  to  this  solution  to  prevent  spontaneous  decomposition.

Morphine  Sulphas. Sulphate  of  Morphia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Morphia,  in  powder,  an  ounce;  Distilled  Water
half  a  pint;  Diluted  Sulphuric  Acid  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Mor-
phia with  the  Water,  then  carefully  drop  in  the  Acid,  constantly  stirring
till  the  Morphia  is  saturated  and  dissolved.  Evaporate  the  solution  by
means  of  a  water-bath,  so  that  it  may  crystallize  upon  cooling.  Dry
the  crystals  upon  bibulous  paper. —  U.  S.

History.  —  In  this  process,  as  soon  as  the  morphia  in  the  water
becomes  completely  dissolved,  its  saturation  is  indicated :  to  determine
whether  there  has  been  an  excess  of  acid  added,  litmus  paper  may  be
employed.  The  morphia  used  should  be  pure;  if,  however,  it  contains
narcotina,  this  will  remain  in  the  mother-liquor,  which  generally  con-
tains a  small  portion  of  morphia  with  impurities,  after  the  first  crystal-
lization. It  should  be  purified,  filtered,  and  again  evaporated  to  obtain
the  remainder  of  the  sulphate.  It  should  be  observed,  that  if  the  heat
during  evaporation  be  carried  too  far,  decomposition  will  ensue,  and  a
new  body  be  formed  destitute  of  morphia.  Sulphate  of  morphia  may  also
be  obtained  by  dissolving  the  morphia  in  boiling  alcohol  of  36°  Baume
(sp.  gr.  0.8428),  saturate  it  with  sulphuric  acid,  while  it  is  hot,  add
purified  animal  charcoal,  boil  for  a  few  minutes,  and  filter  the  solution
while  at  the  boiling  temperature.  Most  of  the  sulphate  is  deposited  on
cooling,  and  the  rest  may  be  procured  by  evaporation  of  the  mother-
liquor.

Sulphate  of  Morphia  is  obtained  in  white,  mossy  tufts  or  feathery
crystals,  which  are  inodorous,  bitter  to  the  taste,  soluble  in  cold  water,
and  in  twice  their  weight  of  boiling  water.  According  to  Liebig  they
consist  of  10.33  of  sulphuric  acid,  75.38  of  morphia,  and  14.29  of  water.
A  heat  of  248°  will  deprive  them  of  9.66  parts  of  their  water,  but  any
further  loss  will  occasion  decomposition.  Their  equivalent  composition
is  given  as  one  equivalent  of  base  292,  one  of  acid  40,  and  six  of  water
54=386;  five  equivalents  of  the  latter  are  water  of  crystallization,  and
may  be  separated  by  heat.  The  tests  for  its  purity  are  those  for  sul-
phuric acid  and  for  morphia.  Pure  Sulphate  of  Morphia  is  readily  and
entirely  soluble  in  water,  and  nearly  so  in  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sulphate  of  Morphia  is  probably  more  often
employed  in  this  country  than  any  other  of  the  salts  of  this  alkali,  and
is  considered  to  be  more  uniform  in  its  action  on  the  system.  It  possesses
the  usual  properties  belonging  to  Morphia  and  its  various  salts,  and  is
used  in  cases  where  these  are  indicated.  The  dose  is  from  an  eighth  of  a


Olea  Destillata.  1139

grain  to  a  quarter,  which  may  be  given  in  pill  or  solution.  One-sixth
of  a  grain  is  about  an  equivalent  of  one  grain  of  opium.  A  Solution  of
Sulphate  of  Morphia,  [Liquor  Morphice  Sulphatis,)  is  made  by  dissolv-
ing eight  grains  of  the  Sulphate  of  Morphia  in  half  a  pint  of  Distilled
Water.  This  forms  a  convenient  solution,  in  which  the  morphia  may  be
administered  in  minute  or  ordinary  doses  to  suit  the  occasion ;  it  will
keep  for  a  long  time  unchanged.  For  an  adult  the  full  dose  is  one  or
two  fluidrachms,  which  contain  from  an  eighth  of  a  grain  to  a  quarter  of
the  sulphate.  Sometimes  the  sulphate  of  morphia  is  not  entirely  soluble
in  water,  which  may  be  owing  to  adulterations,  but  most  commonly  to
the  absence  of  care  in  its  preparation,  in  which  from  want  of  sufficient
water  to  hold  the  sulphate  in  solution,  crystallization  commences  before
the  whole  of  the  morphia  has  been  saturated  by  the  sulphuric  acid.
This  difficulty  may  be  overcome  by  the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  Sul-
phuiic  Acid,  or  eight  or  ten  drops  of  Elixir  Vitriol,  and  a  fluidrachm  of
Alcohul,  which  will  render  the  salt  wholly  soluble  in  water.

There  are  other  salts  of  Morphia,  as  the  Nitrate,  Phosphate  and  Tar-
trate, prepared  as  the  Acetate,  by  substituting  the  respective  acids;  also
the  Hydriodate  of  Morphia,  made  by  mixing  together  strong  solutions  of
Muriate  of  Morphia,  two  parts,  and  of  Iodide  of  Potassium,  rather  more
than  one  part.  Wash  the  precipitate  with  a  little  Cold  Water  ;  press  it
between  folds  of  blotting  paper,  redissolve  in  Hot  Water,  and  crystallize.
Doses  of  these,  same  as  the  Acetate.  Iodide  of  Morphia  is  obtained  by
dissolving  120  equivalents  of  dry  Acetate  of  Morphia  in  eight  times
the  weight  of  Cold  Distilled  Water,  adding,  if  necessary,  a  few  drops  of
pure  Acetic  Acid,  and  mixing  the  filtered  solution  with  a  solution  of
sixty  equivalents  of  Iodide  of  Potassium.  After  some  time  the  salt
crystallizes  in  very  slender  crystals,  but  which  may  be  obtained  of
larger  size,  by  heating  the  mixture  on  a  water-bath,  and  allowing  it  to
cool  slowly.  It  closely  resembles  in  form,  color,  etc.,  the  Sulphate  of
Quinia.  It  is  insoluble  in  Cold  Water,  soluble  in  Hot  Water,  and
readily  in  Alcohol ;  the  solutions  have  a  bitter  taste.


V
OLEA  DESTILLATA.

Distilled  Oils.

For  an  account  of  Volatile,  Distilled,  or  Essential  Oils,  see  Olea  Vol-
atilia,  Part  II,  page  669.

The  United  States  Pharmacopoeia  gives  the  following  general  direc-
tions for  the  preparation  of  Distilled  Oils  :  "  Put  the  substance  from
which  the  Oil  is  to  be  extracted  into  a  retort,  or  other  vessel  suitable  for
distillation,  and  add  enough  Water  to  cover  it,  then  distil  into  a  large
refrigeratory.  Separate  the  Distilled  Oil  from  the  Water  which  comes
over  with  it.  In  this  manner  prepare  Oil  of  Anise  from  Anise  ;  Oil  of
Caraway  from  Caraway; Oil  of  Cloves  from  Cloves; Oil  of  Wormseed


1140  Pharmacy.

from  Wbrmseed;  Oil  of  Cubebs  from  Cubebs  ;  Oil  of  Fennel  horn  Fen-
nel Seed  ;  Oil  of  Partridge  Berry  from  Partridge  Berry  Leaves;  Oil  of
Pennyroyal  (  Oleum  Hedeomw),  from  Pennyroyal ;  Oil  of  Juniper  from
Juniper  Berries  ;  Oil  of  Lavender  from  Lavender  Flowers  ;  Oil  of  Pep-
permint from  Peppermint ;  Oil  of  Spearmint  from  Spearmint;  Oil  of
Horsemint  from  Horsemint ;  Oil  of  Origanum  from  Origanum,  (Marjo-
ram) ;  Oil  of  Pimento  from  Pimento ;  Oil  of  Rosemary  from  Rosemary
27ops;  Oil  of  Savine  from  Savine  ;  Oil  of  Sassafras  from  Bark  of  Sas-
saf?-as  Root;  and  Oil  of  Valerian  from  Valerian."  To  which  I  will  add
Oil  of  Fleabane  from  Fleabane  ;  and  Oil  of  Frechthites  from  Fireweed.
The  Edinburgh  Pharmacopoeia  gives  the  following  general  directions  :
"  Volatile  Oils  are  obtained  chiefly  from  the  Flowers,  Leaves,  Fruits,
Barks,  and  Roots  of  Plants,  by  Distilling  them  with  Water,  in  which  they
have  been  allowed  to  macerate  for  some  time.  Flowers,  Leaves,  and
Fruits  generally  yield  the  finest  Oils,  and  in  greatest  quantity  when  they
are  used  fresh.  Many,  however,  answer  equally  well  if  they  have  been
preserved  by  beating  them  into  a  pulp  with  about  twice  their  weight  of
Muriate  of  Soda,  and  keeping  the  mixture  in  well  closed  vessels.

Substances  yielding  Volatile  Oils  must  be  distilled  with  Water,  the  proper
proportion  of  which  varies  for  each  article,  and  for  the  several  qualities
of  each.  In  all  instances,  the  quantity  must  be  such  as  to  prevent  any
of  the  material  from  being  empyreumatized  before  the  whole  Oil  is  carried
over.  In  operations  where  the  material  is  of  pulpy  consistence,  other
contrivances  must  be  resorted  to  for  the  same  purpose.  These  consist
chiefly  of  particular  modes  of  applying  Heat,  so  as  to  maintain  a  regu-
lated temperature  not  much  above  212°.  On  the  small  scale,  Heat
may  be  thus  conveniently  applied  by  means  of  a  Bath  of  a  strong  Solu-
tion of  Muriate  of  Lime,  or  by  means  of  an  Oil-Bath,  kept  at  a  station-
ary temperature  with  the  aid  of  a  thermometer.

On  the  large  scale  Heat  is  often  applied  by  means  of  Steam  under
regulated  pressure.  In  other  operations  it  is  found  sufficient  to  hang  the
material  within  the  Still  in  a  cage  or  bag  of  fine  network,  and  sometimes
the  material  is  not  mingled  with  the  Water  at  all,  but  is  subjected  to  a
current  of  Steam  passing  through  it.  The  best  mode  of  collecting  the
Oil  is  by  means  of  a  Refrigeratory,  from  which  the  Water  and  Oil  drop
together  into  a  tall  narrow  vessel  provided  with  a  lateral  tube  or  lip  near
the  top,  and  another  tube  rising  from  the  bottom  to  about  a  quarter  of
an  inch  below  the  level  of  the  former.  It  is  evident  that  with  a  Re-
ceiver of  this  construction  the  Water  will  escape  by  the  lower  tube  ;
while  the  Volatile  Oil,  as  it  accumulates,  will  be  discharged  by  the  upper
one,  except  in  the  very  few  instances  where  the  Oil  is  heavier  than
Water.  By  attending  to  the  general  principles  now  explained,  Volatile
Oils  may  be  readily  obtained,  of  excellent  quality,  from  the  Flowers  of
Anthemis  Nobilis,  Lavandula  Vera  and  Ruta  Graveolens ;  from  the  Fruit
of Anethum Graveolens,  bruised ; Carum Carui, bruised ; Eugenia


Olea  Destillata.  1141

Pimenta,  bruised  ;  Fceniculum  Officinale,  bruised  ;  Piper  Cubeba,  oround,
and  Pimpinella  Anisum,  ground  ;  from  the  undeveloped  Dried  Flowers  of
Caryophyllus  Aromaticus ;  from  the  Tops  of  Juniperus  Sabina,  and  Ros-
marinus Officinalis ;  from  the  entire  Herb  of  Mentha  Piperita,  M.  Pule-
gium,  M.  Viridis,  and  Origanum  Majorana;  and  also  from  the  bruised
Root  of  Sassafras  Officinale.

The  Dublin  Pharmacopoeia  gives  the  following  officinal  directions  :
'*  The  Volatile  or  Essektial  Oils  may  be  obtained  by  the  following
general  process  :  The  substance  from  which  the  Oil  is  to  be  extracted
is  macerated  for  twenty-four  hours,  with  five  times  its  weight  of  Water,
in  a  sheet  tin,  or  copper  Still,  and,  a  condenser  being  then  attached,
half  the  Water  is  drawn  over  by  Distillation,  on  the  surface  of  which
the  Oil  will  be  found  to  float,  unless  (which  is  rarely  the  case)  it  should
be  heavier  than  Water,  when  it  will  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  the
receiver.  The  Oil  having  been  separated,  the  aqueous  product,  which
is  a  saturated  solution  of  the  Oil  in  Water,  is  to  be  returned  to  the  Still,
and  the  distillation  resumed,  and  continued  till  the  resulting  liquid  has
the  same  volume  as  before.  The  Oil  is  again  separated,  the  watery  pro-
duct returned  to  the  Still,  and  the  distillation  resumed  ;  and  this  process
is  to  be  repeated  until  it  ceases  to  afford  any  additional  Oily  product.
The  Oil  thus  obtained  is  to  be  separated  as  completely  as  possible  from
Water,  and  preserved  in  a  well-stopped  bottle.

In  this  way  Volatile  Oils  may  be  obtained  from  the  entire  Herb  of
Mentha  Piperita,  Mentha  Pulegium,  Mentha  Viridis ;  from  the  Seeds  or
Fruit  of  Carum  Carui,  Cubeba.  Officinalis,  Eugenia  Pimenta,  Fozniculum
Officinale,  Juniperus  Communis,  Myristica  Moschata,  Pimpinella  Ani-
sum;  from  the  Flowers  of  Anthemis  Nobilis,  Lavandula  Vera ;  from  the
undeveloped  Dried  Flowers  of  Caryopliyllus  Aromaticus  ;  from  the  Tops
of  Juniperus  Sabina,  Rosmarinus  Officinalis ;  from  the  Bark  of  Cinna-
momum  Zeylanicum.  The  Water  distilled  over  in  the  preparation  of  the
several  Oils  should  be  preserved  for  medical  use."

Volatile  Oils  are  contained  in  cells,  generally  peculiar,  and  often  so
large  as  to  be  distinct  to  the  naked  eye.  They  frequently  exist  in  such
an  abundance,  that  they  may  be  obtained  by  mere  expression,  as  with
the  Oils  of  Lemon,  Orange,  Bergamot,  and  Citron.  Sometimes  they
exude  spontaneously  or  from  incisions,  in  combination  with  gum  or  resin,
as  in  the  case  of  Turpentine.  And  again,  the  Volatile  Oil  is  not  formed
in  the  Plants,  until  the  reaction  of  Water  is  obtained  upon  certain  con-
stituent principles,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Oils  of  Black  Mustard  Seed,  and
Bitter  Almonds,  and  perhaps  Peach  Leaves,  Peach  Kernels,  etc.  Most
commonly  it  adheres  with  more  or  less  force  to  the  parts  of  the  Plant
containing  it,  either  becoming  destroyed  or  dispersed  when  the  Plant  is
dried  or  retained  in  part  or  altogether,  even  when  long  kept.


1142  Pharmacy.

Volatile  Oils  may  be  obtained  from  substances  eitber  in  tbe  Recent  or
Dried  state  ;  some  articles  must  be  used  Fresh,  from  tbe  fact  that  the
Oil  becomes  lost  by  drying,  as  is  tbe  case  with  Roses,  Orange  Flowers,
etc.  ;  and  the  greatest  yield  is  obtained  from  most  of  the  Aromatic
Plants  by  Distilling  them  while  Fresh ;  though  some  believe  that  mode-
rate desiccation  ensures  a  larger  product.  When  Dried  substances  are
to  be  submitted  to  distillation,  they  should  first  be  sliced,  rasped,  shaved,
or  bruised,  according  to  the  character  of  the  agent,  and  then  allowed  to
macerate  in  Water,  until  it  has  thoroughly  penetrated  them.  Steam
Heat  is  the  best  for  the  preparation  of  Oils,  because  it  is  less  apt  to
injure  them  ;  but  some  Oils  will  not  readily  ascend  with  Steam  at  212°,
in  consequence  of  which  Water  saturated  with  Salt  is  used,  and  which
does  not  boil  under  230°.  It  must  be  recollected  that  Volatile  Oils  are
injured  by  Heat,  and  that  in  consequence,  the  temperature  of  the  Heat
employed  in  the  Distillation  should  be  as  low  as  may  be  consistent  for
the  ascent  of  the  Oil.

The  Water  employed  in  distillation  answers  a  two-fold  purpose,  that
of  regulating  the  Temperature,  and  thereby  preventing  the  decomposi-
tion of  the  vegetable  substance,  and  also  that  of  facilitating  the  vola-
tilization of  the  oil,  which,  though  requiring  a  much  higher  temperature
when  distilled  alone,  yet  readily  rises  with  the  vapor  of  water.  Some
attention,  however,  must  be  paid  to  the  quantity  of  water  used,  because
if  in  too  large  a  quantity  it  may  hold  the  oil  in  solution  when  the  mixed
vapors  are  condensed ;  and  when  in  very  large  proportion,  no  oil  what-
ever may  be  obtained  separate.  Again,  if  it  be  too  small  in  quantity,
the  whole  of  the  oil  will  not  pass  over,  and  the  plant,  by  adhering  to
the  sides  of  the  vessel,  will  be  burnt.  More  water  is  required  for
dried  plants  than  for  recent  ones,  and  enough  should  always  be  added  to
cover  the  whole  solid  ingredient.  The  quantity  of  water  together  with
that  of  the  plant  combined,  should  never  exceed  three-fourths  of  the
capacity  of  the  alembic,  lest  the  liquor  boil  over.  In  cases  where  the
oil  is  so  small  in  quantity  that  it  becomes  dissolved  in  the  water,  it  is
removed  by  cohobation ;  a  process  which  consists  in  redistilling  the  same
water  several  times  from  fresh  portions  of  the  plant,  till  the  quantity  of
oil  which  comes  over  exceeds  the  solvent  power  of  the  water.  As  the
mixed  vapors  of  oil  and  water  are  generally  of  a  milky  character  when
condensed,  distillation  should  be  continued  as  long  as  this  milky  appear-
ance is  observed  in  the  condensed  fluid  which  comes  over.  The  oil  is
separated  from  the  water  by  instruments  adapted  for  the  purpose,  called
Separatories,  of  which  there  are  several  in  use,  known  as  the  Florentine
Receiver,  Oil-separators,  etc.  (See  Procter's  Mohr  and  Redwood's  Phar-
macy, pages  351-356.)

Volatile  oils  which  have  at  first  an  unpleasant  empyreumatic  odor,
should  be  allowed  to  remain  for  a  few  days  in  vessels  loosely  covered
with  paper,  or  until  this  peculiar  odor  has  disappeared. They  should


Olea  Destillata.  1143

always  be  kept  in  well  closed,  dark  bottles;  otherwise  they  absorb
oxygen  from  the  atmosphere,  become  turbid,  deposit  resin,  and  lose  the
purity  and  richness  of  their  aroma.  These  may,  in  a  great  measure,  be
restored  by  agitating  them  with  animal  charcoal  recently  heated ;  this
will  also  answer  the  purpose  of  freeing  them  from  water,  which  injures
some  oils.

"The  following  Table,  showing  the  proportion  of  Volatile  Oil  obtained
from  the  chief  Medicinal  Vegetable  Substances,  according  to  the  most
recent  experiments,  will  be  found  useful  in  several  ways.  Among  other
things  it  illustrates  several  of  the  general  statements  now  made  as  to  the
influence  of  modes  of  preparation  and  circumstances  in  vegetation  upon
the  quantity  of  oil.  The  data  are  chiefly  extracted  or  calculated  from
experiments  by  M.  Raybaud  in  the  Journal  de  Pharmacie,  xx. — by  Dr.
Martius  in  Reperlorium,  fur  die  Pharmacie,  xxxix. — by  Dr.  Bley  in  the
same  work,  xlviii. — by  M.  Dann  and  by  M.  Voelter  in  the  same  work,
lv.; — and  a  few  have  been  added  from  experiments  of  my  own.  The
numbers  represent  the  number  of  ounces  obtained  from  100  pounds
avoirdupois.  The  experiments  of  the  continental  authorities  were  com-
monly made  on  the  large  scale.  My  own  were  made  on  a  small  scale
with  the  apparatus  at  page  vii.,  and  the  gi'aduated  receiver  at  page
xxxi.;  and  from  a  comparative  trial  in  one  or  two  instances  upon  a  large
scale,  I  am  disposed  to  give  the  preference  for  accuracy  to  small  opera-
tions, when  they  are  carefully  conducted.  The  letters  before  the
figures  refer  to  the  authority  for  each.

Amygdalus  communis. Bitter  almond, Ra.  0.38

Amygdalus  communis. Bitter  almond, Vo.  7.70

Amygdalus  communis. Bitter  almond  (Duflos), 0.8  to.  4.80

Angelica  Archangelica, — dried  root, Ra.  4.50

Anthemis  nobilis, — fresh  flowers  raised  at  Grasse, Ra.  0.75

Anthemis  nobilis, — dried  flowers, do Ra.  1.38

Anthemis  nobilis, — dried  flowers,  long  kept,  Germany, Bl.  4.50

Anthemis  nobilis, — flowers  fresh  dried, Steer.  5.33

Anthemis  nobilis, — flowers  12  months  dried, Steer.  3.0

Apium  graveolens, — dried  fruit, Ra.  9.00

Apium  Petroselinum, — fresh  herb,  after  flowering, Ra.  3.38

Apium  Petroselinum, — dry  fruit,  France, Ra.  12.0

Apium  Pftroselinum, — dry  fruit,  Germany, Da.  30.0

Artemisia  Absinthium, — fresh  herb,  Paris, Ra.  12.0

Artemisia  Absinthium, — dried  herb,  recent,  Germany, .Ma.  6.0

Artemisia  Absinthium, — dried  herb,  a  year  old,  Germany, Bl.  8.75

Artemisia  Absinthium, — dried  herb,  3  years  old,  Germany, Ma.  5.0

Artemisia ? "Wormseed  of  commerce, Ra.  3.0

Artemisia ? Levant  wormseed, Vo.  10.8

Calamus  aromaticus, — fresh  root,  Germany, Ma.  16.0

Calamus  aromaticus, — recently  dried,  Germany, . , Bl.  17.5

Calamus  aromaticus, — long  dried,  Germany, Da.  14,3

Carum  Carui, — dried  fruit  of  French  commerce, Ra.  50.12

Carum  Carui, — dried  fruit  of  German  commerce, Ma.  66.5

Carum  Carui, — do do Da.  46  6

Carum  Carui, — do do Vo  70.0

Caryophyllus  aromaticus. Cloves,  Bourbon, Ra.  144.0

Caryophyllus  aromaticus. Cloves,  Cayenne, Ra.  152.0

Caryophyllus  aromaticus. Cloves, do Bl.  125.0

Caryophyllus  aromaticus. Cloves,  Molucca:  French  commerce, Ra.  148.0

Caryophyllus  aromaticus. Cloves, do English  commerce, ...  .Ra.  112.5


1144


Ph  ARM  ACT.


Caryophyllus  aromaticus. Cloves,  average  German  commerce, Vo.

CaryophyJlus  aromaticus. Cloves,  fines!,  do Da.

Caryophyllus  aromaticus. Cloves,  German  commerce, Steer.

Cinnamomum  zeylanicum,  cinnamon  of  commerce, Ra.

Cinnamomum  Cassia. — cassia'bark  of  commerce, Ra.

Citrus  Aurantium, — Sweet  orange  flowers,  1  May,  Nice, Ra.

Citrus  vulgaris, — Bitter  orange  flowers,  7  May,  Nice, Ra.

Citrus  vulgaris,  do.  do. 12  May,  Carmet, Ra.

Citrus  vulgaris,  do.  do. 16  July,  Paris, Ra.

Citrus  vulgaris,  do.  do. 14  Dec,  Paris, Ra.

Citrus  Aurantium, — rind  of  100  oranges,  by  expression, Ra.

Citrus  Aurantium,  do.  by  distillation, Ra.

Citrus  vulgaris, — rind  of  100  oranges,  by  expression, Ra.

Citrus  vulgaris  do  by  distillation, Ra.

Citrus  Limetta,  rind  of  100  limes,  by  distillation, Ra.

Citrus  Bergamium,  rind  of  100  bergamots,  by  distillation, Ra.

Citrus  Limouum,  rind  of  100  lemons  by  expression, Ra.

Citrus  Limonum,  do.  by  distillation, Ra.

Cocblearia  Amioracia, — fresh  seeds Ra.

Coriandrum  sativum, — dry  fruit  of  French  commerce, Ra.

Coriandrum  sativum, — dry  fruit  of  German  commerce, Da.

Oroton  Eleutheria, — cascarilla  bark, Bl.

Cuminum  Cyminum, — dry  fruit  of  French  commerce, Ra.

Cuminum  Cyminum, — dry  fruit  of  German  commerce, Bl.

Daucus  Carota, — dry  fruit, Ra.

Daucus  Carota, — fresh  root, Ra.

Dracocephalum  moldavicum,  flowering  herb, Ra.

Drimys  Winteri.-Winter's  bark  (probably,  however,  only  Canella alba),  Ra.

Eugenia  Pimenta, — pimenta  berries,  Jamaica Ra.

Fceniculum*  officinale  — dry  fruit  of  French  commerce, Ra.

Fceniculum*  officinale, — dry  fruit  of  German  commerce, Ma.

Foeniculum*  officinale,  do  German  commerce, Bl.

Fceniculum*  officinale,  do  German  commerce, Da.

Fceniculum  officinale, — flowering  herb,  Grasse, Ra.

Fceniculum  officinale, — herb  after  flowering,  Grasse, Ra.

Galipea  officinalis, — Casparia-bark  of  commerce, Ra.

Genista  canariensis,  Rhodium-wood, Ra.

Geum  urbanum, — dry  roots, Ra.

Hyssopus  officinalis, — flowering  herb,  Grasse, Ra.

Illicium  anisatum, — star-anise-fruit, Ra.

Illicium  anisatum, — star-anise-fruit, Da.

Juniper  us  communis, — green  berries,  12  Sept. Ra.

Juniperus  communis, — ripe  berries.  I  Dec.  France Ra.

Juniperus  communis,  do.  fresh,  Germany, Da.

Juniperus  communis,  do.  a  year  old,  Germany, Ma.

Juniperus  communis,  do.  a  year  old,  Germany, Bl.

Juniperus  Sabina, — fresh  twigs,  5  March,  Grasse, Ra.

Juniperus  Sabina, — fresh  twigs,  2  Oct.  Paris Ra.

Juniperus  Sabina, — dried  twigs,  recent,  Germany, Ma.

Juniperus  Sabina, — dried  twigs,  a  year  old,  Germany, Ma.

Larix  Cedrus, — fresh  cedar  wood,  Paris, Ra.

Larix  Cedrus, — cedar  wood  of  commerce Ra.

Laurus  nobilis, — fresh  leaves,  26  Jan.  Paris Ra.

Laurus  nobilis, — leaves  some  years  dried,  Germany,  ... Bl.

Laurus  nobilis, —  (fresh  leaves,) poor  soil,  low  site, Chr.

Laurus  nobilis, —  <early  in  Oct  >  poor  soil,  high  site, Chr.

Laurus  nobilis, — (near  Edinb.  )  very  fine  soil,  low  site, Chr.

Lavandula  vera, — flowering  herbs,  2  Aug.  Grasse Ra.

Lavandula  vera,  do  2  Aug.  Grasse,  north  exposure Ra.

Lavandula  vera, — flowering  herb,  26  July  Soureillas, Ra-

Lavandula  vera, — herb  after  flowering,  26  Sept.  Soureillas, Ra-

Lavandula  Spica. — fresh  herb,  24  July,  Paris, Ra.

Lavandula  Spica, — fresh  herb,  4  Aug.  Grasse, Ra.

Lavandula  Stoechas, — dried  spikes, Ra.

Ligusticum  Levisticum, — fresh  herb,  Paris, >  ■  -Ra-

Melissa  officinalis, — fresh  flowering  herb, Ra.


226.0
2f>0.0
272.0
1.56
12.0
5.0
5.9
4.12
0.9
6.5
2.5
2.75
4.0
4.25
2.12
2.9
1.9
1.4
0.9
2.3
9.0
5.62
44.0
32.5
0.66
0.14
2.10
0.50
12.38
33.0
56.6
S3.0
60.4
4.9
6.0
1.5
0.47
0.53
5.30
34.21
25.5
39
7.75
15.5
10.8
16.25
19.05
14.25
40.0
25.0
0.3
4.25
525
410
7.33
6.9
17.12
11.5
9.12
9.0
15.0
7.62
12.5
6.43
1.12
0.25


*  It  does  not  appear  what  is  the  exact  species  or  variety  of  fennel  understood  by  the  authors  ot
these  four  experiments,  as  they  use  the  vague  name  of  Anct/ium  Fceniculum.


Olea  Destillata.


1145


Mentha  piperita, — fresh  tops  in  flower,  Grasse Ra.  6.25

Mentha  piperita, — fresh  tops  in  flower,  Paris, Ra.  3.40

Mentha  piperita, — dried  tops  in flower,  Germany, Bl.  15.62

Mentha  piperita, — dried  tops  in  flower,  Germany, Ma.  21.0

Mentha  Pulegium,  fresh  flowering  herb, Ra.  1.0

Myristica  moschata  — mace  of  commerce,  finest, Vo.  154.0

Myristica  moschata, — do. fine, Bl.  125.0

Myristica  moschata, — do. worm  eaten, Bl.  65.6

Myristica  moschata, — nutmegs  of  commerce,  fine, Bl.  108.25

Myristica  moschata, do. worm  eaten, Bl.  64.1

Myrtus  communis, — fresh  leaves,  Sept.  20 — Grasse, Ra.  4.5

Myrtus  communis, — fresh  leaves,  Sept.  6 — Paris Ra.  2.5

Origanum  Majorana, — fresh  flowering  herb,  Aug.  3 — Grasse, Ra.  8.5

Origanum  Majorana, — fresh  flowering  herb,  Aug.  3 — Paris, Ra.  4.4

Origanum  vulgare, — fresh  flowering  herb,  Sept.  15 — Paris, Ra.  0.4

Pimpinella  Anisum, — dry  fruit  of  French  commerce, Ra.  35.12

Pimpinella  Anisum, — dry  fruit  new,  German  commerce, Ma.  37.5

Pimpinella  Anisum, — dry  fruit,  old, — German  commerce, Ma.  27.0

Pimpinella  Anisum, — dry  fruit  of  German  commerce, Vo.  25.0

Pimpinella  Anisum, do. do Da.  43.75

Piper  Cubeba, — Cubebs  of  French  commerce, Ra.  19.5

Piper  nigrum, — White  pepper  of do Ra.  16.0

Piper  nigrum, — Black  pepper  of do Ra.  18.12

Prunus  Lauro-cerasus, — fresh  leaves,  November  23, — Paris, Ra.  2.12

Prunus  Lauro-cerasus  ["fresh leaves!  undeveloped,  June  7, Chr.  10.13

Primus  Lauro-cerasus  J  from  the  same  I  half-grown,  June  7, Chr.  7.20

Prunus  Lauro-cerasus  1  plants  : near  [  full-gr.  8  weeks  on  tree,  Jy.15,  Chr.  4.96

Prunus  Lauro-cerasus  [Edinburgh, J  12  months  on  tree,  June  2,.  .Chr.  1.04

Prunus  Lauro-cerasus (Fresh  leaves  of  the  samej 3  mo.  on  tree,. . .  .Chr.  7.04

Prunus  Lauro-cerasus /plant,  1  Sept.  1836,  Edin.) 15  mo.  on  tree,. .  .Chr.  2.24

Renealmia  Cardamomurn, — lesser  cardamoms, Ra.  11.42

Rosa  centifolia,  fresh  flowers,  Grasse , Ra.  0.25

Rosmarinus  officinalis, — fresh  flowering  herb,  Grasse, Ra.  5.0

Rosmarinus  officinalis, do Paris, Ra.  3.5

Rata  graveolens,  fresh  flowering  herb,  20  July,  Grasse, Ra.  4.12

Ruta  graveolens, do. 28  July,  Paris, Ra.  0.63

Ruta  graveolens, — flowering  herb,  newly  dried,  Germany, Bl.  4.4

Ruta  graveolens, — dried  seeds,  South  of  France, Ra.  19.0

Salvia  officinalis,  v.  minor, — fresh  herb,  12  Mar.  Grasse, Ra.  6.0

Salvia  officinalis,  v.  minor, — fresh  herb,  14  June,  Paris, .Ra.  2.5

Salvia  officinalis,  v.  major, — fresh  herb,  12  Mar.  Grasse, Ra.  4.0

Salvia  officinalis,  v.  major, — fresh  herb,  14  June,  Paris, Ra.  3.05

Santalum  album, — sandal  wood  of  commerce, Ra.  5.0

Sinapis  nigra, — black  mustard-seed,  Germany,  12  months  old, Da.  3.9

Sinapis  nigra, — black  mustard-seed,  Germany,  fresh, Da.  5.0

Sinapis  nigra, — black  mustard-seed,  France,  fresh, Da.  7.75

Sinapis  nigra, — black  mustard-seed,  France, Vo.  9.1

Tanacetum  vulgare, — fresh  flowering  herb,  9  July,  Grasse, Ra.  1.2

Tanacetum  vulgare, — fresh  flowering  herb,  25  July,  Paris, Ra.  5.8

Tanacetum  vulgare, — fresh  tops,  Germany, Da.  5.0

Tanacetum  vulgare,  dried  flowering  herb,  Germany, Bl.  15.6

Thuya  occidentalis,  ( fresh "1  Aged,  stunted  tree;  exposed.  Oct.  21.. Chr.  10.8

Thuya  occidentalis,  J  twigs  I  Aged,  vigorous;  sheltered.  Oct.  21,  . .  .Chr.  10.25

Thuva  occidentalis,  |  near [  Young,  vigorous;  exposed.  Oct.  9,. ..  .Chr.  18.25

Thuya  occidentalis,  [Edin.  J  Young,  vig.;  exposed;  fine  soil.  Sept. 26  Chr.  26.40

Thymus  Serpyllum, — fresh  flowering  herb,  6  Aug.,  Grasse, Ra.  5.0

Thymus  Serpyllum, — fresh  flowering  herb,  5  July,  Paris, Ra.  0.9

Thymus  vulgaris, — fresh  flowering  herb,  16  Aug.,  Grasse, Ra.  6.5

Thvmus  vulgaris, — fresh  flowering  herb,  13  July,  Paris Ra.  3.75

Valeriana  officinalis, — dry  root,  a  year  old,  Germany, HI.  30.16

Valeriana  officinalis, — the  root,  Germany, Da.  15.0

Valeriana  officinalis, — the  root,  Germany Vo.  10.5

Verbena  odorata, — fresh  flowering  herb,  Paris, Ra.  3.1

Zingiber  officinale, — dry  root  of  commerce, Ra.  10.8

The  facts  in  the  preceding  table  seem  to  show  that  the  flowers  of  Anthe-
mis  Xouilis,  the  berries  of  Juniperus  Communis,  and  the  root  of  Acorm


1146  Pharmacy.

Calamus  may  be  both  dried  and  long  kept,  without  material  loss  of
volatile  oil ;  but  that  the  herb  of  Artemisia  Absinthium  and  the  tops  of
Juniperus  Sabina,  though  they  may  be  dried,  cannot  be  long  preserved,
without  loss.  It  farther  appears  that  the  seed  of  Sinapis  Nigra  cannot
be  long  kept  without  material  loss ;  and  that  the  mace  and  kernel  of
Myristica  Moschata  suffer  greatly  in  their  proportion  of  oil,  when  attacked
by  worms.  The  influence  of  season  is  well  exemplified  in  the  case  of
the  flowers  of  Citrus  Aurantium,  which  is  well  known  to  flower  at  dif-
ferent periods  of  the  year.  The  effect  of  climate  is  equally  well  shown
in  many  examples,  such  as  the  wood  of  Larix  Cedrus,  the  herb  or  flow-
ering tops  of  Lavandula  Vera,  Lavandula.  Spica,  Mentha  Piperita,  Myr-
tles Vulgaris,  Origanum  Majorana,  Rosmarinus  Officinalis,  Thymus
Serpyllum,  Thymus  Vulgaris,  Tanacetvm  Vulgare,  and  the  seeds  of
Sinapis  Xigra.  Under  this  head,  the  great  superiority  of  Grasse,  in  the
south  of  France,  over  Paris  for  raising  plants  for  distilling  oils,  is  remark-
able. The  effect  of  soil  or  site  is  exhibited  in  my  own  experiments  with
the  leaves  of  Laurus  Xobilis  and  Thuya  Occidentalis ;  and  that  of  the
progress  of  vegetation  is  excellently  shown  in  the  instances  of  the  herb
of  Foeniculum  Officinale  and  Lavandula  Vera,  the  berries  of  Juniperus
Communis,  but  above  all,  the  leaves  of  Prunus  Laurocerasics.  Farther,
the  table  presents  many  examples,  but  especially  under  Caryophyllus  Aro-
maticus,  Carum  Carui,  Coriandrum  Sativum,  and  lllicium  Anisatum,  of
great  differences  prevailing  in  the  relative  proportion  of  volatile  oil,  and
consequently  in  relative  activity,  between  different  specimens  of  the
same  vegetable  substances  as  it  occurs  in  ordinary  commerce.  In  con-
clusion, it  should  be  observed,  that  the  circumstances  most  favorable  to
the  proportion  of  volatile  oil  are  not  necessarily  always  most  favorable
to  its  quality.  Raybaud  mentions,  that  the  cloves  of  English  commerce,
which  will  be  seen  (  Caryophyllus  Aromaticus)  from  the  table  to  have
furnished  the  lowest  proportion  of  oil,  produce  it  of  finer  quality  than
other  kinds  he  examined.  And  lavender,  which  yields  considerably
more  volatile  oil  after  flowering  than  during  inflorescence  (Lavandula
Vera),  produces  in  the  latter  case  an  oil  of  more  delicate  fragrance  than
in  the  former ;  and  it  is  not  so  acrid."

The  above  useful  information  is  extracted  from  Christison's  Dispensa-
tory, and  will,  undoubtedly,  prove  serviceable  to  the  apothecary  and
manufacturing  chemist.

As  it  is  sometimes  required  to  know  the  number-  of  drops  which
certain  volatile  oils  yield  to  a  fluidrachm,  the  following  table,  extracted
from  the  U.  S.  Dispensatory,  and  made  out  by  Professor  Procter,  will
be  found  of  some  value ;  although  it  must  be  recollected  that,  as  the
size  and  number  of  drops  depend  upon  the  shape  of  the  part  from
which  they  fall,  these  results  are  only  approximative  and  relative:

"  The  columns  of  figures  represent  the  number  of  drops  in  a  fluid
drachm  of  the  oils  respectively,  the  first  column  giving  those  obtained


Olea  Destillata.  1147

by  dropping  the  oils  from  the  bottles  in  which  they  are  commonly  kept,
the  second  by  dropping  them  from  a  minim  measure.


Oleum  Mentha  Piperitae 103  109

Menthae  Viridis 89  94

" Rosmarini 104  105

" Sabinse 102  108

Sassafras 102  100

Tanaceti 92  111

Valerianae 116  110

Creasotum , 95  91


Oleum  Anisi 85  86

* Carui 106  108

" Caryophylli 103  103

Chenopodii 97  100

" Cinnamomi 100  102

" Cubebae  86  96

" Fceniculi 103  103

" Gaultheriae 102  101

" Hedeomae 91  91 1

Volatile  oils  possess  almost  universally  the  peculiar  medicinal  pro-
perties of  the  plants  from  which  they  are  obtained.  They  are  most
commonly  used  in  the  form  of  alcoholic  tincture,  under  the  name  of
Essences,  but  may  also  be  given  dropped  on  a  lump  of  sugar,  triturated
with  ten  or  twelve  times  their  weight  of  sugar,  forming  an  oleo-saccha-
rum,  and  then  dissolved  in  water,  or  they  may  be  made  into  an  emul-
sion with  water,  sugar,  and  gum  Arabic.

Oleum  Anisi. Oil  of  Anise.

History. — This  may  be  prepared  according  to  the  process  of  the  U.  S.
Pharmacopoeia;  the  seed  yields,  according  to  various  authors,  from  1.56
to  3.12  per  cent,  of  oil.  The  oil  is  colorless  or  yellowish,  possesses  a
powerful  odor  and  taste  of  the  seed,  and  its  specific  gravity  varies  from
0.9768  to  0.9903,  increasing  with  its  age.  At  50°  it  forms  a  concrete
crystalline  mass,  and  does  not  melt  under  62°.  Alcohol  of  0.840  dis-
solves only  42  per  cent,  of  the  oil,  but  which  is  readily  soluble  in  alcohol
of  0.806.  It  contains  Stearoptene,  a  principle  of  volatile  oils  which  is
solid  at  ordinary  temperatures,  and  is  heavier  than  water;  and  Eleop-
tene,  another  principle,  which  is  fluid  and  more  volatile.  Both  principles
are  said  to  have  the  same  ultimate  composition,  consisting  of  ten  equiva-
lents of  carbon,  six  of  hydrogen,  and  one  of  oxygen  (Cio  Hb  O).
When  long  kept  the  stearoptene  becomes  liquid,  which  is  owing  to
absorption  of  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere.  Spermaceti,  wax,  or  cam-
phor is  sometimes  added  to  oil  of  anise  as  adulterations ;  they  may  be
known  by  the  odor  of  the  latter,  and  the  insolubility  of  the  former  in
alcohol. Nearly  all  the  oil  used  in  this  country  is  imported.

Properties  and  Uses. —  Carminative  and  antispasmodic,  and  especially
adapted  to  flatulency  and  colic  of  infants.  It  likewise,  in  connection  with
aqua  ammonia,  affords  relief  in  spasmodic  cough.  The  dose  is  from
five  to  fifteen  drops.  The  oil  of  star  aniseed  (  Oleum  Badiani)  has  the
fla.vor  of  anise,  and  is  frequently  substituted  for  it.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Spigeliae  et  Sennee  Fluidum ;  Mistura  Caju-
puti  Composita;  Tinctura  Anisi;  Tinctura  Opii  Camphorata.

Oleum  Anthemidis. Oil  of  Chamomile.

History. — Oil  of  Chamomile  is  obtained  by  distillation  of  Chamomile


114:8  Pharmacy.

Flowers  with  Water,  a  thousand  parts  of  which  yield  about  eight  parts
of  oil :  when  first  obtained  it  is  greenish  or  bluish,  but  finally  becomes
yellowish-brown  ;  its  specific  gravity  is  about  0.9083.  It  has  the  odor  of
chamomile  flowers,  and  an  aromatic,  somewhat  pungent  taste.  It  is
said  to  be  a  mixture  of  carbo-hydrogen  with  an  oxygenated  oil.  It  is
prepared  in  Europe.

Properties  arid  Uses. — Oil  of  Chamomile  is  tonic  and  antispasmodic ;
and  has  been  found  very  serviceable  in  spasm  of  the  stomach,  painful
dysmenorrhea,  hiccough,  pertussis,  and  to  prevent  or  lessen  the  griping
influence  of  some  cathartics.  The  dose  is  from  five  to  fifteen  drops.
The  Matricaria  Chamomilla  furnishes  a  thick,  opake,  dark-blue  oil,
becoming  brown  and  unctuous  by  age,  and  which  is  sometimes  used
under  the  name  of  Oil  of  Chamomile.  It  is  less  antispasmodic  than  the
true  chamomile  oil.

Oleum  Beroamii. Oil  of  Bergamot.

History. — Oil  of  Bergamot  is  the  volatile  oil  of  the  rind  of  the  fruit
of  Citrus  Limetta,  from  which  it  is  procured  by  expression,  in  the  same
manner  as  for  obtaining  the  oil  of  lemon.  It  is  imported  from  Italy,
Portugal,  and  the  South  of  France.  It  may  be  obtained  by  distillation,
but  the  product  is  not  so  agreeable  as  by  expression.  The  bergamot
tree  has  small  and  white  flowers  ;  oblong-ovate,  acute  or  obtuse,  dentate
leaves,  paler  on  the  under  surface,  with  winged  or  margined  petioles;
and  the  fruit  is  roundish  or  pyriform,  terminated  by  an  obtuse  point,
with  concave  receptacles  of  oil  in  the  rind ;  its  pulp  is  acid,  rather  aro-
matic, and  pleasant  to  the  taste ;  its  rind  is  pale-yellow,  shinino-,
abounding  in  oil.  The  oil  has  a  peculiar,  agreeable,  rich  fragrance,
somewhat  resembling  oil  of  lemons  but  more  grateful,  a  bitter,  aro-
matic, pungent  taste,  and  a  pale  greenish-yellow  color.  Its  specific
gravity  is  0.885,  and  it  may  be  determined  from  oils  of  orange  and
lemon,  by  its  ready  solubility  in  liquor  potassa,  forming  a  clear  solution.
In  composition,  it  resembles  the  oil  of  lemons.

Properties  and  Uses. — Gently  excitant ;  but  is  used  almost  exclusively
as  a  perfume.

Oleum  Cajuputi. Cajeput  Oil.

History. — This  oil  is  obtained  from  the  leaves  of  Melaleuca  Cajuputi,
a  tree  growing  in  the  Moluccas  and  neighboring  islands,  and  belonging  to
the  Nat.  Ord. — Myrtaceae,  Sex.  Syst. — Polyadelphia  Icosandria.  It  is
a  small  tree,  with  an  erect  but  crooked  stem,  and  scattered  branches,  the
slender  twigs  of  which  droop  like  those  of  the  weeping  willow,  (Salix
Babylonica).  The  bark  is  soft,  spongy,  lamellated,  of  a  whitish  ash
color,  throwing  off  its  exterior  layer  from  time  to  time  in  flakes,  like  the
birch  tree.  The  petioles  are  short,  and  the  leaves  are  alternate,  lanceo-
late, sericeous  when  young,  smooth  when  full  grown,  deep  green,  three
and five-nerved, slightly  falcate, entire, from  three  to  five  inches  in


Olea  Destillata.  1149

length,  from  one-half  to  three-quarters  of  an  inch  broad,  and  exhaling
a  strong  aromatic  odor,  when  bruised.  The  flowers  are  small,  white,
inodorous,  sessile,  and  disposed  in  terminal  and  axillary  downy  spikes,
with  solitary,  lanceolate,  three-flowered  bracts.  The  filaments  are  three
or  four  times  longer  than  the  petals,  and  both  are  inserted  in  the  rim  of
the  calyx.

Cajeput  oil  is  obtained  by  distillation  of  the  Leaves,  which  yield  it  only
in  small  proportion  ;  this,  together  with  the  extensive  employment  of  it
in  India,  renders  it  a  costly  article.  It  is  imported  from  the  East  Indies
in  glass  bottles.  The  leaves  are  collected  in  the  autumn,  allowed  to
steep  for  a  night,  and  then  distilled  in  copper  vessels.  The  oil  is  very
liquid,  transparent,  of  a  grass-green  color,  a  strong  penetrating  odor
partaking  both  of  camphor  and  of  cardamom,  and  a  warm,  pungent
taste,  succeeded  by  an  impression  of  coolness.  Its  green  color  may  be
removed  by  rectification,  and  is  not  essential;  nor  is  it  owing  to  the
presence  of  copper,  as  was  at  one  time  supposed.  True,  it  sometimes
contains  copper,  but  the  pure  green  oil  has  given  no  indications  of  the
presence  of  this  metal.  Copper  may  be  added  to  imitate  or  preserve
the  green  color,  but  its  proportion  is  so  small,  as  not  to  interfere  with
the  internal  use  of  the  oil ;  from  a  pound  of  the  oil  of  commerce,  Guibort
procured  only  two  and  a  half  grains  of  oxide  of  copper.  The  copper
may  be  separated  from  the  oil  by  distillation  with  water,  or  by  agitation
with  a  solution  of  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium.  Oil  of  Cajeput  is  vola-
tile, inflammable,  leaving  no  residue  after  burning,  wholly  soluble  in
alcohol,  and  of  the  specific  gravity,  varying  from  0.914  to  0.9274.  Sul-
phuric and  nitric  acids  exert  but  little  action  on  it.  When  distilled,  a
colorless  oil  first  comes  over  of  sp.  gr.  0.897,  and  then  a  green  oil,
denser,  weaker  in  odor,  but  more  acrid.  It  is  composed  of  ten  equiva-
lents of  carbon  60,  nine  of  hydrogen  9,  and  one  of  oxygen  8=77.

In  consequence  of  its  high  price  it  is  very  subject  to  adulteration.
Oils  of  rosemary  or  turpentine,  impregnated  wTith  camphor  and  bruised
cardamom  seeds,  and  colored  with  resin  of  milfoil,  are  often  sold  as
genuine  oil.  Zeller  considers  iodine  the  best  test,  the  addition  of  which,
reacts  moderately  energetic,  with  but  a  slight  increase  of  temperature,
and  a  faint  development  of  orange-colored  vapors,  after  which  inspissa-
tion  takes  place,  and  soon  results  in  a  dry,  greenish-brown,  brittle  mass.
The  genuine  oil,  it  must  be  recollected,  burns  entirely  away  leaving  no
residue  ;  and  beside  the  test  above  given,  copper  may  be  detected  by
dissolving  the  residuum  which  is  left  after  burning  the  oil  in  nitric  acid,
which  becomes  violet-colored  when  ammonia  is  added  in  excess.

Properties  and  Uses. —  Cajeput  Oil  is  a  powerful  diffusive  stimulant,
diaphoretic,  and  antispasmodic.  When  swallowed  it  occasions  a  sense
of  heat,  with  an  increased  action  of  the  pulse,  and  occasionally  profuse
diaphoresis.  It  is  very  much  esteemed  in  the  islands  of  the  Indian  ocean,
the  inhabitants  of  which  employ  it  extensively  in  rheumatism,  palsy,


1150  Pharmacy.

epilepsy,  and  many  other  diseases ;  using  it  both  internally  and  as  a  local
application.  It  may  be  advantageously  employed  internally  in  chronic
rheumatism,  hysteria,  colic,  spasms  or  cramps  of  the  stomach  or  bowels,
cholera-morbus,  Asiatic  cholera,  in  the  typhoid  stage  of  fevers,  and
wherever  a  powerful  stimulant  is  required.  It  should  never  be  given
internally  when  inflammation  is  present.  Externally,  it  is  very  beneficial
as  an  application  to  rheumatic,  neuralgic,  and  other  pains,  and  may  be
used  alone,  or  in  combination  with  other  oils.  Applied  to  the  cavity  of  a
carious  tooth,  it  relieves  toothache.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  ten  drops,
on  sugar,  or  in  emulsion.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Cajuputi  Composita  ;  Mistura  Olei  Camphorata  ;
Tinctura  Camphorae  Composita.

Oleum  Cari. Oleum  Carui. Oil  of  Caraway.

History. — This  oil  is  easily  separated  by  distillation  of  the  fresh  fruit
with  water,  which  yields  on  an  average  about  4.7  per  cent.  It  is  at  first
pale-yellow,  but  becomes  brownish  by  time,  possesses  the  odor  of  the
fruit,  with  an  aromatic  acrid  taste.  Its  specific  gravity  is  variously  given
as  0.946  and  0.931.  It  consists  principally  of  a  hydro-carbon,  Cio  Hs,
Carvene,  and  an  oxygenated  oil,  Carvacrol.

When  Oil  of  Caraway  is  distilled  with  hydrated  phosphoric  acid,
the  distilled  liquor  being  poured  back  into  the  retort  until  it  ceases  to
have  the  smell  of  caraway,  an  oily  liquid  separates  from  the  phosphoric
acid,  having  a  very  disagreeable  odor,  and  a  strong  taste,  which  is  called
Carvacrol.  Or,  if  a  saturated  solution  of  iodine  be  distilled  with  Oil  of
Caraway,  until  no  more  hydriodic  acid  is  formed,  a  red  mass  will  be
formed  in  the  retort.  This  must  be  acted  upon  by  potassa,  and  the
yellow  solution  distilled.  Carvene  passes  over,  and  the  Carvacrol
remains  ;  this  must  be  purified  by  redistillation.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Caraway  is  a  warm  diffusible  stimulant
and  carminative.  It  is  frequently  used  to  correct  the  griping  and  nau-
seating effects  of  medicines,  also  to  increase  their  flavor.  It  is  consid-
erably used  in  cake  and  confectionary.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  or
ten  drops.  Carvacrol  placed  on  cotton,  and  inserted  into  the  cavity  of
a  carious  tooth,  is  said  to  give  immediate  relief.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Spigeliae  et  Sennse  Fluidum.

Oleum  Caryophylli. Oil  of  Cloves.

History. — Oil  of  Cloves  is  procured  by  distillation  of  bruised  cloves
with  water,  to  which  salt  is  usually  added  to  increase  the  temperature ;
the  cloves  should  be  thoroughly  exhausted  by  repeatedly  distilling  from
the  same  cloves  the  water  which  comes  over.  Good  cloves  yield  from
a  fifth  to  a  sixth  of  their  weight  of  oil.  Formerly,  the  oil  was  imported
from  Europe  or  the  East  Indies,  but  at  present,  it  is  prepared  in  this
country  from  the  Cayenne  cloves,  seven  to  nine  parts  of  which  yield  one
part  of  oil.


Olea  Destillata.  1151

When  first  obtained,  oil  of  cloves  is  very  fluid,  transparent,  and  color-
less, but  gradually  becomes  yellowish,  and  finally  reddish-brown.  It  has
the  strong,  peculiar  odor  of  cloves,  and  an  aromatic,  intensely  acrid,
burning  taste.  It  sinks  in  water,  in  which  it  is  sparingly  soluble,  and  is
completely  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  acetic  acid,  and  the  fixed  oils.  Its
specific  gravity  is  between  1.034  and  1.061.  Nitric  acid  changes  it  to  a
deep-red,  and  forms  oxalic  acid  by  the  application  of  heat.  It  is  less
volatile  than  most  of  the  other  essential  oils,  and  congeals  only  at  — 4°
F.  It  deposits  a  crystalline  stearoptene  on  long  standing.  It  consists  of
two  oils,  one  of  which  is  lighter  than  water,  the  other  heavier.  They
may  be  separated  by  distilling  the  crude  oil  from  a  solution  of  potassa,
the  light,  colorless  oil  passes  over  with  the  watery  vapor ;  its  density  is
0.918,  consists  of,  carbon  and  hydrogen,  and  is  isomeric  with  pure  oil  of
turpentine,  Cio  H*.  It  is  said  to  be  destitute  of  active  properties.  The
heavier  oil  remains  in  union  with  the  potassa,  from  which  it  may  be  ob-
tained by  the  addition  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  then  distilling.  It  is  like-
wise colorless,  but  becomes  darker  by  age,  possesses  the  peculiar  odor
and  taste  of  cloves,  boils  at  470°,  is  of  the  specific  gravity  1.079,  forms
soluble  and  crystallizable  salts  with  the  alkalies,  earths,  and  oxides  of
the  common  metals,  and  is  hence  called  Eugenic  or  Caryophyllic  Acid.
It  is  composed  of  Cn  His  Os.  The  crude  oil  of  cloves  consists  of  carbon
20,  hydrogen  12,  oxygen  5.

Oil  of  cloves  is  frequently  adulterated  with  fixed  oils,  oil  of  pimento,
and  copaiba.  It  may  be  detected  by  observing  that  the  pure  oil  sinks
in  distilled  water.  Zeller  states  that  its  purity  may  be  known  by  its
congealing  into  a  crystalline  mass  with  the  alcoholic  solution  of  potassa,
at  the  same  time  being  deprived  of  its  peculiar  odor.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Oil  of  Cloves  is  stimulant  and  irritant,  and  is
much  used  as  a  corrector  of  other  medicines,  and  as  an  external  counter-
irritant.  It  is  frequently  introduced  on  cotton  into  the  cavity  of  a  carious
tooth  to  relieve  toothache.  Its  dose  is  from  two  to  six  drops  on  sugar,
or  in  emulsion.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Cajuputi  Composita;  Mistura  Olei  Camphorata  ;
Pilulae  Aloes  Compositae.

Oleum  Chenopodii. Oil  of  Wormseed.

History.  —  Oil  of  Wormseed  is  prepared  in  this  country  ;  that  which
is  procured  from  manufacturers  in  the  vicinity  of  Baltimore  is  the  most
esteemed.  It  is  obtained  by  distillation  of  the  bruised  seed  or  ripe  tops
of  the  plant  with  water,  and  when  first  obtained  is  of  a  light  yellow  color,
but  becomes  darker  by  age.  It  possesses  the  odor  and  taste  of  the  plant,
and  has  the  specific  gravity  of  0.908.  An  oil  of  less  strength  is  pre-
pared in  the  Western  States  from  the  leaves,  stalks,  and  seed  of  the
matured  plant,  and,  probably,  possesses  similar  properties  when  given  in
larger  doses. That  from  the  seeds  always  commands  the  highest  price.


1152  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  oil  is  used  only  as  an  anthelmintic.  Its
dose  is  from  four  to  eight  drops  for  a  child,  repeated  twice  a  day  for
three  or  four  days,  and  then  followed  by  a  brisk  cathartic.  It  forms  the
basis  of  several  popular  nostrums  for  worms.

Off.  Prep. — Mistura  Chenopodii  Composita ;  Mistura  Olei  Composita.

Oleum Cinnamomi. Oil  of  Cinnamon.

History. — Oil  of  Cinnamon  is  obtained  by  macerating  coarsely  pow-
dered Cinnamon  Bark  for  two  days  in  Sea  Water,  adding  Muriate  of
Soda,  and  then  distilling.  About  one-third  of  the  oil  which  comes  over
is  light  and  floats  upon  the  Water,  while  the  rest  sinks,  and  this  sepa-
ration of  the  two  oils  continues  for  several  days.  The  Water  used  in
the  distillation  being  saturated  with  the  Oil,  is  reserved  for  future  distil-
lations. Cinnamon  Bark  yields  about  eight  ounces  of  oil  from  eighty
pounds,  and  even  less,  if  the  bark  be  a  few  years  old.  The  two  oils
procured  by  the  distillation,  differ,  apparently,  only  in  density  ;  and  in
the  oil  of  commerce  they  are  probably  united.  When  freshly  prepared
Oil  of  Cinnamon  is  of  a  light  yellow-color,  which  gradually  changes  to
cherry-red.  It  has  the  odor  of  cinnamon,  and  also  its  taste  in  a  concen-
trated state.  It  is  readily  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  has  the  specific  gravity
varying  from  1.035  to  1.041.  Exposed  to  the  air,  it  absorbs  oxygen,
and  deposits  colorless,  sourish,  volatilizable  crystals,  which  are  soluble
in  alcohol,  sparingly  so  in  water,  and  which  may  be  converted  into  ben-
zoic acid  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  and  heat;  these  crystals  are  called
Cinnamic  or  Cinnamonic  Acid,  and  may  be  frequently  observed  in  bottles
which  have  held  the  oil  for  a  long  time.  When  taken  internally,  these
crystals  give  rise  to  the  presence  of  hippuric  acid  in  the  urine,  the  same
as  with  benzoic  acid.  Two  distinct  resins  and  water,  are  also  the  result
of  exposure  to  atmospheric  action  ;  one  of  these  resins  is  soluble  in
hot  alcohol,  but  sparingly  in  cold,  while  the  other  is  soluble  in  either.
Concentrated  nitric  acid,  added  very  gradually  to  oil  of  cinnamon  to
avoid  violent  action,  converts  it  speedily  into  a  mass  of  crystalline  scales,
which  are  considered  to  be  a  compound  of  the  oil  and  acid.  Cinnamyle
(Cis  H:  O2  )  is  the  name  given  to  a  hypothetical  compound  radical  of
oil  of  cinnamon,  which  forms  oil  of  cinnamon  by  uniting  with  one  equiv-
alent of  hydrogen,  and  anhydrous  cinnamic  acid,  when  united  with  one
equivalent  of  oxygen.

Oil  of  Cassia,  or  Chinese  Oil  of  Cinnamon,  very  much  resembles  the
Ceylon  oil  in  color,  odor,  and  taste;  the  latter,  however,  is  inferior.  It
is  sold  at  a  much  less  price  than  the  Ceylon  Oil  of  Cinnamon.  The
chemical  reactions  of  the  two  oils  are  the  same.  Zeller  states  that  they
differ  somewhat,  the  Chinese  oil  being  heavier  than  the  Ceylon,  less
liquid,  and  sooner  rendered  turbid  by  a  decrease  of  temperature  ;  that
iodine  dissolves  rapidly  in  the  latter,  with  increase  of  heat,  and  the  pro-
duction of  a  tough  residue  or  extract,  while  in  the  Cassia  oil  its  solution
is  quiet,  slow,  with  little  heat,  and  a  soft  or  liquid  residue.


Olea  Destillatta.  1153

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Cinnamon  is  stimulant,  aromatic,  anti-
spasmodic, and  carminative.  It  is  frequently  used  to  correct  the  taste  of
medicines,  and  is  given  as  a  stimulant  in  flatulent  colic,  gastrodynia,  and
languor  from  gastric  debility.  It  undoubtedly  exerts  an  influence  upon
the  uterus,  and  will  be  found  valuable  in  uterine  hemorrhage,  in  the  form
of  alcoholic  tincture.  The  tincture  of  the  bark  is  frequently  adminis-
tered for  this  purpose,  but  I  know  from  experience,  that  although  desti-
tute of  astringency,  yet  the  tincture  or  essence  of  the  oil  has  the  same,
if  not  a  better  action,  in  such  cases ;  again,  it  is  an  unsafe  remedy  to
exhibit  during  pregnancy,  as  it  is  very  apt  to  produce  miscarriage.  The
essence,  or  even  cordial  of  cinnamon,  stimulates  the  generative  organs,
and  produces  an  aphrodisiac  influence.  The  dose  of  oil  of  cinnamon  is
one  or  two  drops,  given  in  emulsion  ;  of  the  essence  from  half  a  fluidrachm
to  a  fluidrachm,  given  in  a  wineglass  of  sweetened  water.  Ten  drops
of  oil  of  cinnamon  added  to  a  fluidrachm  of  olive  oil,  gently  heated,
and  rubbed  upon  the  spine,  will  frequently  quiet  a  restless,  fretful  child
suffering  with  flatulence  or  colic,  and  cause  it  to  sleep  ;  if  the  rubefacient
power  requires  to  be  increased,  ten  drops  of  aqua  ammonia  may  be
added.

Oleum Copaiba. Oil  of  Copaiba.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Copaiba  two  pounds;  Water  four  gallons.
Add  the  Copaiba  to  the  Water  in  a  tinned  still,  and,  having  adapted  a
proper  refrigeratory,  distil  three  gallons.  Separate  the  Oil  which  comes
over  from  the  Water,  return  the  latter  to  the  Copaiba,  and  again  distil
three  gallons.  Lastly,  separate  the  Oil  obtained  in  the  second  distilla-
tion, add  to  it  that  first  obtained,  and  keep  the  whole  in  a  well  stopped
bottle.—  U.  S.

History. — The  more  recent  the  Copaiba  the  greater  is  the  amount  of
vola';le  oil  obtained.  Usually  about  one-third  or  one-half  of  the  Copaiba
is  procured  in  oil,  and  it  is  stated  that  one  specimen  yielded  80  per  cent.
The  oil  has  the  taste  and  odor  of  copaiba,  is  colorless,  or  pale-yellow,
according  to  the  variety  of  copaiba  employed,  has  the  specific  gravity
of  0.910,  boils  at  about  470°,  and  is  very  soluble  in  alcohol  and  ether.
It  forms  crystals  of  artificial  camphor  by  absorption  of  muriatic  acid  gas,
is  composed  of  carbon  10,  hydrogen  8,  being  isomeric  with  pure  oil  of
turpentine.  It  is  considered  a  better  preservative  of  potassium  than
naphtha,  on  account  of  its  entire  freedom  from  oxygen.  It  is  best  pre-
pared by  steam  heat.  The  fine  greenish  colored  oil  which  comes  over
during  the  latter  part  of  the  distillation,  may  be  rendered  colorless  by
redistillation.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Oil  of  Copaiba  exerts  an  influence  upon

the  system,  similar  to  that  of  copaiba,  to  which  it  is  preferred  on  account

of  the  smaller  dose  required,  and  its  non-tendency  to  cause  nausea. It

enters  into  many  of  the  nostrums  of  the  day  for  the  cure  of  gonorrhea.

73


1154:  Pharmacy.

The  dose  is  ten  or  fifteen  drops,  which  should  be  given  in  syrup,  pep-
permint or  cinnamon  water,  mucilage,  or  emulsion.

Oleum  Cobeb^e. Oil  of  Czibebs.

History.  —  Cubebs  ground,  and  distilled  with  water,  furnish  about
seven  per  cent,  of  this  oil.  It  is  a  thick,  colorless  oil,  but  as  commonly
met  with  has  a  greenish  or  yellowish  tint.  It  possesses  the  peculiar
taste  and  odor  of  the  berries,  is  lighter  than  water,  being  of  specific
gravity  0.929,  and  thickens  on  exposure  to  the  air  without  being  deprived
of  its  odor;  occasionally  it  deposits  crystals,  which  are  supposed  to  be  a
hydrate  of  the  oil. It  is  composed  of  carbon  and  hydrogen,  Cio  H12.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Cubebs  may  be  substituted  for  the  pow-
derd  berries,  in  many  instances,  with  benefit.  It  is  less  pungent  than
the  oleo-resin  or  fluid  extract,  and  is,  probably,  only  one  of  the  active
principles  of  cubebs.  The  dose  is  ten  or  twelve  drops,  three  times  a
day,  gradually  increased,  as  the  stomach  will  permit,  or  until  it  produces
some  decided  results.  It  may  be  given  in  syrup,  emulsion,  or  in  the
form  of  capsules,  like  copaiba.

Oleum  Erechthiti. Oil  of  Fireweed.

History. — This  oil  is  obtained  by  distilling  the  plant  Erechthites  Hiera-
cifolius  with  water.  As  obtained  in  the  shops,  it  is  quite  fluid,  trans-
parent, yellowish  in  color,  of  a  strong,  peculiar,  fetid  and  slightly
aromatic  odor,  and  a  fetid,  bitterish,  burning  taste.  In  its  odor  and
taste  it  somewhat  resembles  the  Oil  of  Fleabane.  It  is  soluble  in  alco-
hol. No  analysis  has  been  made  of  it.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  therapeutical  actions  of  Oil  of  Fireweed
are  not  well  understood.  It  seems  to  resemble  the  Oil  of  Fleabane  in
its  influence  upon  various  hemorrhages,  and  for  which  agent  it  is  fre-
quently substituted  ;  and  is  considered  by  many  to  be  the  most  effica-
cious, in  such  cases,  of  the  two  oils.  It  also  exerts  a  beneficial  effect  on
mucous  surfaces,  and  has  been  successfully  used  in  diarrhea,  dysentery,
hemorrhoids,  etc.  As  an  antispasmodic  it  has  been  found  of  value  in
spasms  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  colic,  hiccough,  hysteria,  and  per-
tussis. It  is  chiefly  employed  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  oil  of  flea-
bane.  The  dose  is  from  five  to  twenty  drops  on  sugar,  or  in  emulsion.
When  triturated  with  the  extract  of  stramonium,  oil  of  fireweed  is  said
to  form  a  valuable  preparation  for  piles.

Oleum  Erigeroni. Oil  of  Fleabane.

History. — This  is  obtained  by  distillation  of  the  Leaves  and  Flowers
of  Fleabane  with  Water.  When  first  obtained  it  is  said  to  be  of  a  light
yellow  color,  and  transparent.  The  specimen  which  I  have  before  me
is  about  six  years  old,  it  is  quite  fluid,  of  a  wine-red  color,  clear,  with
a  peculiar,  rather  pleasant,  aromatic,  mint-like  odor,  and  an  aromatic,
bitterish,  not  very  agreeable,  penetrating  taste  ;  both  the  odor  and  taste


Olea  Destillata.  1155

recall  to  mind  those  of  oil  of  spearmint,  combined  with  oil  of  amber.
The  only  change  I  have  noticed  in  the  oil  in  my  possession  is  a  deposit
of  a  reddish  color,  resembling  currant  jelly,  soft,  tenacious,  in  fiat  or
tabular  scales  or  crystals,  and  which  I  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of
analyzing.  This  deposit  burns  when  brought  into  contact  with  flame,
giving  off  a  dense  smoke,  with  an  odor  resembling  that  of  cedar.  The
oil  has  not  been  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Oil  of  Fleabane  is  stimulant  and  carminative,
with  scarcely  any  perceptible  astringency.  It  appears,  notwithstanding,
to  exert  a  very  remarkable  influence  on  the  system  in  hemorrhages,  to
check  which,  it  is  chiefly  used.  It  is  said  to  be  of  superior  value  in  all
hemorrhages,  but  more  especially  when  from  the  uterus.  Further  in-
vestigations with  this  remedy  are  required,  in  order  to  know  its  proper
therapeutical  actions.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  ten  drops,  dissolved  in
alcohol,  and  administered  in  mucilage  or  sweetened  water.  Combined
with  five  or  six  parts  of  Castor  Oil,  or  of  Stramonium  Ointment,  it  forms
a  valuable  application  to  piles.  (For  further  uses,  see  Erigeron  Cana-
dense,  part  II,  page  450.)

Oleum  Fceniculi. Oil  of  Fennel.

History. — Oil  of  Fennel  is  prepared  from  Fennel  seeds,  by  distillation
with  water ;  it  is  colorless  or  pale-yellow,  possesses  the  peculiar  taste
and  odor  of  the  seeds,  is  crystallizable  at  50°,  and  has  a  specific  gravity
of  0.997  to  0.999.  The  seeds  yield  about  2.5  per  cent,  of  volatile  oil.
The  oil  contains  Stearoptene  and  Eleoptene,  the  former  of  which  is  iden-
tical in  composition  with  that  obtained  from  oil  of  anise.  It  consists  of
carbon  13  equivalents,  hydrogen  8  and  oxygen  2.

The  oil  employed  in  this  country  is  imported,  but  is  not  very  uniform
in  its  character,  and  which  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  owing  to  its
being  the  product  of  different  plants  or  species.  One  specimen  examined
by  Dr.  Montgomery,  remained  fluid  at  22°.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Fennel  is  principally  used  as  a  carmina-
tive, and  for  the  purpose  of  correcting  or  concealing  the  unpleasantness
of  other  medicines. The  dose  is  from  five  to  twenty  drops.

Oleum  Gaultueri^e. Oil  of  Wintergreen.

History.  —  Oil  of  Wintergreen  is  prepared  by  distilling  the  plant  with
water ;  when  first  procured  it  is  nearly  colorless,  but  becomes  more  or
less  of  a  deep-yellow  or  red  color  by  age.  It  has  a  peculiar  and  agree-
able odor,  and  a  sweetish,  somewhat  pungent,  peculiar  taste.  Its  specific
gravity  is  1.173,  being  the  heaviest  of  the  essential  oils,  and  it  boils  at
412°.  It  possesses  acid  qualities,  and  has,  according  to  Cahours,  the
same  composition  as  the  salicylate  of  methylene.  Its  purity  may  be
determined  by  its  unusual  weight.  The  greater  part  of  the  oil  used  in
this  country,  is  prepared  in  New  Jersey.


1156  Pharmacy.

This  oil  is  not  peculiar  to  the  Gaultheria  alone,  but  has  been  detected
in  the  bark  of  Betula  Lenta,  the  root  of  Polygala  Paucifolia,  and  the
stems  and  roots  of  Spiraea  Vlmaria,  Spiraea  Lobata,  and  Gaultheria
Hispidula.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  oil  is  stimulant  and  aromatic,  and  is  princi-
pally employed  to  correct  or  disguise  the  taste  of  other  medicines.  The
essence,  or  the  oil  dissolved  in  alcohol  is  stated  to  have  been  found
effectual  in  curing  intermittent  fever.  The  dose  of  the  oil  is  from  five  to
ten  or  fifteen  drops  on  sugar,  or  in  emulsion.

Oleum  Hedeom^e. Oil  of  Pennyroyal.

History. — This  oil  is  obtained  from  the  Pennyroyal  plant  of  this  coun-
try, by  distillation  with  water.  It  is  of  a  light-yellow  color,  with  the
agreeable  odor  of  the  plant,  and  its  warm,  pungent  taste,  and  has  the
specific  gravity  0.948.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Pennyroyal  is  a  stimulant,  carminative,
antispasmodic,  and  emmenagogue.  It  has  been  used  with  benefit  in
cramp  of  the  stomach,  flatulent  colic,  nausea,  amenorrhea,  and  to
diminish  the  harshness  of  griping,  as  well  as  nauseating  medicines.  It  is
frequently  employed  for  the  purpose  of  occasioning  abortion,  but  as  with
all  agents  of  this  sort,  it  is  very  dangerous.  It  is  sometimes  applied
externally  as  a  mild  rubefacient.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  ten  drops  on
sugar,  or  in  emulsion.

Oleum  Juniperi. Oil  of  Juniper.

History. — Oil  of  Juniper  is  procured  from  the  bruised  berries  by  dis-
tillation with  water  ;  it  may  likewise  be  procured  from  the  leaves.  It  is
nearly  colorless,  or  pale  greenish -yellow,  lighter  than  water,  being  of
the  specific  gravity  0.911,  has  a  turpentine  odor,  a  warm,  pungent  taste,
and  is  not  perfectly  soluble  in  alcohol.  The  oil  is  imported  into  this
country  from  Europe,  and  is,  probably,  a  mixture  of  that  from  the  berries
and  leaves.  Like  pure  oil  of  Turpentine  it  consists  of  ten  equivalents
of  carbon,  and  eight  of  hydrogen  ;  but  does  not  become  solid  with  muri-
atic acid.  The  fraudulent  addition  of  oil  of  turpentine,  which  frequently
occurs,  may  be  known  by  the  specific  gravity  of  the  mixture  being  much
less  than  that  of  the  pure  oil  of  Juniper.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Oil  of  Juniper  is  stimulant,  carminative,  and
diuretic,  and  is  frequently  employed  to  arrest  chronic  mucous  discharges,
especially  from  the  urethra.  It  may  also  be  used  in  cases  of  dropsy  as
a  diuretic,  combined  with  other  agents.  The  dose  is  from  five  to  fifteen
or  twenty  drops.  The  peculiar  flavor  and  diuretic  property  of  Holland
gin  is  owing  to  the  presence  of  this  oil.
Off.  Prep. — Pilulse  Saponi  Compositae.

Oleum  Juniperi  Virginiana. Oil  of  Cedar.

History. — This  oil  is  prepared  by  distillation  of  the  tops  and  leaves  of
Red  Cedar  with  Water. It  is  quite  fluid,  transparent,  of  a  light  yellow-


Olea  Destillata.  1157

ish  or  reddish  color,  but  becoming  of  a  wine-red  color  by  age,  possesses
the  peculiar  odor,  with  the  nauseous,  bitterish,  warm  taste  peculiar  to
the  leaves,  in  a  concentrated  degree.  Upon  standing,  but  very  little
deposit  ensues  ;  in  a  specimen  before  me  of  sixteen  years'  standing,  and
about  a  pint  in  quantity,  can  be  observed  a  very  slight  deposit  of  con-
fluent whitish  granules  or  scales,  somewhat  resembling  white  wax.

Properties  and  Uses. — Internally  this  oil  is  stimulant  and  emmena-
gogue,  possessing  properties  similar  to  those  of  the  oil  of  savin ;  however,
it  is  very  seldom  administered  internally.  It  is  chiefly  used  as  a  rube-
facient, and  forms  an  excellent  local  application  in  inflammatory  rheu-
matism and  other  painful  affections,  either  alone  or  combined  with  other
articles  to  form  a  liniment.  The  dose,  internally,  is  from  two  to  ten
drops,  on  sugar.

Off.  Prep. — Linimentum  Olei.

Oleum  Lavandulae. Oil  of  Lavender.

History. — Oil  of  Lavender  is  procured  from  the  flowers  of  Lavender,
by  distillation  with  Water;  the  commercial  oil  is  generally  prepared
from  the  flowers  and  flower-stems.  The  dried  flowers  yield  from  1  to  1.5
per  cent,  of  oil.  Oil  of  lavender  is  of  a  pale-yellow  color,  a  pure,  grate-
ful, lavender  odor,  and  a  bitter,  aromatic,  camphoraceous  taste.  Its
specific  gravity  varies  from  0.893  to  0.948.  Berzelius  states  that  at
68°  F.,  the  commercial  oil  has  the  specific  gravity  0.898,  which,  upon
rectification,  is  reduced  to  0.877.  The  oil  prepared  by  distilling  the
whole  herb,  has  the  sp.  gr.  0.920.  It  is  soluble  in  all  proportions  in
alcohol  of  0.830,  in  two  parts  of  proof  spirit,  and  incompletely  in  acetic
acid.  Upon  exposure  to  the  air,  it  absorbs  oxygen  to  the  amount  of
about  120  volumes  in  four  months  and  a  half.  It  consists  of  a  fluid  oil
or  Eleoptene,  and  a  solid  substance  or  Stearoptene,  the  latter  of  which  is
isomeric  with  laurel-camphor.

The  broad  leaved  variety  of  lavender,  Lavandula  Spica,  furnishes  the
Oil  of  Spike,  it  is  not  so  fragrant  as  the  preceding  oil,  and  bears  some
analogy  to  oil  of  turpentine.  It  is  chiefly  used  in  the  preparation  of
varnishes  for  artists.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Lavender  possesses  stimulant  and  car-
minative properties,  and  is  sometimes  administered  in  hysteria,  nervous
debility  and  headache.  Its  fragrance  renders  it  an  important  article  in
perfumery,  in  which  it  is  principally  used.  The  dose  of  it  is  from  one
to  five  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Lavandulae  Composita.

Oleum  Limonis. Oil  of  Lemons.

History. — Oil  of  Lemon  is  obtained  by  lightly  grating  the  fresh  rind  of
the  lemon,  placing  it  in  a  fine  cloth-bag,  and  then  submitting  it  to  pressure ;
the  sediment  is  allowed  to  settle,  and  the  clear  oil  is  poured  off. It  may


1158  Pharmacy.

also  be  procured  by  distillation,,  but  being,  when  thus  made,  less  fragrant,
the  method  by  expression  is  preferred.  The  oil  is  imported  from  the
southern  parts  of  Europe,  as  Italy,  Portugal,  etc.

It  is  of  a  pale-yellow  color,  but  may  be  rendered  colorless  by  distilla-
tion, has  a  rich  lemon  odor,  a  warm,  aromatic,  penetrating  taste,  and  is
very  volatile.  Its  specific  gravity  is  0.8517,  but  is  reduced  to  0.847,  by
distillation  of  about  three-fifths  of  it.  In  pure  or  anhydrous  alcohol  it
dissolves  in  all  proportions,  and  is  soluble  in  seven  or  eight  parts  of
ordinary  alcohol.  The  pure  oil  is  isomeric  with  pure  oil  of  turpentine,
consisting  of  ten  equivalents  of  carbon,  and  eight  of  hydrogen,  and
forms  by  absorption  of  muriatic  acid  gas  a  solid  substance  of  a  crystal-
line character,  and  an  oily  fuming  liquid  of  a  yellow  color.  The  solid
substance  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  oil,  and  one  of  acid,  and  is
analogous  to  the  artificial  camphor  formed  from  oil  of  turpentine,  the
latter  of  which  has  the  formula  C20  Hi6,  HC1,  while  that  from  the
lemons  is  C20  H8,  HC1.  When  cooled  to  8°  F.,  oil  of  lemon  deposits
some  crystals,  and  when  exposed  to  the  air  it  absorbs  oxygen.

It  is  frequently  adulterated  by  alcohol,  the  fixed  oils,  or  more  fre-
quently by  oil  of  turpentine.  Alcohol  may  be  detected  by  the  milky
fluid  which  forms  upon  agitating  the  oil  with  water.  The  fixed  oils  may
be  known  by  leaving  a  permanent  stain  upon  paper,  which  is  not  the
case  with  the  genuine  oil.  Oil  of  turpentine  may  be  detected  by  the
turpentine  odor  evolved  when  the  impure  oil  is  evaporated  from  heated
paper.  M.  Biott  states  that  the  camphor  formed  by  the  oil  of  lemons
exercises  no  action  on  polarized  light,  while  the  oil  itself  rotates  a  ray
to  the  right.  On  the  contrary,  the  camphor  from  oil  of  turpentine  exer-
cises a  power  similar  to  that  possessed  by  the  isolated  oil,  of  rotating  to
the  left.  These  molecular  properties  establish  a  difference  between  the
two  oils,  and  may  serve  to  detect  adulteration  and  fraud.

In  order  to  remove  mucilaginous  and  other  matters  existing  in  the  oil
of  lemons,  it  is  recommended  by  J.  S.  Cobb,  to  agitate  the  oil  with  a
little  boiling  water,  and  to  allow  the  water  to  remain  in  the  bottle.  A
mucilaginous  mixture  forms  on  the  top  of  the  water,  and  acquires  a  cer-
tain tenacity,  so  that  the  oil  may  be  poured  off  nearly  to  the  last,  without
disturbing  the  deposit.  The  gradual  decomposition  of  the  oil,  he  sup-
poses to  be  owing  to  the  presence  of  these  impurities,  which  enter  during
the  process  of  expression  and  decantation.  He  recommends  that  the
oil,  as  well  as  all  other  essential  oils,  should  be  kept  in  a  cool,  dark
place,  where  no  very  great  changes  of  temperature  occur.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant  and  aromatic.  Its  chief  use  is  in  per-
fumery, and  to  impart  a  pleasant  flavor  to  medicines.  It  has  been
recommended  in  certain  cases  of  ophthalmia,  as  a  local  application.  A
very  agreeable  drink  for  the  summer  and  for  febrile  patients  may  be
made  of  White  Sugar  four  ounces,  Oil  of  Lemon  ten  drops,  triturate
together,  and  add  Citric  Acid  two  drachms ;  a  teaspoonful  of  this  to  a


Olea  Destillata.  1159

tumbler  of  water  forms  a  pleasant,  refreshing  draught. Tartaric  acid
may  be  substituted  for  the  citric,  if  desired.

Oleum  Mentha  Piperita. Oil  of  Peppermint.

History.  —  Oil  of  Peppermint  is  obtained  by  distilling  the  herb  with
water;  which  yields  from  the  170th  to  the  300th  part  of  the  oil.  When
fresh  it  is  nearly  colorless,  or  pale  greenish -yellow,  but  becomes  darker
and  even  reddish  by  age.  It  has  the  strong  aromatic  odor  of  the  plant,
together  with  its  warm,  pungent,  camphorous  taste,  is  of  the  specific
gravity  from  0.902  to  0.920,  and  is  soluble  in  alcohol.  When  taken  into
the  mouth  and  air  admitted,  a  sense  of  coolness  is  produced.  At  365°
it  boils,  and  at  —  8°  it  deposits  fine  needle-like  crystals  of  Siearoptene,
which  is  said  to  have  the  same  composition  as  the  oil ;  these  crystals  are
also  deposited  at  ordinary  temperatures,  on  long  standing.  The  compo-
sition of  the  oil  is  C21  H20  O2.  Its  adulterations  with  alcohol  and  oil  of
turpentine  are  not  infrequent;  the  latter  may  be  detected  by  its  imper-
fect solubility  in  cold  alcohol,  its  odor,  and  its  disposition  to  explode
when  iodine  is  added ;  the  former  may  be  known  by  the  dirty-white
liquor  formed  by  adding  an  equal  volume  of  water  to  it.  The  oil  is
extensively  manufactured  in  this  country.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Oil  of  Peppermint  is  a  powerful  diffusible
stimulant,  with  carminative,  antispasmodic,  and  anti-emetic  properties.
It  is  much  employed  to  relieve  flatulence,  gastrodynia,  nausea,  spasms
of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  to  cover  the  taste  of  other  drugs.
Externally,  it  is  occasionally  employed  as  a  rubefacient.  It  enters  into
a  liniment,  which  at  one  time  was  a  popular  remedy  for  various  painful
local  affections;  it  is  composed  as  follows:  Take  of  Oil  of  Olives,  Oil  of
Peppermint,  Oil  of  Turpentine,  Tincture  of  Opium,  Alcohol,  Aqua
Ammonia,  each,  one  fluidounce ;  mix.  To  be  applied  three  or  four
times  a  day.  It  is  commonly  used  under  the  name  of  Essence  of  Pep-
permint, which  is  a  tincture  of  it.  The  dose  of  the  oil  is  five  or  ten
drops  on  sugar.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Mentlue  Piperitae ;  Mistura  Cajuputi  Composita;
Tinctura  Olei  Menthae  Piperitae.

Oleum  Mentha  Viridis. Oil  of  Spearmint.

History.  —  By  distillation  of  Spearmint  herb  with  water,  from  the
170th  to  the  300th  part  of  a  pale-yellow  or  greenish  oil  is  obtained.  It
becomes  red  with  age,  has  the  peculiar  odor  and  taste  of  the  herb  in  a
stron"-  degree,  is  less  agr.eeable  than  oil  of  peppermint,  is  soluble  in
alcohol,  boils  at  320°,  and  is  of  the  specific  gravity  varying  from  0.914
to  0.975.  According  to  Kane  its  composition  is  represented  by  the  for-
mula C35  H28  O. It  is  extensively  prepared  in  this  country.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Spearmint  is  carminative,  antispasmodic,
and  diuretic. It  is  used  very  frequently  as  a  substitute  for  the  oil  of


1160  Pharmacy.

perties. The  dose  of  the  oil  is  five  or  ten  drops  on  sugar.

Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Menthae  Viridis;  Pilulae  Saponi  Compositae;  Pil-
ulae Taraxaci  Compositae ;  Tinctura  Olei  Menthae  Viridis.

Oleum  Monard^e. Oil  of  Horsemint.

History. — Oil  of  Horsemint  is  extensively  manufactured  in  this  country
from  the  fresh  herb,  by  distillation  with  water.  It  is  of  a  reddish-yellow,
or  brownish  color,  of  a  strong,  aromatic  odor,  a  hot,  pungent,  even  acrid
taste,  and  is  soluble  in  alcohol.  It  is  composed  of  a  yellowish-red  fluid,
Eleoplene,  which  has  the  odor  of  thyme,  and  passes  over,  when  distilled
with  water,  of  a  bright-yellow  color — and  of  Stearoptene,  which  forms
in  large  crystalline  fragments,  having  the  odor  and  taste  of  the  oil,  and
for  which  the  name  of  Monardin  has  been  proposed.  The  oil  has  not
been  accurately  analyzed.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Horsemint  is  stimulant,  antispasmodic,
and  anti-emetic,  and  in  the  form  of  the  essence,  has  been  much  used  to
allay  nausea  and  vomiting  in  Asiatic  cholera,  cholera-morbus,  etc.,  its
action  in  these  cases  being  prompt  and  permanent.  The  dose  of  the  oil
is  from  two  to  five  drops  on  sugar ;  of  the  essence,  from  ten  to  thirty
drops  in  sweetened  water.  Externally,  it  is  rubefacient  and  even  vesi-
cant, and  has  been  advantageously  used  in  low  forms  of  fever,  cholera-
infantum,  paralysis,  rheumatic  and  neuralgic  pains,  etc.  It  soon  causes
heat,  redness,  and  pain  when  locally  applied,  affording  in  many  instances
almost  immediate  relief.

Oleum  Origani. Oil  of  Origanum.

History. — This  oil  is  obtained  from  the  Origanum  Vulgarc,  by  distilla-
tion of  the  plant  with  water ;  about  from  four  to  six  parts  of  oil  are  pro-
cured from  a  thousand  parts  of  the  plant.  It  is  of  a  jellow  color,  which
becomes  reddish  by  age ;  too  much  heat  during  the  distillation  will  also
give  it  a  reddish  color.  Its  odor  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  plant,  and
its  taste  hot  and  acrid ;  it  boils  at  354°,  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  has  its
specific  gravity  varying  according  to  several  chemists,  being  given  as
0.867,  0.909,  and  0.940,  and  its  composition  is  represented  by  CsoHtoO.
It  is  imported  from  Europe,  and  is  commonly  adulterated  with  oil  of  tur-
pentine. Much  of  the  oil  of  origanum  sold  in  this  country  is  said  to  be
the  oil  of  thyme,  which  is  prepared  from  the  Thymus  Vulgaris  in  the
South  of  France.

The  Oil  of  Sweet  Marjoram  obtained  from  the  Origanum  Major  anahy
distillation,  in  the  proportion  of  from  two  and  a  half  to  six  parts  from  a
thousand  of  the  plant,  is  of  a  lemon-yellow  color,  light  and  camphora-
ceous,  and  forms  a  deposit  similar  to  camphor.  It  is  seldom  employed
in  the  United  States.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Origanum  is  stimulant  and  rubefacient,
and  is  chiefly  employed  in  the  form  of  liniment  as  an  application  to


Olea  Destillata.  1161

various  parts  suffering  from  painful  affections.  As  with  many  other  essen-
tial oils,  it  affords  relief  in  toothache  upon  being  introduced  into  the
cavity  of  the  carious  tooth,  on  lint  or  cotton.  It  is  very  seldom  adminis-
tered internally.

Off.  Pre]).  —  Linimentum  Capsici  Compositum ;  Linimentum  Olei
Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Saponis  Camphoratum  ;  Tinctura  Camphorae
Composita.

Oleum  Pimento. Oil  of  Pimento.

History. — When  Pimento  Berries  are  bruised  and  distilled  with  water,
they  yield  from  one  to  nearly  five  per  cent,  of  an  oil,  having  the  odor  of
the  berries,  and  a  hot,  pungent  taste.  When  recent  it  is  colorless  or
yellowish,  but  becomes  brownish-red  by  age.  Its  specific  gravity  is
given  as  1.021,  but  it  is  variable.  Nitric  Acid  added  to  it,  turns  it  red.
Like  the  Oil  of  Cloves,  it  unites  with  salifiable  bases,  and  also  consists
of  a  light  oil  and  a  heavy  oil.  When  distilled  with  a  solution  of  caustic
potassa,  the  light  oil  comes  over,  and  the  heavy,  which  remains  behind
in  combination  with  the  potassa,  may  be  obtained  separately  by  distilling
it  with  Sulphuric  Acid.  The  light  oil  is  a  pure  carbohydrogen  ;  the
heavy  forms  crystalline  bodies  with  the  alkalies  ;  these  oils  are  nearly
similar  to  the  light  and  heavy  oils  of  cloves.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Pimento  is  stimulant  and  aromatic,  and
may  be  used  for  similar  purposes  as  other  oils  of  like  character,  in  doses
of  from  three  to  six  drops.
Off.  Prep. — Aqua  Pimentae.

Oleum  Ros.e. Oil,  or  Otto  of  Poses.

History. — Oil  of  Roses  is  prepared  in  Egypt,  Persia,  and  other  Asiatic
countries,  by  distilling  the  petals  of  Rosa  Centifolia,  Rosa  Damascena,
Rosa  Moschata,  and  some  other  species,  with  Water.  It  is  obtained  in
very  small  quantity,  not  exceeding  three  drachms  of  the  oil  from  a
hundred  pounds  of  the  petals.  It  is  a  very  high  priced  oil,  and  is  gen-
erally imported  in  small  vials  or  bottles.  The  manufacturing  season  is
in  March  and  April.

It  is  also  said  to  be  obtained  by  bruising  the  petals  in  a  mill,  express-
ing, filtering  the  expressed  fluid,  then  placing  it  in  small  glass  vessels,
and  exposing  it  to  the  sun  ;  as  the  oil  gradually  rises  to  the  surface,  it  is
removed.  Notwithstanding  the  Oil  of  Roses  is  prepared  in  the  Eastern
kingdoms,  it  has  not  been  obtained  to  any  degree  in  Europe  or  America.

Oil  of  Roses  is  at  first  of  a  greenish  tint,  but  subsequently  presents
various  shades  of  green,  yellow,  or  red  ;  but  the  color  is  no  criterion  of
its  quality.  It  has  an  agreeable,  intense,  most  penetrating  and  diffusive
odor,  concretes  below  80°,  becomes  liquid  at  or  above  84°,  and  has  the
specific  o-rwvity,  at  90°,  of  0.832.  It  dissolves  in  about  150  parts  of
alcohol.  It  consists  of  carbon  23,  hydrogen  23,  and  oxygen  3.  Two
oils enter into its composition,  a  Fluid Oil,  Elcoptene,  consisting of


1102  Pharmacy.

carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen,  and  a  Concrete  Oil,  Stearoptene,  consisting
only  of  carbon  and  hydrogen.  By  pressing  the  Oil  of  Roses  between
folds  of  blotting  paper,  the  Eleoptene  is  absorbed,  while  the  Stearoptene
remains.

Owing  to  its  high  price,  Oil  of  Roses  is  very  subject  to  adulteration
with  the  Oil  of  Sandal  Wood,  other  volatile  oils,  fixed  oils,  spermaceti,
etc.  In  those  specimens  adulterated  with  volatile  oils,  they  may  be
known  by  not  concreting  at  ordinary  temperatures ;  and  those  to  which
fixed  oils  are  added,  leave  a  greasy  stain  on  heated  blotting  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Roses  is  used  altogether  as  a  perfume,
and  is  frequently  added  to  cerates,  ointments,  liquors,  etc.,  for  the  pur-
pose of  rendering  them  fragrant.

Off. Prep. — Aquae  Rosee.

Oleum  Rosmarini. Oil  of  Rosemary.

History.  —  When  the  fresh  Leaves  of  Rosemary  are  distilled  with
Water,  they  yield  from  a  half  to  one  per  cent,  of  Oil,  wThich  is  colorless,
of  specific  gravity  0.911,  soluble  in  Alcohol  of  0.830,  and  possesses  the
odor  of  the  Plant.  Its  boiling  point  is  stated  by  Kane,  to  be  365°,  its
specific  gravity  0.897,  and  its  combination  C45  Hss  O2,  When  rectified
its  sp.  gr.  is  reduced  to  0.8886  ;  and  at  64°  it  requires  forty  parts  of
Alcohol  0.887  for  solution.  Exposed  to  the  air  a  portion  of  it  evapo-
rates, and  a  Stearoptene,  somewhat  analogous  to  Camphor,  is  left,
amounting  to  about  a  sixteenth  of  the  original  weight  of  the  Oil.  It  is
stated  that  by  digesting  the  Oil  with  its  weight,  or  one -half  its  weight
of  Potassa,  and  distilling,  Camphor  will  be  obtained.  Oil  of  Rosemary
is  frequently  adulterated  with  Oil  of  Turpentine ;  the  adulteration  may
be  detected  by  adding  to  the  suspected  Oil  an  equal  volume  of  Alcohol,
which  dissolves  the  Oil  of  Rosemary,  but  leaves  the  Oil  of  Turpentine.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Rosemary  is  stimulant  and  rubefacient ;
it  is  principally  employed,  however,  in  perfumery.  A  very  pleasant
Cologne  may  be  made  as  follows  :  Take  of  Oil  of  Rosemary,  Oil  of
Lemon,  each,  two  fluidrachms  ;  Oil  of  Lavender,  Oil  of  Bergamot,  of
each,  one  fluidrachm  ;  Oil  of  Cinnamon,  Oil  of  Cloves,  Oil  of  Roses,
of  each,  eight  minims ;  Alcohol  one  pint.  Mix,  agitate  well,  and  after
allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  a  few  days,  with  frequent  agitation,
filter. The  dose  of  Oil  of  Rosemary  is  from  three  to  six  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Linimentum  Opii ;  Linimentum  Saponis  Camphoratum.

Oleum  Rut^e. Oil  of  Rue.

History. — The  fresh  Leaves  and  Tops  of  Rue,  when  Distilled  with
Water,  yield  about  seven  grains  in  the  thousand  of  a  yellowish,  acrid,
heavy-smelling  Volatile  Oil,  having  the  pure,  intense,  penetrating  odor
of  the  Plant,  of  specific  gravity  0.837,  and  boiling  at  446°.  It  becomes
gradually  brown  with  age. Its  composition  is  given  as  C28  H23  O3.


Olea  Destillata.  11G3

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Rue  is  stimulant,  antispasmodic,  and  em-
menagogue.  It  has  been  used  with  advantage  in  hysteria,  convulsions,
pertussis,  amenorrhea,  and  dysmenorrhea,  in  the  dose  of  from  two  to
five  drops,  three  times  a  day.  It  is  sometimes  criminally  used  for  the
purpose  of  producing  abortion,  in  which  it  is  highly  dangerous,  having
been  followed  by  fatal  consequences.

Oleum  Sabin.e. Oil  of  Savin.

History. — When  the  Tops  and  Leaves  of  Savin  are  submitted  to  dis-
tillation with  Water,  they  yield  a  yellowish,  clear  Oil,  having  in  an
intense  degree  the  peculiar  odor  of  the  Leaves,  and  a  bitter,  acrid  taste.
The  proportions  of  Oil  obtained,  as  given  by  authors,  vary  very  much,
being  stated  at  from  one  to  sixteen  per  cent.  Its  specific  gravity  is
stated  to  be  0.915,  and  its  boiling  point  315.  It  is  isomeric  with  Oil  of
Turpentine,  being  a  pure  hydro-carbon,  composed  of  ten  equivalents  of
Carbon,  and  eight  of  Hydrogen.  Sulphuric  Acid  added  to  it,  will,  it  is
asserted,  convert  it  into  an  Oil  very  analogous  to  Oil  of  Thyme.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Savin  is  stimulant,  emmenagogue,  and
rubefacient  ;  and  may  be  administered  in  all  cases  as  a  substitute  for  the
plant.  It  has  been  found  especially  valuable  in  amenorrhea.  Ten
drops  of  the  oil  on  sugar,  repeated  three  times  a  day,  will,  it  is  stated,
positively  produce  abortion  in  from  one  to  three  weeks  ;  but  as  with  all
other  agents  of  this  kind,  it  is  apt  to  be  followed  by  very  serious  conse-
quences. The  dose  of  the  Oil,  ordinarily,  is  from  two  to  five  drops.

Off.  Prep. — Tinctura  Caulophylli  Composita.

Oleum  Sassafras. Oil  of  Sassafras.

History. — The  Bark  of  the  Root  of  Sassafras,  when  submitted  to  dis-
tillation with  Water,  yields  from  two  to  three  per  cent,  of  a  heavy  Vola-
atile  Oil,  having  the  specific  gravity  1.094.  When  first  procured  it  is
colorless  or  pale-yellow  but  gradually  acquires  a  reddish  tint.  It  has
the  peculiar  and  agreeable  fragrance  of  Sassafras,  and  a  hot,  penetrating,
aromatic  taste.  It  is  said  to  be  composed  of  twro  Oils,  one  of  which
sinks  in  Water,  while  the  other  floats ;  but  according  to  Berzelius,  the
latter  is  frequently  nothing  more  than  Oil  of  Turpentine,  which  has  been
added  as  an  adulteration.  Sassafras  Oil  becomes  reddened  by  Nitric
Acid,  and  most  readily  inflames  when  fuming  Nitric  Acid  is  added  to  it;
Caoutchouc  placed  in  it,  is  dissolved  after  a  short  time.  Exposed  to  the
air  without  agitation  it  deposits  crystals  of  Stearoptene,  which  possess
the  odor  of  Sassafras,  and  are  transparent.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sassafras  Oil  is  stimulant,  diuretic,  carmina-
tive, alterative,  and  diaphoretic.  It  may  be  used  for  all  the  purposes
for  which  the  bark  is  recommended.  It  is  said  to  be  an  efficacious  appli-
cation to  wens.  It  is  much  used  as  a  local  application  to  rheumatic
and  other  pains.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  ten  drops  on  sugar,  or  in
emulsion.


1164:  Pharmacy.

Off.  Prep. — Emplastrum  Resinae  Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Cajuputi
Compositum  ;  Linimentum  Olei ;  Pilulae  Saponi  Compositae  ;  Tinctura
Camphone  Composita.

Oleum  Succini  Rectificatum. Rectified  Oil  of  Amber

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Amber  a  pint ;  Water  six  pints.  Mix
them  in  a  glass  retort,  and  distil  until  four  pints  of  the  Water  shall  have
passed  with  the  Oil  into  the  receiver  ;  then  separate  the  Oil  from  the
Water,  and  keep  it  in  well  stopped  bottles. —  XI.  S.

History. — The  Oil  of  Amber,  thus  rectified,  is  sufficiently  pure  for
practical  purposes,  yet  it  may  be  procured  thinner,  more  limpid,  and  col-
orless by  several  successive  distillations.  As  ordinarily  found,  it  is  of  an
amber,  or  light  yellowish-brown  color,  with  a  peculiar,  powerful,  disa-
greeable odor,  and  a  warm,  acrid  taste.  It  is  soluble  in  eight  parts  of
alcohol  of  sp.  gr.  0.847  at  55°,  in  five  parts  of  the  sp.  gr.  0.825,  and  in
all  proportions  in  absolute  alcohol.  It  unites  with  fixed  oils,  and  imparts
its  taste  and  odor  to  water,  without  any  apparent  solution.  The  pure
oil  has  the  specific  gravity  0.758  at  75°,  and  boils  at  186°.  Exposed  to
the  light  and  air,  it  gradually  changes  its  color  and  consistence,  until  it
finally  becomes  black  and  solid.  One  hundred  parts  of  it  contain  88.46
parts  of  carbon,  and  11.54  of  hydrogen.

The  crude  Oil  of  Amber  is  prepared  as  follows  :  Put  any  quantity  of
Powdered  Amber,  previously  mixed  with  an  equal  weight  of  Sand,  into
a  glass  retort,  which  is  to  be  only  half  filled;  then  distil,  by  means  of  a
sand-bath,  with  a  gradually  increasing  heat,  an  acid  liquor,  an  oil,  and
a  concrete  acid  impregnated  with  oil.  Separate  the  oil  from  the  other
matters,  and  keep  it  in  well-stopped  bottles. —  U.  S.

In  this  process,  the  amber  becomes  decomposed,  and  yields,  beside
other  matters,  thick,  very  dark-colored,  empyreumatic  oil,  which  floats
upon  the  surface  of  an  acid  liquor  in  the  receiver.  The  addition  of  the
sand  is  to  prevent  the  amber  from  swelling  too  much.  The  oil  may  be
separated  from  the  acid  liquor  by  means  of  a  separating  funnel.  When
the  object  is  to  decompose  all  the  amber  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  as
much  oil  as  it  will  yield,  the  process  of  distillation  should  be  carried  on
in  a  tubulated  iron,  or  earthenware  retort,  as  one  of  glass  cannot  support
the  requisite  heat.

Properties  and  Uses. — Rectified  Oil  of  Amber  is  the  only  form  in  which
the  oil  of  amber  should  be  employed  for  internal  use.  It  is  stimulant,
diuretic,  and  antispasmodic  ;  and  has  been  employed  with  bent-fit  in
amenorrhea,  hysteria,  dysmenorrhea,  tetanus,  epilepsy,  pertussis,  infan-
tile convulsions,  and  various  other  spasmodic  affections.  The  dose  is
from  five  to  thirty  drops  on  sugar,  repeated  as  often  as  required.  Ap-
plied externally  it  is  a  rubefacient,  and  has  been  efficaciously  used  as  a
liniment  in  palsy,  chronic  rheumatism,  pertussis,  and  infantile  convul-
sions ;  in  the  latter  affection  it  should  be  rubbed  along  the  spine,  either


PlLUL^E.  11G5

alone,  or  combined  with  an  equal  part  of  laudanum  and  three  or  four
parts  of  olive  oil.  Roche's  Embrocation,  for  pertussis  and  some  other
spas'modic  affections,  is  composed  of  oil  of  olive,  oil  of  cloves  each,  one
fluidounce,  oil  of  amber,  half  a  fluidounce. Mix.

Off.  Prep. — Linimentum  Succini  Compositum.

Oleum  Tanaceti. Oil  of  Tansy.

History. — Oil  of  Tansy  is  prepared  by  distilling  the  Herb  with  Water.
It  is  of  a  greenish-yellow  color,  with  the  flavor  of  the  plant,  and  deposits
camphor  upon  standing.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Oil  of  Tansy  possesses  the  properties  of  the
plant,  but  is  seldom  employed  internally  on  account  of  its  bitterness.  It
has  been  employed  to  produce  abortion,  but  almost  always  with  fatal
results. Dose  of  the  oil,  from  two  to  five  drops.

Oleum  Valerianae. Oil  of  Valerian.

History. — When  the  root  of  Valeriana  Officinalis  is  distilled  with  Water,
it  yields  rather  more  than  one  per  cent,  of  a  pale-greenish  volatile  oil,
of  the  specific  gravity  0.934,  possessing  a  powerful,  penetrating  valerian
odor,  and  a  warm,  aromatic  taste  ;  and  which  becomes  viscid  and  yellow,
when  exposed  to  the  air.  It  is  a  compound  substance  of  a  peculiar
nature,  containing  a  carbohydrogen,  equivalent  in  composition  with  pure
oil  of  turpentine,  a  minute  quantity  of  stearoptene,  possessing  an  odor
resembling  that  of  pepper  and  camphor,  an  oxygenated  oil  called  Valerol,
(C20  H12  0)  which  is  changed  into  valeric  or  valerianic  acid  by  the  action
of  the  air,  and  a  small  proportion  of  valerianic  acid,  which,  however,  is
increased  by  exposure  to  the  atmosphere.

Properties  and  Uses. — Oil  of  Valerian  possesses  the  properties  of  the
root  in  a  concentrated  degree,  and  may  be  substituted  for  it,  in  all  cases
where  the  root  is  applicable.  It  has  been  found  especially  useful  in  hys-
teria, chorea,  restlessness,  etc.  An  efficacious  preparation  for  nervous,
sleepless  and  hysterical  cases  is  composed  of :  Tincture  of  Lupulin,
Tincture  of  Hyoscyamus,  of  each,  four  fluidounces ;  Camphor,  one
drachm  ;  and  Oil  of  Valerian,  twenty-two  minims.  Mix,  and  give  one
or  two  fluidrachms  for  a  dose.  The  dose  of  the  oil  of  valerian  is  four  or
five  drops.


PILULE.

Pills.
Pills  are  a  very  convenient  mode  of  administering  medicines  which
are  in  any  way  unpleasant,  which  are  insoluble  in  water,  or  which  do
not  require  to  be  given  in  large  doses.  There  is,  probably,  no  form  in
which  medicines  are  more  frequently  administered,  than  that  of  the  Pill ;
and  to  make  a  good  Pill-mass  requires  considerable  knowledge,  tact,  and
judgment  on  the  part  of  the  operator. The  points  demanded  to  prepare


1166  Pharmacy.

a  proper  pill  mass,  are  to  obtain  sufficient  consistency,  that  the  particles
may  cohere  together,  and  to  have  them  firm  enough  to  retain  the  glob-
ular form;  their  component  parts  should  be  such  as  to  prevent  any  ten-
dency to  moldiness,  or  any  absorption  of  moisture  when  exposed  to  the
atmosphere.  Medicines  which  are  deliquescent,  should  not  be  made
into  pills,  and  efflorescent  substances  should  first  be  deprived  of  their
water  of  crystallization.  Neither  should  ingredients  be  added  together
which  exert  a  mutual  reaction  upon  each  other  ;  though  this  is  frequently
done,  perhaps,  to  secure  the  influence  of  the  resulting  formation.

Many  articles  admit  of  being  made  into  pills  at  once,  having  sufficient
consistence  for  that  purpose,  as  with  soft  extracts,  and  some  gum-resins ;
or,  the  addition  of  a  little  water  to  the  former,  or  a  few  drops  of  alcohol
to  the  latter,  will  impart  to  them  the  necessary  degree  of  softness  and
plasticity,  should  they  require  it.  Substances  which  do  not  admit  of
being  made  into  a  pill  mass  by  themselves,  must  have  certain  inert  mat-
ters added  to  them,  called  excipients  ;  and  such  excipients  only  should
be  employed  as  will  give  the  proper  degree  of  consistence  and  tenacity
to  the  mass,  without  interfering  in  any  way  with  the  action  of  its  medi-
cinal agents,  or  rendering  the  pills  too  large  or  hard.  Excipients  vary
very  much  in  their  character,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  articles  to
be  made  into  pill  form  ;  the  most  common  are,  syrup,  mucilage,  soap,
bread-crumb,  conserve  of  roses,  water,  spirit,  gum,  sugar,  magnesia,
starch,  molasses,  etc.  The  dry,  inert  powders  of  starch,  bread-crumb,
flour,  gum  arabic,  etc.,  are  incorporated  with  soft  or  liquid  substances  as
extracts,  confections,  soap,  oils,  syrup,  molasses,  honey,  mucilage,  etc.
The  softer  articles  are  combined  with  hard,  dry,  or  not  readily  soluble
agents  ;  and  among  these  molasses,  and  conserve  of  roses  are  the  most
esteemed,  especially  when  the  pills  are  to  be  kept  for  any  length  of  time.
The  addition  of  too  much  gum  arabic,  or  tragacanth  to  the  pill  mass,  is
objectionable,  as  it  often  causes  the  pill  to  become  so  hard  as  to  have  its
operation  materially  modified,  or  perhaps,  causing  it  to  pass  through  the
intestines  without  being  dissolved.  Whenever  the  excipient  is  named
by  the  physician  in  his  prescription,  the  apothecary  should  adopt  it  if
practicable ;  but,  if  it  be  not  practicable,  then  he  must  follow  his  own
judgment.  Indeed,  it  would  always  be  better  in  prescribing  extempo-
raneous preparations  of  pills,  if  the  physician  would  omit  the  excipient,
and  leave  it  to  the  more  practical  knowledge  of  the  apothecary  to  supply.

The  best  excipients  for  dry  powders,  as  jalap,  rhubarb,  ipecacuanha,
ginger,  digitalis,  conium,  etc.,  are  molasses  or  conserve  of  roses ;  those
for  resinous  extracts,  resins,  and  gum-resins,  are  soap,  proof-spirit,  alka-
line solutions,  and  sometimes  mucilage  ;  and  those  for  the  volatile  oils
and  oleo-resins,  are  soap,  magnesia,  white  wax,  etc.  The  proper  selec-
tion of  these,  however,  depends  entirely  upon  the  peculiar  nature  of  the
medicines  ordered,  and  requires  a  considerable  degree  of  practical
knowledge,  not  expected  to  be  possessed  by  the  practicing  physician.


Pilule.  1167

The  medicinal  ingredients  of  the  pill  should  be  accurately  mixed
together,  and  then  the  excipient,  in  most  cases,  must  be  added,  and  the
whole  beat  in  a  mortar,  till  a  mass  of  perfect  uniformity  and  plasticity  is
formed  ;  care  being  taken  that  the  pills  are  not  made  so  hard  as  to  resist
the  solvent  power  of  the  fluids  of  the  stomach.  The  mass,  having  been
properly  prepared,  is  rolled  into  cylinders  of  precisely  the  same  thick-
ness throughout,  and  of  a  length  depending  upon  the  number  of  pills  to
be  made,  and  is  then  divided,  as  equally  as  possible,  into  the  requisite
quantity  of  pills.  This  is  sometimes  done  by  means  of  a  spatula,  the
spherical  form  being  given  by  rolling  the  pills  between  the  fingers  ;  but
most  apothecaries  are  furnished  with  pill-machines,  which  serve  to
expedite  the  process,  as  wTell  as  to  secure  a  greater  degree  of  accuracy.
A  new  pill-machine  has  been  lately  patented  by  a  Mr.  Lewis,  which  is
said  to  be  superior  to  any  other  yet  used.  "  It  consists  of  two  metallic
cylinders  or  rollers,  having  on  their  surface  a  series  of  hemispherical
indentations  or  cups,  corresponding  in  shape  and  size  to  half  a  pill,  so
that  when  the  rollers  are  brought  into  contact  side  by  side,  and  a  rotary
motion  given  them,  the  hemispheres  in  each  fall  immediately  and  accu-
rately opposite  each  other,  forming  a  series  of  spherical  molds,  in  which,
during  the  process,  the  pills  are  cast.  The  arrangement  for  working  the
rollers  consists  of  two  uprights,  in  and  between  which  they  are  fixed
side  by  side  so  as  to  revolve  on  their  axles.  Motion  is  communicated  by
means  of  a  handle  attached  to  a  small  pinion,  fitting  a  cog-wheel  at  the
side  of  one  of  the  rollers,  at  the  other  side  of  which  is  another  cog-wheel
fitting  a  corresponding  one  on  the  other  roller ;  these  being  accurately
adjusted  cause  each  other  to  revolve  with  equal  speed  so  as  always  to
bring  the  hemispheres  opposite  each  other.  The  pill  mass  is  introduced,
by  means  of  a  small  hopper,  between  the  two  rollers  while  in  motion,
and  as  from  their  being  in  close  contact  it  cannot  pass  through,  it  is
pressed  into  the  hemispheres,  and  the  pills  are  thus  formed,  which  are
collected  from  the  outer  sides  of  the  rollers  as  they  continue  to  revolve.
Thus  far  the  simple  plan  of  making  or  casting  pills  by  means  of  a  rotatory
machine,  with  minor  modifications,  has  been  before  attempted,  but  as
frequently  abandoned  from  the  pills  remaining  firmly  imbedded  in  the
hemispheres  of  one  or  other  of  the  rollers,  and  the  want  of  contrivance
to  deliver  them  freely,  without  the  necessity  for  detaching  them  with
the  hand.  That  difficulty,  in  the  present  machine,  is  entirely  overcome,
and  this  achievement  is  its  principal  claim  to  originality  and  practical
utility.  The  arrangement  by  which  this  long-sought  desideratum  is
accomplished,  consists  of  a  movable  bolt  or  pin  at  the  bottom  of  each
hemisphere,  which,  acted  upon  by  springs  at  the  interior  of  the  rollers,
forces  out  the  pills,  and  detaches  them  effectually  from  the  mold  in
which  they  have  been  cast.  The  only  point  of  adhesion  is  now  the  end
of  the  pin,  from  which  they  generally  fall  by  their  own  inert  gravity;  but
to  prevent  the  possibility  of  their  being  drawn  back  again  into  the  hemi-


1168  Pharmacy.

spheres  by  the  return  of  the  pins  to  their  original  position,  they  are  gently
lifted  off  by  being  carried  between  the  teeth  of  a  sort  of  rake  pressing
against  the  outside  of  the  rollers.  Some  of  the  pills  thus  formed  have  a
slight  rim  round  them,  giving  them  the  appearance  of  a  seed  or  berry,
but  in  every  other  respect  they  are  perfect ;  they  may,  therefore,  be  left
in  their  original  state,  or  subjected  to  the  usual  process  of  mulling.
From  this  machine,  which  had  only  two  bands  or  tiers  of  hemispheres
round  the  rollers,  about  150  pills  might  be  turned  out  in  a  minute,  or
9000  in  an  hour,  working  it  very  slowly.  There  would  be  no  difficulty
in  doubling  the  speed  of  working,  and  the  rapidity  of  making  might  be
multiplied  by  increasing  the  number  of  molds  or  hemispheres  on  the
rollers."  Several  years  ago,  I  saw  a  pattern  machine  upon  a  somewhat
similar  principle,  but  much  more  simple  and  perfect  in  its  arrangement
and  action,  the  invention  of  Mr.  Semple  of  this  city,  which  would  turn
out  about  six  hundred  pills  in  a  minute ;  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  he
has  been  so  much  occupied  since,  as  to  lay  aside  his  valuable  invention.

In  order  to  prevent  the  pills  from  adhering  to  each  other,  or  to  the
sides  of  the  vessels  in  which  they  are  kept,  it  is  usual  to  agitate  them  in
some  dry  powder,  which  gives  them  an  external  covering,  as  well  as
conceals  their  taste.  For  this  purpose,  powdered  elm  bark,  powdered
liquorice  root,  carbonate  of  magnesia,  and  starch  are  employed ;  starch
is  almost  too  light,  carbonate  of  magnesia  may  be  incompatible  with  one
or  more  of  the  ingredients  of  the  pills,  and  the  liquorice  root,  or  elm
bark,  will,  as  a  general  rule,  be  found  the  best.  In  Europe  the  powder
of  Lycopodium  is  much  employed;  and  in  former  times  it  was  customary
to  coat  the  pills  with  silver  or  gold  leaf.

It  has  recently  been  proposed  by  M.  Garotto  cover  pills  with  gelatin,
which  answers  the  purpose  of  concealing  their  taste,  without  interfering
with  their  solubility  in  the  stomach.  He  dips  each  pill,  sustained  on  the
point  of  a  pin,  into  melted  gelatin,  withdraws  it  with  a  rotary  motion,
then  fixes  the  pin  in  a  paste  so  as  to  allow  the  coating  to  dry  in  the  air,
and  having  prepared  about  fifty  pills  in  this  way,  pi-oceeds  to  complete
the  operation  by  holding  the  pin  in  the  flame  of  a  taper  so  as  to  melt  the
gelatin  near  its  point,  and  then  withdrawing  it  from  the  pill  so  as  to  close
up  the  orifice.  The  purest  glue  should  be  selected  for  this  purpose,
melted  with  the  addition  of  two  or  three  drachms  of  water  to  an  ounce
of  the  glue,  and  kept  in  the  liquid  state  by  means  of  a  salt-bath.  A
coating  of  collodion  has  also  been  recommended,  but  this  is  improper,
as  the  collodion  will  not  readily  dissolve  in  the  stomach ;  also  a  mixture
of  equal  parts  of  gum-arabic,  sugar  and  starch,  in  powder;  the  pills  to
be  dipped  in  a  thin  syrup,  and  then  rolled  in  the  mixture.

This  process  is  most  applicable  to  disagreeably  odorous  substances,
as  castor,  assafetida,  valerian,  etc.,  which  are  completely  masked  by  it.
When  the  gelatin  is  previously  colored  with  carmine,  the  pills  resemble
hawthorn  berries.


Pilule.  1169

M.  Calloud  treats  of  the  subject  of  enveloping  medicinal  substances
in  a  covering  to  prevent  unpleasant  taste,  in  Journal  de  Pharmacie
XXIII,  301.  After  having  tried  gum,  starch  and  sugar  without  satis-
faction, owing  to  the  hygroscopic  tendency  of  the  sugar  and  gum  in
moist  air  or  with  a  moist  mass,  and  their  tendency  to  crack  when  very
dry,  he  had  recourse  to  the  dried  mucilage  of  flaxseed  prepared  with
sugar,  with  success.  His  method  is, — take  of  flaxseed  one  part,  white
sugar  three  parts,  spring-water  a  sufficient  quantity.  A  thick  mucilage
is  obtained  by  carefully  boiling  the  seeds,  the  sugar  is  added,  and  the
whole  of  the  moisture  evaporated  by  careful  desiccation.  This  mixture
is  but  very  slightly  hygroscopic,  may  be  reduced  to  fine  powder,  and
employed  for  covering  pills.  This  operation  is  effected  extemporaneously
with  great  facility.  The  pills  slightly  moistened,  are  rolled  in  the  muci-
laginous powder,  by  which  they  are  coated  with  a  layer  of  the  compound.
He  has  used  this  chiefly  for  carbonate  of  iron  pills,  but  it  maybe  applied
to  other  kinds.

M.  Calloud  suggests  another  process  applicable  in  certain  cases,  which
is  the  use  of  butter  of  cacao  as  a  covering  for  pills,  where  owing  to
gastric  irritation,  the  unmasked  pills  will  cause  disagreeable  symptoms.
The  process  is  very  simple  ;  the  prepared  pills  are  thrown  into  melted
butter  of  cacao,  then  removed  with  a  perforated  skimmer,  and  finally
rolled  in  finely  powdered  sugar,  or  what  is  better,  sugar  of  milk.

Pills  are  much  better  preserved  in  small  glass  bottles,  than  in  the
common  wood  or  pasteboard  boxes.

Pilui^e  Aconiti  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Aconite.

Preparation. — Take  of  Extract  of  Aconite  half  a,  drachm  ;  Extract  of
Stramonium  four  grains;  Valerianate  of  Quinia  one  scruple.  Mix
thoroughly  together,  form  a  pill  mass,  and  divide  into  sixty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  very  efficacious  in  febrile  and
inflammatory  complaints,  where  nervous  irritability,  restlessness,  or
wakefulness  is  present,  also  in  nervous  headache,  and  other  nervous
affections.  The  dose  is  one  pill  every  two,  three,  or  four  hours  accord-
ing to  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms,  and  the  effect  caused  by  the  use  of
the  pills. — J.  K.

Pilule  Aloes  Composite.  Compound  Pills  of  Aloes.  Anti-Dys-
peptic Pills.

Preparation. — Take  of  Extracts  of  Boneset,  Mandrake,  and  Ginseng,
each,  two  ounces;  Aloes,  in  powder,  eight  ounces;  Gamboge,  Castile
Soap,  of  each,  in  powder,  four  ounces  ;  Capsicum  and  Lobelia  Seed,  of
each,  an  ounce;  Oil  of  Cloves  twenty  minims.  Mix  the  extracts  together,
then  add  the  powders,  beat  and  work  the  mass  well  together,  and
finally,  add  the  Oil  of  Cloves.  Divide  the  mass  into  pills  of  four  grains
each.— T.  V.  M.
74


1170  Pharmacy.

This  pill  is,  by  many,  considered  superior  to  the  one  originally  given,
of  which  the  following  is  the  formula  :  Take  of  Socotrine  Aloes,  in
powder,  four  ounces  ;  Castile  Soap,  Colocynth,  Gamboge,  of  each,  two
ounces ;  Extract  of  Gentian  four  ounces ;  Oil  of  Cloves  two  drachms.
Mix  as  above. Dose  same  as  above.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  pill  is  cathartic  in  doses  of  from  two  to
four  pills.  It  has  been  found  very  useful  in  dyspepsia,  constipation,
jaundice,  amenorrhea,  and  in  all  ordinary  cases  where  cathartics  are
required.

Pilule  Assafcetid^e  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Assafetida.

Preparation. — Take  of  Assafetida,  Opium,  Carbonate  of  Ammonia,
each,  one  drachm.  Mix  the  Assafetida  and  Opium  together  by  means
of  a  gentle  heat,  and  while  soft  add  the  Ammonia.  Divide  the  mass
into  seventy-five  pills.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  pill  is  useful  in  many  nervous  and  hys-
terical cases.  Each  pill  contains  four-fifths  of  a  grain  of  opium.  The
dose  is  one  or  two  pills,  according  to  the  severity  of  the  case.

Pilule  Baptisi/e  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Wild  Indigo.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Leptandrin  four  grains  ;  Podophyllin  eight
grains;  Sanguinarin  one  grain;  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Wild  Indigo
Root,  a  sufficient  quantity  to  form  a  pill  mass.  Mix  thoroughly  together,
and  divide  into  sixteen  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  cholagogue,  laxative,  and  anti-
septic; they  are  especially  useful  in  typhoid  fevers,  and  in  all  typhoid
conditions,  where  it  is  required  to  keep  the  bowels  regular.  The  dose
is  one  pill,  to  be  repeated  every  two,  three,  or  four  hours  until  a  mild
operation  is  produced  ;  to  be  given  daily  or  every  other  day. — J.  K.

Pilule  Cambogi.e  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Gamboge.

Preparation. — Take  of  Gamboge  and  Scammony,  each,  in  powder,
twelve  grains ;  Elaterium  two  grains ;  Croton  Oil  eight  minims  ;  Extract
of  Hyoscyamus  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  together,  and  divide  into
twelve  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  quick  and  certain  cathartic,  useful  in
dropsy,  obstinate  constipation,  etc.  The  dose  is  one  pill,  repeated  every
hour  or  two,  till  it  operates.  It  is  contra-indicated  when  inflammation
of  any  of  the  abdominal  viscera  is  present.

Pilule  Camphors  Composite.  Compound  Pills  of  Camphor.
Cholera  Pills.

Preparation. — Take  of  Camphor,  Opium,  Kino,  of  each,  in  powder,
thirty  grains ;  Capsicum  five  grains;  Conserve  of  Roses  a  sufficient  quan-
tity. Mix  together  and, form  a  pill  mass,  and  divide  into  thirty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  were  much  employed  in  Asiatic
cholera,  as  a  stimulant,  antispasmodic,  anodyne,  and  astringent, and


Pilule.  1171

with  much  success.  One  pill  to  be  given  after  each  discharge  from  the
bowels,  or  oftener,  if  the  urgency  of  the  case  require  it.  Where  pow-
ders are  preferred,  the  conserve  of  roses  may  be  omitted,  and  the  mix-
ture be  given  in  powder. — R.  S.  N.

Pilule  Cimicifugje  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Black  Cohosh.

Preparation.— Take  of  the  Hydro-alcoholic  Extracts  of  Black  Cohosh,
and  Scullcap,  each,  one  drachm;  Valerianate  of  Quinia  half  a  drachm.
Mix  thoroughly  together,  form  into  a  pill  mass,  and  divide  into  sixty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  will  be  found  very  useful  in  chorea,
and  other  derangements  of  the  nervous  system ;  also  in  fevers  or  other
diseases,  attended  with  much  restlessness  or  wakefulness,  and  in  several
uterine  affections.  The  dose  is  one  pill  every  one,  two,  or  three  hours,
daily,  according  to  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms. — J.  K.

Pilule  Copaib.e. Pills  of  Copaiba.

Preparation. — Take  of  Copaiba  and  "White  Wax,  of  each,  one  drachm.
Melt  the  Wax,  mix  in  the  Copaiba,  and  divide  into  thirty  pills.

These  pills  are  frequently  combined  in  other  proportions,  and  with  the
addition  of  Cubebs.  Thus:  take  of  Copaiba  one  part;  White  Wax  one
part  and  a  half ;  Cubebs,  in  powder,  two  parts.  Melt  the  Wax,  add  the
Copaiba  and  Cubebs,  and  divide  into  four-grain  pills.  This  combination
is  suitable  to  warm  climates.  Another  combination  is :  take  of  Copaiba
one  part ;  White  Wax  two  parts  ;  Cubebs,  in  powder,  three  parts.  Pre-
pare as  above,  and  divide  into  four-grain  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  useful  in  gonorrhea,  and  other
affections  where  the  medicinal  agents  are  indicated.  The  dose  is  two
to  four  pills,  three  times  a  day.

Copaiba  is  usually  solidified  into  a  pill  mass  by  the  use  of  magnesia.
The  magnesia  combines  with  the  hard  resin  or  copaibic  acid,  and  absorbs
the  volatile  oil,  in  consequence  of  which  the  copaiba  gradually  loses  its
fluidity,  becoming  at  first  a  soft,  tenacious  mass,  and  finally  dry,  hard,
and  brittle.  The  proportion  of  magnesia  required  to  solidify  the  copaiba,
depends  entirely  upon  its  proportions  of  volatile  oil  and  hard  resin.
Ordinarily,  about  one-sixteenth  part  of  magnesia  will  be  found  to  solidify
the  copaiba  of  the  shops  in  six  or  eight  hours.  One  advantage  in  this
preparation  is,  that  the  copaiba  is  made  into  a  pilular  condition,  with
but  little  increase  of  its  bulk.  Care  should  be  taken  to  divide  the  mass
into  pills  before  it  becomes  too  hard,  and  that  the  magnesia  employed
has  not  become  hydrated  by  exposure  to  a  moist  air  or  otherwise.

M.  Thierry  states  that  if  one  part  of  freshly  prepared  hydrate  of  lime
be  mixed  in  a  marble  mortar  with  fifteen  parts  of  copaiba,  the  mixture
then  transferred  to  an  open  vessel,  placed  upon  a  sand-bath,  and  the
heat  be  kept  up  for  four  hours,  occasionally  stirring,  it  will  produce  the
same  effect  as  magnesia.  About  a  twenty-fourth  of  the  weight  of  the
mixture  is  lost,  which  is  chiefly  the  water  of  the  hydrate.


1 172  Pharmacy.

Pilule  Copaib^e  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Copaiba.

Preparation. — Take  of  Solidified  Copaiba  one  drachm  ;  Ethereal  Ex-
tract of  Cubebs  half  a  drachm  ;  Podopbyllin  nine  grains;  Gum  Myrrh
one  drachm;  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Nux  Vomica  fifteen  grains.  Mix
thoroughly  together,  and  divide  into  three-grain  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  useful  in  gonorrhea,  gleet,  stric-
ture, and  chronic  inflammation  of  the  prostate.  The  dose  is  from  two
to  four  pills,  twice  a  day.  For  ordinary  cases,  the  following  preparation
will  be  found  beneficial :  Take  of  Solidified  Copaiba  two  drachms;
Ethereal  Extract  of  Cubebs  one  drachm;  Oil  of  Juniper  a  sufficient
quantity,  not  to  impair  the  pilular  consistency  of  the  mass.  Mix,  and
divide  into  pills  of  four  grains  each. The  dose  is  the  same  as  above.

Pilule  Eupurpurini  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Eupurpurin.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Eupurpurin  two  scruples;  Xanthoxylin  one
scruple  ;  Strychnia  one  grain.  Mix  thoroughly  together,  and  divide  into
twenty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  stimulating  diuretic,  and  will  be
found  useful  in  suppression  of  urine,  torpor  or  paralysis  of  the  kidneys
or  bladder,  rheumatism,  hepatic  torpor,  derangements  of  the  digestive
functions,  etc.  The  dose  is  one  pill,  to  be  repeated  three  or  four  times
a  day. — J.  K.

Pilule  Ferri  Carbonatis.  Pills  of  Carbonate  of  Iron.  Vallet's
Ferruginous  Pills.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  eight  ounces  ;  Carbonate  of
Soda  ten  ounces ;  Clarified  Honey  three  ounces;  Sugar,  in  powder,  two
ounces;  Boiling  Water  two  pints;  Syrup  a  sufficient  quantity.  Dissolve
the  Sulphate  of  Iron,  and  Carbonate  of  Soda,  each  separately,  in  a  pint
of  the  Water,  having  previously  added  a  fluidounce  of  Syrup  to  each
pint;  then  mix  the  two  solutions  when  cold,  in  a  bottle  just  large  enough
to  hold  them,  close  it  accurately  with  a  stopper,  and  set  it  by,  that  the
Carbonate  of  Iron  may  subside.  Pour  off  the  supernatant  liquid,  and
having  washed  the  precipitate  with  Warm  Water  sweetened  with  Syrup,
in  the  proportion  of  a  fluidounce  of  the  latter  to  a  pint  of  the  former,
until  the  washings  no  longer  have  a  saline  taste,  place  it  upon  a  flannel
cloth,  to  drain,  and  express  as  much  of  the  Water  as  possible  ;  then
immediately  mix  the  precipitate  with  the  Honey  and  Sugar,  and  by
means  of  a  water-bath  evaporate  the  mixture,  constantly  stirring,  until
it  is  so  far  concentrated  as  to  have  a  pilular  consistence  on  cooling. —  U.  S.

History. — In  the  above  preparation,  the  carbonate  of  iron,  which  by
the  ordinary  processes,  absorbs  oxygen  and  loses  a  great  proportion  of
its  carbonic  acid  while  washing  and  drying,  is,  by  the  saccharine  matter
employed  throughout  the  operation,  almost  completely  prevented  from
such  injurious  change. And  to  preserve  the  ferruginous  preparation


Pilule.  1173

unaltered  for  medicinal  use,  it  is  evaporated  to  a  pilular  consistence,  with,
the  addition  of  Honey  and  Sugar,  as  related  in  the  formula.  If  the  sul-
phate of  iron  used  should  be  impure,  a  portion  of  sesquioxide  will  cer-
tainly be  present.

When  properly  prepared,  this  is  in  a  soft  mass,  of  pilular  consistence,
black  throughout,  of  a  strong,  chalybeate  taste,  and  wholly  and  readily
soluble  in  acids.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  pill  is  a  ferruginous  tonic,  and  may  be
employed  in  all  cases  where  iron  is  indicated.  It  is  especially  useful  in
chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  and  other  female  complaints;  by  its  use  the  color-
ing matter  of  the  blood  seems  to  be  increased,  and  the  capillary  system
rendered  more  active.  It  may  be  divided  into  pills  varying  from  three
to  five  grains  each,  of  which  from  three  to  six  may  be  given  per  day,
and  continued  for  several  weeks,  particularly  if  an  improvement  of  the
health  takes  place.

Pilule  Ferri  Composite.  Compound  Pills  of  Iron.  Emmenagogue
Pills.

Preparation. — Take  of  Subcarbonate  of  Iron  one  drachm;  Podophyl-
lin  fifteen  grains;  White  Turpentine  half  a  drachm.  Mix  well  together,
and  divide  into  thirty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  pill  is  used  chiefly  as  an  emmenagogue.
The  dose  is  one  pill  every  three  or  four  hours.

Pilule  Ferri  Ferrocyanureti  Composite.  Compound  Pills  of
Ferrocyanuret  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Ferrocyanuret  of  Iron,  Sulphate  of  Quinia,  and
Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Black  Cohosh,  each,  two  scruples.  Mix,  and
divide  into  forty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  tonic,  alterative,  and  antiperi-
odic,  and  may  be  used  in  all  diseases  attended  with  periodicity,  as  inter-
mittent fever,  chorea,  epilepsy,  etc.  They  will  be  found  an  excellent
remedial  agent.  The  dose  is  one  pill,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  or
oftener  if  required. — J.  K.

Pilule  Ferri  Iodidi. Pills  of  Iodide  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  a  drachm  ;  Iodide  of  Potas-
sium four  scruples ;  Tragacanth,  in  powder,  ten  grains;  Sugar,  in  pow-
der, half  a  drachm.  Beat  the  articles  with  Syrup  so  as  to  form  a  mass,
to  be  divided  into  forty  pills. —  U.  S.

History. — By  the  above  process,  a  double  decomposition  takes  place  ;
the  sulphuric  acid  of  the  crystallized  sulphate  of  protoxide  of  iron  com-
bines with  the  potassium  to  form  sulphate  of  potassa,  while  at  the  same
time  the  iodine  forms  with  the  iron  an  iodide  of  iron.  Consequently  the
pill  will  contain  sulphate  of  potassa  ;  and  also  a  portion  of  iodide  of
potassium,  this  salt  being  added  in  a  greater  quantity  than  is  required


1174  Pharmacy.

to  decompose  all  the  sulphate  of  iron.  The  sulphate  and  iodide  are  to
be  first  rubbed  together,  and  when  accurately  mixed,  the  sugar  and
tragacanth  must  be  added,  and  then  the  syrup.  By  the  addition  of  the
sugar,  the  iodide  of  iron  is  protected  from  oxidation.

This  pill  should  never  be  kept  or  made,  except  for  immediate  use.  It
is  not  very  tenacious  in  its  character,  and  at  first  evolves  iodine  ;  it  has
a  styptic,  rather  acrid  taste,  but  is  not  so  unpleasant  as  the  Solution  of
Iodide  of  Iron.  The  presence  of  sulphate  of  potassa  and  iodide  of
potassium  renders  it  complex  and  objectionable.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  pill  has  the  same  therapeutical  applica-
tions as  the  solution  of  iodide  of  iron.  Each  pill  contains  a  little  more
than  a  grain  and  a  half  of  iodide  of  iron  ;  one  of  which  may  be  given
for  a  dose,  and  repeated  two  or  three  times  a  day.

In  consequence  of  the  intensely  styptic  taste  of  the  solution  of  iodide
of  iron,  as  well  as  the  disagreeable  stain  it  imparts  to  the  teeth  and  lips,
a  serious  inconvenience  has  arisen  in  its  administration,  and  many  modes
have  been  devised  to  divest  it  of  these  objections,  as  well  as  of  its  ten-
dency to  change.  Perhaps  the  best  mode  of  preparing  it,  is  the  following:
Take  of  pure  Iodine,  Iron  reduced  by  Hydrogen,  each,  half  a  drachm;
Honey,  a  sufficient  quantity  to  give  the  consistency  of  thick  molasses.
Triturate  the  Iodine  as  finely  as  possible,  then  add  the  Iron  and  Honey,
and  continue  the  trituration  until  the  articles  are  thoroughly  mixed
together,  and  fumes  of  iodine  cease  to  be  disengaged,  the  mixture
assuming  a  greenish  tinge.  Then  rub  in  finely  powdered  Extract  of
Liquorice,  a  sufficient  quantity  to  make  the  mass.  After  the  pills  have
been  made,  for  still  further  protection  from  atmospheric  influence,  they
may  be  dipped  once  or  twice  in  an  ethereal  solution  of  Balsam  of  Tolu.

Pilule  Hyoscyami  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Hyoscyamus.

Preparation. — Take  of  Extract  of  Hyoscyamus,  Extract  of  Valerian,
each,  two  drachms  ;  Extract  of  Aconite,  Sulphate  of  Quinia,  of  each,  one
drachm.  Mix  thoroughly  together,  and  divide  into  pills  of  three  grains
each.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  These  pills  will  be  found  advantageous  in
neuralgia,  rheumatism,  chorea,  dysmenorrhea,  and  many  affections  of
a  similar  character.  The  dose  is  one  pill  every  two,  three,  or  four  hours,
according  to  circumstances. As  the  virtue  of  Valerian  resides  in  its  oil,

o

it  is  probable  the  extract  is  nearly  useless ;  and  one-half  the  quantity  of
the  Oil  of  Valerian,  or  Valerianic  Acid,  could  be  substituted  for  the
extract,  and  form  a  much  more  efficacious  pill. — /.  K.

Pilule  Leonuri  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Motherwort.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Hydro-alcoholic  Extracts  of  Motherwort,
and  Unicorn  Root,  each,  two  drachms  ;  Leptandrin,  Cimicifugin,  of  each,
one  drachm.  Mix  thoroughly  together,  form  a  pill  mass,  and  divide  into
sixty  pills.


Pilule.  1175

Properties  and  Uses.— These  pills  are  useful  in  many  uterine  affections,
acting  as  a  uterine  tonic  and  alterative.  One  pill  may  be  given  every
one,  two,  or  four  hours,  according  to  the  urgency  of  the  case. J.  K.

Pilule  Leptandrini  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Leptandrin.

Preparation.— Take  of  Leptandrin  one  drachm  ;  Podophyllin  half  a
drachm;  Extract  of  Rhubarb  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  together,  and
divide  into  sixty  pills.  Some  prefer  making  these  pills  with°Extra'ct  of
Dandelion,  instead  of  Rhubarb.

Properties  and  Uses.— This  is  a  valuable  cholagogue  pill,  very  benefi-
cial in  liver  affections,  obstinate  constipation,  or  wherever  catharsis  is
required.  It  will  likewise  be  found  useful  in  dysentery.  The  dose  is
from  one  to  three  pills,  once  or  twice  a  day.

Pilule  Phytolacca  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Poke.

Preparation.— Take  of  Extract  of  Poke  two  drachms  ;  Hydro-alco-
holic Extract  of  Stillingia  one  drachm;  Extract  of  Stramonium  eight
grains.  Mix  thoroughly  together,  form  into  a  pill  mass,  and  divide  into
sixty-four  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  will  be  found  of  value  in  osteoco-
pus,  or  pains  in  the  bones  of  a  mercurial  or  syphilitic  character,  and  are
also  beneficial  in  rheumatism,  syphilis,  and  scrofula.  The  dose  is  one
pill  every  two,  three,  or  four  hours,  as  the  urgency  of  the  case  may
require.  The  fluid  Extract  of  Stillingia,  may  be  substituted  for  the
Hydro-alcoholic  Extract,  and  pulverized  Poke -root  added  as  an  exci-
pient. — J.  K.

Pilulje  Podophyllini  Composite  Compound  Pills  of  Podophyllin.
Preparation. — Take  of  Podophyllin,  Scammony,  Gamboge,  each,  in
powder,  one  drachm  ;  Castile  Soap  half  a  drachm.  Triturate  the  pow-
ders thoroughly  together  for  about  half  an  hour,  then  add  the  Soap ;
mix  and  beat  the  whole  together  till  they  are  thoroughly  incorporated.
Divide  the  mass  into  one  hundred  and  twenty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  most  valuable  pill  for  all  diseases
where  cathartics  are  required,  and  has  cured  many  cases  of  hepatic
affections  by  a  continued  use  of  them.  The  dose  is  one  or  two  pills,
every  night.  They  have  no  tendency  toward  producing  constipation,
but  rather  the  reverse,  and  after  using  them  for  several  days  in  succes-
sion, the)r  will  generally  be  found  so  active  that  it  will  be  necessary  to
omit  them  for  a  number  of  days,  before  resuming  their  administration.
They  may  be  safely  used  in  all  ordinary  cases  where  purgation  is  desired  ;
they  operate  freely  and  thoroughly,  and  usually  without  causing  nausea,
griping,  or  debility.

In  consequence  of  the  difficulty  with  which  pure  Scammony  is
obtained  in  this  country,  many  practitioners  substitute  for  it,  in  these
pills,  Apocynin,  or  Extract of  Rhubarb,  or  Iridin,  either of which,


1176  pHARMACr.

will,  probably,  be  found  preferable  to  an  impure  or  counterfeit  scam-
mony. — J.  K.

Pilule  Polygoni  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Water  Pepper.

Preparation. — Take  of  Dried  Sulphate  of  Iron,  and  Cimicifugin,  each,
one  drachm;  Ir'idm  fifteen  grains;  Extract  of  Water-Pepper  a  sufficient
quantity. Mix  well  together,  and  divide  into  sixty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  emmenagogue,  and  exert  an
especial  influence  on  the  female  organs  of  generation.  They  have  been
used  with  advantage  in  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  uterine
leucorrhca,  etc. The  dose  is  one  pill  every  two  or  three  hours. — J.  K.

Pilui^e  Pteleini  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Ptelein.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Hydrastin,  Cimicifugin,  Ptelein,  Aletridin,  of
each,  half  a  drachm  ;  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Nux  Vomica  four  grains.
Mix  the  articles  thoroughly  together,  and  divide  into  sixty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  very  efficacious  in  dyspepsia,
attended  with  distress  after  eating,  flatulency,  etc.  They  act  upon  the
mucous  coat  of  the  stomach,  gradually  restoring  it  to  a  normal  condi-
tion. I  have  employed  them  considerably,  and  prefer  them  to  any  other
remedy  which  I  have  ever  used.  If  constipation  be  present,  it  must  be
removed  by  rhubarb  and  potassa,  podophyllin,  or  other  proper  agents.
The  dose  is  one  pill  three  times  a  day,  to  be  taken  about  an  hour  after
each  meal,  with  the  proper  attention  to  diet  and  regimen. — J.  K.

Pilulje  Quinine  Sulphatis. Pills  of  Sulphate  of  Quinia.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Sulphate  of  Quinia  one  drachm ;  Aromatic
Sulphuric  Acid  forty  -five  drops.  Drop  the  Acid  into  the  Quinia  on  a  tile
or  slab,  and  triturate  with  a  spatula  until  it  assumes  a  pilular  consist-
ence ;  then  divide  into  sixty  pills.

History. — This  method  of  forming  Quinia  into  a  pill  mass  was  made
known  by  Mr.  E.  Parrish.  The  ingredients  when  mixed  form  a  fluid,
which  soon  thickens  into  a  paste,  and  finally  becomes  quite  solid,  and  so
adhesive  as  to  be  readily  divided  and  rolled  into  pills ;  care  must  be
taken  not  to  allow  the  mass  to  become  too  dry  and  brittle  before  dividing
it,  as  it  is  liable  to  do  if  allowed  to  remain  too  long.  In  this  form  a  por-
tion of  the  disulphate  being  converted  into  the  soluble  nexitral  sulphate,
the  preparation  more  nearly  resembles  the  solutions  in  composition,  and
is  believed  to  be  more  certain  and  rapid  in  its  action.  When  it  is  desired
to  incorporate  other  substances  in  powder  with  the  Quinia  thus  prepared,
as  Prussiate  of  Iron,  etc.,  they  should  be  added  to  the  mass  when  it  is
just  so  soft  that,  upon  their  addition,  it  will  immediately  assume  the
proper  consistence.  It  is  not,  however,  advisable  to  employ  this  process
the  quinia,  unless  a  little  syrup  or  honey  is  also  added  to  prevent  the
too  rapid  hardening  and  consequent  crumbling  of  the  mass,


PlLULiE.  1177

Properties  and  Uses. — For  the  uses  of  these  pills,  see  Sulphate  of
Quinia.  Each  pill  contains  a  grain  of  sulphate  of  quinia,  and  twelve
are  equivalent  to  an  ounce  of  good  Peruvian  Bark.  The  above  pill
mass,  may  be  made  into  five-grain  pills  if  desired,  •which  will  not  be
found  inconveniently  large.

Pilule  Quinine  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Quinia.

Preparation. —  Take  of  Sulphate  of  Quinia,  Cornine,  and  Tartaric
Acid,  each,  in  powder,  one  drachm,;  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Black
Cohosh  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  together,  and  divide  into  four-grain
pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  tonic  and  antiperiodic,  and  may
be  employed  in  intermittent  and  remittent  fevers,  and  in  all  diseases
attended  with  symptoms  of  periodicity.  The  addition  of  the  tartaric
acid  renders  the  quinia  more  readily  soluble  in  the  juices  of  the  stomach.
The  dose  is  one  pill  every  one,  two,  or  three  hours,  according  to  the
severity  or  urgency  of  the  symptoms. — J.  K.

Pilules  Saponi  Composite.  Compound  Pills  of  Soap.  Diuretic
Pills.

Preparation.  —  Take of  Oils of  Spearmint, Juniper,  and  Sassafras,

each,  one  fluidrachm ;  Castile  Soap  one  drachm  and  a  half.  Beat  the

Soap  in  an  iron  mortar,  gradually  adding  the  Oils,  and  when  the  ingre-
dients are  thoroughly  incorporated,  divide  into  eighteen  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  stimulant  and  diuretic,  and  are
very  beneficial  in  gravel  and  all  chronic  urinary  affections.  The  dose  is
three  pills  three  times  a  day,  or  one  pill  every  hour  through  the  day. —
T.  V.  M.

Pilul^e  Taraxaci  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Dandelion.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bloodroot,  in  powder,  one  drachm.;  Podophyl-
lin  half  a  scruple;  Extract  of  Dandelion  one  drachm  ;  Oil  of  Spearmint
five  minims.  Mix  the  Powders  with  the  Extract,  add  the  Oil,  beat  up
thoroughly  together,  and  divide  into  fifty  pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — Laxative,  nauseant,  and  diuretic.  They  are
of  much  efficacy  in  jaundice,  hepatic  diseases,  and  affections  of  the  kid-
neys. The  dose  is  one  or  two  pills  three  times  a  day,  sufficient  to  pro-
duce a  slight  sensation  of  nausea.  This  pill  is  superior  to  the  one  made
after  the  old  formula.— T.  V.  M.

Pilule  Valeriana  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  Valerian.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Scullcap,  and
Extract  of  Chamomile,  each,  two  drachms  ;  Extract  of  Boneset,  Sulphate
of  Quinia,  of  each,  one  drachm;  Capsicum  one  scruple;  Oil  of  Valerian
half  a  drachm,  by  weight.  Mix  the  articles  together,  beat  them  until
thoroughly  incorporated,  and  divide  into  ninety  pills.


1178  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  tonic  and  nervine,  and  may  be
used  in  all  cases  where  such  a  combination  of  action  is  desired.  The
dose  is  one  pill  every  two  or  three  hours.

Pilule  Viburni  Composite. Compound  Pills  of  High  Cranberry.

Preparation. — Take  of  Hydro-alcoholic  Extracts  of  High  Cranberry,
Blue  Cohosh,  and  Unicorn  Root,  each,  half  a  drachm  ;  Extract  of  Par-
tridge Berry  one  drachm. Mix  together,  and  divide  into  forty  Pills.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  pills  are  of  superior  efficacy  in  uterine
diseases,  as  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  leucorrhea,  etc.  ;  as  a  uterine
tonic  in  habitual  miscarriages  ;  and  may  be  given  during  pregnancy  to
relieve  cramps,  and  many  other  unpleasant  sensations  occurring  at  that
period. The  dose  is  one  or  two  pills  three  times  a  day.— J".  K.

POTASSA.
Preparations  of  Potassa.

Potassa. Potass^  Hydras. Caustic  Potassa. Hydrate  of  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  Solution  of  Potassa  a.  gallon.  Evaporate  the
Water  in  a  clean  iron  vessel  over  the  fire,  till  ebullition  ceases,  and  the
Potassa  melts.  Pour  this  into  suitable  molds,  and  keep  it,  when  cold,
in  well  stopped  bottles. —  U.  S.

History.  —  The  Solution  of  Potassa  used  in  preparing  this  Caustic,
should  be  one  of  recent  manufacture,  and  the  evaporation  should  be  con-
ducted in  an  iron  vessel,  as  glass  or  earthenware  are  acted  on  by  the
potassa  ;  and  in  using  an  iron  vessel,  however  clean  it  may  be,  a  small
portion  of  Oxide-  of  Iron  will  be  imparted  to  the  caustic,  but  not  in
quantity  sufficient  to  interfere  with  its  medicinal  applications.  The  con-
tact of  all  organic  substances  should  be  carefully  avoided.  The  evapo-
ration must  be  completed  as  speedily  as  possible,  so  as  to  lessen  the
liability  to  absorption  of  carbonic  acid  from  the  atmosphere.  Absorption
of  carbonic  acid  will  not  take  place,  so  long  as  the  temperature  is  kept
at  the  boiling  point ;  but  if  the  evaporation  be  in  any  way  interrupted,
and  the  liquid  allowed  to  cool,  the  potassa  becomes  quickly  carbonated.
The  molds  into  which  the  fused  potassa  is  run,  should  be  made  of  iron,
and  having  a  cylindrical  shape.  As  white  flint  glass  is  slightly  acted  on
by  the  caustic  alkali,  it  should  be  kept  in  green  glass  bottles  with  ground
stoppers.

Potassa,  as  met  with  in  the  shops,  is  either  in  the  form  of  fragments
of  plates,  or  in  cylindrical  pencils  of  a  dingy  gray  or  greenish  color,
with  sometimes  a  bluish  tint,  a  fibrous  fracture,  an  intense,  corrosive,
alkaline  taste,  and  an  odor  similar  to  that  of  slaking  lime.  It  is  exceed-
ingly deliquescent,  powerfully  attracting  carbonic  acid  from  the  atmo-
sphere, and  when  moist  feels  soapy.  It  is  readily  soluble  in  water  or
alcohol,  its  aqueous  solution  having  the  properties  of  Liquor  Potassa.


POTASSA.  1179

Acids  combine  with  it,  causing  much  heat,  and  forming  crystallizable
salts.  It  melts  at  a  low-red  heat,  and  is  volatilized  at  a  bright-red  heat.
It  usually  contains  many  impurities,  as  sesquioxide  of  lime,  silica,  sul-
phate of  potassa,  alumina,  chloride  and  teroxide  of  potassium,  carbonate
of  potassa,  etc.  By  dissolving  it  in  alcohol,  which  does  not  act  upon
these  impurities,  but  takes  up  only  the  pure  hydrated  potassa,  filtering
and  evaporating  to  dryness,  and  then  fusing  the  dry  mass  obtained,  a
pure  hydrate  of  potassa  may  be  procured,  white,  dry,  hard,  brittle,  and
intensely  caustic.  This  is  called  Alcoholic  Potassa,  and  possesses  pro-
is  added  to  an  excess  of  tartaric  acid,  it  yields  a  crystalline  precipitate
of  cream  of  tartar,  and  when  added  to  a  solution  of  chloride  of  platinum,
a  yellow  precipitate  is  the  result ;  and  which  actions  will  serve  to  detect
it  from  soda  and  lithia.  Independent  of  its  impurities,  the  officinal
potassa  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  dry  potassa  47.2,  and  one  of  water
9=56.2.  Dry  potassa  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  potassium  39.2,  and
one  of  oxygen  8=47.2.

Properties  and  Uses. — Caustic  Potassa  is  powerfully  corrosive  ;  when
applied  to  soft  animal  textures,  it  first  attracts  their  water,  and  then
rapidly  disorganizes  them ;  after  which  extensive  inflammation  ensues
around  the  part,  previous  to  the  separation  of  a  deep  slough.  It  has  no
action  as  a  poison,  except  what  depends  directly  on  the  local  injury
occasioned;  no  direct  influence  being  exerted  through  the  medium  of
absorption.  Acids,  as  vinegar,  lemon-juice,  etc.,  and  the  fixed  oils  are
antidotes  to  its  injurious  action,  producing  with  it  harmless  salts  of
potassa  or  soapy  solutions.

It  is  administered  internally  only  when  in  solution,  as  an  antacid,  anti-
lithic,  and  diuretic.  Externally,  it  is  used,  in  its  solid  state,  for  m;iking
caustic  issues,  opening  abscesses,  and  destroying  tumors,  but  from  its
extreme  deliquescence,  it  is  very  apt  to  spread,  and  act  on  parts  not
desired.  To  obviate  this  the  integuments  around  the  parts  to  be  acted
on,  should  be  protected  by  two  or  three  layers  of  cloth,  spread  with
adhesive  plaster,  and  perforated  with  a  hole  in  the  center,  of  the  neces-
sary size.  Then  a  rod  of  potassa,  slightly  moistened  at  the  end,  is  to  be
gently  rubbed  over  that  portion  of  the  skin  embraced  in  the  perforation
of  the  plaster.  It  must  be  rubbed  until  the  skin  becomes  discolored,
when  an  elm,  or  bread-and-milk  poultice  must  be  applied.  In  a  few
days  the  eschar  will  be  detached.  After  the  slough  separates,  the
retraction  of  the  surrounding  skin  always  makes  the  surface  of  the  issue
much  larger  than  the  circle  originally  cauterized,  the  extent  of  which
must  be  regulated  accordingly.  In  applying  the  caustic,  wrap  it  with
paper.  We  occasionally  employ  this  caustic  in  the  destruction  of  tumors,
cancers,  etc.,  and  on  the  surface  of  unhealthy  or  malignant  ulcers.  A
very  unscientific  application  of  a  solution  of  this  caustic,  applied  to  the
spine,  has  been  recommended  in  the  treatment  of  tetanus.


1180  Pharmacy.

Equal  parts  of  Caustic  Potassa  and  Quicklime,  rubbed  together,  and
kept  in  well-stopped  bottles,  form  the  Vienna  Caustic  [Potassa  cum
Cake).  It  is  milder  than  the  preceding,  and  has  been  particularly-
recommended  for  cauterizing  the  neck  of  the  uterus.  It  is  also  prepared
in  sticks. (See  Calx,  Part  II,  page  284.)

Potasses  Acetas. Acetate  of  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  Acetic  Acid  a  pint;  Carbonate  of  Potassa  a
sufficient  quantity.  Add  the  Carbonate  of  Potassa  gradually  to  the  Acetic
Acid  till  it  is  saturated ;  then  filter,  and  evaporate  cautiously,  by  means
of  a  sand-bath,  until  a  dry  salt  remains.  Keep  this  in  closely-stopped
bottles.—  U.  S.

History.  —  It  was  formerly  the  method,  in  preparing  this  salt,  to  neu-
tralize distilled  vinegar  with  carbonate  of  potassa,  and  then  evaporate ;
but  by  pursuing  it,  a  salt  of  a  reddish  or  brownish  color  would  be
obtained,  arising  from  the  organic  matter  contained  in  the  vinegar,  and
which  required  some  trouble  and  dexterity  in  manipulation  to  remove.
By  employing  acetic  acid  or  colorless  pyroligneous  acid,  and  a  pure
carbonate,  a  salt  is  obtained  of  sufficient  purity  and  whiteness  for  medi-
cal use.  Care  should  be  observed,  that  no  excess  of  alkali  exists,  as  in
this  case  it  will  react  on  the  acid  during  evaporation  and  give  rise  to
discoloration;  a  slight  excess  of  acid  is  not  liable  to  such  objections.
The  heat  employed  in  drying  the  acetate  of  potassa  should  be  the  chlo-
ride of  calcium  bath  on  the  small  scale,  or  steam  under  pressure  on  the
large  scale ;  as  that  of  a  vapor-bath  is  too  low  for  thorough  desiccation
and  that  of  a  sand-bath  may  become  entirely  too  high.

Acetate  of  potassa  prepared  by  the  above  process  is  in  the  form  of
soft  fibrous  masses,  and  when  pure  is  white,  inodorous,  soapy  to  the
touch,  neutral,  and  of  a  warm,  saline,  pungent  taste.  As  met  with  in
the  shops,  it  has  a  foliated  texture,  somewhat  resembling  spermaceti  in
appearance,  on  account  of  which,  it  was  formerly  called  Foliated  Earth
of  Tartar.  It  is  extremely  deliquescent  when  exposed  to  the  air,
becoming  converted  into  an  oily-like  liquid,  and  should  consequently  be
kept  in  well-stopped  bottles.  Heat  fuses  it,  and  if  continued  or  increased,
decomposes  it,  converting  the  acetic  acid  into  acetone  and  carbonic  acid,
leaving  the  carbonate  of  potassa  remaining.  Acetate  of  Potassa  is  solu-
ble in  half  its  weight  of  temperate  water,  and  twice  its  weight  of  alcohol.
The  salt  exists  in  the  juices  of  many  plants,  and  is  the  chief  source  of
the  carbonate  of  potassa  existing  in  wood-ashes.  It  is  incompatible  with,
the  mineral  acids,  sulphates  of  soda,  and  magnesia,  corrosive  sublimate,
nitrate  of  silver,  and  several  other  earthy  and  metallic  salts.  It  is  com-
posed of  one  equivalent  of  acid  21,  one  of  base  47.2,  and  two  of  water
18=116.2, (A-j-KO+2  Aq.)

As  now  prepared,  Acetate  of  Potassa  is  but  little  liable  to  adultera-
tion ;  but  when  impurities  are  present  the  principal  ones  are  sulphate  of


POTASSA.  1181

potassa,  tartrate  of  potassa,  chloride  of  potassium,  and  the  salts  of  lead
and  copper.  The  salts  of  copper  may  be  detected  by  ferrocyanuret  of
potassium  which  gives  a  brown  precipitate  ;  those  of  lead  by  sulphureted
hydrogen  which  occasions  a  blackish  precipitate.  Chloride  of  potassium
may  be  distinguished  by  adding  nitrate  of  silver  to  a  dilute  solution ;  if
it  be  added  to  a  concentrated  solution,  soluble  crystals  of  acetate  of
silver  will  be  formed.  Tartrate  of  potassa  will  remain  undissolved,
when  the  salt  is  placed  in  alcohol ;  and  the  sulphate  of  potassa  may  be
ascertained  by  the  chloride  of  barium.

Properties  and  Uses. — Acetate  of  Potassa  in  doses  of  from  a  scruple
to  a  drachm,  acts  as  a  diuretic,  and  has  been  used  with  good  effect  in
dropsy,  uric  acid  diathesis,  and  in  other  cases  where  diuresis  is  indi-
cated. It  has  likewise  been  found  beneficial  in  several  cutaneous  diseases,
as  eczema,  lepra,  psoriasis,  etc.  In  these  cases  it  acts  energetically  as
a  diuretic,  and  effects  cures  in  from  three  weeks  to  two  months.  Half  a
drachm  of  the  salt  dissolved  in  water,  may  be  given,  and  repeated  three
times  a  day.  In  doses  of  two  or  three  drachms  it  acts  as  a  mild  cathar-
tic. Two  drachms  of  the  carbonate  of  potassa  saturated  with  distilled
vinegar,  will  produce  a  copious  discharge  of  urine,  and,  in  dropsical
cases,  ten  or  twelve  stools. This  salt  was  formerly  called  Sal  Diurelkus.

Off.  Pre]). — Tinctura  Ferri  Acetatis.

Potass^e  Bicarbonas. Bicarbonate  of  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Potassa  four  pounds;  Distilled
Water  ten  pints.  Dissolve  the  Carbonate  of  Potassa  in  the  Water  and
pass  Carbonic  Acid  through  the  solution  till  it  is  fully  saturated.  Then
filter,  and  evaporate  the  filtered  liquor  that  crystals  may  form,  taking
care  that  the  heat  does  not  exceed  160°.  Pour  off  the  supernatant
liquid,  and  dry  the  crystals  upon  bibulous  paper.  Carbonic  Acid  is
obtained  from  marble  by  the  addition  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid. —  U.  S.

History.  —  By  this  process,  the  carbonate  of  potassa  containing  one
equivalent  of  acid  and  one  of  base,  becomes  combined  with  an  additional
equivalent  of  carbonic  acid.  The  salt  used  should  always  be  pure,  or
else  there  will  be  siliceous  impurities  present,  to  separate  which,  is  the
reason  for  the  filtration  ordered  in  the  above  formula.

Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  may  be  made  by  several  other  processes,
among  which  may  be  mentioned  the  forming  a  solution  of  carbonate  of
potassa  in  its  own  weight  of  water,  adding  about  half  its  weight  of  ses-
quicarbonate  of  ammonia,  heating  the  solution  to  about  130°,  and  stir-
ring occasionally,  until  small  crystals  begin  to  form.  In  this  process,
ammonia  is  evolved,  and  the  ammoniacal  carbonate  is  taken  up  by  the
potassa  salt,  and  while  slowly  cooling,  crystals  of  bicarbonate  of  potassa  are
formed.  Christison  recommends  a  quick,  certain,  and  economical  mode
of  preparing  it.  Sesquicarbonate  of  ammonia,  in  very  fine  powder,  is
to  be  thoroughly  mixed  with  carbonate  of  potassa,  by  the  aid  of  a  very


1182  Pharmacy.

little  water,  triturating  briskly  until  a  perfectly  smooth,  thick,  uniform
pulp  is  formed.  Dry  this  pulp  by  a  gentle  heat,  not  exceeding  130°  or
140°,  and  continue  the  drying  until  an  ammoniacal  odor  ceases  to  be
given  off.  By  the  drying,  ammonia  is  evolved,  and  its  carbonic  acid
combines  with  the  carbonate  of  potassa,  so  that  when  the  sesquicarbonate
becomes  wholly  decomposed  and  all  its  ammonia  volatilized,  a  pure
bicarbonate  of  potassa  is  left  behind,  which  may  be  reduced  to  a  fine
powder.

A  common  mode  of  preparing  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa,  among  manu-
facturers, is  to  suspend  a  solution  of  the  pure  carbonate,  within  a  cask,
over  a  liquid  undergoing  the  vinous  fermentation,  and  allow  it  to  remain
there  for  six  or  seven  weeks ;  the  carbonic  acid  evolved  is  absorbed  by
the  carbonate  of  potassa,  and  a  bicarbonate  is  formed.  Distillers  and
brewers  often  prepare  it  in  this  manner — and  the  Sal  a'eratus  of  com-
merce, which  is  between  a  carbonate  and  a  bicarbonate  in  its  composi-
tion, is  made  in  this  way.

Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  crystallizes  in  colorless,  transparent,  right-
rhombic  prisms,  usually  truncated  on  the  acute  edges ;  their  primitive
form  is  the  rectangular  octaedre.  It  is  inodorous,  slightly  alkaline  to
the  taste,  permanent  in  the  air,  soluble  in  four  parts  of  cold  water,  but
insoluble  in  boiling  water  without  decomposition,  carbonic  acid  being
liberated  and  a  sesquicarbonate  of  potassa  formed ;  it  is  also  insoluble
in  alcohol.  At  a  red-heat  it  loses  about  30.7  per  cent.,  or  all  its  water
of  crystallization,  and  half  its  carbonic  acid,  and  is  converted  into  a  very
pure  carbonate.  It  has  no  power  of  dissolving  or  disorganizing  the
animal  textures.  It  consists  of  two  equivalents  of  acid  44,  one  of  base
47.2,  and  one  of  water  9  =  100.2,  (2  C02+KO+Aq.).

Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  is  subject  to  adulterations  of  the  sulphate  or
muriate  of  potassa,  from  having  employed  an  impure  carbonate  in  its
preparation  ;  and  of  carbonate  of  potassa  from  some  defect  in  the  process
of  making  it.  The  sulphate  and  muriate  of  potassa  may  be  detected  by
chloride  of  barium  or  nitrate  of  silver  causing  a  white  precipitate  in  its
solution  supersaturated  by  nitric  acid.  Carbonate  of  potassa  may  be
known  by  adding  a  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate,  which  will  cause  a
brick-red  precipitate,  if  even  the  hundredth  part  of  the  carbonate  be
present;  a  solution  of  the  pure  bicarbonate  in  forty  parts  of  water  has  no
effect,  or  at  most,  produces  merely  a  white  haze.  The  carbonate  may
also  be  detected  by  adding  starch  sugar  to  a  heated  solution  of  the
bicarbonate  under  examination  ;  if  the  impurity  be  present,  the  solution
becomes  changed  to  yellow  or  brown.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  is  antacid,  antilithic.  and
diuretic,  is  less  irritating  and  unpleasant  than  the  carbonate,  and  maybe
used  in  larger  doses.  It  is  preferred  as  a  general  rule  to  the  Carbonate,
for  which  it  may  in  nearly  all  cases  be  used  as  a  substitute. Dose,  ten


POTASSA.  1183

to  twenty  grains  as  an  antacid  and  antilithic  ;  one  to  two  drachms,  as  a
diuretic.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Rhei  et  Potassse  Fluidum  ;  Pulvis  Rhei  Com-
positus  ;  Syrupus  Rhei  et  Potassse.

Potassa  Bichromas. Bichromate  of  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  neutral  or  yellow  Chromate  of  Potassa  any
quantity ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Dissolve  the  Chromate  in  the
Water,  filter,  warm  the  filtered  solution,  and  while  warm  acidulate  the
solution  with  sulphuric  acid ;  then  set  the  mixture  aside  for  two  or  three
days,  when  beautiful  orange-red  crystals  of  bichromate  of  potassa  will
be  formed.

History. — The  addition  of  sulphuric  acid  to  the  filtered  solution,  as
above  explained,  separates  one  equivalent  of  potassa  from  two  of  the
neutral  chromate,  thus  converting  the  salt  into  a  bichromate.  The
yellow  chromate,  from  which  is  prepared  the  bichromate,  may  be  obtained
by  igniting  four  parts  of  powdered  chrome-iron  ore,  with  one  part  of
nitre,  and  lixiviating  the  resulting  mass  with  water.  The  solution  when
evaporated,  yields  the  chromate  in  crystals.  By  this  process,  oxygen  is
furnished  by  the  nitric  acid  of  the  nitre,  and  the  sesquioxide  of  chro-
mium is  converted  into  chromic  acid,  which  then  combines  with  the
potassa  of  the  same  salt ;  the  iron  likewise  becomes  sesquioxidized  and
insoluble.

Bichromate  of  Potassa  is  in  anhydrous,  prismatic  crystals,  of  an  orange-
red  color,  having  a  cooling,  bitter  taste,  insoluble  in  alcohol,  and  soluble
in  ten  parts  of  cold  and  much  less  boiling  water.  It  fuses  at  a  red-heat
without  decomposition,  forming  a  red  liquid,  which  on  cooling  congeals
into  a  crystalline  mass  and  then  falls  to  powder.  It  is  manufactured
largely  for  the  use  of  calico  printers,  and  those  engaged  in  making  it  are
subject  to  painful  ulcerations  of  the  hands.  Paper  impregnated  with  its
solution,  and  dried,  forms  excellent  tinder.  It  is  composed  of  two
equivalents  of  chromic  acid  104.06,  and  one  of  potassa  47.2=151.26;
its  formula  is  KO,  2  Cr,  O.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bichromate  of  Potassa  is  an  irritant  and  caus-
tic, its  only  therapeutical  use  is  as  an  external  application ;  when  brought
in  contact  with  the  skin,  its  solutions  cause  very  painful  sores,  which  are
difficult  to  heal.  A  saturated  solution  of  it  has  been  recommended  as
an  application  to  warts,  excrescences,  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  scirrhous
tumors,  tuberculous  elevations,  and  to  promote  the  healing  of  ulcers.
About  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm  of  the  salt  may  be  added  to  a
fluidounce  of  water.  When  used  as  a  caustic,  it  must  be  applied  in  the
form  of  powder.  Its  solution  possesses  very  powerful  antiseptic  proper-
ties, and  will  be  found  advantageous  in  cases  of  gangrene,  dry  mortifi-
cation, etc. This  salt  is  also  used  as  a  source  of  chromic  acid,  of  oxygen,


1184  Pharmacy.

and  in  the  forming  artificial  valerianic  acid  for  the  purpose  of  preparing
valerianate  of  soda.

PoTASSiE  BlSULPHAS. Bisulplldte  of  PotaSSO.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  residuum,  in  the  preparation  of  pure  Nitric
Acid  two  pounds;  commercial  Sulphuric  Acid  seven  fluidounces  and  one
fluidrachm,  (Imperial  Measure)  ;  Boiling  Water  six  pints,  (Imp.  Meas.)
Dissolve  the  Salt  in  the  Water,  add  the  Sulphuric  Acid,  concentrate  the
solution,  and  set  it  aside  to  cool  and  form  crystals.

History. — The  salt  which  remains  after  the  distillation  of  nitric  acid  is
a  bisulphate  of  potassa  ;  but  Mr.  Phillips  states  that  when  it  is  dissolved
in  water,  and  the  solution  allowed  to  crystallize,  some  sulphate  and  much
sesquisulphate  are  obtained  instead  of  bisulphate,  owing  to  the  water
retaining  a  part  of  the  excess  of  acid  in  solution.  By  the  addition  of
sulphuric  acid  this  result  is  prevented,  and  the  bisulphate  forms  in  crys-
tals. The  above  is  the  formula  of  the  Edinburgh  College  ;  the  Dublin
College  have  given  another,  which  also  yields  a  pure  bisulphate — it  is  as
follows:  Take  of  Sulphate  of  Potassa,  in  powder,  three  ounces,  (Avoir-
dupois) ;  Pure  Sulphuric  Acid  one  fluid  ounce,  (Imp.  Meas.)  Place  the
Acid  and  Salt  in  a  small  porcelain  capsule,  and  to  this  apply  a  heat
capable  of  liquefying  its  contents,  and  which  should  be  continued  until
acid  vapors  cease  to  be  given  off.  The  Bisulphate,  which  concretes  as
it  cools,  should  be  reduced  to  a  fine  powder,  and  preserved  in  a  well
stopped  bottle.

Bisulphate  of  Potassa  crystallizes  in  small  oblique,  flattened,  right-
rhombic  prisms  ;  or  when  obtained  by  extreme  concentration  and  cooling,
it  has  the  appearance  of  a  firm,  fibrous  mass.  It  is  a  white  salt,  with  a
bitter  and  strongly  acid  taste,  the  crystals  being  permanent  in  the  air,
while  the  fibrous  mass  effloresces.  It  is  soluble  in  twice  its  weight  of
cold,  and  in  less  than  its  weight  of  boiling  water.  It  is  insoluble  in
alcohol,  which  precipitates  the  neutral  sulphate  from  the  aqueous  solu-
tion. Exposed  to  a  moderate  heat  it  fuses  and  runs  like  oil ;  at  a  red
heat,  it  is  deprived  of  water  and  its  excess  of  acid,  and  is  converted  into
the  neutral  sulphate.  It  is  incompatible  with  many  of  the  metals,  most
oxides,  the  alkalies,  earths,  and  their  carbonates.  It  may  be  distin-
guished from  other  salts  by  its  strong  acid  taste,  and  by  its  brisk  effer-
vescence with  an  alkaline  carbonate,  the  solution  after  effervescence,
presenting  the  characters  of  the  neutral  sulphate.  This  salt  was  formerly
known  by  the  name  of  sal  enixum.  It  is  composed  of  two  equivalents
of  acid  80.2,  one  of  base  47.15,  and  two  of  water  18=145.35;  its
formula  is  2  SC-3  +  KO,  2  Aq.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Bisulphate  of  Potassa  is  laxative  and  tonic,
and  is  beneficial  in  constipation  accompanied  with  a  deficient  appetite,
especially  during  convalescence  from  acute  disease ;  and  is  said  to  form
a  grateful  adjunct  to  rhubarb. A  drachm,  each,  of  the  bisulphate,  and


POTASSA.  1185

of  carbonate  of  soda,  dissolved  separately,  each  in  two  fluidounces  of
water,  and  then  mixed,  forms  a  good  aperient  effervescent  draught.  The
dose  of  the  bisulphate  is  one  or  two  drachms.

Potass^e  Carbonas. Carbonate  of  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  Impure  Carbonate  of  Potassa,  (pearlash)  in
powder,  three  pounds;  Water  two  pints  and  a  half.  Dissolve  the  im-
pure carbonate  of  potassa  in  the  water,  and  filter  the  solution,  then  pour
it  into  a  clean  iron  vessel,  and  evaporate  the  water  over  a  gentle  fire,
until  the  solution  thickens  ;  lastly,  remove  it  from  the  fire  and  stir  it  con-
stantly with  an  iron  spatula  until  the  salt  granulates. —  U.  S.

History. — By  the  above  process  the  impure  Carbonate  of  Potassa  is
purified.  The  solution  in  cold  water  is  allowed  to  stand  for  a  few  days,
frequently  stirring  it,  and  is  then  filtered,  which  removes  its  insoluble
impurities,  as  well  as  many  foreign  salts  which  have  not  as  great  an
affinity  for  water  as  the  carbonate,  and  therefore  are  not  dissolved.  The
filtered  solution  is  then  placed  in  iron  vessels,  because  glass  is  acted  on
by  the  potassa,  and  evaporated.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  process,  when
the  solution  is  brought  nearly  to  dryness,  it  is  better  to  keep  it  on  the
fire  at  a  reduced  heat,  removing  it  the  moment  the  solution  thickens.

Carbonate  of  Potassa  is  in  small  roundish  grains,  white,  opake,  of  a
nauseous  alkaline  and  caustic  taste,  soapy  to  the  touch  when  moist,  and
extremely  deliquescent,  forming,  when  exposed  to  the  air,  an  oily  liquid,
termed  by  the  early  chemists  oleum  tarlari  per  deliquum.  It  exerts  an
alkaline  reaction  on  vegetable  colors,  is  very  soluble  in  water,  and  insol-
uble in  alcohol.  On  account  of  its  deliquescence  it  should  always  be
kept  in  well  stopped  bottles.  A  red  heat  drives  off  16  per  cent,  of  its
water  without  any  loss  of  its  carbonic  acid  ;  dilute  sulphuric  acid  decom-
poses it,  evolving  26.3  per  cent,  of  carbonic  acid.  It  is  incompatible  with
acids  and  acidulous  salts,  muriate  and  acetate  of  ammonia,  limewater,
chloride  of  calcium,  sulphate  of  magnesia,  alum,  tartar  emetic,  nitrate  of
silver,  ammoniated  copper,  and  ammoniated  iron,  sulphate  of  iron,  and
tincture  of  muriate  of  iron,  calomel  and  corrosive  sublimate,  acetate  and
subacetate  of  lead,  and  sulphate  of  zinc.  As  it  is  not  decomposed  by
the  tartrate  of  iron  and  potassa,  it  may  be  employed  with  it  in  prescrip-
tions. It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  acid  22,  and  one  of  base
47.2=69.2  (COz-r-KO.)

The  most  common  impurities  met  with,  are  excess  of  moisture,  earthy
matter,  sulphate  of  potassa,.  chloride  of  potassium,  and  silica.  Its  solu-
tion supersaturated  with  nitric  acid,  will  show  the  presence  of  minute
portions  of  a  sulphate  by  giving  a  faint  cloudiness  with  chloride  of
barium  ;  and  of  a  chloride  by  yielding  a  slight  precipitate  with  nitrate  of
silver.  Should  earthy  matter  be  present,  carbonate  of  soda  will  precipi-
tate the  nitric  solution.  The  pure  commercial  carbonate  may  be  known
Dy  five  parts  of  it  saturating  5.44  parts  of  tartaric  acid,  which  has  been
75


H8G  Pharmacy.

gently  dried  so  as  not  to  drive  off  any  of  its  water  of  crystallization.  As
nearly  all  samples  of  carbonate  of  potassa  contain  more  or  less  moisture,
due  allowance  should  be  made  for  this  in  all  chemical  or  pharmaceutical
operations.

Properties  and  Uses. — All  the  carbonates  of  potassa  are  sufficiently
corrosive  to  be  energetic  poisons.  They  occasion  destruction  of  the
mucous  membranes  of  the  fauces,  oesophagus,  stomach,  and  sometimes
of  the  intestines — indicated  at  first  by  violent  burning  pain,  prostration
and  vomiting,  which  is  sometimes  bloody,  and  if  death  does  not  ensue
in  consequence,  in  a  few  days,  excessive  emaciation  follows,  and  con-
stant irritation  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.  The  proper  antidotes  to
them  are  vinegar,  lemon-juice,  or  fixed-oil.

Medicinally,  Carbonate  of  Potassa  is  antacid,  antilithic  and  diuretic.
Useful  in  urinary  affections,  where  the  morbid  secretion  consists  of
lithic  acid,  and  the  lithates,  for  which  about  thirty-five  grains  should  be
given  in  the  course  of  the  day,  in  divided  doses.  Some  prefer  the
potassa  carbonates  to  the  soda,  for  antilithic  purposes,  on  the  supposition
that  they  are  more  energetic  solvents.  It  is  sometimes  used  in  solution,
as  an  injection  into  the  bladder,  for  calculus.  It  has  also  been  employed
in  dyspepsia,  as  an  antacid ;  in  dropsy,  as  a  diuretic ;  and  in  some  cases
of  jaundice ;  and  combined  with  cochineal,  it  has  considerable  repu-
tation in  the  treatment  of  pertussis.  Dissolve  carbonate  of  potassa,
twenty  grains,  in  a  gill  of  water,  add  to  it  ten  grains  of  powdered
cochineal,  sweeten  with  loaf  sugar,  and  give  an  infant  a  teaspoonful
four  times  a  day  ;  to  a  child  two  or  three  years  old,  two  teaspoonfuls ;
four  years  and  upward,  a  tablespoonful  or  more.  To  this  preparation,
five  to  6fteen  drops  of  tincture  of  belladonna  is  sometimes  added.
Externally,  it  is  used  in  the  form  of  bath,  lotion,  or  ointment,  as  an
effectual  remedy  in  obstinate  cutaneous  eruptions.  From  eight  to  six-
teen ounces  may  be  used  for  a  single  bath ;  from  two  to  three  drachms
in  a  pint  of  water,  for  a  lotion ;  or  from  ten  to  sixty  grains  with  an  ounce
of  lard,  as  an  ointment.  Dose  of  the  powder  in  solution,  five  to  thirty
grains.

Off.  Prep. — Extractum  Spigeliae  et  Sennae  Fluidum  ;  Liquor  Potassae ;
Potassae  Acetas;  Potassae  Bicarbonas ;  Potassae  Sulphas;  Potassae  Tar-
fras ;  Potassii  Bromidum ;  Potassii  Cyanuretum  ;  Potassii  Iodidum ;
Potassii  Sulphuretum.

Potassa  Carbonas  Purus.  Pure  Carbonate  of  Potassa.  Salt  of
Tartar.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  a  pound.  Put  the  Bi-
carbonate, previously  powdered,  into  a  capacious  iron  crucible,  heat
Liradually  until  the  water  of  crystallization  is  driven  off,  then  raise  the
heat  to  redness,  and  maintain  that  temperature  for  half  an  hour.
Having  taken  the  crucible  from  the  fire,  and  allowed  it  to  cool,  remove
its  contents,  dissolve  them  in  Distilled  Water,  filter  the  Solution,  and


POTASSA.  1187

complete  the  process  by  evaporating  and  granulating  as  directed  for
Carbonate  of  Potassa. —  JJ.  S.

History. — In  .the  above  process,  by  ignition  of  the  bicarbonate  of
potassa,  it  is  deprived  of  one  equivalent  of  carbonic  acid  together  with
its  water  of  crystallization,  and  the  carbonate  remains.  The  bicarbonate
being  usually  a  very  pure  salt,  the  carbonate  procured  from  it  is  like-
wise as  pure.

Pure  carbonate  of  potassa  differs  from  the  carbonate  in  holding  no
impurities ;  its  actions  are  the  same.  It  was  formerly  called  Salt  of
Tartar,  but,  the  greater  part  of  this  salt  at  present  found  in  the  shops,
is  the  ordinary  carbonate  as  purified  from  pearlash.  It  may  also  be
made  as  follows;  take  of  Bitartrate  of  Potassa  (cream  of  tartar),  two
pounds;  Nitrate  of  Potassa,  a  pound.  Rub  them  separately  into
powder,  then  mix,  and  throw  them  into  a  brass  vessel,  heated  nearly  to
redness,  that  they  may  undergo  combustion.  From  the  residue  pre-
pare the  purest  carbonate  of  potassa,  in  the  manner  directed  for  the
carbonate.

Properties  and  Uses. — Precisely  the  same  as  those  of  the  Carbonate
of  Potassa.

The  Liquor  Potassse  Carbonatis,  Solution  of  Carbonate  of  Potassa,  is
made  by  dissolving  one  pound  of  Carbonate  of  Potassa  in  twelve  fluid
ounces  of  Distilled  Water,  and  then  filtering  the  solution.  The  dose  is
from  ten  to  sixty  drops,  sufficiently  diluted  with  water  or  other  bland
liquid.

Potassa  Chlobas. Chlorate  of  Potassa.

Preparation.  — Dissolve  one  equivalent  of  Caustic  Potassa  in  sufficient
Water  to  form  a  Solution,  containing  10^  per  cent,  of  the  alkali  (sp.  gr.
1.110),  then  mix  the  solution  with  Hydrate  of  Lime  (Quicklime),  five
and  a  half  equivalents;  heat  the  mixture  gradually  to  122°,  and  subject
it  to  a  rapid  current  of  Chlorine  to  saturation,  the  reaction  caused  by
which  raises  the  temperature  to  about  194°.  The  product  is  then  evapo-
rated nearly  to  dryness,  the  residue  dissolved  in  Boiling  Water,  and  Ihe
Solution  filtered  and  set  aside  to  crystallize.

History. — This  is  the  process  of  Prof.  F.  C.  Calvert  of  Manchester,
by  which  260  parts  of  chlorate  are  obtained  from  100  of  anhydrous
potassa,  while  by  the  old  methods  but  43  parts  were  procured.  In  the
above  process  the  combination  of  chlorine  with  the  calcium,  instead  of
the  potassium,  is  determined  by  the  temperature  and  the  strength  of  the
potassa  solution ;  while  the  chlorine  is  converted  into  chloric  acid  by  the
oxygen  from  the  lime.  A  higher  or  lower  density  of  the  solution  of
potassa  gives  less  favorable  results.

Chlorate  of  Potassa  crystallizes  in  four  or  six-sided  rhomboidal  platea,
white,  of  a  pearly  luster,  and  permanent  in  the  air.  It  has  a  cooling,
saline  taste  like  that  of  nitre. It  is  soluble  in  two  and  a  half  parts  of


1188  Pharmacy.

boiling  water,  and  in  sixteen  parts  of  water  at  60°.  Heat  fuses  it,  and
if  carried  to  a  little  beyond  its  point  of  fusion,  nearly  39  per  cent,  of
oxygen  is  disengaged,  leaving  a  residuum  of  chloride  of  potassium.  It
is  due  to  this  escape  of  oxygen  that  the  combustion  of  burning  fuel  is
enlivened  when  the  salt  is  thrown  upon  it.  Mixed  with  a  little  sulphuric
acid  it  becomes  first  yellow,  and  then  red,  and  chlorous  acid  gas  (quad-
roxide  of  chlorine)  is  evolved,  which  has  a  yellow  color,  and  is  explosive
when  heated.  When  triturated  with  a  small  piece  of  phosphorus  or
sulphur,  a  violent  explosion  ensues ;  mixed  first  with  muriatic  acid,  and
then  with  water  it  becomes  possessed  of  bleaching  power.  It  consists
of  one  equivalent  of  chloric  acid  75.42,  and  one  of  potassa  47.2=122.62,
(ClOo+KO).

From  faulty  preparation,  its  most  common  impurity  is  chloride  of
potassium.  This  may  be  detected  by  the  addition  of  nitrate  of  silver
to  its  solution,  which  will  occasion  a  white  precipitate  of  chloride  of
silver,  if  the  impurity  be  present.

Properties  and  Uses. — Chlorate  of  potassa  is  considered  a  refrigerant
and  diuretic ;  and  has  been  used  in  cholera,  and  in  malignant  fevers  for
promoting  the  arterialization  of  the  blood ;  it  is  also  said  to  moisten  and
clean  the  tongue.  According  to  Dr.  O'Shaughnessy  and  other  physi-
cians, it  passes  unchanged  into  the  urine,  and  imparts  a  bright  scarlet
color  to  the  venous  blood.  It  has  been  used  with  considerable  benefit
in  scurvy,  syphilis,  and  liver  complaint ;  and  is  strongly  recommended
in  cancrum  oris,  given  in  solution,  in  divided  doses,  to  the  amount  of
from  ten  to  sixty  grains  in  twenty-four  hours,  according  to  the  age  of
the  child.  It  lessens  the  fetor  and  salivation  attendant  on  the  disease,
and  promotes  granulation.  Internally,  and  used  as  a  mouth  wash,  it  has
been  recommended  in  erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  mouth  and
fauces,  occurring  in  black  tongue.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty  grains;
and  the  mouth  wash  made  by  dissolving  a  drachm  of  the  salt  in  four
fluidounces  of  water.

Potassa  Sesquicarbonas.  Sesqui-carbonate  of  Potassa.  Vegetable
Caustic.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa  one  pound ;  Water  a
sufficient  quantity.  Dissolve  the  Bicarbonate  in  the  Water,  strain  and
then  evaporate  by  means  of  heat  raised  to  a  very  few  degrees  above  the
boiling  point ;  when  sufficiently  concentrated  set  aside  to  cool.  Dry  the
resulting  sesquicarbonate  by  a  gentle  heat.

History. — This  is  the  method  at  present  pursued  in  the  preparation
of  the  Vegetable  Caustic.  The  bicarbonate  of  potassa  becomes  partially
decomposed  during  the  evaporating  process,  but  whether  it  is  converted
into  a  true  sesquicarbonate  of  potassa  (2KO,  3CC-2),  or  is  deprived  of
half  its  carbonic  acid,  remains  yet  to  be  determined

Sesquicarbonate  of  Potassa,  as  prepared  by  the  above  process,  is  sold


POTASSA.  1189

in  the  form  of  a  white  powder,  having  a  pungent,  but  not  very  powerful,
alkaline  odor,  a  sharp,  strongly  alkaline  taste,  is  permanent  in  dry  air,
very  soluble  in  water,  but  insoluble  in  alcohol.  It  is  incompatible  with
the  same  substances  as  the  Carbonate  of  Potassa.

The  above  preparation  differs  very  materially  from  the  original  vegetable
caustic,  which  was  prepared  by  making  a  strong  ley  of  hickory  or  oak-
wood  ashes,  and  evaporating  it,  in  an  iron  kettle,  to  dryness.  This
formed  an  impure  caustic  potassa,  of  a  dingy-gray  or  greenish  color,
very  caustic,  but  less  so  than  the  hydrate  of  potassa,  very  deliquescent,
and  soluble  in  water.  It  is  more  severe  in  its  action  than  the  sesquicar-
bonate,  and  has  occasionally  to  be  employed  in  cases  where  that  exerts
but  little  or  no  beneficial  influence.  As  it  rapidly  attracts  moisture  from
the  atmosphere,  it  must,  as  soon  as  prepared,  be  placed  in  green  glass
bottles  with  good  corks  or  stoppers.

Properties  and  Uses. — Each  of  these  preparations  are  escharotic,  but
do  not,  like  the  hydrate  of  potassa,  destroy  or  decompose  the  healthy
tissues;  their  action  appears  to  be  altogether  exerted  upon  abnormal
growths  and  conditions  of  parts.  They  are  employed  as  local  applica-
tions to  fistulas,  cancers,  fungous  growths,  indolent  ulcers,  unhealthy
conditions  of  mucous  tissues,  as  in  ophthalmic  affections,  disease  of  the
Schneiderian  membrane,  of  the  mouth  and  throat,  urethra,  vaginal
walls,  and  cervix-uteri.  In  solution,  it  has  been  injected  into  the  uterus
in  dysmenorrhea,  uterine  leucorrhea,  etc.,  without  any  unpleasant
symptoms  arising.  In  these  latter  cases  the  milder  sesquicarbonate
must  be  used,  commencing  with  a  weak  solution,  and  gradually  increas-
ing in  strength,  until  the  maximum  degree  that  can  be  used,  is  obtained.
Upon  healthy  tissues  these  agents  exert  but  very  feeble  action  ;  and  in
unhealthy  conditions  they  bring  about  a  normal  action  without  exciting
an  undue  degree  of  inflammation.  They  are  peculiarly  Eclectic  agents
of  great  value.

Potasses  Sulphas. Sulphate  of  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Salt  which  remains  after  the  distillation  of
Nitric  Acid  two  pounds ;  Boiling  Water  two  gallons.  Ignite  the  Salt  in
a  crucible  until  the  excess  of  the  Sulphuric  Acid  is  entirely  expelled ;
then  boil  it  in  the  two  gallons  of  Water  until  a  pellicle  forms,  and,  the
liquor  being  strained,  set  it  aside  that  crystals  may  form.  Pour  off  the
liquor  from  the  crystals  and  dry  them.

History. — When  a  mixture  of  Nitre  and  Sulphate  of  Iron  is  calcined
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  nitric  acid,  the  residue  consists  of  sulphate
of  potassa  and  sesquioxide  of  iron  ;  the  former  may  be  separated  from
the  latter  by  solution  in  water,  concentration,  and  crystallization.  The
sulphate  may  also  be  procured  by  other  processes,  as  by  the  action  of
sulphuric  acid  on  nitre  in  the  distillation  of  nitric  acid  ;  by  the  decom-
position  which ensues  when carbonate of  potassa and sulphate of


1190  Pharmacy.

magnesia  react  upon  each  other,  during  the  preparation  of  carbonate  of
magnesia,  etc.

The  salt  which  remains  after  the  distillation  of  nitric  acid,  is  a  super-
sulphate  of  potassa,  and  by  the  application  of  heat  to  remove  the  excess
of  acid,  it  is  brought  into  the  neutral  state.  The  excess  of  acid  may
also  be  removed  by  the  addition  of  white  marble,  or  slaked  lime,  either
of  which  become  converted  into  insoluble  sulphate  of  lime.  This  ac-
complished, the  liquor  or  solution  of  the  sulphate  of  potassa  is  strained,
evaporated,  strained  again,  and  allowed  to  cool,  when  the  crystals  form.
This  salt  also  occurs  in  volcanic  regions  and  in  the  juices  of  plants ;  but
the  medicinal  article  is  always  an  artificial  preparation.  It  has  at  dif-
ferent times  been  known  under  the  names  of  Sulphate  of  Kali,  Vitriolated
Tartar,  Sal- Poly chrest,  Sal  de  Duobus,  etc.

Sulphate  of  potassa  occurs  in  small,  aggregated,  transparent,  white,  very
hard  crystals,  whose  primary  form  is  the  right  rhombic  prism  or  rhom-
bic octaedre,  but  which  generally  are  short  six-sided  prisms  terminated
by  six-sided  pyramids.  They  have  a  sharp,  saline,  bitterish,  and  nau-
seous taste,  are  permanent  in  the  air,  soluble  slowly  in  about  nine  and  a
half  parts  of  cold  water,  soluble  in  nearly  four  times  their  weight  of
boiling  water,  and  insoluble  in  alcohol.  Heat  causes  a  slight  decrepi-
tation ;  and  a  strong  red  heat  fuses  them,  but  without  change  ;  heated
with  carbonaceous  matter  the  sulphate  is  deoxidized,  and  sulphuret  of
potassium  formed.  A  solution  of  sulphate  of  potassa  slightly  acidulated
with  nitric  acid,  yields  a  white  precipitate  with  chloride  of  barium,  and
a  yellow  one  with  chloride  of  platinum.  It  is  incompatible  with  tartaric
acid  which  unites  with  it  to  form  bitartrate  of  potassa,  and  with  the
soluble  salts  of  lime,  silver,  strontia,  baryta,  and  lead,  with  which  it
forms  insoluble  or  sparingly  soluble  sulphates.  It  is  not  subject  to
adulteration.  It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  acid  40,  and  one  of
potassa  47.2=87.2,  (SOs-fKO).

Properties  and  Uses. — Sulphate  of  potassa  is  a  mild  cathartic,  and
causes  but  little  pain,  heat,  or  irritation  during  its  operation.  In  doses
of  one  or  two  ounces,  it  acts  as  a  powerful  irritant,  and  has  given  rise  to
fatal  accidents.  It  has  been  used  as  an  aperient  after  delivery,  for  the
purpose  of  removing  visceral  obstructions  of  children  attended  with
defective  digestion  and  nutrition,  and  tumid  abdomen,  and  in  jaundice
and  dyspeptic  affections.  The  dose  as  an  aperient  is  from  a  scruple  to
half  a  drachm  ;  in  larger  doses,  say  four  or  five  drachms,  it  acts  slowly
as  a  purge.  It  should  always  be  sufficiently  diluted  with  water,  when
administering  it.

Potassa  Sulphas  cum  Sulphure. Sulphate  of  Potassa  with  Sulphur.

Preparation. — Take  of  Nitrate  of  Potassa,  in  powder,  and  of  Sublimed
Sulphur,  equal  weights.  Mix  them  well  together,  and  throw  the  mixture,
by  small portions  at  a  time,  into  a  red hot  crucible. When  the


POTASSA.  1191

deflagration  is  over,  allow  the  Salt  to  cool,  and  place  it  in  a  glass  vessel
well  stopped.

History. — As  the  above  named  portions  of  the  mixture  are  thrown  into
the  red-hot  crucible,  they  melt,  and  on  the  surface  of  the  fused  mass
floats  the  sulphur,  having  the  appearance  of  a  brown  oil  ;  it  burns  with
a  blue  flame,  throwing  out  in  copious  quantity  sulphuric  acid  gas,  and
becoming  oxidated  at  the  expense  of  the  nitric  acid  of  the  nitre,  which
is  totally  decomposed,  and  enabled  to  furnish  a  sufficient  quantity  of
oxygen  for  the  above  purpose.  The  product  of  this  deflagration  is  a
grayish-white  friable  substance,  the  nature  of  which  has  not  been
ascertained.

It  has  an  acid  and  sulphurous  taste,  and  an  acid  reaction  with  test-
paper  ;  it  is  much  more  soluble  in  water  than  sulphate  of  potassa,  giving
off  a  sulphurous  smell  during  its  solution,  which  solution  is  yellowish.
Sulphureted  hydrogen  is  not  obtained  on  the  addition  of  an  acid  to  it,  nor
is  sulphuret  of  lead  thrown  down  by  the  salts  of  lead.  Its  powder  is
pale  yellowish-white  ;  and  it  dissolves  in  eight  times  its  weight  of  cold
water.  A  white  precipitate,  insoluble  in  nitric  acid,  is  occasioned  by  the
salts  of  barium,  so  that  sulphate  of  potassa  is  present,  and  with  which,
its  other  properties  coincide.  Even  when  prepared  with  equal  care,  it
exhibits,  in  different  specimens,  some  variety  in  its  properties.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  considered  a  mild  cathartic,
resembling  very  much  in  its  action,  that  of  the  sulphate  of  potassa.  It
was  formerly  much  in  vogue  as  a  purgative  in  dyspepsia,  chronic  cuta-
neous eruptions,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm,
and  generally  given  with  some  other  gentle  laxative,  as  bitartrate  of
potassa.

Potass^e  Tartras. Tartrate  of  Potassa. Soluble  Tartar.

Preparation.  — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Potassa  sixteen  ounces  ;  Bitartrate
of  Potassa,  (Cream  of  Tartar,)  in  powder,  three  founds  or  a  sufficient
quantity;  Boiling  Water  a  gallon.  Dissolve  the  Carbonate  of  Potassa  in
the  Water,  then  gradually  add  the  Bitartrate  of  Potassa,  until  efferves-
cence ceases,  or  until  the  solution  is  perfectly  saturated,  then  boil.  Filter
the  solution  through  paper ;  then  evaporate  it  till  a  pellicle  forms,  and
set  it  aside  to  crystallize.  Pour  off  the  Water,  dry  the  Crystals  upon
bibulous  paper,  and  keep  them  in  closely  stopped  bottles. —  U.  S.

History. — Tartrate  of  Potassa,  also  known  by  the  names  of  Soluble
Tartar,  Sal  Vegetabile,  and  Tartarized  Kali,  was  known  as  early  as  the
seventeenth  century.  In  the  above  process  for  obtaining  it,  the  potassa
of  the  carbonate  saturates  the  excess  of  acid  of  the  bitartrate,  while  at
the  same  time  the  carbonic  acid  is  given  off  with  effervescence,  and  at
the  termination  a  neutral  tartrate  of  potassa  is  formed.  As  the  carbon-
ate of  potassa  is  more  readily  soluble  than  the  bitartrate,  it  should  be
dissolved  first,  and  the  latter  added,  (promoting  the  action  by  constant


1192  Pharmacy.

stirring,)  until  the  saturation  is  completed,  and  which  may  be  known  by
the  cessation  of  effervescence.  As  the  solution  should  be  neutral,  or
very  slightly  alkaline,  should  too  much  bitartrate  have  been  added,  the
solution  may  be  changed  to  its  proper  neutrality  by  a  little  more  of  the
carbonate.  After  saturation,  the  tartrate  of  lime,  which  is  deposited  in
white  flocks,  must  be  separated  by  filtration,  and  the  evaporated  solu-
tion then  placed  in  warm  earthenware  vessels,  (not  iron,  as  it  is  apt  to
discolor  the  salt,)  to  procure  a  gradual  cooling,  and  after  several  days,
the  crystals  commence  forming.  If  the  solution  be  somewhat  alkaline,
crystallization  ensues  more  favorably.

Tartrate  of  potassa,  when  properly  prepared,  is  in  the  form  of  white,
transparent  crystals,  which  are  right  rhombic  prisms,  or  irregular  six-
sided  prisms,  terminated  by  two  converging  planes.  It  has  a  mildly
saline,  bitterish  taste,  is  neutral  to  test  paper,  becomes  moist  in  damp  air
without  deliquescence,  is  soluble  in  about  twice  its  weight  of  cold  water,
and  in  much  less  of  boiling  water,  and  is  almost  insoluble  in  alcohol.
At  a  heat  of -250°,  its  water  of  crystallization  is  driven  off,  but  without
fusion,  and  it  becomes  anhydrous  ;  at  a  higher  heat  it  is  decomposed,
fusing,  swelling  up,  and  becoming  finally  converted  into  charcoal  and
carbonate  of  potassa.  The  crystals  alone  should  be  employed  for  me-
dical use,  and  not  the  white  granular  powder  of  the  shops,  obtained  by
constantly  stirring  the  solution  while  evaporating  to  dryness.  It  is  sel-
dom adulterated.  It  is  incompatible  with  all  the  strong  acids,  and  with
many  acidulous  salts.  Its  solution  is  precipitated  by  the  salts  of  baryta,
silver  and  lead,  forming  white  tartrates  of  the  metallic  oxides,  which  are
soluble  in  dilute  nitric  acid.  It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of  acid
66,  and  one  of  potassa  47.2=113.2 — the  crystals  having  no  water  of
crystallization,  KO,  Ci  H2  Oo.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tartrate  of  potassa  is  a  mild  cooling  purgative,
operating  without  much  pain,  and  producing  watery  stools.  Used  in
febrile  diseases,  and  occasionally  combined  with  senna  to  obviate  its
griping  effects. Dose,  from  a  drachm  to  an  ounce.

Potassii  Bbomidum. Bromide  of  Potassium.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bromine  two  ounces;  Iron  Filings  an  ounce ;
Carbonate  of  Potassa  two  ounces  and  a  drachm,  or  a  sufficient  quantity ;
Distilled  Water  four  pints.  Add  first  the  Iron  Filings,  and  afterward
the  Bromine,  to  a  pint  and  a  half  of  the  Distilled  Water,  stirring  the
mixture  frequently  with  a  spatula  for  half  an  hour.  Apply  a  gentle
heat,  and,  when  the  liquor  assumes  a  greenish  color,  add  gradually  the
Carbonate  of  Potassa,  previously  dissolved  in  a  pint  and  a  half  of  the
Distilled  Water,  until  it  ceases  to  produce  a  precipitate.  Continue  the
heat  for  half  an  hour,  and  then  filter.  Wash  the  precipitate  with  the
remaining  pint  of  Distilled  Water,  boiling  hot,  and  filter.  Mix  the  fil-
tered liquors,  and  evaporate  so  that  crystals  may  form.  Lastly,  pour
off  the  liquid,  and  dry  the  crystals  on  bibulous  paper. —  U.  S.


POTASSA.  1193

History. — In  this  process,  the  addition  of  the  iron  and  bromine  to  the
water,  forms  a  solution  of  bromide  of  protoxide  of  iron,  which  is  decom-
posed by  the  subsequent  addition  of  the  carbonate  of  potassa,  the  car-
bonate of  protoxide  of  iron  being  precipitated,  while  the  bromide  of
potassium  is  held  in  solution.  The  carbonate  of  iron  is  separated  from
the  solution  by  filtration,  and  by  the  evaporation  bromide  of  potassium
is  obtained  in  crystals.

Bromide  of  Potassium  crystallizes  in  cubes  or  rectangular  four-sided
tables,  which  are  permanent  in  the  air,  of  a  pearly  luster,  and  anhy-
drous; and  possessing  a  pungent,  saline  taste,  somewhat  like  that  of
common  salt.  It  is  very  soluble  in  water,  sparingly  so  in  alcohol,  decrep-
itates when  heated,  and  at  a  red-heat  fuses  without  becoming  decom-
posed. Its  aqueous  solution  has  no  action  on  litmus  or  turmeric,  is  not
precipitated  by  chloride  of  barium,  but  is  decomposed  by  sulphuric,
nitric,  and  muriatic  acids,  which  set  free  bromine,  and  the  liquid  becomes
brown.  Mixed  with  starch  and  then  acted  upon  by  sulphuric  acid,  the
bromine  is  disengaged,  and  the  liquid  becomes  yellow.  Nitrate  of  silver
14.28  grains  are  required  to  completely  precipitate  ten  grains  of  the  bro-
mide of  potassium,  the  precipitate  being  yellowish.  A  few  drops  of  a
weak  solution  of  chlorine  added  to  its  solution,  will  indicate  the  presence
of  iodine,  by  imparting  a  faintly  blue  or  violet  color  to  a  piece  of  white
paper  moistened  with  the  liquid.  It  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of
bromine  78.4,  and  one  of  potassium  39.2=117.0,  (K  Br.)

Properties  and  Uses. — Bromide  of  Potassium  is  considered  an  altera-
tive and  resolvent.  It  has  been  recommended  in  enlarged  spleen,
scrofula,  secondary  and  tertiary  syphilis.  In  the  latter  diseases,  its
effects  are  slow  and  unsatisfactory  compared  with  those  of  Iodide  of
Potassium ;  in  large  doses  it  is  said  to  produce  nausea,  gastric  derange-
ments, drowsiness,  torpor,  anaesthesia  of  the  fauces,  and  debility  of  the
genital  organs.  Externally,  it  has  been  used  in  the  form  of  ointment,
in  conjunction  with  its  Internal  use,  or  that  of  iodine,  and  has  proved
efficacious  in  bronchocele,  scrofula,  and  enlarged  spleen.  The  dose  of
it  is  from  three  to  ten  grains,  three  times  a  day,  in  pill  or  solution.  The
ointment  is  made  by  mixing  from  two  scruples  to  two  drachms  of  the
bromide  with  an  ounce  of  lard;  of  which  from  one-fourth  to  one-half
may  be  rubbed  over  the  affected  part,  once  in  twenty-four  hours.

Potassii  Cyanuretum. Cyanuret  of  Potassium.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Ferrocyanuret  of  Potassium,  dried,  eight
ounces ;  Carbonate  of  Potassa,  dried,  three  ounces.  Mix  the  salts  inti-
mately, and  throw  the  mixture  into  a  deep  iron  crucible  previously  heated
to  redness;  maintain  the  temperature  till  effervescence  ceases,  and  the
fused  mass  concretes,  of  a  pure  white  color,  upon  a  warm  glass  rod  dipped
into  it;  then  pour  out  the  liquid  carefully  into  a  shallow  dish  to  solidify,
stopping  before  the Salt  becomes  contaminated  with  the  precipitated


1194  Pharmacy.

iron. Break  up  the  mass  while  yet  warm,  and  preserve  it  in  well  stopped
bottles.—  U.  S.

History. — In  this  process  two  equivalents  of  carbonate  of  potassa,  and
two  of  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium  react  upon  each  other  ;  carbonic  acid  is
evolved,  iron  is  set  free,  and  a  compound  is  formed  consisting  of  five
equivalents  of  cyanuret  of  potassium,  and  one  of  cyanate  of  potassa.
The  iron  settles  at  the  bottom  of  the  fused  liquid,  which  must  be  care-
fully poured  off  to  avoid  any  contamination  with  the  iron.  The  cyanate  of
potassa  is  not  present  in  sufficient  quantity  to  injure  the  medicinal  action
of  the  salt ;  and  it  may  be  detected  by  saturating  the  product  with  an
acid,  which  will  evolve  carbonic  acid  with  effervescence,  and  give  rise  to
an  ammoniacal  salt.

The  process  for  preparing  cyanuret  of  potassium,  according  to  the
French  Codex,  is  to  half  fill  a  coated  stoneware  or  iron  retort  with  the
ferrocyanuret,  attach  a  tube  to  it  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  the  gas-
eous products,  and  apply  heat,  until  the  gases  cease  to  be  disengaged ;
then  raise  the  heat  to  a  very  high  temperature  which  must  be  maintained
for  half  an  hour.  After  this  calcination,  a  black  substance  will  be  found
in  the  retort,  covered  with  a  fused  layer  of  pure  cyanuret  of  potassium,
resembling  white  enamel,  which  should  be  at  once  removed  and  placed
into  a  well  stopped  bottle.  The  remaining  mass  is  an  impure  black
cyanuret  of  potassium.

Cyanuret  of  potassium,  as  prepared  by  the  above  formula,  is  amor-
phous, white,  and  opake,  deliquescent  in  moist  air,  soluble  in  water,  but
sparingly  so  in  alcohol.  It  has  a  sharp,  alkaline,  bitter-almond  taste,
and  an  alkaline  reaction.  It  is  always  white  when  pure,  but  any  con-
tamination with  iron  renders  it  yellow.  Exposed  to  the  air  it  loses  its
strength  gradually  either  in  mass  or  solution.  As  found  in  commerce  it
varies  considerably  in  regard  to  purity  ;  the  usual  impurities  are  water,
carbonate,  cyanate,  and  formiate  of  potassa.  Nitrate  of  silver  added
to  its  solution  precipitates  cyanuret  of  silver,  which  is  completely  soluble
in  ammonia.  Cyanuret  of  potassium  is  composed  of  one  equivalent  of
cyanogen  26,  and  one  of  potassium  39.2=65.2,  (K  Cy).

Properties  and  Uses. — Cyanuret  of  Potassium  is  poisonous,  acting
precisely  like  hydrocyanic  acid.  Medicinally,  it  has  been  proposed  as  a
substitute  for  that  acid,  on  account  of  its  greater  uniformity  of  strength,
and  its  less  liability  to  decomposition.  The  dose  is  one-eighth  of  a  grain,
dissolved  in  half  a  fluidounce  of  distilled  water,  to  which  may  be  added
some  aromatic  syrup,  or  if  it  is  desired  to  set  free  the  hydrocyanic  acid,
half  a  fluidrachm  of.  lemon-syrup  may  be  added.  Great  care  must  be
employed  in  using  this  preparation.  Externally,  four  grains  of  the  salt
to  a  fluidounce  of  distilled  water,  has  been  efficaciously  used  in  neu-
ralgic and  other  local  pains,  applied  by  means  of  lint  or  linen. The


POTASSA.  1195

solution  dropped  into  the  eye  every  other  day,  will,  it  is  said,  remove
the  olive  colored  stains  of  the  conjunctiva,  produced  by  the  nitrate  of
silver.

Potassii  Iodidum. Iodide  of  Potassium.

Preparation. — Take  of  Potassa  six  ounces;  Iodine,  in  powder,  sixteen
ounces  ;  Charcoal,  in  fine  powder,  two  ounces  ;  Boiling  Water  three  pints.
Dissolve  the  Potassa  in  the  Water,  add  the  Iodine  gradually,  stirring
after  each  addition  until  the  solution  becomes  colorless,  and  continue  the
additions  until  the  liquid  remains  slightly  colored  from  excess  of  Iodine.
Evaporate  the  solution  to  dryness,  stirring  in  the  Charcoal  toward  the
close,  so  that  it  may  be  intimately  mixed  with  the  dried  Salt.  Rub  this
to  powder,  and  heat  it  to  dull  redness  in  an  iron  crucible,  maintaining  that
temperature  for  fifteen  minutes ;  then,  after  it  has  cooled,  dissolve  out
the  saline  matter  with  pure  Water,  filter  the  solution,  evaporate,  and
set  aside  to  crystallize.  An  additional  quantity  of  Crystals  may  be
obtained  from  the  residual  liquid  by  evaporating  and  crystallizing  as
before.—  U.  S.

History. — In  this  process,  a  slight  excess  of  iodine  is  added  to  an
aqueous  solution  of  potassa,  which  results  in  the  formation  of  two  salts,
Iodate  of  Potassa  and  Iodide  of  Potassium.  The  reaction  of  six  equiv-
alents of  iodine  with  six  of  potassa,  gives  rise  to  the  formation  of  five
equivalents  of  iodide  of  potassium,  and  one  of  iodate  of  potassa.  These
salts  are  obtained  together  by  evaporating  the  solution  to  dryness  ;  and
to  convert  the  iodate  into  iodide  of  potassium,  the  dried  mass  is  exposed
to  a  dull-red  heat.  The  addition  of  charcoal  toward  the  termination  of
the  evaporation  facilitates  the  deoxidation  of  the  iodate,  by  exposure  to
a  dull-red  heat.  The  iodide  of  potassium  is  then  dissolved  from  the
mass,  the  solution  filtered,  evaporated,  and  set  aside  to  crystallize.

Iodide  of  Potassium,  when  pure,  is  in  crystals  or  fragments  of  crystals,
which  are  cubes  or  four-sided  prisms,  with  a  slight  tendency  to  the  rhom-
bic form.  They  are  colorless,  and  opake,  with  a  faint  odor  of  iodine,
and  a  sharp,  saline  taste.  In  dry  air  they  are  permanent,  but  slightly
deliquescent  in  a  moist  one.  They  have  but  little  influence  on  litmus
or  turmeric.  They  dissolve  in  about  two-thirds  their  weight  of  cold
water,  and  in  from  six  to  eight  parts  of  alcohol.  Sulphuric  acid  decom-
poses a  solution  of  iodide  of  potassium,  producing  hydriodic  acid,  which
rapidly  decomposes,  setting  free  iodine ;  if  starch  be  added,  the  liquid  is
changed  to  a  blue  color,  after  standing  a  short  time  ;  but  if  any  iodate
be  present,  the  blue  color  appears  at  once,  in  consequence  of  the  imme-
diate liberation  of  iodine.  Tartaric  acid  added  freely  to  a  concentrated
solution  of  iodine  of  potassium,  occasions  a  white  crystalline  precipitate,
and  if  starch  be  added  to  the  supernatant  liquid,  it  becomes  first  purple
and  then  blue.  Its  solution  is  colored  brownish-red  by  the  addition  of
chloride  of  platinum,  without  occasioning  a  precipitate ;  it  is  but  little


1196  Pharmacy

affected  by  chloride  of  barium  ;  and  not  at  all  by  sulphate  of  iron,  unless
carbonate  of  potassa  be  present,  when  a  whitish  or  greenish-white  pre-
cipitate occurs,  which  effervesces  on  the  addition  of  a  diluted  acid.  A
low  red-heat  fuses  it,  giving  a  crystalline  pearly  mass  on  coolino- ;  a  full
red-heat  volatilizes  it  without  decomposition.  The  solution  of  iodide  of
potassium  possesses  the  property  of  dissolving  a  large  quantity  of  iodine,
forming  a  liquid  of  a  deep-brown  color,  containing  the  iodureted  iodide.
Iodide  of  potassium  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  iodine  126.3  and  one
of  potassium  39.2=165.5,  (KI).

It  is  exceedingly  subject  to  adulteration,  both  from  faulty  manufacture,
and  fraudulent  admixture.  The  most  usual  impurities  are  the  iodate  of
potassa,  carbonate  of  potassa,  chlorides  of  sodium  and  potassium,  and
water.  Iodate  of  potassa  is  generally  present  only  as  an  accidental  im-
purity ;  it  may  be  detected  by  its  insolubility  in  alcohol ;  also  by  the
rich  blue  color  produced  at  once  by  the  addition  of  tartaric  acid  and
starch  solution.  When  pure,  neither  the  iodide  of  potassium,  nor  the
iodate  of  potassa  are  thus  affected,  but  only  when  they  become  mixed.
Carbonate  of  potassa  may  be  present  in  the  proportion  of  from  one  to
five  per  cent.,  and  even  ten,  without  altering  -(he  crystalline  appearance
of  the  iodide  ;  but  it  increases  its  tendency  to  deliquesce.  When  the
proportion  is  greater  than  this  the  iodide  becomes  granular  and  highly
deliquescent.  This  impurity  may  be  detected  by  the  insolubility  of  the
carbonate  in  alcohol ;  by  the  addition  of  limewater,  which  precipitates  a
milky  carbonate  of  lime ;  and  by  its  destroying  the  color  of  tincture  of
iodine  when  it  is  added  to  the  solution.  Chloride  of  sodium  or  potas-
sium may  be  detected  by  the  addition  of  nitrate  of  silver,  which,  if  the
salt  be  pure,  will  precipitate  iodide  of  silver,  which  is  hardly  soluble  in
ammonia ;  but  if  the  precipitate  be  soluble  in  ammonia  it  is  a  chloride
of  silver,  and  the  salt  is  rendered  impure  by  the  presence  of  a  chloride.
If  the  ammonia  be  saturated  with  nitric  acid,  it  will  give  up  the  chloride
of  silver  as  a  white  precipitate  ;  but  if  no  chloride  be  present,  the  am-
monia, as  before  said,  takes  up  a  very  minute  portion  of  iodide  of  silver,
and  the  subsequent  addition  of  nitric  acid,  will  hardly  disturb  the  trans-
parency of  the  solution.  The  presence  of  water  may  be  detected  by
heating  the  iodide  in  a  glass  tube,  upon  which  the  water  will  condense
in  the  upper  part  of  the  tube.  Bromide  of  potassium  is  also  an  adulte-
ration which  may  be  detected  by  bichloride  of  mercury,  with  which  it
causes  no  precipitate.  Or,  it  may  be  detected  by  adding  to  an  aqueous
solution  of  the  iodide,  successively  and  in  excess,  a  solution  of  sulphate
of  copper,  and  aqueous  sulphurous  acid  ;  filter  the  liquor,  and  treat  it
with  ether  and  chlorine  water.  Shake  the  whole  together  and  allow  it  to
rest;  if  the  ether,  which  rises  to  the  surface,  be  tinged  of  a  reddish-
yellow  color,  bromine  is  present.  Iodide  of  Potassium  is  often  incor-
rectly called  by  the  name  of  Ilydriodate  of  Potash.


POTASSA.  1197

Properties  and  Uses. — In  large  doses  Iodide  of  Potassium  is  an  irritant.
In  small  doses  it  is  diuretic  and  alterative  ;  it  has  been  detected  in  the
urine,  in  six  minutes  after  being  swallowed.  This  may  be  accomplished
by  adding  a  portion  of  starch  to  the  cold  urine,  and  then  a  few  drops  of
nitric  acid  ;  if  the  iodide  be  present,  this  will  produce  a  blue  color.  In
some  constitutions  Iodide  of  Potassium  produces  peculiar  symptoms,  such
as  dryness  and  irritation  of  the  throat,  irritation  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane of  the  air  passages,  various  cutaneous  eruptions,  excessive  diure-
sis, cerebral  excitement  resembling  that  caused  by  alcoholic  liquors,
vascular  injection  of  the  conjunctiva  and  tumefaction  of  the  eyelids,  and
discharges  from  the  vagina  and  urethra,  simulating  blennorrhea.  Upon
ceasing  the  use  of  the  medicine,  these  various  symptoms  gradually
disappear.  Iodism  is  occasionally  caused  by  it,  or  some  of  the  symp-
toms characterizing  that  influence.  It  appears  to  be  more  especially
useful  in  goitre,  strumous  enlargement  of  the  glands,  strumous  sores  and
eruptions,  strumous  ophthalmia,  syphilitic  affections,  mammary  tumors,
enlargement  of  the  liver,  amenorrhea,  leucorrhea,  mercurio-syphilitic
sore-throat,  mercurial  cachexy,  and  indeed  all  tubercular  affections  of
serous  tissues.  It  is  extensively  employed  in  the  above  forms  of  disease,
by  Eclectics,  in  combination  with  the  Compound  Syrup  of  Stillingia,  in
the  proportion  of  four  drachms  of  the  Salt  to  a  pint  of  the  Syrup.  When
taken  for  a  length  of  time,  and  especially  if  used  in  rather  large  doses,
it  will  excite  ptyalism,  and  frequently  an  affection  of  the  mucous  mem-
branes of  the  air  passages,  very  much  resembling  a  cold  in  the  head.
The  dose  of  it  is  from  two  to  ten  grains  ;  it  should  always  be  given  in
possible  form,  on  account  of  its  numerous  chemical  relations  with  other
bodies,  many  of  which  decompose  it,  and  form  insoluble  iodides.

Off.  Prep. — Liquor  Iodinii  Compositus ;  Pilulse  Ferri  Iodidi ;  Tinc-
tura  Iodinii  Composita  ;  Unguentum  Iodinii  Compositum.

Potassii  Sulphuretum.  Sulphuret  of  Potassium.  Hepar.  Liver  of
Sulphur.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphur  an  ounce;  Carbonate  of  Potassa  two
ounces.  Rub  the  Carbonate  of  Potassa,  previously  dried,  with  the  Sul-
phur ;  melt  the  mixture  in  a  covered  crucible  over  the  fire  ;  then  pour
it  out  on  a  marble  slab,  and  as  soon  as  cold,  break  it  into  pieces,  and  put
them  into  a  well  stopped  bottle. —  U.  S.

History. — By  the  above  process  a  mixture  is  obtained  of  tersulphuret
of  potassium  with  sulphate  of  potassa.  On  the  application  of  heat  to  the
mixture,  the  carbonic  acid  of  the  carbonate  is  expelled.  We  may  sup-
pose, in  this  operation,  that  ten  equivalents  of  sulphur  react  on  four
of  potassa.  Of  the  potassa,  three  equivalents  are  decomposed  and  con-
verted into  three  of  oxygen  and  three  of  potassium. These  latter  three


1198  Pharmacy.

combine  with  nine  equivalents  of  the  sulphur,  and  form  three  equivalents
of  tersulphuret  of  potassium.  The  remaining  equivalent  of  sulphur  is
converted  into  sulphuric  acid  by  the  action  of  the  three  equivalents  of
oxygen,  and  sulphate  of  potassa  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  this
gas  with  the  undecomposed  equivalent  of  potassa.

The  best  formula  for  the  preparation  of  sulphuret  of  potassium  is  that
of  M.  Henry;  he  mixes  one  part  of  roll  sulphur,  in  powder,  with  two
parts  of  pure  salt  of  tartar,  and  places  the  mixture  into  flat-bottomed
matrasses,  each  of  which  should  be  only  two-thirds  filled.  These  are
placed  on  a  sand-bath,  and  heat  applied  at  first  gentle,  but  finally
increased,  and  continued  until  the  whole  is  thoroughly  fused,  when  it
is  allowed  to  cool.  The  necks  of  the  matrasses  must  be  kept  free  from
any  obstruction.  The  resulting  mass  is  smooth,  compact,  and  of  a  fine
yellow  color ;  it  should  be  placed  in  well  stopped  bottles  after  having
been  broken  into  pieces.

Sulphuret  of  potassium  is  a  hard,  brittle  substance,  of  a  liver-brown
color,  having  a  nauseous,  bitterish,  and  alkaline  taste,  and  no  odor  when
dry.  When  moistened  with  water  it  emits  a  very  fetid  smell,  owing  to
the  disengagement  of  sulphureted  hydrogen.  When  exposed  to  the  air,
it  gradually  absorbs  oxygen,  and  undergoes  a  series  of  changes,  result-
ing in  the  formation  of  sulphate  of  potassa  and  free  sulphur,  and  the
mass  becomes  inodorous,  and  white  on  its  surface.  It  is  soluble  in
water,  forming  an  orange-yellow  solution,  with  a  strong  smell  of  sulphu-
reted hydrogen.  It  is  incompatible  with  the  mineral  acids  which  pre-
cipitate sulphur,  and  free  sulphureted  hydrogen,  and  with  most  metallic
solutions  which  are  thrown  down  as  sulphurets.  Winckler  has  found
specimens  of  it  to  consist  of  tersulphuret  of  potassium  53.3  parts,  hypo-
sulphite of  potassa  29.5,  sulphite  of  potassa  7,  together  with  a  small
quantity  of  sulphate  and  carbonate.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Sulphuret  of  Potassium  is  a  local  irritant,
producing  in  doses  of  a  few  drachms  dangerous  inflammation  of  the
alimentary  canal  with  tetanic  spasms ;  sometimes  it  acts  as  an  emetic
and  cathartic.  In  small  doses,  and  repeated,  it  is  said  to  increase  the
temperature  of  the  surface,  also  the  frequency  of  the  pulse,  and  to  aug-
ment the  secretions,  particularly  those  from  mucous  membranes.  It  is
likewise  antacid,  alterative,  and  antispasmodic,  and  has  been  advanta-
geously employed  in  chronic  rheumatism  and  gout,  various  cutaneous
affections,  painter's  colic,  chronic  catarrh,  asthma,  and  hooping-cough.
Externally,  it  has  been  very  efficacious  in  scabies  and  other  cutaneous
diseases,  in  the  form  of  lotion,  bath,  or  ointment.  For  a  lotion,  or  oint-
ment, fifteen  to  thirty  grains  of  the  sulphuret  may  be  dissolved  in  one
ounce  of  water,  or  mixed  with  an  ounce  of  lard— and  for  a  bath  the
same  quantity  may  be  added  to  each  gallon  of  water.  The  dose,  inter-
nally, is  from  two  to  ten  grains,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  in  solution
with  syrup,  or  given  in  pill  form  with  liquorice.


PULVERES.  1199

PULVERES.
Powders.

Medicines  which  have  no  very  unpleasant  taste,  no  corrosive  action,
which  are  not  deliquescent,  and  which  do  not  require  to  be  given  in
very  large  doses,  are  the  most  conveniently  administered  in  the  form
of  powder.  When  an  article  is  reduced  to  powder,  it  has  a  much
greater  surface  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  air  and  light,  than  when  in
the  crude,  aggregate  mass ;  and  as  many,  if  not  all  Powders,  are  more
or  less  injured  by  the  action  of  these  agents,  it  is  always  better  to  keep
them  in  well  stopped  bottles,  and  excluded  from  the  action  of  light,  by
a  coating  of  black  varnish,  or  by  other  means.  Were  druggists  to  pursue
this  rule,  they  would  find  it  very  advantageous  in  many  respects.  Some
agents,  notwithstanding  even  these  precautions,  lose  their  virtues  rapidly
when  in  the  state  of  powder ;  such  should  be  pulverized  in  small  quantities
at  a  time,  and  only  as  they  are  required.  As  a  general  rule,  the  finer  the
Powder,  or  the  longer  it  is  triturated,  the  more  active  it  becomes.  And
in  the  various  preparations  of  the  Alkaloids,  and  Resinoids,  care  must  be
taken,  in  all  instances,  to  triturate  for  at  least  nearly  half  an  hour,  which
renders  them  much  more  energetic  and  effectual  in  their  results.  M.
Dorvault  thinks  that  the  operation  of  pulverization  effects  an  actual
change  in  the  chemical  and  therapeutical  properties  of  many  agents.
Sugar  is  less  soluble  in  water,  and  less  sweet,  when  long  pulverized  or
triturated — and,  he  inquires,  Is  this  to  be  referred  to  an  altered  electri-
cal condition  of  the  sugar,  as  the  phosphorescence  developed  during  the
act  of  pulverization  in  the  dark  would  lead  us  to  suppose  ?  Gum  arabic
powdered,  has  not  the  same  taste,  nor  the  same  solubility,  as  when  Jn
the  entire  state.  If  a  given  quantity  of  water  may  be  made  to  dissolve
forty  parts  of  arsenious  acid  in  the  vitreous  state,  the  same  quantity  of
water  can  be  made  to  dissolve  only  fourteen  parts  after  pulverization.
(Annals  of  Pharmacy,  May,  1852.)  Changes  of  this  kind  may  ensue
from  the  action  of  light,  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere,  its  nitrogen,  or
its  electricity,  etc.,  upon  matter  reduced  to  such  a  state  of  fineness  that
nearly  every  part  of  it  is  exposed  to  the  peculiar  agent  which  effects
these  changes.

Simple  powders  are  those  which  consist  of  a  single  substance ;  com-
pound powders,  those  containing  two  or  more  ingredients  mixed  together.
As  the  substances  entering  into  the  formation  of  a  compound  powder
may  be  of  various  textures  and  densities,  it  is  generally,  preferable  to
pulverize  each  article  separately,  then  mix  and  triturate  them  together
thoroughly.  Some  articles,  however,  require  the  intervention  of  another
before  Uiey  can  be  reduced  to  powder,  as  Camphor,  which  is  pulverized
by  the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  alcohol;  or  Camphor  and  Opium  which
require  the  addition  of  sugar  or  gum  Arabic  ;  others  again,  are  powdered
with  facility  by  the  aid  of  a  harder  substance. Medicines  that  can-tain


1200  Pharmacy.

a  large  proportion  of  fixed  oil,  or  which  are  deliquescent  should  never
latter  are  apt  to  injure  the  preparation  by  their  moisture,  while  the
former  may  destroy  it  in  consequence  of  rancidity.  Articles  which  are
incompatible  should  never  be  united  together,  unless  the  decomposing
compound  is  required.  When  volatile  or  deliquescent  substances  are
of  potassa,  they  should  be  divided  in  waxed  papers,  and  inclosed  in  tin
foil,  a  tin  box,  or  a  wide  mouthed  vial  before  delivering  them.  The
paper  used  for  powders  of  ordinary  character,  should  be  very  smooth,
or  glazed,  to  prevent  the  powder  from  adhering  to  it,  and  sufficiently
soft  and  yielding  to  be  opened  or  closed  readily,  without  springing  so  as
to  throw  out  any  portion  of  the  powder.  Some  apothecaries  fold  up
their  powders  in  foolscap  paper,  and  these  when  opened  by  the  patient,
in  consequence  of  their  stiffness,  spill  or  throw  out  a  very  material
leaving  it  to  the  patient  to  apportion  the  dose,  unless  otherwise  desired,
it  should  always  be  put  into  a  wide  mouthed  vial.

The  old  absurd  and  unscientific  style  of  combining  eight  or  ten
articles  in  one  preparation  is  fortunately  becoming  unpopular,  and
though  a  few  preparations  of  the  kind  are  retained,  yet  the  major
amount  of  our  present  compounds  consist  of  but  two  or  three,  and
never  exceeding  four  substances ;  in  the  former,  the  articles  were  too
frequently  thrown  together  without  any  guide  or  rule,  or  any  regard  to
compatibilities,  and  though  benefit  might  be  derived  from  these  hetero-
geneous mixtures,  it  was  always  difficult  to  ascertain  upon  which  article
or  articles  the  effect  depended,  or  whether  it  was  owing  to  a  third  agent,
th,e  result  of  decomposition.

In  preparing  powders,  the  proper  plan  is  to  dry  the  article,  then  beat
it  in  an  iron  mortar,  and  after  a  short  trituration,  sift  it  through  a  fine
sieve,  and  return  the  coarser  parts  to  the  mortar,  and  repeat  this  alter-
nate pulverization  and  sifting  several  times  until  the  process  is  completed.
When  very  active  articles,  such  as  strychnia,  chloride  of  gold,  atropia,
etc.,  are  to  be  given  in  the  form  of  powders — gum,  sugar,  sugar  of
milk,  starch,  or  marsh-mallow  should  be  triturated  with  them,  in  order
to  facilitate  their  reduction  to  minute  division.

Light  powders  may  be  given  in  water,  gruel,  milk,  etc.;  heavy  ones
require  syrup,  molasses,  honey,  or  one  of  the  confections;  always  bear-
ing in  mind  whether  the  vehicle  be  compatible  with  the  active  ingredi-
ents of  the  powder.

Pulvis  Asclepi^e  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Pleurisy  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  Pleurisy  Root,  and  Spearmint,  each  in  powder,
and  Sumach  Berries,  of  each,  two  ounces;  Bayberry  Bark  and  Skunk
Cabbage,  of  each,  in  powder,  one  ounce ;  Pulverized  Ginger  half  an
ounce. Mix  them.


PuLVERES.  1201

Properties  and  Uses. — Very  useful  diaphoretic  in  coughs,  colds,  and
as  a  drink  in  febrile  diseases.  Two  drachms  of  the  powder  may  be
infused  in  half  a  pint  of  boiling  water,  sweetened,  and  drank  in  wine-
glassful  doses,  every  hour  or  two.  Or  in  common  colds,  the  half  pint
of  warm  infusion  may  be  taken  at  a  draught,  and  repeated  in  an  hour
if  necessary. —  W.  S.  M.

Pulvis  Camphors  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Camphor.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tannic  Acid,  Kino,  Camphor,  each,  in  powder,
one  scruple;  Opium,  in  powder,  half  a  scruple.  Mix  well  together,  and
divide  into  twenty  powders.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  powders  are  stimulant,  antispasmodic,
anodyne,  and  astringent,  and  have  proved  highly  successful  in  the  treat-
ment of  Asiatic  cholera,  cholerine,  and  severe  cholera  morbus.  They
speedily  check  the  discharges,  and  relieve  the  pains  or  cramps.  The
dose  is  one  powder,  to  be  given  after  each  discharge  from  the  bowels,  or
oftener  if  the  urgency  of  the  case  require  it.  The  powders  may  be
given  in  molasses,  quince  syrup,  or  blackberry  jelly.  Where  more
stimulus  is  required,  one  or  two  grains  of  capsicum  may  be  added  to
each  dose. — J.  K.

Pulvis  Carbonis  Ligni  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Charcoal.

Preparation.  — Take  of  Charcoal  two  ounces;  Rhubarb,  in  powder,  one
ounce;  Bicarbonate  of  Soda  half  an  ounce. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  will  be  found  very  beneficial
in  dyspepsia,  attended  with  acidity  of  the  stomach,  loss  of  appetite,
constipation  or  diarrhea,  and  distress  at  the  stomach  after  eating.  It
will  prove  useful  in  all  derangements  of  the  digestive  functions  where
acidity  of  the  stomach  is  present.  The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful  in  water
or  Indian  meal  gruel,  three  or  four  times  a  day.  If  cream  of  tartar  one
ounce,  be  substituted  for  the  Bicarbonate  of  Soda,  it  will  form  an  excel-
lent laxative  powder  for  piles. — J.  K.

Pulvis  Cypripedii  Compositus.  Compound  Powder  of  Yellow  Ladies
Slipper. Nerve  Powder.

Preparation. — Take  of  Yellow  Ladies  Slipper  Root,  Pleurisy  Root,
Skunk  Cabbage  Root,  and  Scullcap,  of  each,  in  powder,  one  ounce.
Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  is  useful  to  allay  irritability  or
excitability  of  the  nervous  system,  to  relieve  spasms,  and  to  produce
sleep  in  restless,  wakeful,  or  excited  conditions.  When  acidity  of  the
stomach  is  present,  it  is  common  to  add  Bicarbonate  of  Soda,  an  ounce.
The  dose  is  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm  three  times  a  day,  or  as
required ;  it  is  usually  administered  in  tea  or  water. — J.  K.

Pulvis  Hydrastis  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Golden  Seal.

Preparation. — Take  of  Golden  Seal,  Blue  Cohosh,  and  Helonias,  each,
in  powder,  half  an  ounce. Mix  together.
76


1202  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  is  tonic  and  antispasmodic.  It
will  be  found  very  efficient  in  dyspepsia,  chronic  inflammation  of  the
mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach,  and  will  afford  much  relief  in  cases
of  distress  of  the  stomach  after  eating,  and  in  aphthous  inflammations
of  the  mouth.  It  may  also  be  administered  to  prevent  a  relapse,  in
bilious  colic.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm,  three  or
four  times  a  day,  in  water,  tea,  or  wine,  as  the  case  may  require. J.  K.

Pulvis  Hydrastini  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Hydraslin.

Preparation. — Take  of  Hydrastin,  Cornin,  and  Myricin,  of  each,  one
scruple. Mix  together  and  divide  into  twenty  powders.

Properties  and  Uses. — Stimulant,  tonic,  and  exerting  an  influence  on
mucous  membranes.  It  will  be  found  useful  in  chronic  gastritis,  and
some  forms  of  dyspepsia,  jaundice,  etc.  The  dose  is  one  powder,  every
two,  three,  or  four  hours,  as  the  case  may  require.  It  will  also  be
found  an  excellent  tonic  during  convalescence  from  exhausting  dis-
eases.— R.  S.  K

Pulvis  Ipecacuanha  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Ipecacuanha.

Preparation. — Take  of  Pleurisy  Root,  Blood  Root,  Ipecacuanha,  Nitrate
of  Potassa,  of  each,  in  powder,  one  drachm. Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  has  both  diuretic  and  diaphoretic
effects  upon  the  system;  it  is  useful  in  febrile  and  inflammatory  diseases,
and  especially  in  cases  where,  from  idiosyncracy  or  other  causes,  opium
is  inadmissible. The  dose  is  ten  or  fifteen  grains  every  hour  or  two.

Pulvis  Ipecacuanha  et  Opii  Compositus.  Compound  Powder  of
Ipecacuanha  and  Opium. Diaphoretic  Powder.

Preparation. — Take  of  Opium,  in  powder,  half  a  drachm;  Camphor,
in  powder,  two  drachms;  Ipecacuanha,  in  powder,  one  drachm;  Bitartrate
of  Potassa  one  ounce. Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  is  a  valuable  anodyne  and  dia-
phoretic, and  is  perhaps,  superior  to  any  other  preparation  in  its  dia-
phoretic effects  upon  the  system.  It  is  of  great  efficacy  in  all  febrile
and  inflammatory  diseases,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  cholera  morbus,  gout,
rheumatism,  after-pains,  all  cases  of  nervous  irritability  or  excitement,
and  wherever  an  anodyne  combined  with  a  diaphoretic  is  required.  It
promotes  perspiration  without  increasing  the  heat  of  the  body.  The
above  is  the  original  formula,  but  practitioners  vary  in  preparing  it
according  to  their  favorite  views ;  thus  some  omit  the  cream  of  tartar
and  substitute  nitrate  of  potassa,  or  bicarbonate  of  soda,  while  others
omit  the  opium,  substituting  in  its  place  lactucarium,  or  twice  the
quantity  of  cypripedin.  Dose,  three  to  five  grains  every  three  or  four
hours  in  febrile  or  inflammatory  diseases ;  and  in  some  cases,  ten  grains,
three  times  a  day.  Its  action  may  be  materially  promoted  as  a  dia-
phoretic by  warm  drinks,  such  as  catnip,  balm,  or  sage  tea,  lemonade,


PuLVERES.  1203

etc.,  which,  however,  should  not  be  given  immediately  after  the  admin-
istration of  the  powder,  lest  vomiting  be  provoked.  In  rheumatism,
pneumonia,  cerebral  affections,  hepatic  disease,  etc.,  it  is  frequently
combined  with  small  doses  of  podophyllin.

In  preparing  the  powder,  the  Camphor  must  first  be  reduced  to
powder  by  trituration  with  a  few  drops  of  alcohol,  then  add  a  small
portion  of  the  Bitartrate  of  Potassa,  continue  the  trituration  until  the
Camphor  has  been  still  further  divided,  add  the  Opium  in  powder,  then
the  Ipecacuanha,  and  lastly,  the  remainder  of  the  Bitartrate,  and  tritu-
rate all  together  for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes. — K  Smith.

Pulvis  Jalap^e  Compositus.  Compound  Powder  of  Jalap.  Anti-
bilious  Physic.

Preparation. — Take  of  Alexandria  Senna,  in  powder,  two  pounds;
Jalap,  in  powder,  one  pound ;  Cloves  or  Ginger,  in  powder,  two  ounces.
Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses.— This  forms  an  excellent  purgative,  useful  in
nearly  all  cases  where  such  action  is  required.  It  combines  power  with
mildness,  and  acts  throughout  the  whole  alimentary  canal,  cleansing  it
of  all  abnormal  accumulations,  and  stimulating  the  whole  biliary  appara-
tus to  healthy  action.  It  may  be  given  to  either  sex,  and  at  all  ages ;
and  is  used  in  all  febrile,  inflammatory  or  chronic  diseases,  being  contra-
indicated  in  severe  gastric  or  intestinal  inflammation,  and  requires  to  be
used  cautiously  and  in  moderate  doses,  during  pregnancy,  menorrhagia,
and  certain  other  diseases.  Dose,  one  drachm,  put  into  a  gill  of  boiling
water,  and  allowed  to  stand  till  cold,  then  sweeten  if  desired,  stir,  and
drink  the  whole  contents.  Milk,  wine,  cider,  lemonade  or  coffee,  etc.,
may  be  substituted,  in  proper  cases,  for  the  water.  In  febrile  diseases
its  utility  will  be  much  increased  by  adding  about  ten  grains  of  bitar-
trate of  potassa  to  each  dose.

Pulvis  Leptandrini  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Leptandrin.

Preparation. — Take  of  Leptandrin,  in  powder,  one  drachm;  Podo-
phyllin, in  powder,  half  a  drachm;  Sugar  of  milk  five  drachms.  Mix,
and  triturate  well  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  a  cholagogue  cathartic,  of
immense  benefit  in  epidemic  dysentery,  in  doses  of  eight  grains,  re-
peated every  hour  or  two,  until  it  operates  freely ;  after  which  it  may
be  given  two  or  three  times  a  day.  It  may  likewise  be  used  with
advantage  in  typhoid,  remittent,  and  intermittent  fevers,  with  or  without
the  addition  of  sulphate  of  quinia,  also  in  all  biliary  derangements.
The  addition  of  three  grains  of  Santonin  to  each  dose,  and  given  twice
a  day,  forms  an  admirable  anthelmintic. — J.  K.

Pulvis  Lobelia  Compositus. — Compound  Powder  of  Lobelia.  Emetic
Powder.


1204:  Pharmacy.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lobelia,  in  powder,  twelve  ounces;  Bloodroot
and  Skunk  Cabbage,  in  powder,  of  each,  six  ounces;  Ipecacuanha  eight
ounces;  Capsicum,  in  powder,  two  ounces. Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  excellent  emetic,  and  may  be
used  in  all  cases  where  an  emetic  is  indicated ;  it  vomits  easily  and
promptly,  without  causing  cramps,  or  excessive  prostration.  The  dose
is  two  drachms,  one  fourth  of  which  (half  a  drachm)  must  be  given
every  fifteen  minutes,  in  an  infusion  of  boneset.  Warm  boneset  drank
freely  during  the  time  of  taking  it,  will  very  much  facilitate  its  operation  ;
and  it  will  also  be  found  that,  in  many  cases,  temperate  water  (at  60°)
will  be  equally  as  effective  in  assisting  the  induction  of  emesis  as  the  infu-
sion, and  much  more  agreeable. — J.  K.

Pulvis  Myric^e  Compositus.  Compound  Powder  of  Bayberry.  Ceph-
alic Powder.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bayberry  Bark  and  Bloodroot,  of  each,  in
powder,  one  ounce. Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses.  This  powder  is  used  either  alone  or  combined
with  an  equal  part  of  common  snuff,  as  a  snuff  in  catarrh,  headache,
polypus,  etc.  In  obstinate  affections  of  the  nasal  mucous  membrane,
it  is  frequently  combined  with  Sesquicarbonate  of  Potassa  one  or  two
drachms,  and  Golden  Seal,  half  an  ounce.

Pulvis  Nigrum. Black  Powder. Emmenagogue  Powder.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Flowers  of  Sulphur,  Myrrh,  Steel  Filings,
Loaf  Sugar,  of  each,  in  fine  powder,  four  ounces;  White  Wine  two  pints.
Mix  together,  and  by  means  of  a  gentle  heat,  evaporate  till  nearly  dry.
Remove  from  the  fire,  and  when  cold,  pulverize  and  keep  in  well  stopped
bottles.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  compound  has  been  used  with  much
success  in  the  treatment  of  primary  or  idiopathic  amenorrhea,  chlorosis,
etc.  The  dose  is  half  a  drachm,  to  be  repeated  three  times  a  day;  it  may
be  taken  in  syrup,  or  molasses,  or  in  the  form  of  pills.  It  will  also  be
found  an  excellent  remedy  in  several  forms  of  cutaneous  disease.

Pulvis  Podophylli  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of  Mandrake.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Blue  Flag,  Mandrake,  Bitter  Root,  Swamp
Milkweed,  each,  in  powder,  one  ounce  ;  Blood  Root  half  an  ounce.  Mix
together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  is  cathartic  and  alterative,  and  is
very  valuable  in  cases  of  obstinate  constipation,  hepatic  derangements,
dyspepsia,  worms,  and  in  scrofulous,  rheumatic,  and  syphilitic  affections.
The  dose  is  half  a  drachm  or  a  drachm,  repeated  three  times  a  day  ;  it
may  be  administered  in  water  or  tea. — J.  K.

Pulvis  Podophyllum  Compositus.  Compound  Powder  of  Podophyl-
lin. Hydragogue  Powder.


PULVERES.  1205

Preparation. — Take  of  Podophyllin  four  grains ;  Bitartrate  of  Po-
tassa  three  drachms. Mix  intimately  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  active  hydragogue,  and  is  frequently
employed  in  dropsy,  obstructed  menstruation,  etc.  (It  is  employed  in
place  of  the  old  Compound  Powder  of  Mandrake,  which  was  composed
of  equal  parts  of  Powdered  Mandrake  Root,  Cream  of  Tartar,  and
Spearmint,  and  which  was  given  in  doses  of  a  drachm.)  Dose,  one
scruple  ;  administered  every  two  hours,  until  it  operates  sufficiently.
The  addition  of  about  one  or  two  grains  of  Capsicum  to  each  dose,  will
render  it  much  more  speedy  in  its  operation.

Pulvis  Quinine  Compositus. Compound  Powder  of Quinia.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Sulphate  of  Quinia,  Ferrocyanuret  of  Iron,
each,  one  drachm. Mix  thoroughly  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  is  tonic,  febrifuge,  and  antiperi-
odic.  It  is  much  employed  by  Eclectic  practitioners  in  febrile  and
inflammatory  diseases,  and  in  all  diseases  in  which  there  is  the  least  ten-
dency to  periodicity.  As  a  tonic  it  is  either  used  alone,  or  frequently
in  combination  with  other  tonics,  as  hydrastin,  cornin,  etc.  The  dose  is
from  three  to  six  grains  of  the  powder,  repeated  two,  three  or  four  times
a  day,  according  to  symptoms.  It  was  introduced  to  the  profession  as
an  agent  in  the  above  diseases,  by  Prof.  I.  G.  Jones,  of  Columbus,
Ohio.

Pulvis  Rhei  Compositus.  Compound  Powder  of  Rhubarb.  Neutral-
izing Powder.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rhubarb,  Bicarbonate  of  Potassa,  and  Pep-
permint Leaves,  each,  in  powder,  one  ounce. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  is  an  invaluable  remedy  in  diar-
rhea, cholera  morbus,  dysentery,  summer  complaint  of  children,  acidity
of  stomach,  heart-burn,  and  as  a  mild  cathartic  during  pregnancy.  The
dose  is  from  half  a  drachm  to  two  drachms,  every  one,  two,  or  three
hours,  as  may  be  required. (See  Syrup  of  Rhubarb  and  Potassa.)

Pulvis  Stypticus. Styptic  Powder.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron,  in  powder,  two  ounces;  Alum,
in  powder,  one  ounce.  Mix  them,  and  calcine  by  a  red  heat,  as  named
for  Red  or  Styptic  Powder,  under  the  head  of  Sesquioxide  of  Iron,
which  see.  When  cold,  pulverize  the  mass,  and  keep  it  in  well  stopped
bottles.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  powder  is  styptic,  and  is  frequently  em-
ployed in  the  treatment  of  external  hemorrhages,  and  bleeding  piles,
either  alone,  or  in  combination  with  stramonium  ointment,  poke  ointment,
oil  of  fireweed,  etc.  Given  internally,  in  doses  of  three  grains,  combined
with  Capsicum  one  grain,  it  has  proved  effectual  in  passive  hemorrhages
from  the  luncfs  and  uterus.


1206  Pharmacy.

Pbxvis  Xanthoxylini  Compositus.  Compound  Powder  of  Xan-
thoxylin.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Xanthoxylin,  Hydrastin,  and  Sulphate  of
Quinia,  each,  one  drachm;  Sugar  of  Milk  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix
together,  adding  just  enough  Sugar  of  Milk  to  form  a  powder,  and  then
divide  into  sixty  powders.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  most  valuable  stimulating  tonic,  and
alterative,  and  may  be  employed  in  all  cases  requiring  such  actions.  As
in  debility  of  the  digestive  functions,  dyspepsia,  convalescence  from
fevers,  diarrhea,  and  dysentery,  hepatic  torpor,  periodical  headache
scrofula,  and  other  chronic  diseases  accompanied  with  excessive  debility.
The  dose  is  one  powder,  to  be  repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  it
may  be  given  in  water,  milk,  molasses,  syrup,  or  wine,  as  symptoms  may
ndicate.  One  powder  contains  a  grain,  each,  of  xanthoxylin,  quinia,
and  hydrastin. — J.  K.

QUINIA.

Preparations  of  Quinia.

Quinia  is  one  of  our  most  valuable  remedies,  and  is  obtained  from  the
Yellow  Peruvian  Bark ;  the  pure  Quinia  is  seldom  used ;  but  its  Salts
are  more  generally  employed,  especially  those  a  description  of  which
immediately  follows.  The  Acetate,  Ferrocyanuret,  Nitrate,  Muriate,  Lac-
tate, Citrate,  Iodide,  and  Phosphate,  have  also  been  employed  and  recom-
mended ;  but  none  of  them  has  yet  gained  a  standard  reputation.

The  Ferrocyanuret  of  Quinia  is  made  by  boiling  together  two  parts  of
Sulphate  of  Quinia,  and  three  of  Ferrocyanuret  of  Potassium  in  a  very
little  Water,  pouring  off  the  liquor  from  a  greenish-yellow  substance  of
an  oily  consistence  which  is  precipitated,  washing  the  latter  with  Dis-
tilled Water,  then  dissolving  it  in  strong  Alcohol  at  100°  F.,  filtering
immediately,  and  afterward  evaporating  the  solution.  The  Tannate  of
Quinia  may  be  prepared  by  precipitating  the  Infusion  of  Bark,  or  Solu-
tion of  Quinia,  by  the  Infusion  of  Galls  or  Solution  of  Tannic  Acid,  and
then  washing  and  drying  the  precipitate.  The  other  above  named  Salts
of  Quinia  may  be  prepared  by  saturating  a  Solution  of  the  Acids
respectively  with  Quinia,  and  evaporating  the  solutions.  Either  of  these
Salts  may  be  given  in  the  same  doses  as  the  Sulphate.  The  Iodide  of
Quinia  is  obtained  by  adding  a  Solution  of  twenty-four  parts  of  Iodide  of
Potassium  in  eight  of  Water,  by  drops,  to  a  strong  Solution  of  twenty
parts  of  Bisulphate  of  Quinia.  Wash  the  precipitate  quickly,  and  dry
it  in  the  shade.  It  is  tonic,  alterative,  and  resolvent,  and  has  been  found
of  efficacy  in  scrofulous  enlargements  of  the  glands,  in  doses  of  from
half  a  grain  to  two  grains.  Or  it  may  be  made  by  decomposing  a  Solu-
tion of  one  equivalent  of  Muriate  of  Quinia  with  a  Solution  of  four
quivalents  of  Iodide  of  Potassium. When  dry,  Iodide  of  Quinia  thus


Quinia.  1207

prepared,  has  the  properties  of  a  resin,  is  easily  reduced  to  a  white,  ino-
dorous powder,  extremely  bitter,  and  permanent  in  the  air.  It  is  very
soluble  in  Water,  Alcohol,  or  Ether,  forming  clear  and  colorless  solu-
tions, which  deposit  the  Iodide  of  Quinia  on  evaporation.  Concentrated
Sulphuric  and  Nitric  Acids,  and  Chlorine,  decompose  it  instantly,  with
elimination  of  Iodine.

Off.  Prep. — Ferri  et  Quiniae  Citras ;  Ferri  et  Quiniae  Tartras  ;  Quiniae
Murias  ;  Quiniae  Sulphas  ;  Quiniae  et  Morphiee  Tartras  ;  Quiniae  et  Sali-
ciniae  Tartras  ;  Quiniae  Valerianas.

Quinine  Sulphas. Sulphate  of  Quinia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Yellow  Calisaya  Bark,  in  coarse  powder,  four
pounds;  Muriatic  Acid  three fiuidounces ;  Lime,  in  powder,  five  ounces ;
Water  five  gullons ;  Sulphuric  Acid,  Alcohol,  Animal  Charcoal,  each,  a
sufficient  quantity.  Boil  the  Bark  in  one-third  of  the  Water,  mixed  with
one-third  of  the  Muriatic  Acid,  and  strain  through  linen.  Boil  the  resi-
due twice  successively,  with  the  same  quantity  of  Water  and  Acid  as
before,  and  strain.  Mix  the  decoctions,  and,  while  the  liquor  is  hot,
gradually  add  the  Lime,  previously  mixed  with  two  pints  of  Water,  stir-
ring constantly  until  the  Quinia  is  completely  precipitated.  Wash  the
Precipitate  with  Distilled  Water,  and,  having  pressed,  dried,  and  pow-
dered it,  digest  it  in  Boiling  Alcohol.  Pour  off  the  liquor,  and  repeat
the  digestion  several  times,  until  the  Alcohol  is  no  longer  rendered  bitter.
Mix  the  liquors,  and  distil  off  the  Alcohol,  until  a  brown,  viscid  mass
remains.  Upon  this  substance,  removed  from  the  vessel,  pour  about
half  a  gallon  of  Distilled  Water,  and,  having  heated  the  mixture  to  the
boiling  point,  add  as  much  Sulphuric  Acid  as  may  be  necessary  to  dis-
solve the  impure  alkali.  Then  add  an  ounce  and  a  half  of  Animal
Charcoal,  boil  for  two  minutes,  filter  the  liquor  while  hot,  and  set  it
aside  to  crystallize.  Should  the  liquor,  before  filtration,  be  entirely  neu-
tral, acidulate  it  very  slightly  with  Sulphuric  Acid  ;  should  it,  on  the
contrary,  change  the  color  of  litmus  paper  to  a  bright  red,  add  more
Animal  Charcoal.  Separate  the  crystals  from  the  liquor,  dissolve  them
in  Boiling  Water  slightly  acidulated  with  Sulphuric  Acid,  add  a  little
Animal  Charcoal,  filter,  and  set  aside  to  crystallize.  Wrap  the  crystals
in  bibulous  paper,  and  dry  them  with  a  gentle  heat.  The  Mother
Waters  may  be  made  to  yield  an  additional  quantity  of  Sulphate  of
Quinia  by  precipitating  the  Quinia  with  Solution  of  Ammonia,  and  treat-
ing the  precipitated  alkali  with  Distilled  Water,  Sulphuric  Acid,  and
Animal  Charcoal,  as  before. —  U.  S.

History. — In  this  process  the  Yellow  Calisaya  Bark  is  employed  in
preference,  on  account  of  its  containing  a  greater  proportion  of  Quinia
than  the  other  barks,  and  holding  it  in  combination  with  less  Cinchonia.
As  found  in  the  bark,  the  quinia  is  united  with  kinic  acid,  and  very  pro-
bably one  or  more  coloring  principles. As  water  will  not  take  up  all  the


1208  Pharmacy.

quinia  of  the  bark,  muriatic  acid  is  added  in  excess,  at  least  as  far  as
relates  to  the  quinia,  and  a  soluble  muriate  is  formed,  mixed  with  several
impurities.  After  the  several  decoctions  have  been  mixed  and  filtered,
lime  is  added,  which  decomposes  the  muriate  of  quinia,  combining  with
its  acid  to  form  muriate  of  lime,  while  the  quinia,  being  insoluble,  is
precipitated,  leaving  most  of  the  impurities  in  solution  with  the  water  ;
any  excess  of  lime  is  also  thrown  down  with  the  quinia.  The  precipitate
is  next  washed  to  separate  from  it  all  soluble  impurities,  and  is  then
digested  in  alcohol  which  dissolves  the  quinia,  and  separates  it  from  its
insoluble  impurities  ;  after  which,  by  concentration,  an  impure,  brown,
viscid  quinia  is  obtained.  This  is  subjected  to  the  action  of  boilino-  dis-
tilled water,  acidulated  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  officinal  sulphate  or
disulphate  of  quinia  is  formed.  The  animal  charcoal  added  at  this  period
of  the  process,  facilitates  the  crystallization  of  the  sulphate  of  quinia  as
the  solution  cools,  by  its  carbonate  of  lime  neutralizing  a  portion  of  the
sulphuric  acid.  The  solution  must  not  be  completely  neutralized,  but
hold  the  acid  very  slightly  in  excess,  lest  the  crystallization  ensue  before
filtration  is  completed.  The  solution  and  re -crystallization  of  the  sul-
phate, is  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  it  colorless  ;  which  frequently
cannot  be  effected  until  after  a  third  solution  and  re-crystallization.  In
drying  the  crystals  a  gentle  heat  should  be  employed,  that  they  may
not  effloresce.  The  sulphate  of  cinchonia  remains  in  solution  in  the
mother  liquors.

M.  Calvert  states  that  there  is  no  certainty  in  the  proportion  of  sul-
phate of  quinia  when  obtained  from  bark  by  the  solvent  action  of  muri-
atic acid,  and  the  precipitant  influence  of  lime  ;  as  a  solution  of  chloride
of  lime,  as  well  as  lime-water,  dissolves  quinia.  Consequently,  all  the
quinia  is  not  precipitated,  especially  when  the  lime  is  added  in  excess.
To  obviate  this,  and  obtain  a  thorough  precipitate  of  the  quinia,  he  first
neutralizes  the  excess  of  acid  by  carbonate  of  soda,  and  then  precipi-
tates by  caustic  soda;  quinia  not  being  soluble  in  this  alkali.  The  aver-
age product  of  quinia  obtained  from  calisaya  bark  is  from  one  to  three
per  cent.

By  the  above  process,  sulphate  of  quinia  may  be  obtained  from  any
of  the  Peruvian  barks  ;  but,  with  the  exception  of  the  calisaya,  all  the
other  varieties  will  afford  a  large  proportion  of  Sulphate  of  Cinchonia
held  in  solution  by  the  mother  waters,  after  the  crystallization  of  the
quinia.

Sulphate  of  Quinia  is  in  the  form  of  a  loose  mass  of  interlaced,
filiform,  slightly  flexible,  silky  crystals,  sometimes  grouped  in  small
stellated  tufts,  of  a  snow-white  color,  inodorous,  and  possessing  a
pure,  most  intense,  bitter  taste.  Exposed  to  the  air,  they  lose  about
three-fourths  of  their  water  of  crystallization  by  efflorescence.  At  the
temperature  of  212°,  they  become  luminous,  especially  when  rubbed;
at  about  210°,  they  ■  ,ielt,  presenting  a  waxy  appearance ;  and  at  a  red


Quinia.  1209

heat  they  are  charred,  and  gradually  entirely  dispersed.  Sulphate  of
quinia  requires  740  parts  of  water  at  54°  F.,  to  dissolve  it,  forming  an
opalescent  solution;  and  30  parts  at  212°,  the  latter  depositing  it  in
crystals,  on  cooling-.  It  is  scarcely  soluble  in  ether,  but  dissolves  in
about  sixty  parts  of  alcohol  of  sp.  gr.  0.835.  "When  the  water  is  acidulated
with  sulphuric  acid,  it  dissolves  much  more  readily.  It  is  dissolved
with  facility  by  the  diluted  acids,  and  even  oxalic  and  tartaric  acids  in
excess.  If  to  a  concentrated  solution  of  sulphate  of  quinia,  as  much
sulphuric  acid  be  added  as  enters  into  its  constitution,  (or  an  additional
equivalent)  a  neutral  sulphate  of  quinia  is  obtained  by  concentration  and
crystallization  ;  rhombic  prisms  are  formed,  consisting  of  one  equivalent
of  quinia,  one  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  eight  of  water.  These  are  soluble
in  their  own  water  of  crystallization  at  212°,  and  in  eleven  parts  of  water
at  54°  F.;  they  are  also  soluble  in  diluted,  and  less  so  in  absolute  alco-
hol. They  constitute  the  proper  sulphate  of  quinia,  and  were  formerly
incorrectly  called  Bisulpliate,  or  Super  sulphate  of  Quinia.  The  officinal
sulphate,  is  a  disulphate  of  quinia,  which  is  the  only  one  employed  me-
dicinally. It  consists,  in  the  form  of  crystals,  of  two  equivalents  of
quinia  324,  one  of  sulphuric  acid  40,  and  eight  of  water  72=436,
(2NC20  His,  O2  SOo).

Sulphate  of  Quinia  is  incompatible  wilh  the  alkalies,  their  carbonates,
and  alkaline  earths  which  decompose  it.  Its  aqueous  solution  has  a
peculiar  blue  tint  by  reflected  light ;  potassa,  soda,  or  ammonia  added
to  it,  yields  a  white  precipitate  of  quinia  ;  tannic  acid,  or  astringent  infu-
sions containing  tannic  acid,  furnish  a  white  precipitate  of  insoluble
tannate  of  quinia.  The  soluble  salts  of  baryta  and  lead  occasion  preci-
pitates. When  a  fresh  solution  of  chlorine  is  added  to  it,  and  then
water  of  ammonia,  an  emerald-green  color  is  obtained,  together  with  a
gradual  deposition  of  a  green  color.  If  a  concentrated  solution  of  ferro-
cyanuret  of  potassium  be  substituted  for  the  ammonia,  a  dark-red  color
is  produced,  which  after  several  hours,  gradually  becomes  converted  into
a  green. A  solution  of  cinchonia  is  not  thus  acted  upon.

The  high  price  of  Sulphate  of  Quinia  has  led  to  various  adulterations.
The  most  common  of  which  are :  the  fraudulent  additions  of  sugar,  sul-
phate of  lime,  mannite,  starch,  stearin,  margarin,  caffein,  salicin,  sul-
phate of  cinchonia,  etc.  Sulphate  of  cinchonia  may  be  detected  as
follows,  even  in  the  smallest  quantity  :  Take  38  grains  of  the  suspected
sulphate  of  quinia,  and  introduce  it  into  a  flask  with  half  an  ounce  of
solution  of  ammonia;  agitate  them  well,  and  allow  the  mixture  to  repose
twenty-four  hours.  Then  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  heat  it,  until  the
excess  of  ammonia  has  been  almost  completely  driven  off;  allow  it  to
cool,  and  add  one  ounce  of  pure  ether.  By  agitation  the  quinia  is
quickly  and  completely  dissolved,  and  by  rest  the  contents  of  the  flask
consists  of  two  transparent  liquids,  the  lower  containing  sulphate  of
ammonia,  the  upper  quinia  dissolved  in  ether,  if  the  salt  be  pure  ;  but


1210  Pharmacy.

if  it  contain  sulphate  of  cinchonia,  there  will  be  an  intermediate  stratum
between  the  two  liquids  of  insoluble  cinchonia.  Sulphate  of  Cinchonia
is  best  detected  by  dissolving  the  salt  in  forty  parts  of  boilino-  water,
which  on  cooling  will  deposit  most  of  the  sulphate  of  quinia,  but  retain
most  of  the  salt  of  cinchonia — and  by  concentrating  the  residual  solution,
the  latter  is  obtained  in  short  rhombic  prisms,  or  pearly  scales  —  forms
which  are  never  assumed  by  sulphate  of  quinia.

Many  of  the  above  adulterations  may  be  ascertained  by  remarking
the  degree  of  solubility  of  the  sulphate  in  different  menstrua,  as  well  as
is  entirely  dissipated  by  exposure  to  a  red-heat,  and  if  any  substance
remains  behind  it  is  sulphate  of  lime,  or  some  mineral  substance.  Fatty
matters,  when  present,  are  not  wholly  soluble  in  acidulated  water  ;
starch  and  gum  are  not  dissolved  by  alcohol.  Sugar,  or  mannite,  may
be  known  by  the  sweet  taste  imparted  to  the  residuum  remaining  after
evaporation  of  the  watery  solution,  —  this  having  been,  previous  to  its
evaporation,  deprived  of  its  quinia  by  precipitation  with  an  alkaline  car-
bonate and  filtration.  Salicin  is  discovered  by  cold  concentrated  sul-
phuric acid  forming  with  the  suspected  salt  a  red  instead  of  a  colorless
solution.  If  this  acid  solution  is  brown  or  black,  it  indicates  starch,
sugar,  fatty  matters,  or  other  organic  substances.  Pelletier  states  that
unless  the  salicin  exceeds  one-tenth  of  the  amount,  this  change  of  color
does  not  ensue  ;  and  consequently  when  less  than  this  proportion,  the
salicin  must  be  separated  as  follows  :  Add  six  parts  of  concentrated
sulphuric  acid  to  one  part  of  the  suspected  salt,  and  to  the  resulting
brown  liquid,  add  125  parts  of  water.  The  salicin  separates,  and  by
filtration  may  be  obtained  in  the  form  of  a  white  bitter  powder,  which
becomes  bright-red  by  contact  with  sulphuric  acid.  Caffein  is  difficult
to  detect,  though  it  changes  the  solubility  of  the  salt  in  different  men-
strua. A  volatile  ammoniacal  salt  may  be  known  by  the  ammoniacal
odor  evolved  upon  the  addition  of  potassa.  The  purity  of  sulphate  of
quinia  may  be  determined  by  the  following  method  of  the  Edinburgh
College  :  "A  solution  of  ten  grains  in  a  fluidounce  of  distilled  water  and
two  or  three  drops  of  sulphuric  acid,  if  decomposed  by  a  solution  of  half
an  ounce  of  carbonate  of  soda  in  two  waters  (twice  its  weight  of  water),
and  heated  till  the  precipitate  shrinks  and  fuses,  yields  on  cooling  a
solid  mass,  which  when  dry  weighs  7.4  grains,  and  in  powder  dissolves
entirely  in  solution  of  oxalic  acid."  Christison  states  that  though  this
test  is  sufficient  for  most  impurities,  it  will  not  answer  where  the  adul-
teration is  caffein  or  sulphate  of  cinchonia.  He  also  gives  the  following
convenient  test  for  determining  its  purity:  "Twenty  parts  of  boiling
water  acidulated  with  sulphuric  acid  dissolve  it  entirely  and  without  any
floating  oily  globules  appearing,  if  there  be  no  fatty  matter  present ;  the
solution  when  cold,  does  not  become  blue  with  tincture  of  iodine  if  free
of  starch  ;  it  does  not  precipitate  with  oxalic  acid  if  free  of  lime  ;  and


Quinia.  1211

when  treated  with  solution  of  baryta  so  long  as  a  precipitate  forms,  which
precipitate  is  a  mixture  of  quinia  and  sulphate  of  baryta,  the  liquid  has
not  a  sweet  taste,  if  free  of  sugar  or  mannite."

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Sulphate  of  Quinia  is  febrifuge,  tonic,  and
antiperiodic.  Small  doses  frequently  repeated,  strengthen  the  pulse,
increase  muscular  force,  and  invigorate  the  tone  of  the  nervous  system.
In  some  persons  it  induces  headache,  sickness,  or  irregular  action  of  the
bowels — which  effects  are  generally  obviated  by  combining  it  with  mor-
phia, extract  of  stramonium,  or  both  ;  and  these  effects  will  be  almost
certain  to  follow  if  gastro-enteritic  irritation  pre-exists.  Large  doses,  as
one  scruple,  or  half  a  drachm,  produce  many  unpleasant  symptoms,  and
ought  never  to  be  used  ;  among  these  may  be  named  sickness  and  pain
at  the  stomach,  giddiness,  flushed  countenance,  palpitation,  a  sense  of
distension  in  the  head,  intense  weighty  headache,  ringing  in  the  ears,
vomiting,  numbness  in  the  feet,  deafness,  blindness,  and  delirium.  The
evil  results  following  large  doses,  or  the  injudicious  administration  of
quinia  has  caused  many  physicians  to  reject  it  altogether,  in  their  prac-
tice. This  is  wrong.  Quinia  is  a  safe  and  very  superior  remedy,  in
proper  hands.  As  well  might  we  reject  all  active  and  useful  agents,
because,  when  improperly  used,  they  produce  deleterious  consequences.
Again,  the  quinia,  especially  that  imported  into  this  Western  Country
for  many  years  past,  has  been  much  adulterated  with  agents  calculated
to  cause  the  mischief  attributed  to  the  salt ;  and,  it  must  also  be  remem-
bered, that  many  of  the  symptoms  following  the  use  of  quinia,  are  the
legitimate  results  of  disease  itself,  as  an  enlarged  spleen,  a  deranged
condition  of  the  nervous  system,  etc.,  or  are  the  deplorable  consequences
of  a  combined  mercurial  treatment,  which  has  been  and  still  continues  to
be  a  fashionable  practice  in  many  portions  of  this  section  of  the  country.
No  sensible  or  well  educated  physician  will  ever  object  to  the  proper
employment  of  the  pure  sulphate  of  quinia.

With  many  patients,  the  beneficial  influence  of  this  agent  will  not  be
observed  until  Cinchonism  has  been  produced,  known  by  giddiness,  a
buzzing  or  ringing  in  the  ears,  slight  headache,  etc.;  while  with  others  it
produces  good  effects  independent  of  the  production  of  these  symptoms.
When  taken  internally  it  is  absorbed,  and  may  be  detected  in  the  sweat
and  urine.

Sulphate  of  Quinia  in  Eclectic  practice  is  used  in  all  febrile  diseases,
without  regard  to  the  violence  of  the  fever,  or  the  degree  of  congestive
enlargement  of  the  liver  or  spleen ;  it  is  usually  given  during  the  inter-
missions or  remissions,  and  in  doses  sufficient  to  affect  the  head,  each
day) — when  for  that  day  its  administration  is  omitted  ;  but  should  there
be  no  apparent  remissions,  it  is  then  given  daily  to  produce  the  same
influence  upon  the  head,  without,  as  before  said,  regard  to  the  violence
of  the  fever,  etc. Previous  to  its  administration,  however,  any  symp-


1212  Pharmacy.

toms  of  irritability,  wakefulness,  or  restlessness,  must  first  be  subdued
It  is  frequently  given  in  these  cases,  as  well  as  in  many  other  forms  of
disease,  in  combination  with  ferrocyanuret  of  iron ;  and  was  first  intro-
duced to  the  profession,  as  a  safe  and  efficacious  remedy  in  this  class  of
maladies  by  Prof.  I.  G.  Jones.  In  typhus  and  typhoid  fever,  it  will  be
found  of  much  service,  in  conjunction  with  small  doses  of  Leptandiin  or
Podophyllin,  sufficient  to  produce  a  daily  alvine  evacuation.  In  febrile
relapses,  acute  rheumatism,  neuralgia,  dyspepsia,  debility,  convalescence
from  most  acute  and  chronic  diseases,  dysentery,  and  in  all  epidemic
diseases,  and  every  disease  characterized  by  periodicity,  it  maybe  given
with  every  expectation  of  success.  Combined  with  morphia,  I  have
used  it  successfully  in  epilepsy,  delirium  tremens,  and  the  convulsive
diseases  of  intemperate  persons.  In  dysmenorrhea,  in  conjunction  with
extract  of  stramonium  or  belladona,  and  cimicifugin,  it  proves  almost  a
specific.  It  is  generally  contra-indicated  during  the  presence  of  gastric
inflammation,  or  unusual  irritation  of  the  stomach  ;  though  the  addition
of  morphia,  in  such  cases,  will  sometimes  prevent  any  hurtful  conse-
quences.

As  a  tonic,  sulphate  of  quinia  will  be  found  useful  in  all  diseases
connected  with  an  enfeebled  state  of  the  system,  and  especially  in  the
debility  resulting  from  exhausting  diseases  ;  in  chlorosis,  and  in  anemic
conditions  it  should  be  given  in  union  with  chalybeates.  Externally,
sulphate  of  quinia  in  solution,  has  formed  a  valuable  application  to  indo-
lent ulcers,  buboes,  chancres,  and  chronic  mucous  inflammations.  The
dose  of  it  internally,  is  from  half  a  grain  to  three  grains,  repeated  every
one,  two,  three,  or  four  hours,  as  the  urgency  of  the  case  may  require.
Large  doses  are  improper.

A  solution  of  Sulphate  of  Quinia  may  be  made  by  adding  twenty
grains  of  the  salt  to  one  fluidrachm  of  Elixir  of  Vitriol,  and  when  dis-
solved, add  two  fluidounces  of  water.  The  dose  of  this  solution  is  twenty
drops  every  hour,  in  about  half  an  ounce  of  water,  or  syrup  of  ginger.
Another  solution  may  be  made  by  dissolving  Sulphate  of  Quinia,  Tar-
taric Acid,  of  each,  twenty  grains,  in  two  fluidounces  of  Water.  The
dose  is  as  above.  The  acetate,  nitrate,  phosphate,  ferrocyanate,  citrate
and  muriate  of  quinia,  possess  similar  properties,  but  are  not  usually
preferred  in  practice.

Off.  Prep. — Pilulee  Quiniae  Sulphatis  ;  Pilulae  Quiniae  Compositae ;
PilulaB  Valerianae  Compositae;  Pulvis  Quiniae  Compositus ;  Pulvis  Xan-
thoxylini  Compositus ;  Tinctura  Quiniae  Composita.

Quinine  et  Morphine  Tartras. Tartrate  of  Quinia  and  Morphia.

Preparation. — Take  of  pure  crystallized  Tartaric  Acid,  dried,  one
hundred  and  fifty-six  grains ;  pure  Quinia  one  hundred  and  sixty -two
grains;  pure  Morphia  two  hundred  and  ninety-two  grains;  Water  a  suf-
ficient quantity. Add  the  Acid  and  the  Alkalies  to  the  Water,  and  boil


Quinia.  1213

together.  When  the  whole  is  dissolved,  evaporate  at  a  low  temperature,
till  the  Solution  is  of  the  consistence  of  thick  syrup,  then  spread  it  in
layers  on  glass  or  porcelain  plates,  and  dry  in  the  shade.

History. — This  valuable,  non-crystallizable,  double-alkaloidal  salt  is  the
discovery  of  my  former  colleague,  Prof.  J.  Milton  Sanders.  It  is  obtained
in  beautiful  transparent  scales  or  plates,  holding  each  alkaloid  in  its  equiv-
alent proportion.  It  is  inodorous,  having  a  slightly  bitter  taste,  and  is
very  soluble  in  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tartrate  of  Quinia  and  Morphia  is  a  sedative,
tonic,  and  febrifuge,  and  is  useful  in  all  febrile  diseases,  especially  where
there  is  great  irritability  or  excitability  of  the  nervous  system,  restless-
ness, watchfulness,  etc. ;  also  in  delirium  tremens,  periodic  spasmodic
diseases,  epilepsy,  and  wherever  a  sedative  tonic  effect  is  desired.  The
dose  is  from  a  fourth  of  a  grain  to  a  grain,  every  one,  two,  or  four  hours,
as  the  urgency  of  the  case  may  require.

Quinine  et  Salictni^e  Tartras. Tartrate  of  Quinia  and  Salicin.

Preparation. — Take  of  pure  Salicin  four  hundred  and  fifty -seven  grains;
Tartaric  Acid,  crystallized  and  dried,  one  hundred  and  fifty -six  grains;
pure  Quinia  one  hundred  and  sixty-two  grains  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity .
Add  the  Alkaloids  to  the  Water,  and  boil  together,  until  they  are  dis-
solved. Evaporate  the  solution  at  a  low  temperature,  till  it  is  of  the
consistence  of  thick  syrup ;  then  spread  it  in  layers  on  glass  or  porcelain
plates,  and  dry  in  the  shade.

History. — This  non-crystallizable,  double-alkaloidal  salt  is  likewise  the
discovery  of  Prof.  J.  Milton  Sanders.  It  is,  like  the  previous  salt,
obtained  in  scales  or  pellicles,  inodorous,  bitter,  and  possessing  in  a  high
decree  the  activity  of  both  its  constituent  alkaloids.  It  is  soluble  in
water.

Properties  and  Uses — Tartrate  of  Quinia  and  Salicin  is  a  febrifuge,
tonic,  and  antiperiodic.  It  possesses  an  activity  which  does  not  belong
to  its  isolated  salts,  and  may  be  used  in  all  those  cases  where  either
quinia  or  salicin  would  be  indicated.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  five  grains,
every  one,  two,  or  four  hours.

N.  B.  Professor  Sanders  has  also  prepared  the  corresponding  citrates
of  the  above  salts,  as  well  as  the  Ferrocitrates  of  Quinia,  Morphia,  and
Salicine;  prepared  by  substituting  citric  acid  for  the  tartaric,  and  which
may  be  substituted  for  the  corresponding  tartrates,  if  desired,  in  the  same
doses,  and  forms  of  disease.

Quinine  Valerianas. Valerianate  of  Quinia.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Muriate  of  Quinia  seven  drachms  (Dublin
weio-ht);  Valerianate  of  Soda  one  hundred  and  twenty  four  grains;  Dis-
tilled Water  sixteen  jiuidounces.  Dissolve  the  Valerianate  of  Soda  in  two
ounces  of  the  Water,  and  the  Muriate  of  Quinia  in  the  remainder,  and,


1214  Pharmacy.

the  temperature  of  each  solution  being  raised  to  120°,  but  not  higher,
let  them  be  mixed,  and  let  the  mixture  be  set  by  for  twenty-four  hours
when  the  Valerianate  of  Quinia  will  have  become  a  mass  of  silky  acicu-
lar  crystals.  Let  these  be  pressed  between  folds  of  blotting  paper,  and
dried  without  the  application  of  artificial  heat. — Dub.

History. — In  this  process  a  double  decomposition  takes  place  between
the  two  salts,  producing  a  solution  of  chloride  of  sodium,  and  crystals  of
valerianate  of  quinia.  This  salt  may  also  be  made  by  either  of  the  fol-
lowing methods  :  Add  a  slight  excess  of  Valerianic  Acid  to  a  Concen
trated  Solution  of  Quinia,  in  strong  Alcohol;  dilute  the  solution  with
twice  its  weight  of  Water,  stir  the  mixture  accurately,  and  evaporate  at
a  temperature  not  exceeding  122°  F.  After  the  evaporation  of  the
Alcohol,  the  Valerianate  appears  in  fine  crystals,  sometimes  isolated,  at
others  grouped  together,  and  which  increase  from  day  to  day.  Or  it
may  be  procured  by  double  decomposition  of  Sulphate  of  Quinia  and
Valerianate  of  Lime,  each  dissolved  in  weak  Alcohol,  and  then  eva-
porated.

Valerianate  of  Quinia  is  in  white,  acicular  crystals,  having  a  power-
ful, repulsive  odor  of  valerianic  acid,  which  is  quite  distinct  from  that
of  oil  of  valerian.  It  is  soluble  in  cold  water,  and  more  readily  in  hot,
being  deposited  in  fine  crystals  on  cooling.  In  boiling  water  it  fuses  into
oily  globules,  and  becomes  decomposed  with  dissipation  of  its  valerianic
acid;  its  solution  should  not  be  heated  above  120°.  Alcohol  dissolves
it.  It  appears  to  lose  its  strength  gradually  on  exposure  to  the  air ;  and
is  easily  decomposed  by  mineral  and  other  acids.

Properties  and  Uses. — Valerianate  of  Quinia  is  tonic,  febrifuge,  and
sedative,  and  may  be  employed  similarly  with  the  tartrate  of  quinia  and
morphia.  It  is  highly  recommended  by  Prof.  I.  G.  Jones  in  hemicrania,
and  in  febrile  or  other  diseases,  to  relieve  restlessness,  wakefulness,
or  nervous  irritability.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  grain  to  two  grains,
every  two,  three,  or  four  hours,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case.

Off.  Prep. — Pilulae  Cimicifugae  Compositse.


SODA.

Preparations  of  Soda.

Sod^e  Bicarronas. Bicarbonate  of  Soda.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Soda,  in  crystals,  a  convenient
quantity ;  break  the  crystals  in  pieces,  and  put  them  into  a  wooden  box,
having  a  transverse  partition  near  the  bottom,  pierced  with  numerous
small  holes,  and  a  cover  which  can  be  tightly  fitted  on.  To  a  bottle
having  two  tubulures,  and  half  filled  with  water,  adapt  two  tubes,  one
connected  with  an  apparatus  for  generating  carbonic  acid,  and  termin-
ating under  the  water  in  a  bottle,  the  other  commencing  at  the  tubulure,


Soda.  1215

in  which  it  is  inserted,  and  entering  the  box  by  an  opening  near  the  bot-
tom, beneath  the  partition.  Then  lute  all  the  joints,  and  cause  a  stream
of  carbonic  acid  to  pass  through  the  water  into  the  box,  until  the  car-
bonate of  soda  is  fully  saturated. — Carbonic  acid  is  obtained  from  marble,
by  the  addition  of  Dilute  Sulphuric  acid. —  U.  S.

History. — In  this  process,  the  crystals  of  Carbonate  of  Soda,  placed
on  a  perforated  diaphragm,  are  exposed  to  the  action  of  carbonic  acid.
During  the  progress  of  the  operation,  a  considerable  amount  of  water  is
set  free,  in  consequence  of  the  bicarbonate  combining  with  less  water  of
crystallization  than  the  carbonate;  hence  the  necessity  of  the  diaphragm
to  allow  the  water  to  drain  off,  instead  of  dissolving  the  bicarbonate.
When  the  process  is  finished,  the  crystals  on  the  diaphragm  will  still
retain  their  form,  but  become  changed  into  an  opake  and  porous  sub-
stance. There  are  several  other  methods  of  preparing  this  salt,  which
it  is  unnecessary  to  relate  here.

Bicarbonate  of  Soda,  according  to  its  mode  of  preparation,  is  in  small,
white,  opake,  irregular  scales,  or,  in  minute,  colorless,  indistinct  crystals,
or,  when  prepared  by  the  above  formula,  in  opake,  porous  masses,  of  a
snow-white  color,  and  composed  of  numerous,  aggregated,  crystalline
grains.  It  is  permanent  in  the  air,  and  possesses  a  saline,  slightly  alka-
line, not  unpleasant  taste.  It  is  soluble  in  thirteen  parts  of  temperate
water,  and  in  much  less  at  212°,  from  the  latter  of  which,  it  is  obtained
in  minute,  hard,  white  grains,  composed  of  radiated  fibers,  as  it  slowly
cools.  When  its  solution  is  heated  a  little  above  120°,  carbonic  acid
gradually  passes  off  from  the  salt,  which  becomes  converted  into  sesqui
carbonate  at  212°.  At  a  red-heat  it  is  converted  into  an  anhydrous
carbonate,  its  water  of  crystallization,  and  an  equivalent  of  carbonic
acid  being  expelled.  Bicarbonate  of  soda  consists  of  one  equivalent  of
soda  31.3,  two  of  acid  44.24,  and  one  of  water  9=84.54.

Bicarbonate  of  soda  is  seldom  adulterated,  its  principal  impurity  being
the  result  of  faulty  preparation ;  in  consequence  of  which,  probably
arising  from  imperfect  saturation  with  carbonic  acid,  a  greater  or  less
proportion  of  carbonate  of  soda  is  found  with  it.  The  presence  of  the
carbonate  may  be  known  by  the  decided  alkaline  and  disagreeable  taste
imparted ;  by  the  solution  yielding  a  white  precipitate  with  sulphate  of
magnesia ;  and  by  a  solution  in  forty  parts  of  water,  giving  a  reddish-
brown  precipitate  with  corrosive  sublimate,  even  if  only  one  per  cent.
of  the  carbonate  be  present,— this  test  causes  a  slight  opalescence  only
with  the  pure  bicarbonate.  When  a  solution  of  bicarbonate  of  soda  is
not  precipitated  by  chloride  of  platinum,  or  when,  after  supersaturation
with  nitric  acid,  no  precipitate  is  occasioned  by  chloride  of  barium  or
nitrate  of  silver,  it  shows  the  absence  of  potassa  salts,  and  of  sulphates
and  chlorides.  Bicarbonate  of  soda  is  incompatible  with  acids,  acidulous
salts,  lime-water,  muriate  of  ammonia,  and  earthy  and  metallic  salts.
Sulphate  of  magnesia  does  not  decompose  it.


1216  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — Bicarbonate  of  Soda  possesses  properties  simi-
lar to  the  bicarbonate  of  potassa,  though  less  actively  diuretic ;  it  also
resembles  the  carbonate  of  soda  in  its  action,  but  is  much  less  irritating
and  milder  to  the  taste. It  is  an  excellent  antacid  and  antilithic;'and
has  been  used  in  calculous  diseases  with  predominance  of  uric  acid.
When  the  carbonate  of  soda  is  given  in  these  cases,  its  continued  use  is
liable  to  induce  phosphatic  deposits,  after  the  removal  of  the  uric  acid
which  is  not  the  case  with  the  bicarbonate,  especially  when  taken  in  car-
bonic acid  water,  which  has  the  power  of  maintaining  the  phosphates  in
solution,  even  after  it  has  caused  the  uric  acid  to  disappear. The  same
remark  is  applicable  to  the  bicarbonate  of  potassa. In  doses  of  a  ^rain
dissolved  in  milk  and  water,  and  repeated  every  five  minutes,  the  bicar-
bonate of  soda  has been  used,  with  apparent  advantage,  in  infantile
croup,  promoting  the  expectoration  of  the  false  membrane. The  dose
of  this  salt  for  an  adult  is,  from  ten  to  sixty  grains,  in  a  glass  of  carbonic
acid water, or  common soda  water. Soda Powders, or  Effervescing
Powders  are  prepared  by  placing  in  one  paper  Tartaric  Acid,  twenty-five
grains  ;  and  in  another  Bicarbonate  of  Soda  thirty  grains. When  to  be
used,  they  are  dissolved  in  separate  portions  of  water,  to  which  some
aromatic  syrup  may  be  added,  and  then  mixed. Effervescence  imme-
diately ensues,  during  which  the liquid  is  to  be -drank. It  forms  a
refrigerant  and  slightly  laxative  draught,  which  is  very  agreeable  and
refreshing,  especially  to  persons  with  fever. The  effervescence  is  occa-
sioned by  the  escape  of  carbonic  acid,  which  is  set  free  from  the  bicar-
bonate by  the  tartaric  acid,  which  unites  with  the  soda,  forming  a  tar-
trate of  soda.

The  Yeast  or  Baking  Powders,  which  are  now  sold  so  extensively
throughout  the  country,  are  composed  of  54.7  parts  of  crystallized  bitar-
trate  of  potassa,  in  powder ;  22.7  parts  of  soda-salseratus,  a  salt  between
the  carbonate  and  bicarbonate,  as  regards  its  proportion  of  carbonic  acid;
and  22.7  parts  of  starch,  of  which  corn  starch  is  the  best.  A  good
baking  powder  may  be  made  of  two  and  a  half  parts  of  bitartrate  of
potassa,  and  one  part,  each,  of  bicarbonate  of  soda  and  starch.

Sod^e  Cakbonas  Exsiccatus. Dried  Carbonate  of  Soda.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Soda  a,  convenient  quantity.  Ex-
pose it  to  heat,  in  a  clean  iron  vessel,  until  it  is  thoroughly  dried,  stirring
constantly  with  an  iron  spatula  ;  then  rub  it  into  powder. —  IT.  S.

History. — Carbonate  of  Soda  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  base,  one  of
acid,  and  ten  of  water ;  at  a  moderate  heat  it  undergoes  the  watery
fusion,  and  a  higher  heat  drives  off  all  the  water  and  leaves  a  white,
opake,  porous,  anhydrous  carbonate,  which  is  easily  pulverizable.  It
consists  of  one  equivalent  of  base,  one  of  acid,  and  no  water  of  crystal-
lization, Na  O+CO2.  Dilute  sulphuric  acid  decomposes  it,  disengaging
40.7  per  cent,  of  carbonic  acid.


Soda.  1217

Properties  and  Uses. — Dried  or  Anhydrous  Carbonate  of  Soda  pos-
sesses properties  similar  to  the  crystallized  carbonate.  It  is  antacid  and
antilithic,  and  has  been  highly  extolled  in  calculous  affections  depending
on  a  morbid  secretion  of  uric  acid.  Being  free  from  any  water  of  crys-
tallization it  readily  admits  of  being  made  into  pills  ;  from  a  similar
cause  its  dose  is  less  than  the  crystallized  salt.  From  five  to  fifteen
grains  may  be  administered  for  a  dose,  and  repeated  three  times  a  day  ;
it  is  best  given  in  the  form  of  pill  with  soap  and  aromatics.

Off.  Prep. — Sodce  Bicarbonas.

Sod.e  et  Potassa  Tartras.  Tartrate  of  Potassa  and  Soda.  Tarta-
rizcd  Soda. Rochelle  Salt.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Soda  a  pound;  Bitartrate  of  Po-
tassa sixteen  ounces  ;  Boiling  Water/ve  pints.  Dissolve  the  Carbonate  of
Soda  in  the  Water,  and  gradually  add  the  Bitartrate  of  Potassa.  Filter
the  solution,  and  evaporate  until  a  pellicle  forms ;  then  set  it  aside  to
crystallize.  Pour  off  the  liquor,  and  dry  the  crystals  on  bibulous  paper.
Lastly,  again  evaporate  the  liquor  that  it  may  furnish  more  crystals. —

u.  s.

History. — This  salt  was  discovered  by  Seignette,  an  apothecary  of
Rochelle  in  1672,  but  the  mode  of  preparing  it  was  not  made  known
until  in  1731  by  Geoffroy.  It  is  a  double  salt  consisting  of  tartrate
of  soda  combined  with  tartrate  of  potassa.  It  has  been  prepared  in
various  ways,  but  is  at  present  made  by  neutralizing  bitartrate  of  potassa
with  carbonate  of  soda ;  the  excess  of  tartaric  acid  in  the  bitartrate  is
saturated  by  the  carbonate  of  soda,  carbonic  acid  being  given  off  at  the
same  time,  with  effervescence.

Tartrate  of  potassa  and  soda  is  in  the  form  of  beautiful,  colorless,  and
nearly  transparent  crystals,  frequently  very  large,  and  having  the  shape
of  prisms  or  half  prisms,  with  six,  eight,  or  ten  sides ;  their  primitive
form  is  the  right  rhombic  prism.  It  is  permanent  in  the  air,  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  slight  efflorescence  in  very  dry  air,  has  a  mild,  saline,  slightly
bitter,  not  disagreeable  taste,  dissolves  in  five  times  its  weight  of  cold,
and  in  much  less  boiling  water,  and  its  solution  is  neutral  to  test-paper.
Heat  causes  it  to  fuse  in  its  water  of  crystallization,  and  when  increased
decomposes  it,  destroying  the  tartaric  acid,  and  leaving  a  mixture  of  its
two  alkaline  bases  in  the  form  of  carbonates,  with  charcoal.  Chloride
of  barium,  or  a  weak  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  added  to  its  solution,
occasions  no  precipitate,  unless  sulphates  or  chlorides  are  present.  It  is
incompatible  with  most  acids,  acidulous  salts,  except  the  bitartrate  of
potassa,  acetate  and  subacetate  of  lead,  the  soluble  salts  of  lime  and  of
baryta.  Acids  decompose  it  by  uniting  with  the  soda,  and  causing  a
crystalline  precipitate  of  bitartrate  of  potassa.  It  consists  of  one  equiv-
alent of  tartrate  of  potassa  113.2,  one  of  tartrate  of  soda  97.3,  and  eight
of  water  72=282.5.  Or,  two  equivalents  of  tartaric  acid  132,  one  of
77


1218  Pharmacy.

potassa  47.2,  one  of  soda  31.3,  and  eight  of  water  72=282.5  (2t+
KO+Na  0+8  Aq). It  is  not  subject  to  adulteration.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tartrate  of  Potassa  and  Soda  is  a  mild,  coolinw
purgative,  and  being  more  agreeable  than  most  neutral  salts,  it  is  espe-
cially adapted  to  those  whose  stomachs  are  delicate  or  irritable.  The
dose  is  from  two  drachms  to  one  ounce,  dissolved  in  ei^ht  or  ten  parts
of  water.  Given  in  small  doses,  and  frequently  repeated,  it  is  absorbed,
and  instead  of-  purging,  produces  alkalinity  of  the  urine.  Two  drachms
of  tartrate  of  potassa  and  soda  added  to  two  scruples  of  bicarbonate  of
soda,  and  put  up  in  one  (blue)  paper,  and  thirty-five  grains  of  tartaric
acid  placed  in  the  other  (white)  paper,  forms  the  gentle  aperient  known
as  Seidlitz  Powder.  Dissolve  the  contents  of  each  paper,  separately,  in
half  a  tumbler  of  water,  mix  the  two  solutions,  and  drink  immediately
while  it  is  effervescing.

Sod^e  Phosphas. Phosphate  of  Soda.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bone,  burnt  to  whiteness  and  powdered,  ten
pounds ;  Sulphuric  Acid  six  pounds;  Carbonate  of  Soda  a  sufficient
quantity.  Mix  the  powdered  Bone  with  the  Sulphuric  Acid  in  an  earthen
vessel ;  then  add  a  gallon  of  Water,  and  stir  them  well  together.  Dio-est
for  three  days,  occasionally  adding  a  little  Water  to  replace  that  which  is
lost  by  evaporation,  and  frequently  stirring  the  mixture.  At  the  expi-
ration of  this  time,  pour  in  a  gallon  of  Boiling  Water,  and  strain  through
linen,  gradually  adding  more  Boiling  Water,  until  the  liquid  passes  nearly
tasteless.  Set  by  the  strained  liquor,  that  the  dregs  may  subside,  from
which  pour  off  the  clear  Solution,  and  boil  it  down  to  a  gallon.  To  this
solution,  poured  off  from  the  dregs,  and  heated  in  an  iron  vessel,  add,
by  degrees,  the  Carbonate  of  Soda  previously  dissolved  in  Hot  Water,
until  effervescence  ceases,  and  the  phosphoric  acid  is  completely  neu-
tralized ;  then  filter  the  liquor,  and  set  it  aside  to  crystallize.  Having
removed  the  Crystals,  add  to  the  liquor,  if  necessary,  a  small  quantity
of  Carbonate  of  Soda,  so  as  to  render  it  slightly  alkaline.  Then  alter-
nately evaporate  and  crystallize,  so  long  as  any  crystals  are  produced.
Lastly,  preserve  the  crystals  in  a  well  stopped  bottle. —  JJ.  S.

History. — Bones  are  composed  chiefly  of  carbonate  of  lime,  gelatin,
and  phosphate  of  lime,  and  when  burnt  at  a  full  red-heat,  the  gelatin  is
decomposed,  its  carbon  becomes  gradually  consumed,  and  a  white  sub-
stance called  bone-phosphate  is  left,  consisting  of  phosphate  of  lime  and
a  small  proportion  of  carbonate,  etc.  When  this  bone-phosphate  is  well
pulverized,  and  subjected  to  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid,  decomposition
of  the  carbonate  of  lime,  with  effervescence,  takes  place.  The  phosphate
of  lime  becomes  partially  decomposed,  phosphoric  acid  is  set  free,  and
all  the  lime  detached  from  the  two  salts,  combines  with  the  sulphuric
acid,  forming  a  precipitate  of  sulphate  of  lime.  The  disengaged  phos-
phoric acid  unites  with  that  portion  of  the  phosphate  of  lime  which  has


Soda.  1219

not  been  decomposed,  and  a  solution  of  the  superphosphate  of  lime  is
the  result.  Boiling  water  is  now  added  for  the  purpose  of  separating
any  sulphate  of  lime  which  may  remain  in  the  solution,  and  the  whole  is
strained  ;  the  sulphate,  which  remains  on  the  strainer,  is  washed  as
long  as  it  yields  any  superphosphate,  which  may  be  known  by  the  acid
taste  of  the  water  passed.  The  washings  and  strained  solution  of  super-
phosphate of  lime,  being  mixed  together,  and  allowed  to  rest,  a  portion
of  sulphate  of  lime  is  precipitated  as  the  liquid  cools,  and  from  which  it
is  separated  by  decantation.  The  liquid  is  then  concentrated  by  evapo-
ration, which  causes  a  still  further  deposit  of  sulphate  of  lime,  which  is
separated  by  rest  and  decantation  as  before.  The  concentrated  solution
of  superphosphate  of  lime  is  now  heated,  and  a  hot  solution  of  carbonate
of  soda  added  to  saturation.  The  excess  of  phosphoric  acid  in  the
solution  combines  with  the  soda  to  form  phosphate  of  soda,  while  the
carbonic  acid  is  set  free  with  effervescence ;  the  superphosphate  of  lime
having  lost  its  excess  of  acid,  is  precipitated  as  the  neutral  phosphate.
The  liquid  being  a  solution  of  phosphate  of  soda,  is  now  filtered  to  sepa-
rate the  neutral  phosphate  of  lime,  after  which  it  is  evaporated  and
allowed  to  crystallize.  In  order  to  insure  a  complete  precipitation  of  the
neutral  phosphate,  as  well  as  an  entire  disengagement  of  the  carbonic
acid,  both  solutions,  when  added  together,  should  be  boiling  hot ;  and
if  the  solution  of  phosphate  of  soda  thus  procured,  be  slightly  alkaline,
the  crystals  will  form  more  abundantly  and  with  greater  facility.

An  economical  and  expeditious  mode  for  obtaining  phosphate  of  soda,
has  been  given  by  M.  Funcke,  a  German  chemist.  It  consists  in  diffus-
ing the  powdered  bone-phosphate  in  water,  adding  enough  dilute  sul-
phuric acid  to  decompose  the  whole  of  its  carbonate  of  lime,  and  when
effervescence  has  ceased,  to  add  nitric  acid,  which  dissolves  the  phos-
phate of  lime,  and  leaves  the  sulphate.  To  this  nitric  solution,  sulphate
of  soda,  equal  in  quantity  to  the  bone  employed,  is  added,  and  when
reaction  ceases,  the  nitric  acid  may  be  recovered  by  distillation.  By
this  process,  sulphate  of  lime  and  phosphate  of  soda  are  generated,  which
may  be  separated  from  each  other  by  the  action  of  water,  and  the  phos-
phate crystallized  in  the  ordinary  manner.  Phosphate  of  soda  crystal-
lizes in  rhombic  prisms  terminated  by  four  converging  planes;  the
crystals  are  large,  colorless,  and  transparent,  but  soon  become  opake  on
account  of  their  speedy  efflorescence  in  the  air.  They  have  a  cooling,
mildly-saline  taste,  somewhat  like  that  of  common  salt,  and  have  a  slight
alkaline  reaction.  Heat  fuses  them  in  their  water  of  crystallization,  and
if  continued  the  water  passes  off,  leaving  only  one  equivalent  of  water,
which  is  obstinately  retained  by  every  two  equivalents  of  soda.  At  a
red-heat,  all  the  water  is  expelled,  and  the  salt  melts  into  a  limpid
globule,  which  becomes  opake  on  cooling  ;  in  this  form  it  is  the  pyro-
phosphate of  soda  of  Clark,  or  the  diphosphate  of  Turner.  Phosphate
of  soda  is  soluble  in  four  parts  of  cold,  and  two  of  boiling  water. It  is


1220  Pharmact.

not  apt  to  be  adulterated,  but  may  contain  carbonate  of  soda,  from  an
excess  being  added  during  the  process,  and  which  may  be  known  by  the
effervescence  occurring  on  the  addition  of  an  acid.  If  any  soluble  sul-
phate be  present,  chloride  of  barium  will  precipitate  a  mixture  of  sulphate
and  phosphate  of  baryta,  and  which  nitric  acid  will  not  wholly  dissolve ;
if  the  precipitate  dissolves  in  nitric  acid  with  effervescence,  it  is  a  carbo-
nate of  baryta,  caused  by  the  presence  of  carbonate  of  soda.  Nitrate  of
silver  will  produce  a  yellow  precipitate  if  a  chloride  be  present,  and
which  precipitate  is  a  mixture  of  chloride  and  phosphate  of  silver,  not
entirely  soluble  in  nitric  acid.  Phosphate  of  soda  is  incompatible  with
the  soluble  salts  of  lime,  which  precipitate  phosphate  of  lime,  with  the
magnesian  salts,  and  with  neutral  metallic  solutions.  It  consists  of  two
equivalents  of  soda  62.6,  one  of  phosphoric  acid  72,  and  twenty-five  of
water  225=359.6  (2  Na  O+POs  +25  HO).  If  a  solution  of  phosphate
of  soda  be  evaporated  at  90°,  the  salt  crystallizes  with  only  fifteen,
instead  of  twenty-five  equivalents  of  water.

Properties  and  Uses. — Phosphate  of  Soda,  formerly  known  as  Sub-
phosphate  of  Soda,  and  Sal  Mirabile,  is  a  mild,  saline  cathartic,  well
adapted  to  children,  and  persons  with  delicate  stomachs.  The  dose  is
from  half  an  ounce  to  two  ounces,  and  is  best  given  in  gruel  or  weak
broth,  to  which  it  imparts  a  taste  as  if  seasoned  with  common  salt.

Off.  Prep. — Ferri  Phosphas.

Sod^e  Valerianas. Valerianate  of  Soda.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bichromate  of  Potassa,  in  powder,  nine  ounces,
(Avoirdupois);  Fusel  Oil  four  fluidounces,  (Imperial  measure);  Com-
mercial Oil  of  Vitriol  six  fluidounces  and  a  half,  (Imp.  meas.);  Water
half  a  gallon,  (Imp.  meas.)  ;  Solution  of  Caustic  Soda  one  pint,  (Imp.
meas.),  or  as  much  as  is  sufficient.  Dilute  the  Oil  of  Vitriol  with  ten
fluidounces  of  Water,  and  dissolve  the  Bichromate  of  Potassa,  in  the
remainder  of  the  Water,  with  the  aid  of  heat.  When  both  the  Solutions
have  cooled  down  to  nearly  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  place
them  in  a  matrass,  and  having  added  the  Fusel  Oil,  mix  well  by  repeated
shaking, "until  the  temperature  of  the  mixture,  which  at  first  rises  to
150°,  has  fallen  to  80°  or  90°.  The  matrass  having  been  now  connected
with  a  condenser,  heat  is  to  be  applied  so  as  to  distil  over  about  half  a
gallon  of  liquid.  Let  this,  when  exactly  saturated  with  Solution  of
Caustic  Soda,  be  separated  from  a  little  Oil  that  floats  upon  its  surface,
and  evaporated  down  until  the  escape  of  Aqueous  Vapor  having  entirely
ceased,  the  residual  salt  is  partially  liquefied.  Now  withdraw  the  heat,
and  when  the  Valerianate  of  Soda  has  concreted,  it  is,  while  still  warm,
to  be  divided  into  fragments,  and  preserved  in  a  well  stopped  bottle. —
Dub.

History. — In  this  process,  Valerianic  Acid  is  formed  by  the  oxidizing
action  of  chromic  acid,  or  of  the  sulphuric  acid  and  bichromate,  on  the


Strychnia.  1223

fusel  oil,  and  passes  over  with  water  ;  the  solution  of  caustic  soda  being
then  added  to  it  to  saturation  forms  a  solution  of  valerianate  of  soda,
which  is  obtained  in  the  solid  form  by  evaporation.  The  oil  that  floats
on  the  surface  of  the  solution  of  the  valerianate,  is  valerianate  of  amylic
ether.  Fusel  oil  is  converted  into  valerianic  acid  by  being  deprived  of
two  equivalents  of  hydrogen,  while  at  the  same  time  it  gains  two  of
oxygen.  Valerianate  of  soda  is  a  deliquescent  salt,  having,  at  first,  a
styptic  taste  followed  by  sweetishness,  a  valerian  odor,  and  is  very  soluble
in  water.  It  fuses  without  loss  of  acid  at  285°,  and  on  cooling,  becomes
a  white  solid  ;  it  consists  of  one  equivalent  of  soda  31.3,  and  one  of
acid  93=124.3  (Na  0,  Cio  Hq  Os).

Properties  and  Uses. — Valerianate  of  Soda  is  not  used  as  a  medicine,
but  for  the  preparation  of  the  valerianates  of  iron,  quinia,  etc.,  by  double
decomposition  of  the  soda  salt  with  salts  of  the  respective  bases.  It
might  be  used  with  advantage  in  nervous  and  irritable  habits,  attended
with  acidity  of  the  stomach.

Of.  Prep. — Quiniae  Valerianas.


STRYCHNIA.

Strychnia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Nux  Vomica,  rasped,  four  pounds  ;  Lime,  in
powder,  six  ounces  ;  Muriatic  Acid  three  fiuidounces  ;  Alcohol,  Diluted
Sulphuric  Acid,  Solution  of  Ammonia,  Purified  Animal  Charcoal,  Water,
of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Digest  the  Nux  Vomica  in  two  gallons  of
Water,  acidulated  with  a  fluidounce  of  the  Muriatic  Acid,  for  twenty-
four  hours  ;  then  boil  for  two  hours,  and  strain  with  expression  through
a  strong  linen  bag.  Boil  the  residuum  twice  successively  in  the  same
quantity  of  Acidulated  Water,  each  time  straining  as  before.  Mix  the
decoctions  and  evaporate  to  the  consistence  of  thin  syrup  ;  then  add  the
Lime  previously  mixed  with  a  pint  of  Water,  and  boil  for  ten  minutes,
frequently  stirring.  Pour  the  mixture  into  a  double  linen  bag,  and,
having  washed  the  precipitate  well  with  Water,  press,  dry,  and  powder
it.  Treat  the  Powder  repeatedly  with  Boiling  Alcohol,  until  deprived
of  its  bitterness  ;  mix  the  liquors,  and  distil  off  the  Alcohol  by  means
of  a  water-bath.  Mix  the  residue  with  Water,  and,  having  applied  heat,
drop  in  sufficient  Diluted  Sulphuric  Acid  to  neutralize  and  dissolve  the
Strychnia ;  then  add  purified  Animal  Charcoal,  boil  for  a  few  minutes,
filter,  evaporate,  and  crystallize.  Dissolve  the  crystals  in  Water,  and
add  sufficient  Solution  of  Ammonia  to  precipitate  the  Strychnia.  Lastly,
dry  the  precipitate  on  bibulous  paper. —  U.  S.

History. In  the  above  process  the  nux  vomica  is  first  reduced  to  a

powder  in  order  to  be  more  readily  acted  upon,  and  this  may  be  done


1222  Pharmacy.

by  rasping  the  seeds,  or  by  exposing  tliem  to  steam  until  softened,  and
then  slicing,  drying,  and  grinding  them. The  strychnia  is  then  extracted
by  water  acidulated  with  muriatic  acid,  which  forms  a  solution  of  muri-
ate of  strychnia. This  is  concentrated,  and  on  the  addition  of  lime  the
salt  is  decomposed, — an  impure  strychnia  is  precipitated,  while  the  chlo-
ride  of  calcium  remains  in  solution. The  precipitate  is  treated  with
boiling  alcohol  which  takes  up  the  strychnia,  and  which  may  be  obtained
in  impure  and  colored  crystals,  by  concentration  of  the  alcoholic  solution.
To  purify  it,  sulphuric  acid  is  added  to  the  crystals  forming  a  sulphate  of
strychnia,  while  at  the  same  time  animal  charcoal  is  employed  to  decolo-
rize it. In  the  last  part  of  the  process  ammonia  is  added  to  the  sulphate
of  strychnia,  which  decomposes  it,  precipitating  crystals  of  strychnia,
while  the  sulphate  of  ammonia  remains  in  solution. The  brucia  of  the
nux  vomica,  accompanies  the  strychnia throughout  the  process,  and
remains  in  the  solution  only  when  the  strychnia  is  obtained  from  the
alcoholic  solution. As  brucia  is  more  readily  soluble  in  cold  alcohol
than  strychnia,  it  would  be  an  improvement  upon  the  above  process,  to
continue  the  purification  by  two  or  more  solutions,  and  crystallizations  in
alcohol. Or  if  it  be  desired  to  remove  the  brucia  almost  entirely,  the
strychnia  obtained  may  be  dissolved  in  very  diluted  nitric  acid,  then  fil-
tered and  concentrated  for  crystallization. The  nitrate  of  brucia  forms
short,  thick,  dense  prismatic  crystals,  grouped  together,  and  the  nitrate
of  strychnia  crystallizes  in  radiated  tufts  of  long,  light,  silky,  capillary
needles. On  adding  water  to  these,  and  gently  agitating,  the  strychnia
may  be  poured off,  leaving  the  brucia. The  salts  may  then  be  dis-
solved, separately,  in  water,  and  decomposed  by  ammonia. Strychnia
is  obtained  in  great  proportion  from  St.  Ignatius'  Bean,  but  on  account
of  its  scarcity,  the  nux  vomica  seeds  are  employed. It  is  also  stated
that  it  may  be  profitably  procured  from the  bark  of  the  nux  vomica
tree.

Strychnia  crystallizes  in  elongated,  oblique,  colorless  octaedres,  or
quadrilateral  prisms  with  quadrilateral  terminations  ;  when  rapidly  crys-
tallized from  the  alcoholic  solution,  it  is  in  the  form  of  a  white,  granular
powder.  It  is  inodorous,  with  an  intense  bitterness  which  may  be  com-
municated to  water  containing  only  a  600,000th  part  of  it,  is  permanent
in  the  air,  fusible  like  a  resin,  and  is  completely  dissipated  by  a  red-heat.
It  is  soluble  in  fixed  and  volatile  oils,  in  6667  parts  of  water  at  50°,  in
2000  at  212°,  and  in  boiling  alcohol ;  it  is  insoluble  in  ether  or  pure  alco-
hol, and  is  alkaline  in  its  reactions.  The  strychnia  usually  met  with  is
in  the  form  of  a  grayish-white  powder.  Strychnia  consists  of  carbon,
hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen,  the  proportions  of  which  have  been  vari-
ously given ;  Liebig  and  Gerhardt  define  its  composition  to  be  Cu  H21
Oi  Ns.

If  brucia  be  present  in  strychnia,  the  addition  of  nitric  acid  reddens  it.  A
concentrated  solution  of  pure  strychnia  in  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,


Strychnia.  1223

becomes  of  a  splendid  violet  color  on  the  addition  of  a  minute  quantity
of  solution  of  chromate  of  potassa.  Strychnia  may  be  detected  in  very
minute  quantity,  by  placing  a  drop  of  the  suspected  liquid  on  glass,  and
allowing  the  liquor  to  evaporate,  then  to  the  dry  residuum  add  a  drop  of
concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  or  enough  to  moisten  it,  and  then  add  a
drop  of  solution  of  ferrocyanide  of  potassium  (red  prussiate  of  potassa),
and  mix  well  together  ;  a  fine  deep  violet  color  will  be  immediately  pro-
duced, which  passes  slowly  into  a  light  brick-red  color,  and  remains  for
several  hours.  It  may  likewise  be  detected  in  minute  quantity,  by  rub-
bing a  little  of  the  alkali  with  a  few  drops  of  concentrated  sulphuric
acid  containing  one-hundredth  of  nitric  acid, — the  solution  will  be  with-
out color ;  but  if  peroxide  of  lead  be  added  in  the  smallest  quantity,  a
magnificent  blue  color  will  be  at  once  produced,  and  which  will  pass
rapidly  into  violet,  then  gradually  to  red,  and  finally  into  yellow.

Brucia  may  be  obtained  from  false  angustura  bark,  by  a  similar  pro-
cess to  that  of  procuring  strychnia  from  nux  vomica,  with  the  exception
that  the  alcoholic  extract  of  the  precipitate  occasioned  by  lime  or  mag-
nesia, should  be  treated  with  oxalic  acid,  and  then  with  a  mixture  of
rectified  alcohol  and  ether,  which  takes  up  the  coloring  matter,  and
leaves  the  oxalate  of  brucia.  This  is  decomposed  by  magnesia,  and  the
brucia  separated  by  alcohol,  and  obtained  in  crystals  by  spontaneous
evaporation.  Brucia  crystallizes  in  small,  delicate,  pearly,  colorless
scales,  is  inodorous,  intensely  bitter,  permanent  in  the  air,  and  fusible  a
little  above  212°.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  in  850  parts  of  cold  and  500
of  boiling  water,  sparingly  soluble  in  volatile  oils,  and  insoluble  in  ether
and  the  fixed  oils.  It  has  an  alkaline  reaction,  and  like  strychnia  forms
crystallizable  salts  with  acids.  Nitric  acid  reddens  it,  which  becomes
yellow  by  heat,  and  violet  upon  the  addition  of  protochloride  of  tin.

Prof.  J.  Milton  Sanders  has  prepared  two  salts  of  strychnia,  the  citrate
and  tartrate,  which  he  considers  the  most  efficient  form  of  administra-
tion, and  as  possessing  more  activity  and  safety  than  the  pure  strychnia.
He  prepares  the  Citrate  of  Strychnia  by  dissolving  with  a  gentle  heat  in
a  sufficient  quantity  of  distilled  water,  one  hundred  and  ninety-two
grains  of  dried  citric  acid,  and  then  adding  three  hundred  and  forty-six
grains  of  pure  strychnia.  By  gentle  evaporation  the  citrate  may  be  ob-
tained in  crystals.  It  is  an  acid  salt,  and  its  constitution  is  (C12  Hs  Ou-}-
H2)  +  (C«  H22N2  O4).  That  is,  one  equivalent  of  the  strychnia  has
displaced  one  equivalent  of  the  external  hydrogen  of  the  citric  acid.
As  it  is  a  tribasic  acid,  there  are  still  two  equivalents  of  external  hydro-
gen to  be  displaced,  ere  the  acid  be  entirely  neutralized.  The  dose  is
from  one-tenth  to  one-twentieth  of  a  grain,  to  be  given  cautiously  till  the
desired  effect  is  produced.

The  Tartrate  of  Strychnia  he  obtains,  by  dissolving  in  a  sufficient
quantity  of  Distilled  Water,  one  hundred  and  fifty-six  grains  of  Tartaric
Acid,  and  then  adding  three  hundred  and  forty-six  grains  of  Strychnia.


1224  Pharmacy.

and  evaporating  as  above.  It  is  also  an  acid  salt  with  the  composition  indi-
cated by  the  formula  (Cs  Hi  Oio+H)  +  (Cw  H22  N2  04).  The  dose  is
the  same  as  the  citrate.

Properties  and  Uses. — Nux  Vomica  and  Strychnia  act  chiefly,  if  not
solely,  by  stimulating  the  spinal  chord  and  medulla  oblongata,  and  with-
out affecting  the  functions  of  the  brain.  The  slightest  observable  effects
from  small  doses  are  twitches  of  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and  leffs,
occurring  especially  during  sleep,  accompanied  with  restlessness,  some
anxiety,  acceleration  of  the  pulse,  and  generally  slight  perspiration.
Sometimes  the  action  of  the  bowels  is  increased,  and  the  discharge  of
urine  is  either  augmented,  or  discharged  more  frequently — it  likewise
promotes  the  venereal  appetite.  Large  doses  occasion  very  violent  start-
ing of  the  muscles — even  a  tendency  to  lockjaw,  succeeded  by  stiffness,
weariness,  pain  or  rending  in  the  limbs.  In  their  highest  degree,  these
effects  amount  to  violent  tetanic  spasms,  occurring  in  frequent  fits,  with
brief  intervals  of  repose,  acute  sensibility,  and  dreadful  alarm.  Through
whatever  form  or  texture  Strychnia  is  introduced  into  the  body,  it  exerts
this  action  more  or  less,  operating  with  an  energy  proportioned  to  the
activity  of  absorption  where  it  is  applied.  It  is  not  a  cumulative  poison
like  mercury  or  digitalis  ;  nor  does  its  activity  diminish  under  the  influ-
ence of  habit,  as  with  opium.  There  is  no  known  antidote  for  it;  mor-
phia is  probably  the  best,  as  full  opiate  doses  will  somewhat  arrest  these
effects.  Camphor  and  sweet  oil,  have  been  advised  as  antidotes,  but
further  investigations  are  required  before  they  can  confidently  be  relied
upon.  M.  Duclos  states  that  under  the  application  of  negative  electricity,
the  poisonous  effects  of  strychnia  on  animals  subside,  while  under  that
of  the  positive  they  are  aggravated.  As  some  patients  are  powerfully
affected  by  the  smallest  doses  of  this  agent,  too  much  caution  cannot  be
employed  in  its  administration.  I  would  observe  here,  that  a  short
time  since,  a  favorite  Newfoundland  bitch,  with  three  pups  about  two
months  old,  were  poisoned  by  some  evil-minded  person,  by  strychnia
placed  on  meat.  One  of  the  pups  died  in  the  convulsed  condition  com-
mon to  the  influence  of  strychnia ;  the  others  were  attacked  with  spas-
modic twitchings  which  continued  to  increase.  From  some  cause  the
bitch  vomited  up  her  meat,  a  portion  of  which  was  eaten  by  two  chick-
ens about  six  or  eight  weeks  old.  To  the  bitch  and  the  remaining  two
pups  I  gave  about  a  gill  of  sweet  oil  to  each,  followed  by  about  four
grains  of  camphor  to  the  mother,  and  two  grains  to  the  pups,  in  some
bread  ;  they  recovered  and  are  doing  well.  Of  the  chickens,  one  was
apparently  dying,  lying  on  the  ground,  wings  outspread,  mouth  open,
and  with  frequent  spasmodic  jerks,  the  other  trembled  and  spasmodi-
cally staggered  around  like  an  intoxicated  person  ;  to  each  of  these  I
gave  about  a  grain  of  camphor  in  butter,  and  fastened  them  up,  and  in
an  hour  they  had  both  fully  recovered. I  mention  these  facts  that


Syrupi.  1225

further  inquiries  may  be  made  as  regards  the  antidotal  power  of  camphor
in  poisoning  by  strychnia.  To  determine  whether  strychnia  was  the
poison  administered,  the  meat  vomited  by  the  dogs  was  carefully  exam-
ined. Both  dogs  and  chickens  were  actively  purged.

The  alcoholic  extract  of  Nux  Vomica  and  Strychnia,  are  more  gene-
rally employed  in  medicine ;  and  the  action  of  the  former  is  owing  to  the
strychnia  it  contains.  Strychnia  is  used  in  hemiplegia,  paraplegia,
partial  paralysis  of  particular  joints  or  muscles,  and  of  the  bladder.  The
paralyzed  muscles  are  always  first  affected,  if  they  are  thrown  into
spasms  at  all.  If  the  remedy  is  to  succeed,  improvement  begins
speedily.  It  must  not  be  used  in  recent  cases  of  palsy,  or  while  general
reaction  prevails;  neither  when  signs  exist  either  of  local  irritation  in
the  brain  or  spinal  chord,  or  of  determination  of  blood  to  the  head.  It
has  been  likewise  used  in  neuralgia,  epilepsy,  ague,  amenorrhea,  dysen-
tery, rheumatism,  syphilitic  osteocopi,  and  obstinate  constipation.  In
the  treatment  of  gleet,  urethral  stricture,  and  recent  enlargement  of  the
prostate,  I  have  found  it  a  superior  remedy,  used  internally  and  locally.
In  dyspepsia,  where  there  is  a  want  of  appetite,  constipation,  and  a  sen-
sation of  epigastric  weight  after  eating,  I  have  found  the  combination
of  one  grain  of  the  alcoholic  extract  of  Nux  Vomica,  well  triturated  with
forty  grains  of  ptelein,  and  divided  into  twenty  pills,  an  excellent  remedy  ;
likewise  in  dyspepsia  connected  with  impotence,  caused  by  masturbation
or  venereal  excesses ;  the  dose  is  one  pill,  repeated  three  times  a  day.
Strychnia  will  also  be  found  advantageous  in  many  uterine  diseases,
prolapsus  uteri,  etc.  The  dose  of  strychnia  is  from  one-twentieth  of  a
grain  to  one-tenth,  two  or  three  times  a  day  ;  it  may  be  rendered  more
soluble  in  alcohol  or  water,  by  the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  an  acid,  as
the  acetic,  muriatic,  nitric,  or  sulphuric.  Its  best  form  of  administration
is  that  of  pill.  Brucia  exerts  an  influence  upon  the  system  very  similar
to  that  occasioned  by  strychnia,  but  is  less  energetic  ;  its  dose  is  from
one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  half  a  grain,  three  or  four  times  a  day.  In  the
administration  of  Brucia  and  Strychnia,  or  any  of  their  salts,  great  caution
must  be  observed,  and  the  patient  carefully  watched  during  its  use.

Off.  Prep. — Pilulse  Eupurpurini  Compositae.


SYRUPI.

Syrups.

Syrups  are  liquid  officinal  medicines,  of  a  viscid  consistence,  produced
by  the  concentrated  solution  of  Sugar  alone  or  Sugar  mixed  with  Honey,
in  Water,  "Wine,  or  Vinegar.  Syrups  are  either  Simple  or  Medicated  ;
simple  syrup  is  where  the  solution  of  the  sugar  is  made  with  water  only ;
it  forms  the  basis  of  a  great  many  medicated  syrups.

Medicated  syrups,  are  those  in  which  one  or  more  medicinal  agents
enter  into the  solution,  and  are  commonly  prepared by  incorporating


1226  Pharmact.

Sugar  with  Vegetable,  Aqueous  or  Spirituous  solutions,  expressed  Juices
etc.  When  the  active  principles  of  the  ingredients  used  are  dissi
pated  or  decomposed  by  boiling,  or  where  they  are  not  readily  soluble  in
water,  they  are  frequently  extracted  by  Diluted  Alcohol,  the  spirituous
ingredient  of  which  is  either  retained,  or  driven  off,  as  may  be  required*
occasionally  they  are  prepared  by  adding  a  Tincture  of  the  medicinal
agent  or  agents  to  simple  syrup,  and  evaporating  the  Alcohol.  The
stability  of  a  Syrup  depends  mainly  on  its  composition  and  consistence,
the  temperature,  and  the  amount  of  its  exposure  to  the  air  ;  and  no
ingredients  should  be  admitted  into  its  composition  except  the  active
principle  required  and  simple  syrup.  As  most  syrups  are  used  in
chronic  diseases  during  the  absence  of  febrile  or  active  inflammatory
symptoms,  the  addition  of  the  alcoholic  tincture  is  not  objectionable,
unless  it  be  in  large  proportion  ;  but  syrups  prepared  for  febrile  or  in-
flammatory difficulties  should  be  entirely  free  from  any  spirituous  liquor
whatever.

The  best  and  most  economical  plan  in  making  syrups,  is  to  employ
only  Refined  Sugar,  as  it  saves  the  trouble  of  subsequent  clarification,
beside  being  less  liable  to  undergo  change.  The  quantity  of  sugar
required  is  about  two  parts  to  one  of  liquid ;  if  it  be  in  too  small  pro-
portion, the  syrup  will  be  apt  to  ferment ;  if  in  too  large,  crystals  of
sugar  will  be  deposited.  The  heat  employed  should  be  adapted  to  the
character  of  the  active  principle  ;  if  it  be  volatile,  a  gentle  heat  is  re-
quired, as  well  as  in  cases  where  a  high  temperature  would  decompose
it.  If  it  be  not  injured  by  heat,  concentration  should  be  conducted  with
a  lively  fire,  and  effected  as  quickly  as  possible,  as  in  many  instances  a
long  continued  heat  will  impair  its  efficiency.  The  proper  degree  of
concentration  is  30°  Baume's  saccharometer,  when  boiling,  and  35°
when  cold  ;  or  specific  gravity  when  boiling  1.261,  and  when  cold  about
1.319.  After  the  syrup  has  cooled,  if  a  pellicle  forms  upon  its  surface,
it  has  been  concentrated  too  much.  Syrups  which  contain  no  volatile
principle,  or  one  not  injured  by  heat,  may  frequently  be  restored  to  their
original  condition,  after  having  undergone  vinous  fermentation,  by  again
boiling  them  to  expel  the  alcohol  and  carbonic  acid,  and  sufficiently
concentrating  them  ;  and  a  syrup  thus  recovered  is  less  apt  to  undergo
subsequent  change,  on  account  of  the  fermenting  principles  having  been
decreased  or  consumed.  Various  means  have  been  devised  for  the  pre-
servation of  syrups  :  a  little  sulphate  of  potassa,  chlorate  of  potassa,  or
sugar  of  milk,  have  been  recommended  for  this  purpose.  One  flui-
drachm  of  Hoffman's  Anodyne  to  the  pint  of  syrup  will  effectually
check  a  tendency  to  fermentation.  The  maintenance  of  a  syrup  in  a
regular  degree  of  temperature,  say  55°  to  60°,  will  tend  very  much  to
lessen  its  liability  to  ferment.  As  a  general  rule  syrups  intended  to
be  kept  should  be  bottled  while  hot,  securely  corked  and  sealed,  and
after  cooling  should  be  shaken  that  the  moisture  condensed  on  the  cork


Syrupi.  1227

may  be  mixed  with  the  syrup,  and  not  form  a  diluted  layer  at  the  sur-
face.

The  syrups  used  in  Eclectic  practice,  which  have  been  prepared
according  to  the  method  of  W.  S.  Merrell,  are  found  to  keep  for  a  lonw
time  without  undergoing  change  ;  in  relation  to  which  he  has  furnished
the  following  remarks:  —  Most  of  the  medical  syrups  should  be  pre-
pared on  the  same  principles  as  the  Fluid  Extracts,  only  they  are  less
concentrated,  and  therefore  proportionally  less.  Alcohol  should  not  be
retained  in  their  composition,  for,  as  they  are  administered  in  larger  doses,
the  presence  of  spirit  in  them  would  be  more  appreciable  and  injurious.

All  the  compounds  that  have  been  proposed  for  syrups  in  the  Eclectic
school  of  practice,  such  as  the  Alterative,  Scrofulous,  and  Pulmonary
syrups  comprise  substances  whose  medical  principles  are  imperfectly
soluble  in  water,  and  should,  therefore,  be  acted  on  by  Alcohol.  I  make
these  preparations  with  the  same  apparatus,  and  by  the  same  process
as  I  make  the  Fluid  Extracts,  thus  retaining,  most  perfectly,  all  the
aroma  and  volatile  essences  of  the  ingredients.  Physicians  and  apothe-
caries who  have  not  such  apparatus,  may  substitute  the  process  laid
down  under  the  formula  for  Alterative  Syrup,  which  sec.

In  all  these  preparations,  the  principle  should  be  adopted  of  confining
the  boiling  and  evaporation  to  the  weaker  portion  of  the  solution,  so
that  those  delicate  principles  which  are  evaporated  or  decomposed  by
heat  may  be  submitted  to  its  action  as  little  as  possible.

Syrupus  (Syrupus  Simplex). Syrup  (Simple  Syrup).

Preparation. — Take  of  refined  Sugar  two  pounds  and  a  half;  Water  a
pint.  Dissolve  the  Sugar  in  the  Water  with  the  aid  of  heat,  remove
any  scum  which  may  form,  and  strain  the  Solution  while  hot. —  TJ.  S.

History. — Simple  syrup,  when  properly  made,  is  sweet,  inodorous,
thick,  viscid,  colorless  and  transparent.  When  made  with  sugar,  not
well  refined,  it  is  apt  to  be  turbid,  and  may  be  clarified  by  beating  the
white  of  an  egg  to  a  froth  with  three  or  four  ounces  of  water,  adding
this  to  the  syrup,  with  about  five  per  cent,  of  animal  charcoal  if  any
peculiar  flavor  or  color  be  present,  boiling  the  whole  for  a  short  time  so
that  the  albumen  may  coagulate,  and  removing  the  scum  which  rises  to
the  surface,  either  by  a  skimmer,  or  by  filtration  through  flannel;  this
will  clarify  two  gallons  of  syrup.

Properties  and  Uses.— Syrup  is  employed  in  various  mixtures,  pills,
medicated  syrups,  and  extemporaneous  prescriptions.

Off,  prep_ — Pilulce  Ferri  Compositae;  Syrupus  Acidi  Citrici  ;  Syrupus
Ferri  Iodidi ;  Syrupus  Ferri  Phosphatis;  Syrupus  Ipecacuanha;  Syrupus
Tolutanus.

Syrupus  Acidi  Citrici. Syrup  of  Citric  Acid. Lemon  Syrup.

Preparation. — Take  of  Citric  Acid,  in  powder,  two  drachms ;  Oil  of
Lemons  four  minims;  Syrup  two  pints. Rub  the  Citric  Acid  and  Oil  of


1228  Pharmacy.

Lemons  with  a  fluidounce  of  the  Syrup,  then  add  the  mixture  to  the
remainder  of  the  Syrup,  and  dissolve  with  a  gentle  heat. —  U.  S.

History. — This  syrup  is  more  readily  prepared  than  lemon  syrup,
keeps  better,  and  is  more  uniform,  though  not  quite  so  well  flavored.
Tartaric  acid,  which  is  frequently  substituted  for  the  citric,  is  apt  to
irritate  the  stomach,  and  the  syrup  prepared  with  it,  does  not  keep  so
well.  A  preparation  sold  as  Syrup  of  Lemons,  and  which  is  in  no  way
inferior  to  the  above,  is  made  by  adding  to  one  gallon  of  Water,  half  a
pound  of  Citric  Acid,  one  pound  of  Ivory  Black,  and  thirteen  pounds
of  Refined  Sugar;  boil  together,  filter,  and  add  one  fluidrachm  of  Oil  of
Lemon.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  added  to  water,  or  to  carbonic  acid
water,  forms  an  agreeable  and  refrigerant  beverage  for  persons  laboring
under  febrile  complaints,  and  in  certain  states  of  the  system.  From  a
fluidrachm  to  half  a  fluidounce  may  be  added  to  half  a  pint  of  the  fluid
in  which  it  is  to  be  taken.

Syrupus  Allii. Syrup  of  Garlic.

Preparation. — Take  of  fresh  Garlic,  sliced  and  bruised,  six  ounces;
Diluted  Acetic  Acid  a  pint;  Re6ned  Sugar,  in  coarse  powder,  two  pounds.
Macerate  the  Garlic  in  ten  fluidounces  of  the  Diluted  Acetic  Acid,  in  a
glass  vessel,  for  four  days,  and  express  the  liquor.  Then  mix  the  resi-
due with  the  remainder  of  the  Diluted  Acetic  Acid,  and  again  express
until  sufficient  has  passed  to  make  the  whole,  when  filtered,  measure  a
pint.  Lastly,  pour  the  filtered  liquor  on  the  Sugar  contained  in  a  quart
bottle,  and  agitate  till  it  is  dissolved. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  is  useful  in  chronic  catarrhal  affec-
tions of  the  lungs,  and  is  particularly  beneficial  in  the  cases  of  infants,
on  account  of  the  stimulus  it  affords  to  the  nervous  system.  The  dose
is  a  teaspoonful  to  a  child  a  year  old.  The  active  matter  of  garlic  is
more  readily  taken  up  by  vinegar  than  water.  A  syrup  of  onions  is
often  prepared  extemporaneously  for  coughs,  by  slicing  one  or  two
onions,  and  laying  the  slices  upon  each  other  with  sugar  between ;  this
is  set  by  the  fire  in  a  saucer  or  glass  vessel,  and  kept  there,  until  the
juice  of  the  onion  and  the  sugar  have,  by  the  aid  of  the  heat,  formed
a  syrup  in  the  vessel. It  may  be  given  freely.

Syrupus  Arali^;  Compositus.  Compound  Syrup  of  Spikenard.  Pul-
monary Balsam.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Roots  of  Spikenard,  Elecampane,  Comfrey,
and  Bloodroot,  of  the  Leaves  and  Flowers  of  Horehound,  and  of  the
Bark  of  Wild  Cherry,  each,  one  pound.  1.  Grind  and  mix  the  articles
together;  place  the  whole  six  pounds  in  a  convenient  vessel,  cover  them
with  Alcohol  of  76  per  cent.,  and  macerate  for  three  days.  Then
transfer  the  whole  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Hot
Water,  until  three  pints  of  the  Alcoholic  tincture  have  been  obtained,


SYRun.  1229

which  retain  and  set  aside.  2.  Then  continue  the  percolation,  and  of  this
second  solution  reserve  so  much  as  contains  a  sensible  amount  of  Spirit,
and  distil  or  evaporate  the  Alcohol  from  it.  3.  Continue  the  displacement
by  Hot  Water,  until  the  solution  obtained  is  almost  tasteless,  and  boil
down  this  weaker  infusion  until,  when  added  to  the  second  solution
after  the  evaporation  of  its  Alcohol,  it  will  make  eighteen  pints.  4.  To
these  two  solutions  combined,  add  twenty-four  pounds  of  Refined  Sugar,
and  dissolve  it  by  heat,  carefully  removing  any  scum  which  arises  as  it
comes  to  the  point  of  boiling ;  and  if  it  exceeds  twenty-one  pints,  evapo-
rate to  that  quantity  with  constant  stirring.  Then  remove  from  the  fire,
and  when  nearly  cold,  add  the  three  pints  of  Alcoholic  Tincture  first
obtained  and  set  aside,  and  make  three  gallons  of  Syrup.  Each  pint
will  contain  the  virtues  of  four  ounces  of  the  ingredients.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  elegant  remedy  for  obstinate  coughs
of  long  standing,  and  pulmonary  affections  generally.  It  is  often
employed  advantageously  in  pulmonary  and  bronchial  difficulties  com-
bined with  one-fourth  part  of  Fluid  Extract  of  Queen's  Root.  The
dose  of  the  syrup  is  half  a  fluidounce  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Syrupus  Assafcetid^e. Syrup  of  Assafetida.

Preparation. — Take  of  Assafetida  an  ounce  ;  Boiling  Water  a  pint;
Sugar  two  pounds.  Triturate  the  Assafetida  in  a  mortar  with  a  portion
of  the  Boiling  Water  until  a  uniform  paste  is  formed,  then  gradually
add  the  remainder  of  the  Water,  strain  and  add  the  Sugar,  dissolving  it
with  a  gentle  heat.

History. — Good  assafetida  contains  nearly  six  per  cent,  of  volatile
oil,  which  would  be  dissipated  were  much  heat  employed  in  the  solution
of  the  sugar.  The  object  of  employing  boiling  water  instead  of  cold,
is  to  have  more  of  the  gum-resin  taken  up,  and  which  is  permanently
dissolved  or  suspended  by  the  sugar.  This  syrup  is  nearly  white  when
first  made,  but  gradually  assumes  a  pinkish  tinge ;  it  is  quite  permanent,
keeping  for  several  months  without  any  material  change,  and  has
the  advantage  of  being  entirely  free  from  alcohol,  which  is  often
objectionable.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  excellent  form  for  the  administration
of  assafetida,  being  less  stimulant  than  the  tincture,  and  more  prompt
in  its  action  than  the  pill.  The  dose  is  one  or  two  tablespoonfuls,
repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day.  If  used  in  enema,  two  to  four
fluidounces  may  be  injected  into  the  rectum  at  one  time.  Other  Anti-
spasmodics may  be  combined  with  it,  as  fluid  extracts  of  Black  Cohosh,
Blue  Cohosh,  Ladies  Slipper  Root,  Scullcap,  Valerian,  etc.,  according  to
indications.

Syrupus  Cinnamomi. Syrup  of  Cinnamon.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tincture  of  Cinnamon  four  fluidounces ;  Water
three  pints ;  Refined  Sugar  seven  pounds  and  a  half;  Essence  of  Cinna-


1230  Pharmacy.

mon  [Tincture  of  the  Oil,)  four  fluidrachms.  Mix  the  Tincture  with
three  pounds  of  the  Sugar  in  a  shallow  dish,  and  evaporate  the  Alcohol
with  the  aid  of  a  gentle  heat,  or  allow  it  to  evaporate  spontaneously;
then  add  the  remainder  of  the  Sugar,  and  dissolve  it  in  two  pints  and  a
half  of  the  Water.  With  the  remaining  half  pint  of  Water,  beat  up
the  whites  of  two  Eggs,  add  it  to  the  Syrup,  boil  for  one  or  two  minutes,
strain  through  a  Canton  flannel  bag,  and  when  nearly  cool  add  the
Essence  of  Cinnamon.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  is  a  warm  aromatic  stomachic,  car-
minative, and  astringent.  It  is  chiefly  used  as  an  adjuvant  to  other
less  pleasant  medicines,  especially  in  the  treatment  of  diarrhea,  dys-
entery, hemorrhages,  and  where  astringents  are  indicated.  It  may  be
given  in  doses  of  one  or  two  fluidrachms.

Syrupus  Cochlearije  Compositus. Compound  Syrup  of  Horseradish.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recent  Root  of  Horseradish,  grated,  two
ounces;  Boneset,  Leaves  and  Tops,  one  ounce ;  Canada  Snakeroot  half
an  ounce;  Boiling  Water,  Diluted  Acetic  Acid,  of  each,  a  sufficient
quantity;  Refined  Sugar  two  pounds.  Infuse  the  Boneset  and  Canada
Snakeroot,  in  half  a  pint  of  the  Boiling  Water,  and  express  with  strong
pressure,  adding  Boiling  Water  to  the  mass  until  half  a  pint  of  infusion
is  obtained ;  then  add  the  Sugar  and  dissolve  by  gentle  heat.

Add  the  Horseradish  to  Dilute  Acetic  Acid,  half  a  pint;  let  it  stand
for  two  days,  and  then  express,  adding  Dilute  Acetic  Acid  to  the  mass
until  half  a  pint  of  the  Acetous  Solution  is  obtained.  Add  this  to  the
above  Syrup,  and  agitate  until  all  the  Sugar  is  dissolved.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  efficient  preparation  for  obstinate
colds,  catarrhs,  hoarseness,  and  chronic  irritation  of  the  throat  and
fauces.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms,  every  two  or  three
hours.  The  following  compound,  known  as  " Cough  or ■Vegetable Elixir •"
has  been  found  a  most  beneficial  agent  in  chronic  pulmonary  affections,
cough,  etc.  To  one  gallon  of  good  cider  vinegar,  add  half  a  pound,
each,  of  Balsam  of  Tolu  and  gum  Arabic,  dissolve  by  heat,  and  add  of
Refined  Sugar  six  pounds;  when  all  is  dissolved,  remove  from  the  fire,
and  add  of  Tincture  of  Opium,  eighteen  fluidounces.  The  dose  of  this
is  a  teaspoonful  three,  four,  or  five  times  a  day,  or  whenever  the  cough
is  severe.  Sometimes  molasses  may  be  substituted  for  the  sugar,  or
honey.

Syrupus  Corydallis  Compositus. Compound  Syrup  of  Turkey  Corn.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Root  of  Turkey  Corn,  coarsely  bruised,
two  pounds ;  the  Leaves  of  Twin-leaf  one  pound;  Blue  Flag  Root  one
pound;  Sheep  Laurel  Leaves  half  a  pound.  1.  Mix  the  articles
together ;  place  the  whole  four  pounds  and  a  half  in  a  convenient  vessel,
cover  them  with  Alcohol  of  76  per  cent.,  and  macerate  for  three  days.
Then  transfer  the  whole  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add


SrRUPi.  1231

Hot  Water  until  two  pints  and  four  fiuidounces  of  the  Alcoholic  Tincture
have  been  obtained,  which  retain  and  set  aside.  2.  Then  continue  the
percolation,  and  of  this  second  Solution  reserve  so  much  as  contains  a
sensible  amount  of  Spirit,  and  distil  or  evaporate  the  Alcohol  from  it.
3.  Continue  the  displacement  by  Hot  Water,  until  the  Solution  obtained
is  almost  tasteless,  and  boil  down  this  weaker  infusion  until,  when  added
to  the  second  Solution  after  the  evaporation  of  its  Alcohol,  it  will  make
thirteen  pints  and  a  half.  4.  To  these  two  Solutions  combined,  add
eighteen  pounds  of  Refined  Sugar,  and  dissolve  it  by  heat,  carefully
removing  any  scum  which  arises  as  it  comes  to  the  point  of  boiling;  and
if  it  exceeds  fifteen  pints  and  twelve  fiuidounces,  evaporate  to  that
quantity  with  constant  stirring.  Then  remove  from  the  fire,  and  when
nearly  cold  add  the  two  pints  and  four  fiuidounces  of  Alcoholic  Tincture
first  obtained  and  set  aside,  and  make  eighteen  pints  of  Syrup.  It  may
also  be  flavored  with  some  agreeable  aromatic  essence,  as  Sassafras,
Wintergreen,  Prickly  Ash  Berries,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  valuable  alterative  syrup,  and  is  used
with  much  success  in  syphilis,  scrofula,  liver  affections,  and  rheumatism.
The  iodide  of  potassium  may  be  added  to  it,  in  the  same  manner  as
usually  pursued  with  the  Compound  Syrup  of  Stillingia,  to  which  this  is
by  no  means,  second.  The  dose  is  a  fluidrachm,  three  or  four  times  a
day,  in  half  a  gill  of  water. — J.  K.

Some  twenty  years  since,  a  half-breed  Indian,  called  Ben  Smith,
in  the  State  of  New  York,  made  a  syrup,  which  gained  considerable
reputation  as  a  remedy  in  syphilitic  diseases,  and  which  sold  rapidly  for
three  dollars  per  bottle;  the  following  is  the  formula  for  its  preparation:
Take  of  Indian  Hemp,  (Apocyn,  Cann.),  Virginia  Sarsaparilla,  Inner
Bark  of  White  Pine,  each,  one  pound ;  Mezereon  four  ounces ;  Sheep
Laurel  half  a  pound ;  Water  four  gallons;  Sugar  eight  pounds.  Place
the  Plants  in  the  water,  boil  for  a  few  minutes,  and  then  gradually  eva-
porate, until  about  two  gallons  of  decoction  are  left,  then  strain,  and  add
the  Sugar.  To  each  quart  bottle  of  this  Syrup  he  added  forty  drops  of
Nitric  Acid,  and  twenty  grams  of  Tartar  Emetic  dissolved  in  a  sufficient
quantity  of  Spirits.  The  dose  was  a  wineglassful  three  times  a  day.  I
have  never  been  able  to  ascertain  the  true  botanical  character  of  the
Virginia  Sarsaparilla.  This  syrup  has  been  found  as  efficacious  in
syphilis,  when  prepared  without  the  tartar-emetic.

Syrupus  Ipecacuanha. Syrup  of  Ipecacuanha.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Ipecacuanha,  in  powder,  eight  ounces  Troy ;
Alcohol,  sp.  gr.  0.835,  Syrup,  of  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Add  the
Ipecacuanha  to  twelve  fiuidounces  of  the  Alcohol,  and  allow  it  to  stand
for  twelve  hours  ;  then  add  sufficient  Alcohol  to  make  the  mixture  of  the
consistence  of  Syrup,  and  introduce  the  whole  into  a  suitable  displacer,
in  which  it  gradually  settles  down  as  the  Alcohol  percolates ;  a  piece  of


1232  Pharmacy.

muslin  is  laid  on  the  surface,  and  when  it  has  settled  down  uniformly,
more  Alcohol  is  added  until  the  filtered  liquid  measures  half  a  gallon,
reserving  the  first  half  pint  that  comes  through ;  distil  and  evaporate  the
remainder  to  eight  fluidounces,  and  then  add  the  reserved  half  pint.
This  forms  a  Fluid  Extract  of  Ipecacuanha,  of  which  two  fluidounces
represent  one  ounce  Troy,  of  the  root.

To  four  pints  of  Syrup  add  eight  fluidounces  of  the  above  Fluid  Ex-
tract of  Ipecacuanha,  and  evaporate  the  Mixture  to  three  pints  ;  then
add  four  pints  of  Syrup,  and  one  pint  of  Water,  making  one  gallon  of
Syrup  of  Ipecacuanha.

History. — Owing  to  the  presence  probably  of  gum  and  coloring  matter,
the  Syrup  of  Ipecacuanha,  as  generally  prepared  by  diluted  alcohol,  is
very  liable  to  fermentation  ;  but  made  according  to  the  above  formula
of  Mr.  Joseph  Laidley,  it  contains  but  little,  if  any  alcohol,  possesses  all
the  medicinal  virtues  of  the  drug,  and  keeps  as  well  as  simple  syrup,
without  fermenting.  When  the  four  pints  of  syrup  are  added  to  the
fluid  extract,  should  it  not  be  perfectly  clear,  it  may  be  rendered  so  by
mixing  with  water  the  white  of  one  egg,  adding  it  to  the  syrup,  boiling
for  a  few  minutes  and  straining.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  is  emetic  and  expectorant;  it  is  used
principally  in  cases  of  children.  As  an  emetic  the  dose  for  an  adult  is
one  or  two  fluidounces ;  for  a  child  one  or  two  years  old,  one  or  two
fluidrachms  —  to  be  repeated  every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  till  it  ope-
rates. When  used  as  an  expectorant,  an  adult  may  take  one  or  two
fluidrachms  ;  a  child,  from  five  to  twenty  minims.

Mr.  A.  G.  Dunn  prepares  a  " Saccharated  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Ipecac-
uanha," which  he  considers  superior  to  any  other  preparation  of  the  drug;
it  is  made  as  follows  :  Bruise  the  Root  of  Ipecacuanha  four  ounces,  to  a
coarse  powder,  and  macerate  for  thirty  days  in  Diluted  Alcohol  sixteen
fluidounces,  shaking  it  occasionally;  then  filter  and  express.  The  tincture
thus  formed  is  to  be  evaporated  to  two  fluidounces,  and  then  mixed  with
Refined  Sugar,  eight  ounces  ;  lastly,  triturate  in  a  stone  mortar  until  it  is
entirely  dry.  This  preparation  has  the  peculiar  odor  and  taste  of  Ipe-
cacuanha, is  of  a  brownish-yellow  color,  is  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,
ether,  mucilage  of  gum  Arabic,  etc.,  is  of  uniform  strength,  and  agree-
able to  take. The  dose  is  the  same  as  of  the  powdered  root.

Syrupus  Lobelia. Syrup  of  Lobelia.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Vinegar  of  Lobelia  two  pints;  Sugar  four
pounds.  Dissolve  with  the  aid  of  heat,  not  to  exceed  180°,  and  continue
the  heat  for  three  hours,  removing  any  scum  which  may  form,  and  strain
while  hot.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  pleasant  expectorant  syrup,  and
notwithstanding  the  volatile  properties  of  lobelia  are  dissipated  by  heat,
this  syrup  will  be  found  sufficiently  active  for  practical  purposes  ;  the


Syrupi.  1233

long-continued  digestion  removes  the  peculiar,  disagreeable  taste  of  the
lobelia.  It  will  be  found  very  useful  in  infantile  cases  of  catarrh,  per-
tussis, croup,  pectoral  diseases,  to  produce  emesis,  and  to  brino-  the
system  under  the  relaxing  influence  of  lobelia.  The  dose  is  from  one
fluidrachm  to  half  a  fluidounce. — jV.  T.  Isgrigg.

Syrupus  Mitchells  Compositus.  Compound  Syrup  of  Partridge-
Berry. Mothers'  Cordial.

Preparation. — Take  of  Partridge-Berry  one  pound ;  Helonias  Root,
High  Cranberry  Bark,  Blue  Cohosh  Root,  of  each,  four  ounces.  Grind,
and  mix  the  articles  together  ;  place  the  whole  pound  and  three  quar-
ters in  a  convenient  vessel,  cover  them  with  fourth  proof  Brandy,  and
macerate  for  three  days.  Then  transfer  the  whole  to  a  displacement
apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Brandy,  until  three  pints  of  spirituous
tincture  have  been  obtained,  which  reserve.  Then  continue  the  dis-
placement with  Hot  Water  until  the  liquid  passes  tasteless,  add  to  this  two
pounds  of  Refined  Sugar,  and  evaporate  by  a  gentle  heat  to  five  pints  ;
remove  from  the  fire,  add  the  reserved  three  pints  of  Spirituous  Tincture,
and  flavor  with  Essence  of  Sassafras.  Strictly  speaking,  this  is  not  a
Syrup,  but  a  sweetened  Infusion,  yet  I  place  it  here,  as  being  nearly  in
its  appropriate  class.

Properties  and,  Uses.  —  This  preparation  is  a  uterine  tonic  and  anti-
spasmodic. It  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  the  functions  of  the
internal  reproductive  organs  are  deranged,  as  in  amenorrhea,  dysmen-
orrhea, menorrhagia,  leucorrhea,  and  to  overcome  the  tendency  to
habitual  abortion.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  four  fluidounces,  three  times
a  day.  Pregnant  females,  especially  those  of  a  delicate,  or  nervous
system,  will  find  it  an  advantage  to  take  one  or  two  doses  daily,  for
several  weeks  previous  to  parturition,  as  by  the  energy  it  imparts  to  the
uterine  nervous  system,  the  labor  will  be  very  much  facilitated,  beside
which,  it  frequently  removes  the  cramps  to  which  some  females  are
liable  during  the  latter  weeks  of  utero-gestation.  The  medicine  appears
to  exert  a  specific  influence  on  the  uterus. — J.  K.

A  preparation  called  the  "Parturient  Balm,"  has  also  been  used  and
recommended  in  the  above  diseases,  but  I  have  found  it  to  be  of  less
efficacy;  however,  as  some  practitioners  employ  it,  I  introduce  the  for-
mula for  its  preparation  at  this  place  :  Take  of  Blue  Cohosh  Root,
Spikenard  Root,  each,  four  pounds ;  Black  Cohosh  Root,  Partridge-
Berry  Herb,  Queen  of  the  Meadow  Root,  of  each,  two  pounds  ;  Ladies
Slipper  Root,  Comfrey  Root,  of  each,  one  pound.  Proceed  to  make  a
Syrup,  similar  to  the  directions  given  for  the  Compound  Syrup  of  Sar-
saparilla,  reserving  eight  pints  of  the  strongest  tincture  first  obtained,
usirj"-  sixty-four  pounds  of  Refined  Sugar,  and  making  eight  gallons  of
Syrup.  The  dose  of  this  is  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  three
or  four  times  a  day.
78


1234:  Pharmacy.

Syrupus  Phytolacca  Compositus. Compound  Syrup  of  Poke.

Preparation. — Take  of  Poke  Root,  and  Bark  of  American  Ivy,  (Am-
pelopsis  Quinq.),  each  coarsely  bruised,  one  pound ;  Black  Cohosh  Root
coarsely  bruised,  and  Sheep  Laurel  Leaves,  each,  half  a  pound.  1 .  Mix
the  articles  together  ;  place  the  whole  three  pounds  in  a  convenient
vessel,  cover  them  with  Alcohol  of  76  per  cent.,  and  macerate  for  three
days.  Then  transfer  the  whole  to  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradu-
ally add  Hot  Water,  until  one  pint  and  a  half  of  the  Alcoholic  tincture
passes,  which  retain  and  set  aside.  2.  Then  continue  the  percolation,
and  of  this  second  solution  reserve  so  much  as  contains  a  sensible  amount
of  Spirit,  and  distil  or  evaporate  the  Alcohol  from  it.  3.  Continue  the
displacement  by  Hot  Water,  until  the  solution  obtained  is  almost  tasteless,
and  boil  down  this  weaker  infusion  until,  when  added  to  the  second
solution  after  the  evaporation  of  its  Alcohol,  it  will  make  nine  pints.
4.  To  these  two  solutions  combined,  add  twelve  pounds  of  Refined
Sugar,  and  dissolve  it  by  heat,  carefully  removing  any  scum  which
arises  as  it  comes  to  the  point  of  boiling,  and  if  it  exceeds  ten  pints  and
a  half,  evaporate  to  that  quantity  with  constant  stirring.  Then  remove
from  the  fire,  and  when  nearly  cold,  add  the  pint  and  a  half  of  Alcoholic
tincture  first  obtained  and  set  aside,  and  make  one  gallon  and  a  half  of
Sj'rup.  Flavor  with  some  aromatic  essence,  as  Sassafras,  Winter-
green,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  is  an  excellent  alterative  and  anti-
syphilitic,  and  is  beneficial  in  syphilis,  scrofula,  and  rheumatism.  If
required,  Iodide  of  Potassium  may  be  added  to  it,  as  in  the  instance  of
Compound  Syrup  of  Stillingia.  The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful  three  or  four
times  a  day,  in  half  a  gill  of  water. — J.  K.

Syrupus  Pruni  Virginians. Syrup  of  Wild  Cherry  Bark.

Preparation. —  Take  of  Wild  Cherry  Bark,  in  coarse  powder,  five
ounces  ;  Refined  Sugar  two  pounds  ;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Moisten
the  Bark  thoroughly  with  Water,  let  it  stand  for  twenty-four  hours  in  a
close  vessel,  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,  and  pour  Water  gradually
upon  it  until  a  pint  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.  Add  to  this  the  Sugar,
in  a  bottle,  and  agitate  occasionally  until  it  is  dissolved. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  forms  a  handsome  tonic  and  sedative
syrup,  which  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where  wild  cherry  bark  is  indi-
cated or  desired. It  may  be  given  in  doses  of  half  a  fluidounce.

Syrupus  Rhei  et  Potass^e  Compositus.  Compound  Syrup  of  Rhubarb
and  Potassa. Neutralizing  Cordial.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  best  India  Rhubarb,  in  coarse  powder,  and
Bicarbonate  of  Potassa,  each,  one  pound ;  Cinnamon,  Golden  Seal,  of
each,  half  a  pound ;  Refined  Sugar  six  pounds  ;  Fourth  Proof  Brandy
two  gallons  ;  Oil  of  Peppermint  two  fuidrachms. Macerate  the  Rhu-


Syrupi.  1235

barb,  Potassa,  Cinnamon,  and  Golden  Seal,  in  the  Brandy  for  two  days,
then  express  the  tincture  with  strong  pressure,  and  add  to  it  the  Oil  of
Peppermint,  previously  dissolved  in  a  little  Alcohol.  Break  up  the  cake
or  compressed  residue  from  the  press,  and  place  it  in  a  displacement
apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Warm  Water,  until  the  strength  of  the
articles  is  exhausted.  Evaporate  this  solution  to  eight  pints,  and  while
the  liquor  is  still  hot  dissolve  in  it  the  Sugar.  Continue  the  evaporation,
if  necessary,  until  when  added  to  the  tincture  first  obtained,  it  will  make
three  gallons,  and  mix  the  two  solutions  together.  Strictly  Speaking,
this  is  not  a  Syrup,  but  a  sweetened  Tincture. —  W.  S.  M

Dr.  Hill  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  the  formula  by  which  he  pre-
pares this  syrup,  and  which  many  physicians  prefer  on  account  of  its
pleasantness  and  efficacy.  It  is  as  follows :  Take  of  best  India  Rhubarb,
in  coarse  powder,  and  pure  Carbonate  of  Potassa,  each,  two  ounces ;
Golden  Seal,  Cinnamon,  of  each,  one  ounce  ;  Refined  Sugar  four  pounds ;
Brandy  one  gallon;  Oil  of  Peppermint  twenty  minims.  Macerate  the
Rhubarb,  Golden  Seal,  and  Cinnamon,  in  half  a  gallon  of  the  Brandy
for  six  hours,  with  a  gentle  heat ;  then  transfer  the  mass  to  a  percolator
and  displace  with  the  remaining  half  gallon  of  Brandy.  The  remaining
strength,  if  there  be  any,  can  be  obtained  by  adding  Water  until  the
liquor  comes  off  tasteless.  To  this  add  the  Carbonate  of  Potassa,  Sugar,
and  Oil  of  Peppermint,  this  last  having  been  previously  rubbed  with  a
sufficient  quantity  of  the  Sugar  to  absorb  it  and  mix  the  two  liquors.
The  whole  of  the  active  properties  of  the  ingredients  may  be  obtained
with  more  certainty  by  using  Alcohol  76  per  cent.,  instead  of  Brandy,
owing  to  the  great  want  of  uniformity  in  the  quality  of  the  latter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  is  an  agreeable  laxative,  antacid,
and  tonic,  it  may  be  used  in  cases  of  obstinate  constipation,  acidity  of
stomach,  dyspepsia,  and  as  a  laxative  in  pregnancy  and  where  piles  are
present.  It  is  the  principal  remedy  employed  by  Eclectics  in  diarrhea,
dysentery,  cholera-morbus,  cholera-infantum,  and  in  the  same  diseases
as  the  Compound  Powder  of  Rhubarb.  The  dose  for  an  adult  is  a  table-
spoonful,  every  half  hour,  hour,  or  two  hours,  according  to  the  urgency
of  the  symptoms ;  for  a  child  in  proportion  to  its  age.

Strupus  Rumecis  Compositus.  Compound  Syrup  of  Yellow  Dock.
Scrofulous  Syrup.

Preparation.— Take  of  Yellow  Dock  Root  two  pounds ;  Bark  of  the
Root  of  False  Bittersweet  one  pound;  Bark  of  American  Ivy,  (Ampe-
lopsis  Quinq.),  and  Figwort,  (Scroph.  Mariland.),  of  each,  half  a  pound ;
Refined  Sugar  sixteen  pounds.  1.  Grind  and  mix  the  drugs  together,
place  the  whole  four  pounds  in  a  convenient  vessel,  cover  them  with
Alcohol  of  76  per  cent.,  and  macerate  for  two  days.  Then  transfer  the
whole  to  a  common  displacement  apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Hot
Water,  until  two  pints  have  been  obtained,  which  retain  and  set  aside.


1236  Pharmacy.

2.  Then  continue  the  percolation,  and  of  the  second  solution  reserve  so
much  as  contains  a  sensible  amount  of  Spirit,  and  distil  or  evaporate  the
Alcohol  from  it.  3.  Continue  the  displacement,  by  Hot  Water,  until
the  solution  obtained  is  almost  tasteless,  and  boil  down  this  weaker  infu-
sion till  it  begins  to  thicken,  or  until,  when  added  to  the  balance  remain-
ing of  the  second  portion,  after  the  evaporation  of  the  Alcohol,  it  will
make  twelve  pints.  4.  To  these  two  solutions  combined,  add  the  Sugar,
and  dissolve  by  heat,  carefully  removing  the  scum  which  arises  as  it
comes  to  the  point  of  boiling.  Then  if  it  exceeds  fourteen  pints,  evapo-
rate to  that  quantity  with  constant  stirring ;  remove  from  the  fire,  and
when  nearly  cold,  add  the  two  pints  of  Alcoholic  tincture  first  obtained
and  set  aside,  and  make  two  gallons  of  syrup.  Each  pint  will  contain
the  virtues  of  four  ounces  of  the  ingredients.  It  may  be  flavored  with
some  aromatic  essence.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  is  alterative  and  antiscrofulous,  and
is  extensively  and  successfully  used  in  the  treatment  of  scrofula,  all
scrofulous  affections,  and  many  cutaneous  diseases.  Iodide  of  potassium
is  frequently  added  to  it,  in  the  proportion  of  an  ounce  to  the  pint  of
syrup.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms,  three  times  a  day,  in
about  a  gill  of  water ;  or  when  the  iodide  is  added,  one  or  two  fluidrachms,
in  water.

Syrupus  Sanguinary. Syrup  of  Bloodroot.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Bloodroot,  in  coarse  powder,  eight  ounces;
Acetic  Acid  four  fiuidounces ;  Water  five  pints;  Refined  Sugar  two
pounds,  Troy.  Macerate  the  Bloodroot  for  three  days,  in  two  fiuidounces
of  the  Acetic  Acid,  and  a  pint  of  the  Water ;  then  transfer  to  a  perco-
lator, and  displace  with  the  remainder  of  the  Acetic  Acid  mixed  with
the  balance  of  the  Water.  Evaporate  by  means  of  a  water-bath,  to
eighteen  fiuidounces,  add  the  Sugar,  and  form  a  syrup.

History. — By  the  above  process  carefully  conducted,  the  root  will  be
exhausted,  and  a  syrup  of  a  deep  ruby  color  obtained,  opake  in  quantity,
but  transparent  in  thin  strata,  having  a  strongly  acrid  and  bitterish  taste.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where
Bloodroot  is  applicable,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  sixty  drops.  An  excel-
lent cough  mixture  is  composed  of  equal  parts  of  Syrup  of  Squill,  Syrup
of  Balsam  of  Tolu,  Syrup  of  Ipecacuanha,  Syrup  of  Bloodroot,  and
Paregoric ;  the  dose  of  which  is  a  teaspoonful  whenever  the  cough  is
troublesome.  Syrups  of  Wild  Cherry  Bark,  Bloodroot,  Balsam  of  Tolu,
and  Fluid  Extract  of  Stillingia,  combined  in  equal  proportions,  have  been
found  very  useful  in  chronic  bronchial  and  catarrhal  affections.

Syrupus  Sarsaparill^e  Compositus.  Compound  Syrup  of  Sarsapa-
rilla. Alterative  Syrup.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Hoots  of  Honduras  Sarsaparilla,  Yellow
Dock,  Burdock,  and  ground  Guaiacum  Wood,  each,  ten  ounces  ;  Bark  of


Syrupi.  1237

the  Root  of  Sassafras,  of  Southern  Prickly  Ash,  Elder  Flowers,  Blue  Flag
Root,  of  each,  eight  ounces.  1.  Grind  and  mix  the  articles  together,  place
the  whole  four  pounds  and  a  half  in  a  convenient  vessel,  cover  them  with
Alcohol  of  76  per  cent.,  and  macerate  for  two  days.  Then  transfer  the
whole  to  a  common  displacement  apparatus  or  percolator,  and  gradually
add  Hot  Water,  until  two  pints  have  been  obtained,  which  retain  and  set
aside.  2.  Then  continue  the  percolation,  and  of  the  second  solution  reserve
so  much  as  contains  a  sensible  amount  of  Spirit  and  distil  or  evaporate  the
alcohol  from  it.  3.  Continue  the  displacement,  by  Hot  Water,  until  the
solution  obtained  is  almost  tasteless,  and  boil  down  this  weaker  infusion
till  it  begins  to  thicken,  or  until,  when  added  to  the  balance  remaining
of  the  second  portion,  after  the  evaporation  of  the  alcohol,  it  will  make
twelve  pints.  4.  To  these  two  solutions  combined,  add  sixteen  pounds
of  Refined  Sugar,  and,  by  heat,  dissolve — carefully  removing  the  scum
which  arises  as  it  comes  to  the  point  of  boiling.  Then,  if  it  exceeds  that
quantity,  evaporate  the  Syrup  with  constant  stirring,  to  fourteen  pints,
remove  from  the  fire,  and  when  nearly  cold,  add  the  two  pints  of  tincture
first  obtained,  and  make  two  gallons  of  Syrup.  Each  pint  will  contain
the  virtues  of  four  ounces  of  the  ingredients.  It  may  be  flavored  with
essence  of  Wintergreen,  Sassafras,  or  Prickly- Ash  Berries,  etc.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  valuable  Syrup,  which  may  be
used  in  all  cases  where  an  alterative  is  indicated ;  in  chronic  hepatitis,
rheumatism,  syphilis,  scrofula,  cutaneous  diseases,  ulcers,  white  swell-
ing, rickets,  necrosis,  and  every  taint  of  the  system.  Some  physicians
add  an  ounce  of  the  Iodide  of  Potassium  to  every  pint  of  Syrup.  The
dose  is  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful,  three  or  four  times  a  day,
in  about  a  gill  of  water.

Syrupus  Scill^e. Syrup  of  Squill.

Preparation. — Take  of  Vinegar  of  Squill  a  pint ;  Refined  Sugar  two
pounds.  Add  the  Sugar  to  the  Vinegar  of  Squill,  dissolve  with  the  aid
of  heat,  removing  any  scum  which  may  form,  and  strain  the  solution
while  hot.—  U  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — Syrup  of  Squill  is  used  as  an  expectorant  in
cousrhs  and  catarrhs,  and  as  an  emetic  in  infantile  cases  of  catarrh,  and
other  pectoral  complaints.  It  is  frequently  given  in  combination  with
Tincture  of  Lobelia,  and  other  emetic  or  expectorant  agents.  The  dose
of  it  is  about  a  fiuidrachm.

Syrupus  Senega. Syrup  of  Seneka.

Preparation. — Take  of  Seneka,  in  coarse  powder,  four  ounces;  Alco-
hol half  a  pint;  Water  a  pint  and  a  half;  Refined  Sugar  fifteen  ounces.
Mix  the  Alcohol  and  Water,  pour  half  a  pint  of  the  liquid  on  the  Seneka,
and  allow  the  mixture  to  stand  for  twelve  hours ;  then  transfer  it  to  a
percolator,  and  gradually  pour  upon  it  the  remainder  of  the  menstruum,
When  the  liquor  has  ceased  to  pass,  evaporate  it  by  means  of  a  water-


1238  Pharmacy.

bath  to  half  a  pint,  filter,  and,  having  added  the  Sugar,  dissolve  with
the  aid  of  heat,  removing  any  scum  which  may  form,  and  strain  the  solu-
tion while  hot. —  U.  S.

A  still  better  plan  for  preparing  this  Syrup,  is  according  to  that  laid
down  for  Syrup  of  Ipecacuanha,  by  first  preparing  an  Alcoholic  Fluid
Extract,  and  adding  it  to  Simple  Syrup ;  by  this  method  the  separation  of
the  gum  and  other  matters  which  cause  a  tendency  to  fermentation,  is
entirely  avoided.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  stimulating  expectorant,  which  is
often  very  useful  in  pectoral  complaints.  It  is  frequently  combined  with
syrup  of  squill,  tincture  of  lobelia,  syrup  of  sanguinaria,  etc.  Its  dose
is  one  or  two  fluidrachms.

Sybupus  Stillingi^:. Syrup  of  Queen's  Hoot.

Preparation. — Take  of  Queen's  Root  three  pounds  ;  Prickly  Ash  Ber-
ries one  pound  and  a  half ;  Refined  Sugar  eighteen  pounds.  1.  Grind,
and  mix  the  articles  together ;  place  the  whole  four  pounds  and  a  half
in  a  convenient  vessel,  cover  them  with  Alcohol  of  76  per  cent.,  and
macerate  for  three  days.  Then  transfer  the  whole  to  a  displacement
apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Alcohol,  until  five  pints  of  the  Alcoholic
tincture  have  been  obtained,  which  retain  and  set  aside.  2.  Then  con-
tinue the  percolation  with  Hot  Water,  until  the  liquor  passes  almost
tasteless,  add  the  Sugar  to  it,  and  evaporate  by  gentle  heat  until  thirteen
pints  are  obtained ;  to  which  add  the  reserved  five  pints  of  Alcoholic
tincture,  and  make  eighteen  pints  of  Syrup.  It  may  be  flavored  with
Essence  of  Sassafras,  if  required.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  has  been  found  highly  beneficial  in  bron-
chial and  laryngeal  affections,  also  in  obstinate  cases  of  rheumatism,
and  wherever  a  stimulating  alterative  is  required.  The  dose  is  from  a
fluidrachm  to  half  a  fluidounce,  three,  four,  or  five  times  a  day,  accord-
ing to  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms. It  should  be  taken  in  water.

Syrupus  Stillingi^e  Compositus. Compound  Syrup  of  Queen's  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  Queen's  Root,  and  Root  of  Turkey-Corn,  each,
two  pounds  ;  Blue  Flag-root,  Elder  Flowers,  and  Pipsissewa  Leaves,  of
each,  one  pound ;  Coriander,  and  Prickly  Ash  Berries,  of  each,  half  a
pound.  1 .  Grind,  and  mix  the  articles  together  ;  place  the  whole  eight
pounds  in  a  convenient  vessel,  cover  them  with  Alcohol  of  76  per  cent.,
and  macerate  for  three  days.  Then  transfer  the  whole  to  a  displacement
apparatus,  and  gradually  add  Hot  Water  until  four  pints  of  the  Alcoholic
tincture  have  been  obtained,  which  retain  and  set  aside.  2.  Then  con-
tinue the  percolation,  and  of  this  second  solution  reserve  so  much  as
contains  a  sensible  amount  of  Spirit,  and  distil  or  evaporate  the  Alcohol
from  it.  3.  Continue  the  displacement  by  Hot  Water,  until  the  solution
obtained  is  almost  tasteless,  and  boil  down  this  weaker  infusion  until,
when  added  to  the  second  solution  after  the  evaporation  of  its  Alcohol,


Syeupi.  1239

it  will  make  twenty-four  pints.  4.  To  these  two  solutions  combined,  add
thirty-two  pounds  of  Refined  Sugdf ,  and  dissolve  it  by  heat,  carefully
removing  any  scum  which  arises  as  it  comes  to  the  point  of  boilino-;  and
if  it  exceeds  twenty-eight  pints,  evaporate  to  that  quantity,  with  constant
stirring.  Then  remove  from  the  fire,  and  whennnearly  cold  add  the  four
pints  of  reserved  Alcoholic  tincture  and  make  four  gallons  of  Syrup,
each  pint  of  which  will  be  equal  to  four  ounces  of  the  ingredients  in
medicinal  virtue.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  most  powerful  and  effective  alterative,
and  is  extensively  used  by  Eclectic  practitioners  in  all  syphilitic,  scrofu-
lous, osseous,  mercurial,  hepatic,  and  glandular  diseases  ;  or  in  every
case  where  an  alterative  is  indicated.  It  is  most  commonly  given  with
an  ounce  of  Iodide  of  Potassium  added  to  each  pint  of  the  syrup.  The
dose  is  a  fluidrachm,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  in  half  a  gill  of  water ;
but  where  the  Iodide  is  omitted,  the  dose  is  from  a  fluidrachm  to  a
fiuidounce,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  also  in  water.  This  is  considered
one  of  the  most  potent  Eclectic  remedies  in  all  chronic  diseases.

Syrupus  Tolutanus. Syrup  of  Tolu.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Tincture  of  Tolu  a  fiuidounce  and  a  half;
Refined  Sugar  two  and  a  half  pounds,  Troy  ;  Water  a  pint.  Mix  the
Tincture  with  one  pound  of  Sugar  in  a  shallow  dish,  and  evaporate  the
Alcohol  with  the  aid  of  a  gentle  heat,  or  allow  it  to  evaporate  sponta-
neously ;  then  add  the  remainder  of  the  Sugar,  and  dissolve  it  in  twelve
ounces  of  the  Water.  With  the  remaining  four  ounces  of  Water,  beat  up
the  white  of  one  Egg,  add  it  to  the  Syrup,  boil  for  one  or  two  minutes,
and  strain  through  a  Canton  flannel  bag.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  syrup  is  used  in  coughs,  and  to  impart  an
agreeable  flavor  to  mixtures;  the  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm,  to
two,  or  even  four  fluidrachms.

Syrupus  Zingiberis. Syrup  of  Ginger.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tincture  of  the  best  Jamaica  Ginger  two  fluid-
ounces;  Refined  Sugar  five  pounds;  Water  two  pints.  Mix  the  Tincture
with  two  pounds  of  Sugar  in  a  shallow  dish,  and  evaporate  the  Alcohol
with  the  aid  of  a  gentle  heat,  or  allow  it  to  evaporate  spontaneously  ;
then  add  the  remainder  of  the  Sugar,  and  dissolve  it  in  twenty-four
ounces  of  the  Water.  With  the  remaining  eight  ounces  of  the  Water,
beat  up  the  whites  of  two  Eggs,  add  it  to  the  Syrup,  boil  for  one  or  two
minutes,  and  strain  through  a  Canton  flannel  bag.

Properties  and  Uses. — Syrup  of  Ginger  is  used  as  a  warm  stomachic
addition  to  purgative,  tonic,  or  other  infusions  or  mixtures,  and  to  im-
part flavor  to  drinks.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm,  to  two,
three,  or  four  fluidrachms.


1240  Pharmacy.

TINCTURE.

Tinct&res.

Tinctures  are  officinal  preparations,  obtained  either  by  the  solution,
maceration,  digestion,  or  percolation  of  the  principles  of  certain  sub-
stances in  Alcohol,  or  by  the  simple  mixture  of  Alcohol  with  an  Acid  or
Alkaline  liquid.  They  are  Simple  tinctures  when  they  contain  the  active
principles  of  a  single  substance,  and  Compound  tinctures,  when  they  con-
tain those  of  several.  Occasionally,  Spirit  of  Ammonia  or  Ether  are  em-
ployed as  the  solvents,  furnishing  Ammoniated  tinctures,  and  Ethereal
tinctures.  Tinctures  are  also  prepared  by  means  of  gin,  brandy,  wine,
etc.,  as  the  solvent ;  the  former  are  termed  Spirituous  Tinctures,  and
those  with  wine,  Vinous  Tinctures,  or  Medicated  Wines.  When  the  prin-
ciple to  be  dissolved  is  insoluble  in  water,  rectified  spirit,  (alcohol  of
sp.  gr.  0.835,)  is  preferred  as  the  menstruum;  when  it  is  soluble  in
both  alcohol  and  water,  diluted  or  proof  spirit  is  preferred.  The  former
is  applicable  to  resins,  guaiacum,  camphor,  and  the  essential  oils,  in  which
the  presence  of  water  would  interfere  with  the  solvent  power  of  the
alcohol ;  the  latter  is  proper  where  the  articles  contain  extractive,  tan-
nin, gum  united  with  resin,  or  essential  oil.

In  preparing  Tinctures,  as  a  general  rule,  the  medicine  should  be  in
the  dry  state,  and  very  finely  pulverized  ;  it  should  first  be  moistened
with  the  liquid,  after  which  the  whole  quantity  may  be  added.  There
are,  however,  some  exceptions  to  this  rule,  as  for  instance,  where  the
powder,  by  agglutination,  presents  an  obstacle  to  the  action  of  them  en-
struum  :  in  this  case,  the  substance  to  be  acted  upon  should  be  coarsely
bruised,  sliced,  or  pulverized.  It  is  recommended  that,  when  several
substances  of  various  solubilities  are  employed,  they  be  added  succes-
sively  to  the  spirit;  those  least  soluble  first,  those  most  so  last ;  as  other-
wise the  liquid  might  become  saturated  with  the  ingredient  for  which  it
has  the  strongest  affinity,  and  thus  be  rendered  incapable  of  dissolving
a  due  proportion  of  the  others.

Tinctures  prepared  by  maceration  or  digestion  require  to  be  kept  in
well-stopped  vessels  in  order  to  prevent  the  evaporation  of  alcohol ;  to
be  frequently  shaken  during  the  maceration  or  digestion,  which  should
be  continued,  at  ordinary  temperatures,  for  a  period  of  two  weeks :  if
prepared  by  digestion  a  shorter  time  is  required.  They  may  then  be
expressed,  if  required,  and  filtered,  though  some  are  in  the  habit  of
allowing  the  dregs  to  remain,  on  the  supposition  that  it  contributes  to
maintain  the  uniformity  of  strength,  and  prevent  any  precipitation  that
might  otherwise  ensue  ;  but  this  is  an  error.

The  preparation  of  tinctures  by  percolation  or  displacement,  answers
very  well  for  small  operations,  but  is  scarcely  adapted  in  cases  where
any  large  quantity  of  tincture  is  required,  and  is  not  so  excellent  a  mod*
for  general  purposes  as  that  of  maceration,  unless  skillfully  executed  by
persons  experienced  in  the  proper  method  of  conducting  it.


TlNCTURJE.  1241

It  has,  likewise,  been  recommended  to  suspend  in  the  solvent,  imme-
diately under  its  surface,  the  solid  matter  in  powder  or  bruised,  and
contained  loosely  in  a  bag,  raising  it  occasionally  above  the  surface  of
the  liquor,  allowing  it  to  drain,  and  again  immersing  it.  It  is  said  that
the  period  of  maceration  is  much  shortened  in  this  way.  As  the  upper
portion  of  liquid  becomes  heavier  by  impregnation  with  the  substances
dissolved,  it  falls  to  the  bottom,  and  a  constant  current  is  thus  estab-
lished, which  continues  until  the  liquid  is  saturated,  or  the  solid  substance
exhausted.

Preserved  vegetable  juices,  or  the  tinctures  of  the  expressed  juices  of
various  plants,  are  prepared  by  adding  alcohol  of  0.838  one  part,  to  four
parts  of  the  juice,  after  this  last  has  stood  for  twenty-four  hours,  and
then  filtering  another  period  of  twenty-four  hours  after  the  addition  of
the  alcohol.  This  preserves  the  juice,  and  at  the  same  time  precipitates
the  inert  mucilaginous  matter.

Tinctures  should  always  be  kept  in  accurately  stopped  bottles,  as,
otherwise,  the  evaporation  of  the  alcohol,  by  increasing  their  strength,
might  be  attended  with  serious  consequences.

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Win.  S.  Merrell,  of  this  city,  an  experienced
and  practical  pharmaceutist,  who  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  the  fol-
lowing observations  on  this  subject :

"A  Tincture,  in  the  pharmaceutical  sense,  is  the  solution  of  some
medicinal  substance  in  Alcohol,  either  pure  or  diluted,  and  is  mostly
employed  to  separate  the  more  active  Medicinal  principles  of  vegetables
from  their  woody  fiber  and  other  nearly  inert  substances,  as  starch,  gum,
and  mucilage,  which  are  not  soluble  in  that  menstruum,  and  present  them
in  a  liquid  form.  The  greater  part  of  the  more  active  proximate  princi-
ples of  vegetables  are  soluble  in  strong  Alcohol,  but  many  of  them,  espe-
cially in  their  native  combinations,  are  also  soluble  in  Water,  and  a  few,
of  an  extractive  or  saline  character,  are  more  soluble  in  the  latter  than
in  the  former  menstruum.  And  in  most  cases  an  admixture  of  Water
facilitates  the  process  of  tincturing,  by  softening  the  mucilage  and  other
principles  not  soluble  in  Alcohol,  thus  enabling  the  latter  to  penetrate  the
substance,  and  act  more  readily.  In  these  cases,  therefore,  a  dilute
spirit,  or  mixture  of  alcohol  and  water,  should  be  used  ;  and  the  proper
proportions  of  such  mixture  for  tincturing  the  different  articles  of  the
Materia  Medica,  becomes  an  important  lesson  to  be  learned  by  the  apoth-
ecary and  the  physician.

In  the  tinctures  recognized  as  officinal,  in  the  U.  S.  Dispensatory,  the
strength  of  the  solvent  is,  in  most  cases,  indicated  with  sufficient  accu-
racy,"but  in  the  progress  of  reform,  a  great  number  of  medicines  have
been  brought  into  use,  in  respect  to  which  we  have  hitherto  had  no  such
guide.  Some  general  suggestions  may,  therefore,  be  useful  to  the  less
experienced  practitioner.


1242  Pharmacy.

In  all  cases  it  is  proper  to  use  as  dilute  a  spirit  as  is  adequate  to  obtain
the  strongest  practical  tincture,  provided  it  be  sufficiently  strong  to  pre-
vent fermentation,  and  preserve  the  solution  from  decomposition  and
change ;  for  the  alcoholic  stimulant,  in  itself  considered,  is  in  most  cases
undesirable.  The  common  alcohol  of  commerce,  marked  76  per  cent.,
is  sufficiently  strong  for  almost  any  of  these  preparations.  It  is  strono-
enough  to  dissolve  the  resins,  such  as  guaiacum,  tolu,  etc.,  and  also  the
essential  oils,  in  the  proportions  directed,  and  this  is  all  that  is  required.

The  dilute  alcohol  of  the  Dispensatory,  is  nearly  represented  by  a
mixture  of  the  two  parts  common  alcohol,  of  76  per  cent.,  and  one  part
water,  which  is  about  the  right  strength  for  the  majority  of  the  vegetable
tinctures.  Those  roots,  however,  of  which  the  medicinal  virtues  consists
mostly  of  a  resinoid,  as  podophyllum,  leptandra,  and  many  others,  and
also  those  vegetables  containing  much  essential  oil,  require  a  solvent
somewhat  stronger  than  this,  and  either  the  76  per  cent,  alcohol,  or  that
reduced  but  little  below  this  standard,  say  to  the  strength  of  fourth  proof
spirits,  should  be  used.

On  the  other  hand,  medicines  which  are  almost  wholly  of  an  extractive
character,  as  aloes,  and  others  whose  medicinal  principles  are  soluble  in
water,  require  very  dilute  alcohol  to  tincture  them,  (see  Art.  Aloes,  in
U.  S.  Disp.,)  as  the  only  use  of  the  spirit  in  this  case  is  to  precipitate
and  render  insoluble  the  mucilage,  and  to  prevent  the  tincture  from
spoiling.  Gum  Kino  should  be  tinctured  in  dilute  alcohol,  and  not  in
strong,  as  directed  in  the  Pharmacopoeias ;  for  if  prepared  in  alcohol  of
officinal  strength,  it  will  rapidly  gelatinize  on  standing,  which  will  not
be  the  case  if  prepared  with  spirit  somewhat  diluted,  and  kept  in  well
closed  vessels.

In  the  preparation  of  tinctures  from  such  vegetables  as  require  dilute
spirit,  the  process  may  be  much  facilitated,  if  not  rendered  more  perfect,
by  first  wetting  the  ground  or  powdered  substance  with  the  proportion
of  water  that  is  admissible,  say  one-third.  Apply  the  water  hot,  and
after  digesting  a  short  time,  sufficient  to  expand  the  ligneous  fiber,  and
soften  or  dissolve  the  gum,  mucilage,  etc.,  add  the  required  proportion
of  Alcohol,  which  can  thus  readily  reach  and  dissolve  the  active  princi-
ples soluble  in  it,  while  at  the  same  time,  it  precipitates  the  dissolved
mucilage,  etc. For  example  :

Tinctura  Cimicifug^e. Tincture  of  Black  Cohosh.

Tfc Black  Cohosh  Root, four  ounces.

Boiling  Water, eight  fluidounces.

Alcohol,  76  per  cent one  pint  and  a  half.

Powder  or  bruise  the  root,  and  pour  the  boiling  water  upon  it,  and  let
it  digest  for  two  hours ;  then,  when  sufficiently  cool,  transfer  it  to  the
bottle  in  which  it  is  to  be  kept,  and  add  the  alcohol.  Let  it  stand  three
days,  frequently  shaken,  and  filter  for  use.


Tincture.  1243

[I  differ  somewhat  with  Mr.  Mcrrell's  method  of  preparing  this  tinc-
ture. As  the  virtue  exists  principally  in  the  resin  and  oil,  there  is  no
necessity  for  the  addition  of  any  Water  to  the  preparation,  and  I  have
obtained  much  better  results  from  the  tincture,  with  strong  alcohol,  as  I
always  prepare  it,  than  from  the  diluted  tincture. — K.]

Acting  upon  this  principle,  I  many  years  ago  made  what  I  consider
an  improvement  in  the  mode  of  preparing  the  tincture  of  opium,  which
should  be  adopted  by  every  physician  and  apothecary.  The  directions
in  the  old  Pharmacopoeias  are,  to  slice  the  opium,  and  put  it  in  the  bottle
with  dilute  alcohol,  and  macerate  with  frequent  shaking,  for  two  weeks  ;
but  if  the  opium  be  hard  and  compact,  many  small  lumps  will  not  be
dissolved  for  a  long  time.  I  have  examined  the  dregs  of  laudanum  after
standing  six  months  under  the  tincture,  and  have  found  in  them  still
impenetrated  pieces  of  pure  opium.  The  consequence  of  such  a  mode
of  preparation  is,  that  the  tincture  will  at  first  be  quite  weak,  and  will
continue  to  increase  in  strength  until  near  the  last,  when  it  will  be  far
above  the  standard  strength,  and  liable  to  produce  dangerous  conse-
quences. To  avoid  this  objection,  the  later  editions  of  the  U.  S.  Phar-
macopoeias direct  that  the  opium  be  first  dried  and  powdered  ;  but  this
adds  one-fourth  to  the  expense,  if  the  opium  be  purchased  ready  pow-
dered, and  takes  time,  trouble  and  labor,  which  the  physician  cannot
often  spare,  to  dry  and  powder  it  himself,  and  hence  it  is  seldom  done.

The  whole  difficulty  may  be  avoided  by  the  following  method  :  Take
of  good  Turkey  Opium,  1200  grains,  (about  2|  ounces  avoirdupois.  This
is  the  proportion  required  by  the  U.  S.  and  most  of  the  European  Dis-
pensatories, although  most  of  the  laudanum  sold  in  the  shops  is  only  the
strength  of  one  ounce  avoirdupois  to  the  pint).  Slice  the  opium  and  pour
over  it  half  a  pint  (g  viii.)  boiling  water,  and  work  it  with  the  pestle  or
hand  until  it  is  dissolved  into  a  perfect  emulsion,  and  no  lumps  can  be
felt  in  it,  which  is  done  in  a  very  few  minutes ;  then  pour  it  into  the
bottle,  and  with  two  ounces  more  of  warm  water  rinse  your  vessels,
pestle,  and  hands,  and  add  this  to  the  above,  and  then  add  twenty  fluid-
ounces  of  common  alcohol,  76  per  cent. — Shake  it  well.  In  this  manner
a  quart,  or  any  other  quantity  of  laudanum  can  be  made  in  half  an  hour,
and  in  twenty-four  hours  it  will  be  of  full  and  uniform  strength.  In
making  each  subsequent  batch,  the  dregs  of  the  former  one  should  be
poured  out  upon  a  paper  filter  in  a  funnel,  and  the  alcohol  for  the  new
batch  be  percolated  through  it,  thus  preserving  all  the  strength  of  this
costly  drug.  I  find  that  the  Edinburgh  College  have  in  the  latter  edi-
tions of  their  Dispensatory,  adopted  a  plan  somewhat  similar  to  the  above,
but  much  more  troublesome  and  wasteful.

In  the  same  manner  we  may  advantageously  make  the  tinctures  of
the  o-um-resins,  as  Myrrh,  Assafetida,  etc.;  but  in  these  cases  a  smaller
proportion  of  water  must  be  employed,  unless  it  be  counterbalanced  by


1244  Pharmacy.

using  the  strong  officinal  alcohol,  as  the  proper  solvent  for  these  gums
is  a  stronger  spirit  than  that  required  for  opium."

Tinctura.  Aconiti  Foliorum. Tincture  of  Aconite  Leaves.

Preparation. — Take  of  Aconite,  dried  Leaves,  four  ounces ;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Aconite,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  an  apparatus  for  displacement,
and  gradually  pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered
liquor  are  obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tincture  of  Aconite  Leaves  possesses  all  the
properties  of  Aconitum  Napellus,  and  may  be  used  wherever  the  drug
is  indicated,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  thirty  drops.  It  should  not  be  con-
founded with  the  tincture  of  the  root,  which  is  a  much  more  powerful
preparation.

Tinctura  Aconiti  Radicis. Tincture  of  Aconite  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  Aconite  Root,  in  fine  powder,  a  pound  ;  Alco-
hol two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express  strongly,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  macerating  a  pound  of  pow-
dered Aconite  Root  with  a  pint  of  Alcohol  for  four  days,  then  placing
the  mixture  in  a  percolator,  and  adding  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered
liquor  are  obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  much  stronger  preparation  than  the
tincture  of  the  leaves,  and  care  should  be  employed  not  to  use  the  two
tinctures  indiscriminately.  It  may  be  used  for  the  same  purposes,  but
in  smaller  doses,  commencing  with  three  drops  in  a  teaspoonful  of  water,
and  gradually  increasing  it  to  ten  or  twelve  drops.

Tinctura  Aloes. Tincture  of  Aloes.

Preparation. — Take  of  Aloes,  in  powder,  one  ounce ;  extract  of  Liq-
uorice three  ounces;  Alcohol  half  a  pint;  Distilled  Water  a  pint  and  a
half. Macerate  for  fourteen  days  and  filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  a  cathartic  and  tonic,  but  is  seldom
used  on  account  of  its  unpleasant  taste  ;  aloes  being  preferred  in  the
form  of  pill.  As  a  cathartic,  the  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  a
fiuidounce  and  a  half.

Tinctura  Aloes  et  Myrrh^e.  Tincture  of  Aloes  and  Myrrh.  Elixir
Proprietatis.

Preparation. —  Take  of  Aloes,  in  powder,  three  ounces;  Saffron  two
ounces;  Tincture  of  Myrrh  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  and
filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  tonic,  purgative,  and  emmena-
gogue ;  it  has  been  beneficially  employed  in  chlorosis,  and  other  abnor-


Tincture.  1245

mal  conditions  of  the  female  system,  connected  with  derangement  of
the  menstrual  secretion,  and  with  constipation.  It  will  likewise  be  found
useful  as  a  stimulating  laxative,  in  cold,  languid  habits,  independently
of  any  menstrual  difficulty. The  dose  is  one  or  two  fiuidrachms.

Tinctura  Arali^e  Spinos^. Tincture  of  Prickly  Elder.

Preparation. — Take  of  Prickly  Elder  Bark,  in  powder,  three  ounces  ;
Diluted  Alcohol  one  pint.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
powdered  Bark  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  twenty-four
hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon
it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  one  pint  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  tonic,  stimulant,  and  alterative ;
and  is  efficacious  in  chronic  rheumatism,  pulmonary  affections,  colic,
flatulence,  cholera-morbus,  and  Asiatic  cholera.  It  is  useful  in  syphilis,
in  combination  with  the  Tincture  of  Turkey-Corn.  During  the  preva-
lence of  cholera  in  1849-50-51,  it  was  added  to  emetic  and  cathartic
medicines,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  any  tendency  toward  excessive
discharges  from  the  bowels.  It  also  serves  as  a  local  stimulating  appli-
cation, when  properly  diluted  with  strong  infusion  of  Golden  Seal,  in
cases  of  chronic  ophthalmia.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  drops,
three  or  four  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Arnic/e. Tincture  of  Leopard' s-bane.

Preparation. — Take  of  Arnica  flowers  two  ounces;  Diluted  Alcohol  a
pint. Macerate  for  one  week,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
flowers  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  twenty-four
hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon
it  Diluted  Alcohol,  until  one  pint  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  principally  used  as  a  local
application  to  sprains,  bruises,  wounds,  etc.;  but  it  may  also  be  used
internally  in  all  cases  where  Arnica  would  be  applicable.  The  dose  is
from  ten  to  thirty  drops.

Tinctura  Assafcetid^e. Tincture  of  Assafetida.

Preparation. — Take  of  Assafetida  four  ounces  ;  Alcohol  two  pints.
Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  and  filter  through  paper. —  U  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  all  the  virtues  of  assa-
fetida. The  dose  is  from  thirty  to  sixty  drops.  Added  to  water,  the
resin  separates,  and  the  solution  becomes  milky.

Off.  Prep. — Enema  Assafcetidae  Composita.

Tinctura  Assafcetid.e  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Assafetida.

Preparation. — Take  of  Assafetida,  Lupulin,  Stramonium  Seec  bruised,
Valerian  Root,  in  powder,  each,  one  ounce;  Alcohol  three  pints.  Mace-
rate for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.


1246  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  used  principally  in  epilepsy;
though  it  will  be  found  useful  in  hysteria,  chorea,  and  other  derange-
ments of  the  nervous  system.  The  dose  is  a  fluidrachm,  repeated
every  two  or  three  hours,  in  severe  cases  ;  and  in  ordinary  cases,  three
times  a  day,  to  be  taken  in  water,  tea,  or  wine. — J.  K.

Tinctura  Belladonna. Tincture  of  Belladonna.

Preparation. — Take  of  recently  dried  Belladonna  Leaves  four  ounces;
Diluted  Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and
filter  through  paper.

This.  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Belladonna,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  all  the  virtues  of  Bel-
ladonna, when  prepared  from  the  recently  dried  leaves.  The  dose  is
from  five  to  thirty  drops.  When  made  from  the  imported  leaves,  it  is  less
to  be  relied  upon  than  the  extract,  on  account  of  their  uncertain  strength.

Tinctura  Benzoini  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Benzoin.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Benzoin  three  ounces;  Purified  Storax  two
ounces;  Balsam  of  Tolu  one  ounce;  powdered  Aloes  half  an  ounce;
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  and  filter  through
paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  has  been  known  under  various
names,  as  Balsamum  Traumaticum,  Baume  de  Commandeur,  Wade's
Balsam,  Friar's  Balsam,  Jesuit's  Drops,  etc.,  and  which  is  used  as  a
stimulating  expectorant  in  chronic  catarrhal  affections,  and  as  a  local
application  to  indolent  ulcers.  The  dose  is  from  thirty  drops  to  two
fiuidrachms.  Turlington's  Balsam,  which  is  a  popular  remedy  in  this
country,  is  made  of — Benzoin  twelve  ounces;  Storax  four  ounces;  Soco-
trine  Aloes  one  ounce;  Peruvian  Balsam  two  ounces;  Myrrh  one  ounce;
Angelica  root  half  an  ounce;  Balsam  of  Tolu  four  ounces;  Extract  of
Liquorice  four  ounces;  Alcohol  eight  pints.  Digest  for  ten  days  and
strain. It  is  an  improper  application  to  fresh  wounds.

Tinctura  Camphors. Tincture  of  Camphor.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Camphor  four  ounces;  Alcohol  two  pints.
Dissolve  the  Camphor  in  the  Alcohol. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  stimulant  and  antispasmodic.
It  is  used  externally  as  an  anodyne  embrocation  in  gouty  and  rheumatic
pains,  chilblains,  and  in  the  inflammation  resulting  from  sprains  and
bruises.  Internally,  it  is  used  for  various  purposes,  or  wherever  a
stimulating  or  antispasmodic  action  is  required.  The  dose  is  from  five
to  sixty  drops,  first  added  to  Sugar,  and  then  mixed  with  Water.


TlNCTURiE.  1247

Tinctura  Camphors  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Camphor.
Rheumatic  Tincture. Rheumatic  Drops  or  Liniment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Camphor  one  pound;  Oil  of  Origanum,  Oil
of  Hemlock,  of  each,  half  a  pound;  Oil  of  Sassafras,  Oil  of  Cajeput,  of
each,  two  ounces;  Oil  of  Turpentine  one  ounce;  Capsicum  four  ounces;
Alcohol  one  gallon. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  exceedingly  efficacious  as  an  external
application,  in  almost  every  painful  affection ;  and  is  of  advantage  in
chronic  rheumatism,  pains  in  various  parts  of  the  system,  bruises,
sprains,  chilblains,  contusions,  lameness,  numbness,  white  swelling,  and
other  swellings,  etc.  In  ordinary  cases  apply  two  to  four  teaspoonfuls
to  the  affected  part,  and  rub  it  well  by  the  fire  ;  and  apply  warm  flannel
over  the  region  of  the  affected  part,  several  times  a  day.  Internally,
take  twenty  drops  on  Sugar;  but  in  severe  and  obstinate  cases,  after
bathing  as  above  directed,  apply  an  additional  piece  of  flannel,  which
must  be  kept  constantly  wet  with  the  drops,  until  relieved.  When
applied  to  the  teeth,  wet  a  small  quantity  of  cotton,  and  introduce  it  into
the  decaying  teeth ;  if  the  face  is  swollen  bathe  with  it  likewise. — J.  K.

Tinctura  Cannabis  Indict. Tincture  of  India  Hemp.

Preparation. — Take  of  Purified  Extract  of  India  Hemp  half  a  drachm;
Alcohol  onefiuidounce. Dissolve  the  Extract  in  the  Alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  powerful  sedative  narcotic,  which
has  been  used  in  neuralgia,  cholera,  and  other  symptoms  where  the
India  Hemp  has  been  recommended,  with  much  success.  The  dose  is
five  drops,  gradually  increased  to  twenty  or  forty,  according  to  its  in-
fluence.

Tinctura  Cantharidis. Tincture  of  Spanish  Flies.

Preparation. — Take  of  Spanish  Flies,  bruised,  an  ounce;  Diluted  Alco-
hol two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through
paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Flies,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  them  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  them  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  the  best  form  for  the  internal  adminis-
tration of  Cantharides,  in  chronic  gonorrhea,  gleet,  amenorrhea,  and
some  urinary  derangements.  Externally,  it  is  sometimes  used  as  a  rube-
facient, but  care  should  be  taken  to  avoid  its  vesicating  action.  The
dose  is  from  twenty  to  sixty  drops,  repeated  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Capsici. Tincture  of  Cayenne  Pepper.

Preparation. — Take  of  Cayenne  Pepper  an  ounce;  Diluted  Alcohol
two  pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  and  filter  through  paper.


1248  Pharmacy.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Cayenne  Pepper,  in  Powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  putting  it  into  a
percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol,  until  two  pints
of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained. —  JJ.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tincture  of  Cayenne  Pepper  is  a  useful  and
permanent  stimulant,  and  may  be  administered  in  low  states  of  the
system  with  great  gastric  insensibility,  as  in  typhus  fevers  and  scarlatina
maligna,  likewise  in  the  cases  of  drunkards.  Diluted  with  some  muci-
laginous fluid,  it  forms  a  useful  gargle,  and  applied  to  the  relaxed  uvula
by  means  of  a  camel's  hair  pencil,  it  frequently  affords  relief;  it  is  also
an  excellent  application  to  the  eye  in  cases  of  chronic  ophthalmia.  It  is
frequently  applied  locally,  with  advantage,  in  cases  of  swellings,  rheu-
matic pains,  partial  paralysis,  atrophied  muscles,  etc.  The  dose  is  from
ten  to  sixty  drops  in  water,  three,  four,  or  five  times  a  day,  according  to
the  urgency  of  the  case.

Tinctura  Cardamomi. Tincture  of  Cardamom.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Cardamom,  bruised,  four  ounces;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Cardamom,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  aromatic  and  carminative;
and  is  useful  in  mild  colic,  flatulency,  nausea,  gastric  debility,  etc.;  it  is
also  advantageously  added  as  an  agreeable  aromatic  to  tonic  and  pur-
gative mixtures,  tinctures,  infusions,  etc.  The  dose  is  one  or  two
fluidrachms.

Tinctura  Cardamomi  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Cardamom.

Preparation. — Take  of  Cardamom,  bruised,  six  drachms;  Caraway,
bruised,  two  drachms;  Cinnamon,  bruised,  five  drachms;  Raisins,  deprived
of  their  seeds,  five  ounces ;  Cochineal,  bruised,  a  drachm;  Diluted  Alco-
hol two  pints  and  a  half.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and
filter  through  paper. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  agreeable  aromatic  tincture,  and
is  used  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  Tincture  of  Cardamom,  and  in  the
same  doses.

Tinctura  Castorei. Tincture  of  Castor.

Preparation. — Take  of  Castor,  bruised,  two  ounces;  Alcohol  two  pints.
Macerate  for  seven  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  should  always  be  prepared  from
the  Russian  castor,  if  possible ;  its  properties  are  the  same  as  the  castor,


Tincture.  1249

in  substance,  and  it  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  thirty  minims  to  two
fiuidrachms.

Tinctura  Castorei  Ammoniata. Ammoniated  Tincture  of  Castor.

Preparation. — Take  of  Castor,  bruised,  two  ounces  and  a  half;  Assa-
fetida,  in  small  fragments,  ten  drachms;  Spirit  of  Ammonia,  two  pints
(Imperial  Measure).  Digest  for  seven  days  in  a  well  closed  vessel ;
strain,  and  strongly  express  the  residuum,  and  filter. — Ed.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  active  stimulant  and  antispasmodic,
applicable  to  hysterical  and  nervous  affections  unattended  with  inflam-
matory symptoms,  and  severe  spasm  of  the  stomach.  It  may  be  given
in  doses  of  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fiuidrachms.

Tinctura  Catechu. Tincture  of  Catechu.

Preparation. — Take  of  Catechu  three  ounces ;  Cinnamon,  bruised,  two
ounces;  Diluted  Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,
and  filter  through  paper. —  U.  8.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  astringent  tincture,  useful  in
chronic  diarrhea,  dysentery,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to
three  fiuidrachms,  which  may  be  given  in  sweetened  water,  some  muci-
laginous liquid,  or  in  Port  wine.  On  long  keeping  it  sometimes  gela-
tinizes, when  it  becomes  unfit  for  use.

Tinctura  Caulophylli  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Blue
Cohosh.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Blue  Cohosh  Root,  in  powder,  two  ounces;
Ergot,  Water  Pepper,  of  each,  bruised,  one  ounce ;  Oil  of  Savin  half  a
fuidounce;  Alcohol  one  pint  and  a  half.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,
express  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
plants  with  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  then
transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  it  Alcohol
until  twenty-three  fluidounces  and  a  half  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained,
to  which  add  the  Oil  of  Savin.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  emmenagogue  tincture,  very
useful  in  amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  and  other  uterine  affections.  The
dose  is  a  fluidrachm  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Cimicifug^e  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Black
Cohosh.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Saturated  Tincture  of  Black  Cohosh  four
fluidounces;  Saturated  Tincture  of  Bloodroot  two  fluidounces;  Saturated
Tincture  of  Poke  Root  one fuidounce. Mix  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  valuable  alterative  and  expectorant,
and  appears  to  exert  a  specific  influence  on  the  lungs,  rendering  the
breathino-  easy,  diminishing  the  frequency  of  the  pulse,  and  the  genera]
°79


1250  Pharmacy.

excitability  of  the  system.  It  is  used  in  pulmonary  affections,  hemop-
tysis, hepatic  diseases,  dyspepsia,  "aryngitis,  etc.  The  dose  is  from
half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm  every  two  or  three  hours,  according
to  the  indications.  A  very  slight  degree  of  nausea  produced  and  main-
tained by  it,  will  be  found  to  result  in  the  most  decided  benefit. — J.  K.

Tinctura  Cinchona. Tincture  of  Peruvian  Bark.

Preparation. — Take  of  Peruvian  Bark,  in  powder,  six  ounces;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Bark  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for  forty-eio-ht  hours,
then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  it
Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  chiefly  used  as  an  adjunct  to
other  preparations  of  bark  or  solutions  of  quinia.  It  may  be  given  in
the  dose  of  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms.  However,  it  is  seldom  used
alone.

Tinctura  Cinchona  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Peruvian
Bark.

Preparation.- — Take  of  Calisaya  Bark,  in  powder,  four  ounces;  Bitter
Orange  Peel,  bruised,  three,  ounces ;  Virginia  Snakeroot,  in  moderately
fine  powder,  six  drachms ;  Saffron,  chopped,  two  drachms;  Cochineal,
bruised,  a  drachm;  Good  French  Brandy  twenty  fluidounces.  Macerate
for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  same  dry  materials,  by
beating  them  well  together,  moistening  them  thoroughly  with  the
Brandy,  allowing  the  mixture  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  trans-
ferring it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  it  Brandy,  until
twenty  fluidounces  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

History . — This  preparation  is  generally  known  by  the  name  of  ffuxham's
Tincture  of  Bark.  It  is  commonly  prepared  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  instead
of  Brandy,  but  I  have  introduced  Brandy  as  the  solvent,  more  espe-
cially on  account  of  the  preparation  made  from  it,  called  Ferrated
Tincture  of  Peruvian  Bark.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  tincture  is  an  excellent  stomachic  cordial,
and  may  be  used  wherever  a  mild  tonic  of  this  character  is  desired.
The  dose  is  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms.

Tinctura  Cinchona  Ferrata. Ferrated  Tincture  of  Peruvian  Bark.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Compound  Tincture  of.  Peruvian  Bark
one  pint;  Hydrated  Sesquioxide  of  Iron,  dried  at  a  temperature  not
exceeding  130°  F.,four  drachms;  Ammonio-citrate  of  Iron  two  hundred
and  fifty -six  grains.  To  the  compound  Tincture  add  the  Hydrated  Ses-
quioxide, and  digest,  until  all  the  Cincho-tannin,  whether  pure,  oxidized,
or  combined,  is  completely  eliminated. Then  filter  and  wash  the  Tan-


Tincture.  1251

nate  and  excess  of  Oxide  with  Boiling  Alcohol  to  remove  any  trace  of
Alkaloid  which  may  have  been  precipitated  with  the  Tannin ;  this  Alco-
holic Solution  may  be  evaporated  to  dryness,  the  product  dissolved  in  a
little  "Water  acidulated  with  Citric  Acid,  and  added  to  the  filtered  liquor
along  with  the  Ammonio-citrate  of  Iron.

Properties  and  Uses. —  This  forms  an  exceedingly  agreeable,  and
energetic  invigorative,  admirably  adapted  in  the  cases  of  weak  and
languid  habits  of  children  and  females,  where  the  body  is  in  a  pallid  or
flaccid  state,  and  very  susceptible  of  fatigue  or  morbid  action.  It  does
not  solely  depend  on  the  quinia  and  iron  it  contains  for  its  value  as  a
curative  agent ;  the  grateful  and  by  no  means  inefficient  adjuvants,  the
orange  peel,  snakeroot,  and  other  proximate  principles  of  cinchona,
independent  of  quinia,  are  by  no  means  to  be  overlooked,  and  cannot  be
replaced  by  salts  of  quinia  and  iron  alone,  however  scientific  their  arti-
ficial combinations  may  appear.  Each  fluidounce  contains  sixteen  grains
of  ammonio-citrate  of  iron.  The  dose  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms,  three
or  four  times  a  day. — Sand.  Simes.

Tinctuba  Cinnamomi. Tincture  of  Cinnamon.

Preparation. — Take  of  Cinnamon,  bruised,  three  ounces  ;  Diluted  Alco-
hol two  pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Cinnamon,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tincture  of  Cinnamon  is  an  aromatic  astringent,
and  may  be  used  in  chronic  diarrhea,  menorrhagia,  uterine  hemorrhage,
and  as  an  adjuvant  to  other  astringent  solutions.  The  dose  is  from  one
to  four  fluidrachms,  in  sweetened  or  mucilaginous  liquid.

Tinctura  Cinnamomi  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Cinnamon.

Preparation.  —  Take  6f  Cinnamon,  bruised,  an  ounce;  Cardamom,
Prickly  Ash  Berries,  Ginger,  of  each,  b%uised,  three  drachms;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  be  prepared  from  the  same  dry  ingredients ;  in  the
state  of  powder,  by  moistening  them  thoroughly  with  Diluted  Alcohol,
allowing  them  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to
a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  them  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two
pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  very  warm  and  agreeable  aromatic
tincture,  useful  in  flatulence,  gastric  debility,  spasm  of  the  stomach,  and
chronic  diarrhea.  The  dose  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms  in  sweetened
water.


1252  Pharmacy.

Tinctura  Cocci  Cacti. Tincture  of  Cochineal.

Preparation. — Take  of  Cochineal,  in  fine  powder,  two  ounces  ;  Diluted
Alcohol  tenfiuidounces.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  calmative  and  antispasmodic,
and  may  be  given  in  pertussis,  asthma,  hysteria,  and  nervous  diseases,
in  doses  of  from  twenty  drops  to  a  fluidrachm.  It  is  also  employed  for
coloring  liquid  preparations.

Tinctura  Colchici  Seminis. Tincture  of  Colchicum  Seed.

Preparation. — Take  of  Colchicum  Seed,  bruised,  four  ounces;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Colchicum  Seed,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand
for  twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  may  be  used  wherever  colchicum
is  indicated.  It  is  also  employed  as  an  external  application  in  gouty,
neuralgic,  and  rheumatic  pains.  The  dose  is  from  thirty  drops  to  two
fluidrachms.

Tinctura  Colchici  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Colchicum.

Preparation. — Take  of  Colchicum  Seed,  bruised,  two  ounces;  Black
Cohosh  Root,  in  powder,  three  ounces;  Diluted  Alcohol  two  pints.  Mace-
rate for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the  dry
materials,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained.

Or,  it  may  be  made  by  adding  together,  equal  parts  of  the  Tinctures
of  Colchicum  Seed,  and  Black  Cohosh  Root.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  excellent  agent  in  inflammatory
rheumatism  and  gout,  and  has  proved  a  superior  remedy  in  phlegmasia
dolens,  or  the  swelled  leg  of  parturient  women.  The  dose  is  from  ten
to  sixty  drops,  or  more,  as  circumstances  indicate,  every  one,  two,  three,
or  four  hours.  Iodide  of  potassium,  fifteen  grains  to  the  ounce  of  tinc-
ture, may  frequently  be  added  with  advantage. — J.  K.

Tinctura  Colombo. Tincture  of  Colombo.

Preparation. — Take  of  Colombo,  bruised,  four  ounces ;  Diluted  Alcohol
two  ounces. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Colombo,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually


Tincture.  1253

pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  forms  a  bitter  tonic ;  it  may  be
added  to  tonic  infusions  or  decoctions,  whenever  it  is  required  to  slightly
increase  their  stimulant  power. The  dose  is  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms.

Tinctura  Corydalis. Tincture  of  Turkey-  Corn.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Root  of  Turkey-Corn,  in  powder,  three
ounces  ;  Diluted  Alcohol  one  pint.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,
and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Turkey- Corn,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  forty-
eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring
upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  one  pint  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  efficient  alterative-tonic,  useful
in  all  cases  where  simple  tonics  are  indicated,  and  highly  beneficial  in
syphilitic,  and  scrofulous  affections.  The  dose  is  from  twenty  drops  to
two  fluidrachms,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Digitalis. Tincture  of  Foxglove.

Preparation. — Take  of  Foxglove  four  ounces ;  Diluted  Alcohol  two
pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Foxglove,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses.  — This  preparation  possesses  the  virtues  of  Fox-
glove, and  affords  a  convenient  mode  of  administering  that  narcotic.
The  close  is  from  five  to  twenty  drops,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  and
increased,  if  necessary,  with  much  care.

Tinctura  Ergots. Tincture  of  Ergot.

Preparation. — Take  of  Ergot  of  Rye,  in  coarse  powder,  eight  ounces  ;
Diluted  Alcohol  twenty  fluidounces.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  ex-
press, and  then  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Ergot,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for  twenty-
four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  on
Diluted  Alcohol  until  twenty  fluidounces  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  may  be  used  in  all  cases  where
the  action  of  ergot  is  indicated  or  desired.  The  dose  is  one  or  two
fluidrachms.

Tinctura  Ferri  Acetatis. Tincture  of  Acetate  of  Iron.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Sulphate  of  Iron  eight  ounces,  avoirdupois;
Distilled  Water  half  a  pint,  (ten  fluidounces,  Imperial  measure);  Pure


1254  Pharmacy.

Sulphuric  Acid  six  fluidrachms ,  (Imp.  meas.);  Pure  Nitric  Acid  half  a
Jiuidounce,  (Imp.  meas.)  ;  Acetate  of  Potassa  eight  ounces,  (avoird.)  ;
Rectified  Spirit  half  a  gallon,  (Imp.  meas.).  To  nine  fluidounces  of  the
Water  add  the  Sulphuric  Acid,  and  in  the  mixture,  with  the  aid  of  heat,
dissolve  the  Sulphate  of  Iron.  Add  next  the  Nitric  Acid,  first  diluted
with  the  remaining  fluidounce  of  Water,  and  evaporate  the  resulting
solution  to  the  consistence  of  a  thick  syrup.  Dissolve  this  in  one  quart
(two  pints,  Imp.  meas.),  and  the  Acetate  of  Potassa  in  the  remainder
of  the  Spirit,  and,  having  mixed  the  solutions,  and  shaken  the  mixture
repeatedly  in  a  large  bottle,  let  the  whole  be  thrown  upon  a  calico  filter.
When  any  further  liquid  ceases  to  trickle  through,  subject  the  filter,  with
its  contents,  to  expression,  and  having  cleared  the  turbid  tincture  thus
procured  by  filtration  through  paper,  let  it  be  added  to  that  already
obtained. The  specific  gravity  of  this  tincture  is  0.891. — Dub.

History. — In  the  first  part  of  this  process  the  sulphate  of  protoxide  of
iron  is  converted,  by  the  action  of  the  sulphuric  and  nitric  acids,  aided
by  heat,  into  the  tersulphate  of  the  sesquioxide.  This  is  dissolved  in
half  the  spirit,  and  the  acetate  of  potassa  in  the  remaining  half,  and  the
two  spirituous  solutions  being  mixed,  a  double  decomposition  ensues;
sulphate  of  potassa,  which  is  insoluble  in  rectified  spirit,  is  precipitated,
while  the  teracetate  of  sesquioxide  of  iron  remains  in  solution.  This,
when  filtered,  constitutes  the  present  tincture  of  acetate  of  iron.  The
whole  of  the  acetate  of  potassa  is  decomposed,  in  consequence  of  sul-
phate of  iron  being  added  in  excess ;  and  the  filtration  removes  not  only
the  sulphate  of  potassa,  but  also  the  excess  of  the  iron  salt,  which  is
insoluble  in  alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  deep-red,  transparent  liquid,  having
a  strong  chalybeate  taste.  It  is  tonic  and  astringent,  and  beside  its
internal  administration  as  a  chalybeate,  it  forms  an  excellent  vaginal
enema  for  leucorrhea,  when  properly  diluted  with  water.  The  dose  of
it  is  from  twenty  drops  to  a  teaspoonful,  given  in  a  sufficient  quantity  of
water.

Tinctura  Ferri  Chloridi.  Tincture  of  Chloride  of  Iron.  Tincture
of  Muriate  of  Iron.

Preparation. — Take  of  Subcarbonate  of  Iron  half  a  pound ;  Muriatic
Acid,  sp.  gr.  1.16,  a  pint ;  Alcohol  three  pints.  Pour  the  Acid  upon  the
Subcarbonate  of  Iron,  in  a  glass  or  porcelain  vessel,  mix  them,  and
when  effervescence  has  ceased,  apply  a  gentle  heat,  and  continue  it,
stirring  occasionally,  until  the  carbonate  is  dissolved;  then  filter  the
solution,  and  mix  rt  with  the  Alcohol. —  U.  S.

History. — Tincture  of  Chloride  of  Iron  is  a  liquid  of  a  reddish-brown,
somewhat  yellowish  color,  a  sour  and  exceedingly  styptic  taste,  and  an
odor  somewhat  like  that  of  muriatic  ether;  On  exposure  to  the  air,  a
small  deposit  of  sesquioxide  of  Iron  may  take  place,  rendering  the


Tincture.  1255

tincture  proportionably  feeble,  but  this  can  be  easily  obviated  by  adding
sufficient  muriatic  acid  to  dissolve  the  precipitate.  It  is  incompatible  with
the  alkalies,  alkaline  earths  and  their  carbonates,  astrino-ent  vegetable
infusions,  and  the  mucilage  of  gum  arabic.  When  the  tincture  is  eva-
porated, the  resulting  sesquichloride  of  iron  is  of  a  dark  orange  color,
hardly  crystallizable,  deliquescent,  and  composed  of  two  equivalents  of
iron  56,  and  three  of  chlorine  106.26=162.26.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  chalybeate  Tincture  is  tonic,  diuretic  and
astringent.  It  is  very  useful  in  scrofula,  gleet,  chronic  gonorrhea,  leu-
corrhea,  dysury  dependent  on  spasmodic  stricture,  and  passive  hemor-
rhage from  the  uterus,  kidneys  or  bladder.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to
thirty  drops,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  diluted  with  a  sufficient  quantity
of  water.  In  doses  of  from  ten  to  twenty  drops,  in  water,  and  repeated
every  two  hours,  the  Tincture  of  Chloride  of  Iron  has  been  found  a
valuable  agent  in  the  treatment  of  erysipelas,  usually  effecting  a  cure  in
from  two  to  six  days,  and  during  the  employment  of  which,  the  only
local  applications  necessary  are  hair  powder,  and  cotton  wadding.  The
bowels  to  be  kept  open.  Externally,  it  has  proved  useful  in  destroying
venereal  warts,  as  a  styptic  in  cancerous  and  fungous  ulcers,  and  is
one  of  the  best  applications  that  can  be  applied  to  a  venereal  chancre.
In  this  last,  it  should  be  applied  by  means  of  a  feather ;  and  a  piece  of
lint  moistened  with  it,  should  be  kept  in  constant  contact  with  the  sur-
face of  the  ulcer.  As  an  application  to  chancre,  it  is  the  only  one  that
I  have  made  for  the  last  fifteen  years,  (except  the  nitric  acid  during  its
pustular  stage,)  and  is,  in  my  opinion,  decidedly  the  best  local  remedy
for  this  kind  of  ulcer  that  can  be  used.  Occasionally  it  causes  severe
pain,  when  it  should  be  diluted  with  as  little  water  as  possible,  but  in  the
majority  of  instances  after  the  first  or  second  application,  patients  hardly
notice  it.  It  keeps  the  chancre  clean,  its  surface  soft,  and  changes  the
poisonous  character  of  the  virus,  so  that  its  absorption  is  followed  by  no
bad  result.  As  the  chancre  soon  becomes  so  changed,  by  the  uses
of  this  tincture,  that  it  is  frequently  difficult  to  detect  it  from  the
healthy  surrounding  integuments,  the  practitioner  must  be  careful  not  to
be  misled  by  this  appearance  and  cease  his  internal  treatment  too  soon.
Prof.  R.  S.  Newton,  to  whom  I  made  known  this  employment  of  the  tinc-
ture, and  several  others,  have  used  it  with  the  most  beneficial  results.

Tinctura  Gelsemini. Tincture  of  Yellow  Jessamine.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  fresh  Root  of  Yellow  Jessamine,  cut  into
small  pieces,  eight  ounces ;  Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen
days,  express  and  filter.  This  forms  a  saturated  tincture,  beautifully
tino-ed  with  violet ;  it  has  a  peculiar  odor  somewhat  resembling  that  of
new  honey,  and  a  faint,  peculiar,  not  unpleasant  taste.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  the  active  properties  of
the  root,  and  may  be  given  as  a  febrifuge  in  intermittent,  remittent,


1256  Pharmacy.

typhus,  typhoid,  and  many  other  fevers  ;  it  is  likewise  beneficial  in  neu-
ralgia, nervous  headache,  toothache,  etc.  And  combined  with  tincture
of  cimicifuga,  or  tincture  of  colchicum,  it  proves  decidedly  efficacious  in
rheumatism  and  gout.  In  rigidity  of  the  os  uteri,  puerperal  convulsions,
puerperal  peritonitis,  and  painful  dysmenorrhea,  I  consider  this  the  very
best  agent  in  the  Materia  Medica.  I  have  employed  it  in  all  these  vari-
ous conditions  and  with  the  most  marked  success.  It  is  preferable  to
lobelia  as  a  relaxant,  as  it  does  not  occasion  any  nausea  or  vomiting.
To  one  young  lady  laboring  under  a  most  agonizing  dysmenorrhea,  I
administered  a  teaspoonful  of  the  tincture  every  half  hour  for  four
hours,  before  it  produced  its  influence  upon  her,  after  which,  smaller
doses  sufficed  to  maintain  its  effect,  and  she  suffered  no  further  pain
during  the  menstruation.  While  it  produces  a  relaxation  of  the  rigid  os
uteri,  it  seems  to  exert  an  influence  on  the  uterine  contractility,  pro-
moting this  action  of  the  organ.  However,  I  have  only  noticed  this
latter  effect  in  a  few  instances ;  further  investigations  are  required  before
we  can  place  any  reliance  on  this  therapeutical  action  from  its  adminis-
tration during  parturition.  The  dose  of  the  tincture  of  gelseminum  is
from  ten  drops  to  a  fluidrachm,  according  to  circumstances,  and  the
urgency  of  the  case.  The  effects  of  an  overdose  may  be  removed,  by
holding  aqua  ammonia  to  the  nostrils,  with  the  internal  administration
of  stimulants.

Tinctura  Gentians  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Gentian.

Preparation. —  Take  of  Gentian,  Colombo,  Swamp  Milkweed,  Rhu-
barb, Prickly  Ash  Berries,  Sassafras,  each,  in  powder,  one  ounce;  Good
French  Brandy  four  pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  same  dry  materials,  in
the  state  of  powder,  by  moistening  them  thoroughly  with  Brandy,
allowing  them  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a
percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  them  Brandy  until  four  pints  of
filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  mild  aperient,  stimulant,  and  tonic,
and  is  especially  adapted  to  children  with  debilitated  stomachs,  or  dis-
ordered condition  of  the  digestive  organs,  after  the  administration  of
anthelmintics  for  the  removal  of  worms,  and  during  convalescence  from
exhausting  diseases,  as  summer-complaint,  diarrhea,  dysentery,  fevers,
etc.  The  dose  is  from  ten  drops  to  a  teaspoonful  three  or  four  times  a
day,  in  sweetened  water. — J.  K.

Tinctura  Guaiaci. Tincture  of  Guaiacum.

Preparation. — Take  of  Guaiacum,  in  powder,  half  a  pound;  Alcohol
two  pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days  and  filter  through  paper. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  used  in  gout,  rheumatism,  dys-
entery, amenorrhea,  and  dysmenorrhea  ;  the  dose  is  from  one  to  thre-e


Tinctures.  1257

fluidrachms,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  given  in  mucilage,  or  sweetened
water.  Dewees'  Tincture  of  Guaiacum,  (Tinctura  Guaiaci  Alkalina,)
recommended  in  suppression  of  the  menses  and  dysmenorrhea,  is  made
as  follows  :  Take  of  the  best  Guaiac,  in  powder,  four  ounces;  Carbonate
of  Soda  or  of  Potassa,  one  drachm  and  a  half;  Pimento,  in  powder,  an
ounce  ;  Diluted  Alcohol  a  pound.  Digest  for  a  few  days.  Dose,  a  tea-
spoonful  three  times  a  day,  to  be  gradually  increased,  if  necessary.

Tinctura  Guaiaci  Aromatica.  Aromatic  Tincture  of  Guaiacum.
Greenhow's  Cholera  Mixture.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Guaiacum,  Cloves,  and  Cinnamon,  each,  in
powder,  one  ounce  ;  Brandy  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days  and
filter.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  Tincture  is  an  excellent  aromatic  stimu-
lant, astringent,  and  diaphoretic.  It  was  extensively  used  in  Cincinnati,
by  the  Eclectics,  during  the  cholera  of  1849-50-51,  and  with  excellent
effect.  The  late  Prof.  T.  V.  Morrow,  considered  it  as  one  of  the  best
agents  in  the  treatment  of  that  disease.  The  dose  is  from  a  teaspoonful
to  a  tablespoonful,  in  sweetened  water,  every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,
until  relief  is  obtained.  The  addition  of  an  ounce  of  Prickly  Ash  Ber-
ries to  this  tincture  will  materially  enhance  its  value.

Tinctura  Hydrastis. Tincture  of  Golden  Seal.

Preparation. — Take  of  Golden  Seal  Root,  in  powder,  three  ounces ;
Diluted  Alcohol  one  pint.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express  and
filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Golden  Seal  Root,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand
for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  tonic,  and  will  be  found  bene-
ficial in  chronic  gastric  affections,  hepatic  diseases,  chronic  diarrhea,
and  general  debility.  Diluted  and  applied  locally,  it  forms  an  efficacious
remedy  in  leucorrhea,  and  ophthalmia.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty
drops,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  in  water.

Tinctura  Hydrastis  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Golden
Seal.

Preparation. — Take  of  Golden  Seal  Root,  Lobelia  Seed,  each,  in  pow-
der, two  ounces  ;  Diluted  Alcohol  one  pint.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,
express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  same  dry  materials,  in
powder,  by  moistening  them  thoroughly  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing
them  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  perco-
lator, and  gradually  pouring  upon  them  Diluted  Alcohol  until  one  pint


1258  Pharmacy.

of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained. Or,  it  may  be  made  by  adding  too-ether
equal  parts  of  the  Tinctures  of  Golden  Seal,  and  Lobelia.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  valuable  local  application  to  diseased
mucous  surfaces.  It  is  highly  recommended  by  Prof.  Z.  Freeman,  in
chronic  catarrh,  to  be  snuffed  up  into-the  nostrils,  or  applied  by  means
of  a  camel's  hair  pencil  ;  it  is  also  useful  in  chronic  ophthalmic  diseases,
diluted  with  water. — Z.  F.

Tinctura  Hyoscyami. Tincture  of  Henbane.

Preparation. — Take  of  Henbane  Leaves  four  ounces;  Diluted  Alco-
hol two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through
paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Henbane  Leaves,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  them  to
stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and
gradually  pouring  upon  them  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered
liquor  are  obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  anodyne  and  soporific,  and
may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  Opium  in  cases  where  this  latter  drug
disagrees,  or  where  its  constipating  effects  are  not  desired.  Sometimes
the  Tincture  of  Henbane  purges;  when  this  is  the  case,  a  small  portion
of  laudanum  may  be  added  to  it.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm
to  a  fluidrachm.

Tinctura  Hyperici. Tincture  of  St.  John's  Wort.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Blossoms  of  St.  John's  Wort  (recent)  five
ounces ;  Alcohol  one  pint.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and
filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  may  be  used  to  fulfill  the  indica-
tions of  the  plant ;  but  its  principal  use  is  as  a  local  application  to
wounds,  bruises,  ulcers,  swellings,  tumors,  ecchymosis,  etc.  The  dose
internally  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm.  As  a  local  applica-
tion it  is  equal  to  Arnica.

Tinctura  Iodinii. Tincture  of  Iodine.

Preparation. — Take  of  Iodine  an  ounce ;  Alcohol  a  pint.  Dissolve
the  Iodine  in  the  Alcohol. —  U.  S.

History.  —  The  Tincture  of  Iodine  should  be  kept  in  well  stopped
bottles,  and  not  exposed  to  the  light,  and  it  is  better  to  make  up  but
small  quantities  at  a  time,  as  a  reaction  takes  place  between  the  iodine
and  alcohol,  producing  chemical  changes,  especially  if  the  tincture  be
exposed  to  the  action  of  light.  In  preparing  the  tincture  the  iodine
should  be  well  dried.  It  has  a  deep  brown  color,  becomes  gradually
decomposed  on  standing,  -or  on  the  addition  of  water.

Properties  and  Uses.  — This  preparation  is  seldom  administered  inter-
nally, on  account  of  its  liability  to  precipitation  in  the  stomach,  and


Tincture.  1259

consequent  irritation  produced  by  the  crude  iodine.  When  given,  the  dose
is  ten  drops,  gradually  increased  to  thirty,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  to
be  administered  in  sweetened  water,  or  still  better,  wine,  if  not  contra-
indicated.  Thirty  drops  are  about  equal  to  one  grain  of  iodine.  Its
principal  use  is  externally,  in  erysipelas,  chilblains,  and  several  cutane-
ous diseases — it  has  likewise  been  recommended  as  a  local  application  in
local  rheumatism,  croup,  bites  of  serpents,  etc.  It  may  be  applied  by
means  of  a  camel's  hair  pencil.

Tinctura  Iodinii  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Iodine.

Preparation. — Take  of  Iodine  half  an  ounce  ;  Iodide  of  Potassium  an
ounce  ;  Alcohol  a  pint.  Dissolve  the  Iodine  and  the  Iodide  of  Potassium
in  the  Alcohol. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  may  be  used  internally  for  all  the
purposes  to  which  iodine  is  applicable.  Unlike  the  Tincture  of  Iodine,
it  is  not  decomposed  when  diluted  with  water.  The  dose  is  five  drops,
three  times  a  day,  gradually  increased  to  thirty  if  necessary.

Tinctura  Iridis. Tincture  of  Blue  Flag.

Preparation. — Take  of  Blue  Flag  Root,  in  powder,  three  ounces  ;  Alco-
hol a  pint. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the  Blue
Flag  Root,  in  powder,  with  Alcohol,  allowing  them  to  stand  for  forty-
eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pour-
ing upon  them  Alcohol,  until  one  pint  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  Tincture  of  Blue  Flag  possesses  the  same
alterative  and  cathartic  properties  as  the  root,  and  may  be  used  in  all
cases  as  a  substitute  for  the  powder,  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  sixty  drops,
according  to  the  effect  desired,  two  or  three  times  a  day.  Six  fluidrachms,
each,  of  the  Tinctures  of  Blue  Flag,  and  Mandrake  roots,  with  two
fluidrachms  of  a  saturated  tincture  of  Nux  Vomica,  form  an  efficacious
remedy  in  obstinate  constipation,  hepatic  torpor,  derangements  of  the
spleen,  sick  headache,  want  of  appetite,  syphilitic  affections,  gleet,  recent
stricture  of  the  urethra,  impotency  from  masturbation,  recent  disease  of
the  prostate,  etc.  The  mixture  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  ten  to
fifteen  drops,  in  water,  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Kalmi^e. Tincture  of  Sheep  Laurel.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sheep  Laurel  Leaves  three  ounces ;  Diluted
Alcohol  one  pint. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Sheep  Laurel  Leaves,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to
stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and
gradually  pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  one  pint  of  filtered
liquor  is  obtained.


1260  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  sedative  and  alterative,  and
may  be  successfully  used  in  jaundice,  syphilitic  diseases,  palpitation  of
the  heart,  etc.,  in  doses  of  ten  drops,  carefully  and  gradually  increased
to  thirty.  In  obstinate  syphilitic  affections,  I  frequently  add  a  portion
of  this  tincture  to  the  Compound  Syrup  of  Stillingia,  with  marked  advan-
tage. Externally,  the  tincture  is  beneficial  in  itch,  and  some  other  cuta-
neous affections.

Tinctura  Kino. Tincture  of  Kino.

Preparation. — Take  of  Kino,  in  powder,  three  ounces  and  a  half;  Dis-
tilled Water  twelve  fuidounces  ;  Alcohol  twenty  fiuidounces.  Macerate
for  fourteen  days,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  mixing  with  the  powdered
Kino,  an  equal  bulk  of  Sand,  transferring  the  mixture  to  a  percolator,
and  gradually  pouring  upon  it  the  above  proportions  of  Alcohol  and  Dis-
tilled Water,  mixed  together,  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tincture  of  Kino  is  astringent,  and  is  princi-
pally used  in  diarrhea,  cholera  morbus,  cholera,  etc.,  in  doses  of  one  or
two  fiuidrachms  ;  it  is  frequently  added  to  astringent  mixtures.  It  is
very  liable  to  gelatinize  on  standing,  and  lose  its  astringency,  especially
if  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  atmosphere  ;  hence,  it  should  be  made
frequently,  in  small  quantities  at  a  time,  and  be  kept  in  well  stopped
bottles.

Tinctura  Krameri^e. Tincture  of  Rhatany.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rhatany,  in  powder,  six  ounces  ;  Diluted  Alco-
hol two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through
paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  moistening  the  Rhatany
thoroughly  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for  forty-eight
hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  it
Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  useful  in  chronic  diarrhea,  and  other
cases  where  an  astringent  is  required.  It  likewise  forms  an  excellent
local  application  to  the  gums,  where  they  are  tender,  spongy,  and  bleed.
The  dose  is  one  or  two  fiuidrachms  in  sweetened  water,  or  wine,  if  not
contra-indicated,  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Laricis  Composita.  Tinctura  Pinus  Penhul^e  Compo-
sita. Compound  Tincture  of  Tamarac. Bone's  Bitters.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tamarac  Bark,  Juniper  Berries,  of  each,  six
ounces;  Prickly  Ash  Bark  four  ounces;  Wild  Cherry  Bark,  Seneca
Snakeroot,  of  each,  three  ounces ;  Tansy  one  ounce;  Whisky  five  pints;
Molasses  a  pint  and  a  half;  Hydro-alcoholic  Extract  of  Mandrake  an
mince  and  a  half;  Water  a  sufficient  quantity. Let  the  medicinal  Herbs,


Tincture.  1261

Roots,  and  Barks,  be  coarsely  pulverized  and  mixed  together.  To  the
mixture  add  three  pints  of  the  Whisky,  and  let  them  stand  twenty-four
hours  ;  then  place  the  whole  in  a  vapor  displacement  apparatus,  and
force  through  the  articles  the  steam,  or  vapor  of  the  additional  Whisky
two  pints,  after  which  the  steam  from  Water  sufficient  to  make  the  whole
amount  of  Tincture  equal  to  twenty-four  pints.  To  this  add  the  Mo-
lasses, and  the  Hydro-alcoholio  Extract  of  Mandrake;  which  last  must
be  thoroughly  dissolved.

Properties  and  Uses. — Although  not  properly  a  tincture,  yet  to  avoid
a  new  class  of  pharmaceutic  agents,  bitters,  I  place  this  compound  among
the  tinctures.  It  is  an  improvement  upon  the  original  Bone's  Bitters,
and  is  now  generally  preferred  by  Eclectics.  It  possesses  nearly  four
times  the  strength  of  that  heretofore  made,  and  consequently  must  be
taken  in  a  much  smaller  dose,  a  desideratum  with  all  medicines  contain-
ing alcohol.  The  whisky  and  juniper  berries  are  less  expensive,  and
more  readily  obtainable  than  the  pure  Holland  Gin  recommended  in  the
original,  and  likewise  render  the  preparation  more  actively  diuretic ;  and
the  substitution  of  the  Extract  of  Mandrake,  for  the  bitter,  and  to  many
patients,  unbearable  taste  of  aloes,  renders  it  much  more  valuable  as  a
cholagogue,  alterative,  and  aperient.  It  forms  an  excellent  alterative
tonic  and  aperient  for  dyspepsia,  menstrual  obstructions,  and  other  dis-
eases where  such  a  combination  of  action  is  indicated.  The  dose  is  half
a  fluidounce,  three  times  a  day,  about  an  hour  previous  to  each  meal.

Tikctura  Lavandulae  Composita. Compowid  Sjnrit  of  Lavender.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Oil  of  Lavender  three  fiuidr  a  dims ;  Oil  of
Anise  one  drachm  and  a  half ;  Cloves,  in  powder,  one  ounce  ;  Mace  three
drachms;  Red  Saunders  two  ounces  ;  Brandy  four  fuidounces  ;  Jamaica
Rum  one  gallon.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through
paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  far  superior  to,  and  makes  a  much  more
agreeable  compound  than  the  formula  of  the  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeia.  It
forms  a  delightful  preparation  which  is  much  employed  as  a  remedy  for
flatulence,  hysteria,  gastric  uneasiness,  nausea,  and  general  languor  or
faintness.  It  is  also  used  as  an  adjuvant  and  corrigent  of  other  medicines.
The  dose  is  from  thirty  drops  to  a  fluidrachm  or  two,  given  in  sweetened
water,  or  on  sugar. — /.  K.

Tinctxtra  Leptandr^e. Tincture  of  Blackroot.

Preparation.— Take  of  Black  Root,  in  powder,  three  ounces  ;  Diluted
Alcohol  one  pint. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Black  Root,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for
forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pour-
ing upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  one  pint  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.


12G2  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  aperient  and  cholagogue,
and  is  employed  in  various  derangements  of  the  biliary  organs ;  it  is  also
added  to  medicines  for  summer-complaint,  chronic  diarrhea,  remittent
fever,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  two  fluidrachms,  two
or  three  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Lobelia. Tincture  of  Lobelia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lobelia,  (the  herb),  four  ounces  ;  Diluted  Al-
cohol two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through
paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  adding  Diluted  Alcohol  to  the
Lobelia,  in  powder,  and  allowing  it  to  stand  for  twenty-four  hours,  or
until  thoroughly  moistened,  then  transferring  the  whole  to  a  displacer,
and  gradually  adding  to  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered
liquor  have  passed.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  the  same  properties  as
Lobelia  ;  the  dose  is  from  thirty  to  sixty  drops  as  a  nauseant ;  and  half
a  fiuidounce,  or  more,  as  an  emetic.  A  tincture  prepared  of  equal  parts
of  vinegar  and  alcohol,  instead  of  diluted  alcohol,  is  preferable  to  the
above,  in  cases  where  it  is  not  to  be  kept  for  a  length  of  time.  Exter-
nally, the  tincture  of  lobelia  is  beneficial  as  a  local  application  in  tetter,
and  similar  cutaneous  eruptions,  stings  of  insects,  and  in  the  poisoning
by  Rhus.

Tinctura  Lobelia  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Lobelia.  Dr.
J.  King's  Expectorant  Tincture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lobelia,  (herb),  Bloodroot,  Skunk  Cabbage
Root,  Wild  Ginger  Root,  and  Pleurisy  Root,  each,  coarsely  powdered,
one  ounce  ;  Water,  (or  Vinegar),  one  pint ;  Alcohol  three  pints.  Mace-
rate for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  same  dry  materials,  in
powder,  by  thoroughly  moistening  them  with  Alcohol  diluted  as  above,
allowing  them  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to
a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  them  Alcohol  diluted  as  above
with  Water,  (or  Vinegar),  until  four  pints  of  filtered  liquor  have  been
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  forms  an  excellent  emetic  for  chil-
dren and  infants,  and  may  be  safely  used  in  croup,  hooping-cough,  bron-
chitis, asthma,  convulsions,  and  in  all  cases  where  an  emetic  is  required.
It  will  likewise  be  found  beneficial  as  an  expectorant,  or  nauseant  in
coughs,  pleuritic  affections,  asthma,  pertussis,  and  whenever  expectorants
are  indicated. It  is  among  the  most  valuable  of  Eclectic  remedies.

In  croup,  for  children  one  year  old,  give  half  a  tablespoonful  in  a
tablespoonful  of  molasses,  and  repeat  it  every  fifteen  minutes,  until  it
vomits ;  after  which,  a  teaspoonful  may  be  given  every  hour  or  two,  as
required — the  vomit  to  be  repeated  two  or  three  times  a  day. A  child


Tincture.  1263

from  two  to  six  months  old,  may  take  from  half  to  a  teaspoonful  for  a
dose  ;  less  than  two  months  old,  from  fifteen  to  twenty-five  drops,  to  be
repeated  every  ten  minutes,  if  vomiting  is  required.  Children  from  three
to  six  years  old,  may  take  a  tablespoonful,  in  molasses  or  warm  water,
every  ten  minutes,  until  it  vomits.  Warm  boneset  or  thoroughwort  tea,
ought  always  to  be  given  in  order  to  facilitate  its  operation  as  an  emetic.
For  cough,  asthma,  etc.,  to  promote  expectoration  and  remove  tight-
ness across  the  chest;  and  in  all  ordinary  cases  where  an  expectorant  is
required,  adults  may  take  one  or  two  teaspoonfuls  in  half  a  wineglassful
of  slippery  elm  tea,  three  to  five  times  a  day,  or  as  often  as  required.
Children  from  one  year  old  to  ten,  may  take  from  half  to  a  teaspoonful
in  the  same  manner ;  and  for  those  less  than  one  year,  from  ten  to  thirty
drops.  Should  the  above  doses  vomit,  they  should  be  lessened,  except
when  vomiting  is  desired.  The  stomach  and  bowels  must  be  kept  reg-
ular in  all  cases,  by  gentle  medicines.

Tinctura  Lobelia  et  Capsici  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of
Lobelia  and  Capsicum. Antispasmodic  Tincture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lobelia,  Capsicum,  and  Skunk  Cabbage  Root,
each,  in  powder,  two  ounces;  Diluted  Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for
fourteen  day§,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  same  dry  materials,  in
powder,  by  thoroughly  moistening  them  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing
them  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percola-
tor, and  gradually  pouring  upon  them  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of
filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Or,  it  may  be  made  by  combining  together,  equal  parts  of  the  satu-
rated tinctures  of  Lobelia,  Capsicum,  and  Skunk  Cabbage  Root.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  a  powerful  antispasmodic  and
relaxant,  and  will  be  found  highly  efficacious  in  cramps,  spasms,  convul-
sions, tetanus,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  teaspoonful  to  a  teaspoonful,
every  ten  or  twenty  minutes,  or  as  often  as  the  urgency  of  the  case
requires.

In  convulsions  and  tetanus,  it  may  be  poured  into  the  corner  of  the
mouth,  and  repeated  as  often  as  necessary  ;  generally,  the  effect  is
almost  instantaneous.  This  valuable  preparation  should  always  be  in
the  possession  of  every  physician.  In  rigidity  of  the  os  uteri,  a  teaspoon-
ful administered  by  mouth,  or  by  enema  into  the  rectum,  and  repeated
in  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  will  be  found  to  produce  a  state  of  softness
and  disability  without  the  necessity  of  using  the  lancet,  so  highly  recom-
mended by  a  certain  class  of  practitioners,  in  such  cases.

Tinctura  Lttpulini. Tincture  of  Lupulin.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lupulin  four  ounces;  Alcohol  two  pints.  Ma-
cerate for  fourteen  days  and  filter  through  paper.—  U.  S.


1264  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — Lupulin  is  the  active  principle  of  hops,  and  as
the  quantity  of  it  varies  in  different  specimens  of  hops,  a  tincture  of  it  is
decidedly  preferable  to  one  made  of  hops.  It  may  be  employed  with
advantage  in  coughs,  after-pains,  and  in  all  cases  where  opium  is  inad-
missible. The  dose  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms  in  mucilage  or  sweetened
water.

Tinctura  Mentha  Viridis. Tincture  of  Spearmint. Spirits  of  Mint.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  the  fresh  Herb  of  Spearmint  a  sufficient  quan-
tity to  fill  a  glass  jar,  and  cover  with  good  Holland  Gin.  Macerate  for
seven  days,  express,  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  diuretic  and  stimulant.  It  may
be  beneficially  employed  in  strangury,  retention  of  urine,  gravel,  and
various  chronic  nephritic  diseases.  The  dose  is  from  two  to  four  ounces,
three  times  a  day ;  but  in  severe  and  painful  cases  it  may  be  repeated
every  half  hour  or  hour  until  relief  is  obtained.  Externally,  it  forms  an
excellent  application  to  hemorrhoids  when  in  a  state  of  inflammation ;
cotton  must  be  moistened  with  it,  and  applied  to  the  part.

Tinctura  Myrrh^e. Tincture  of  Myrrh.

Preparation. — Take  of  Myrrh,  bruised,  four  ounces;  Alcohol  three
pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days  and  filter  through  paper. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tincture  of  Myrrh  is  chiefly  employed  as  a  local
application  to  stimulate  foul  and  indolent  ulcers,  and  to  promote  the
exfoliation  of  bones;  and,  diluted  with  water,  it  may  be  advantageously
applied  to  spongy  gums,  aphthous  sore  mouth,  and  ulcerations  of  the
throat ;  occasionally  it  is  employed  internally  as  an  emmenagogue,  and
stimulant  expectorant,  in  doses  of  from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm.

Tinctura  Myrrh^e  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Myrrh.  Hot
Drops.

Preparation. — Take  of  Myrrh,  bruised,  eight  ounces;  Capsicum  two
ounces ;  Alcohol  one  gallon. Macerate  for  fourteen  days  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — Eclectics  very  rarely  employ  this  preparation
internally ;  occasionally,  however,  it  is  used  in  cases  of  nausea,  gastric
distress,  especially  after  a  hearty  meal,  flatulence,  etc.,  in  doses  of  from
half  a  fluidrachm  to  a  fluidrachm  in  sweetened  water.  Its  internal  em-
ployment is  contra-indicated  when  inflammation  is  present.  Its  principal
use  is  externally,  when  it  proves  an  excellent  local  application  to  sprains,
bruises,  fresh  wounds,  cuts,  rheumatism,  offensive  ulcers,  etc.

Tinctura  Nucis  Vomicae. Tincture  of  Nux  Vomica.

Preparation. — Take  of  Nux  Vomica,  rasped,  two  ounces ;  Alcohol
eight  fuidounces.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through
paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Nux  Vomica,  in  powder,  with  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for  forty-


Tincture.  1265

eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  very  gradually
pouring  Alcohol  upon  it  until  eight  fluidounces  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  the  properties  of  the
nux  vomica,  but  as  the  seeds  vary  in  their  quantity  of  active  matter,  it
is  an  inferior  preparation  to  the  tincture  of  strychnia,  or  alcoholic  extract
of  nux  vomica.  Its  extreme  bitterness  is  a  great  objection  to  its  employ-
ment. It  is  occasionally  employed  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  drops  ;
and  as  an  external  application  in  local  paralysis.

Tinctura  Olei  Anisi. Tincture  of  Oil  of  Anise. Essence  of  Anise.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Anise  one  fluidounce ;  Alcohol  nine
fluidounces. Mix  with  agitation. — Dub.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  aromatic,  antispasmodic,  and
carminative,  and  may  be  employed  in  flatulency,  cough,  cramp  of  the
stomach,  and  to  flavor  other  preparations.  The  dose  is  from  twenty  to
sixty  drops  for  an  adult,  in  sweetened  water.  The  following  forms  a
very  pleasant  preparation  for  cough  :  Take  of  Aqua  Ammonia,  Tincture
of  Opium,  each,  one  fluidounce  ;  Essence  of  Anise,  half  a  fluidounce.
Mix.  Dose,  from  twenty  to  sixty  drops.

Tinctura  Olei  Carui.  Tincture  of  Oil  of  Caraway.  Essence  of
Caraway.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Caraway  one  fluidounce  ;  Alcohol  nine
fluidounces. Mix  with  agitation. — Dub.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  aromatic,  carminative,  and  antispas-
modic. It  may  be  used  in  flatulency,  nausea,  etc.,  and  to  flavor  mix-
tures. The  dose  is  from  twenty  to  sixty  drops  in  sweetened  water.

Tinctura  Olei  Cinnamomi.  Tincture  of  Oil  of  Cinnamon.  Essence
of  Cinnamon.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Cinnamon  one  fluidounce ;  Alcohol  nine
Huidounces. Mix  with  agitation. — Dub.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  the  stimulant  and  aro-
matic properties  of  cinnamon  ;  and  may  be  beneficially  employed  in
menorrhagia  and  uterine  hemorrhage,  in  which,  a  teaspoonful  may  be
taken  in  a  wineglass  of  sweetened  water,  every  five,  ten,  or  thirty  min-
utes, according  to  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms.

Tinctura  Olei  Mentha  Piperita.  Tincture  of  Oil  of  Peppermint.
Essence  of  Peppermint.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Peppermint  two  fluidounces  ;  Alcohol  a
pint. Dissolve  the  Oil  in  the  Alcohol. —  U.  S:

Properties and  Uses. —  Tincture  of  Oil of  Peppermint,  more  com-
monly known  as  Essence  of  Peppermint,  is  carminative  and  antispasmodic.
It  may  be  used  in  nausea,  colic,  flatulency,  cramp  or  gripings  of  the
80


1266  Pharmacy.

bowels,  etc. The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty  drops  on  sugar,  or  mixed
with  sweetened  water.

Tinctura  Olei  Mentha  Viridis.  Tincture  of  Oil  of  Spearmint.
Essence  of  Spearmint.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Spearmint  two  fiuidounces ;  Alcohol  a
pint. Dissolve  the  Oil  in  the  Alcohol. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  antispasmodic,  carminative,
and  diuretic,  and  may  be  employed  similarly  to  the  essence  of  pepper-
mint. The  dose  is  from  twenty  to  forty  drops  on  sugar,  or  mixed  with
sweetened  water.

Tinctura  Olei  Sassafras.  Tincture  of  Oil  of  Sassafras.  Essence
of  Sassafras.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Oil  of  Sassafras  two  fiuidounces  ;  Alcohol  a
pint. Dissolve  the  Oil  in  the  Alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  stimulant,  carminative,  diuretic,
and  alterative.  Its  principal  use  is  to  flavor  syrups  and  other  fluid  pre-
parations. The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty  drops  on  sugar,  or  mixed  with
sweetened  water.

Tinctura  Opii. Tincture  of  Opium. Laudanum.

Preparation. — Take  of  good  Turkey  Opium,  sliced,  twelve  hundred
grains;  Boiling  Water  ten  fiuidounces ;  Alcohol  76  p.  ct.,  twenty  fluid-
ounces.  Pour  eight  fiuidounces  of  the  Boiling  Water  on  the  Opium,  and
with  the  hand  or  pestle,  reduce  it  to  an  emulsion ;  then  pour  it  into  the
bottle  in  which  it  is  to  be  kept,  rinse  the  pestle  or  hand  with  the  remain-
ing two  fiuidounces  of  Warm  Water,  and  add  it  to  the  fluid  in  the  bottle,
together  with  the  Alcohol.  Agitate  well,  and  set  it  aside  ;  in  twenty-
four  hours  it  will  be  of  full  strength.  (See  Mr.  Merrell's  remarks  on
Tinctures,  page  1241-2.)

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  the  medicinal  virtues  of
opium,  and  maybe  used  in  all  cases  where  the  drug  is  indicated,  in  doses
of  from  ten  to  forty  drops.  Twenty- five  drops  are  about  equal  to  one
grain  of  opium.

If  Diluted  Acetic  Acid  be  employed  in  the  above  formula  instead  of
Water,  it  will  form  a  much  better  tincture,  and  one  less  liable  to  vary  in
strength — the  Tinctura  Opii  Acetata,  or  Acetated  Tincture  of  Opium,
and  which  may  be  given  in  the  same  doses  as  above.

The  following  is  offered  to  the  profession  by  Eugene  Dupuy,  Pharma-
ceutist, of  New  York,  as  a  substitute  for  McMunn's  Elixir  of  Opium,  (a
trial  of  six  years  has  been  accorded  to  it,  and  none  of  the  unpleasant
effects  attributed  to  Laudanum  have  as  yet  attended  its  administration):
Take  of  Opium  ten  drachms,  make  it  into  a  thin  pulp  with  a  sufficient
quantity  of  water;  then  allow  the  mixture  to  stand  in  a  cool  place  forty-
eight  hours;  after  which  transfer  it  into an elongated  glass  funnel


Tincture.  1267

containing  filtering  paper,  and  add  a  superstratum  of  Water  equivalent  to
the  bulk  of  the  whole  mass.  When  twelve  ounces  of  liquid  have  filtered,
add  to  the  filtered  solution,  Alcohol,  95  per  cent.,  four  ounces.  The
solution  is  an  Aqueous  Solution  of  Opium,  nearly  free  from  narcotina,
preserved  by  alcohol,  and  contains  about  two-thirds  of  the  substance  of
the  Opium — the  residue  consisting  chiefly  of  resin,  narcotina,  caoutchouc,
ligneous  matter,  etc.

For  a  similar  purpose,  the  following  mode  of  preparation  is  recom-
mended in  the  American  Journal  of  Pharmacy  :

Macerate  ten  drachms  (Troy)  of  Opium,  in  half  a  pint  of  Water,  for
two  days,  and  express ;  subject  the  dregs  to  two  successive  macerations,
using  six  fiuidounces  of  Water  each  time,  with  expression  ;  mix  and  strain
the  liquors,  evaporate  them  to  two  fiuidounces,  and  agitate  the  liquid
with  Sulphuric  Ether  four  fiuidounces,  several  times  during  half  an  hour.
Then  separate  the  Ether  by  means  of  a  funnel,  evaporate  the  solution
of  Opium  to  dryness,  dissolve  the  Extract  in  half  a  pint  of  Cold  Water,
pour  the  Solution  on  a  filter,  and  after  it  has  passed  wash  the  filter  with
sufficient  water  to  make  twelve  fiuidounces  of  filtered  Solution,  to  which
add  four  fiuidounces  of  Alcohol.

By  this  process  the  Ether  removes  all  that  the  Water  has  dissolved  of
the  thebaina,  the  meconin,  a  part  of  the  codeia,  the  odorous  principle,
meconate  of  narcotine,  and  fatty  matter.  The  evaporation  to  dryness,
and  re -solution  in  Water,  removes  the  ethereal  odor,  and  separates  a
portion  of  acid,  resin,  and  extractive.

Tinctura  Opii  Camphorata.  Camphorated  Tincture  of  Opium.  Pare-
goric Elixir.

Preparation. — Take  of  Opium  one  drachm,  reduce  it  to  an  emulsion  in
Boiling  Water  one  fluidounce,  then  add  Benzoic  Acid  a.  drachm  ;  Oil  of
Anise,  a  fluidrachm ;  Clarified  Honey  two  ounces  ;  Camphor  two  scruples;
Alcohol  76  per  ct.,  twenty-two  fiuidounces;  Distilled  Water  nine  fluid-
ounces. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  and  filter  through  paper.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  pleasant  anodyne  and  antispasmodic  ;
used  to  allay  cough,  in  asthma,  pertussis,  chronic  catarrh,  and  consump-
tion ;  to  relieve  nausea  and  slight  pains  in  the  stomach  and  bowels  ;  to
check  diarrhea,  and  to  procure  sleep.

The  dose  for  an  adult,  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms ;  for  an  infant,  from
five  to  ten  or  twenty  drops.

The  nostrums  known  by  the  names  of  Baieman's  Drops,  and  God-
frey's Cordial,  two  very  dangerous  articles  in  the  hands  of  nurses  and
many  non-professional  persons,  are  generally  prepared  as  follows:
Baieman's  Pectoral  Drops,  take  Opium,  in  powder,  Catechu,  in  powder,
Camphor,  Red  Saunders,  rasped,  each,  two  ounces;  Oil  of  Anise  four
fluidrachms;  Diluted  Alcohol  four  gallons. Digest  for  ten  or  twelve


1268  Pharmacy.

days. It  is  about  equal  in  strength  to  the  Camphorated  Tincture  of
Opium,  one  fluidounce  being  about  equal  to  two  grains  of  Opium.

Godfrey's  Cordial.  Dissolve  Carbonate  of  Potassa  two  ounces  and  a
half,  in  Water,  twenty-six  pints;  add  Molasses  from  the  Sugar  Refiners,
sixteen  pints,  and  heat  over  a  gentle  fire  till  they  simmer ;  take  off  the
scum  which  arises,  and  add  a  mixture  of  Laudanum  a  pint  and  a  half,
and  Oil  of  Sassafras  four  rluidrachms.  A  fluidounce  of  this  preparation
contains  rather  more  than  a  grain  of  opium.

The  coroner  of  Nottingham  states,  that  "  Godfrey's  Cordial  is  given
to  children  to  a  great  extent;  and  that  he  has  no  doubt  whatever  that
many  infants  are  yearly  destroyed  in  that  borough,  but  who  dying
gradually,  never  come  under  his  notice  officinally."  There  can  be  no
doubt  of  the  truth  of  this  assertion.  At  all  events  we  can  say  positively
that  such  instances  occur  elsewhere. — (Dunglison's  Am.  Med.  Lib.  and
Intell.,  Jan.  1840,  p.  299.)

Tinctura  Podophylli. Tincture  of  Mandrake.

Preparation. — Take  of  Mandrake  Root,  in  powder,  three  ounces;  Alco-
hol one  pint. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Mandrake,  in  powder,  with  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for  forty-eight
hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  it
Alcohol  until  one  pint  of  filtered  liquor  is  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  the  alterative,  chola-
gogue,  purgative,  and  other  properties  of  the  root,  and  may  be  used
wherever  that  is  indicated. The  dose  is  from  ten  to  sixty  drops.

Tinctura  Polygoni. Tincture  of  Water  Pepper.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Water  Pepper,  the  fresh  Herb,  a  sufficient
quantity,  to  fill  a  quart  jar;  then  add  Holland  Gin,  or  Proof  Spirit,  as
much  as  can  be  held  in  the  jar.  Macerate  for  seven  days,  express  and
filter.

This  Tincture  may  likewise  be  made  from  the  dried  herb,  in  powder,
six  ounces  to  one  pint  and  a  half  of  Proof  Spirit,  and  macerating  for
fourteen  days ;  or  by  percolation.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  has  been  used  with  efficacy  in
amenorrhea,  dysmenorrhea,  suppressed  lochial  discharge,  and  in  mode-
rate menorrhagia. The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful  three  or  four  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Quinine  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Quinia.  Ague
Bitters.

Preparation. — Take  of  Quinia  thirty  grains ;  Cream  of  Tartar  one
ounce  ;  Cloves,  in  powder,  one  ounce ;  Whisky  one  pint.  Macerate  for
twenty-four  hours,  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  Tincture  is  febrifuge,  antiperiodic,  and
tonic,  and  is  used  in  intermittent  and  remittent  fevers,  and  other  diseases
attended  with  symptoms  of  a  periodical  character. In  intermittent  fever,


Tincture.  1269

the  dose  for  an  adult  is  half  a  fluidounce  every  hour  during  the  inter-
mission, until  two  or  three  hours  previous  to  the  return  of  the  next
expected  chill,  when  the  dose  should  be  given  every  half  hour.  The
dose  for  children  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms. — T.  V.  M.

Tinctura  Rhei. Tincture  of  Rhubarb.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rhubarb,  bruised,  three  ounces;  Cardamom
Seeds,  bruised,  half  an  ounce;  Diluted  Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for
fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Rhubarb  and  Cardamom,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing
them  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percola-
tor, and  gradually  pouring  upon  them  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints
of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  purgative,  stomachic,  and  tonic.
It  is  principally  used  in  flatulent  colic,  dyspepsia,  constipation,  and  in
low  forms  of  fever.  The  dose,  as  a  purgative,  is  from  half  a  fluidounce
to  a  fluidounce ;  as  a  stomachic,  one,  two,  or  three  fluidrachms.

Tinctura  Rhei  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Rhubarb.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rhubarb,  bruised,  four  ounces ;  Bitter  Root,
Golden  Seal,  Gentian,  Prickly  Ash  Berries,  of  each,  bruised,  two  ounces;
Sassafras,  Cardamom  Seeds,  of  each,  one  ounce;  Diluted  Alcohol  five
pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  dry  materials  in  the
state  of  powder,  by  thoroughly  moistening  them  with  Diluted  Alcohol,
allowing  them  to  stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  the  mix-
ture to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  adding  Diluted  Alcohol,  until  five
pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — Compound  Tincture  of  Rhubarb  is  laxative,
tonic,  and  stomachic ;  it  is  especially  useful  in  debilitated  conditions  of
the  digestive  organs,  hepatic  torpor,  dyspepsia,  constipation,  and  to
restore  the  tone  of  the  bowels  after  the  removal  of  worms,  after  diar-
rheas, dysenteries,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  a  fluid-
ounce,  two  or  three  times  a  day  in  sweetened  water,  or  sufficient  to  pro-
cure one,  but  not  over  two  alvine  evacuations  daily. — J.  K.

Tinctura  Sanguinarije. Tincture  of  Bloodroot.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bloodroot,  in  powder,  six  fluidounces  ;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Bloodroot,  in  very  fine  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand
for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.


1270  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — In  the  dose  of  three  or  four  fluidrachms,  this
tincture  will  prove  emetic  ;  and  from  ten  to  sixty  drops  will  act  as  a
nauseant,  expectorant,  stimulant,  and  alterative.  As  all  the  medicinal
virtues  of  bloodroot  are  taken  up  by  Alcohol,  I  do  not  see  the  necessity
of  using  this  liquid  diluted.  For  several  years  past  I  have  been  accus-
tomed to  prepare  this  tincture  with  undiluted  alcohol,  which  I  have
found  to  give  a  much  better  medicinal  solution,  and  to  be  more  satisfac-
tory in  its  effects.

Tinctura  Sanguinary  Acetata  Composita.  Compound  Acetaled
Tincture  of  Bloodroot. Acetous  Emetic  Tincture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bloodroot,  Lobelia,  Skunk  Cabbage  Root,  each,
in  powder,  two  ounces  ;  Distilled  Vinegar  two  pints  ;  Alcohol  two  fluid-
ounces.  Macerate  the  drugs  and  Vinegar  together,  in  a  close  glass
vessel,  for  fourteen  days,  then  express,  filter,  and  to  the  filtered  liquor
add  the  Alcohol.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  dry  materials  in  powder,
by  thoroughly  moistening  them  with  Distilled  Vinegar,  allowing  them  to
stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and
gradually  pouring  Distilled  Vinegar  upon  them  until  two  pints  of  filtered
liquor  are  obtained,  to  which  add  the  Alcohol.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  much  used  by  Eclectics  as
an  emetic  and  expectorant,  in  all  cases  where  such  agents  are  required.
As  an  emetic,  the  dose  is  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms,  in  some  sweet-
ened aromatic  infusion,  to  be  repeated  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  until
vomiting  is  produced ;  as  an  expectorant  the  dose  is  from  twenty  to  sixty
drops,  every  hour  or  two.  It  also  forms  a  useful  external  application  to
erysipelas,  tetter,  and  other  forms  of  cutaneous  disease.

Tinctura  Sanguinary  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Bloodroot.
Emetic  Tincture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bloodroot,  Lobelia,  Skunk  Cabbage  Root,  each,
in  powder,  two  ounces  ;  Diluted  Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  in  a  close
glass  vessel  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  dry  materials  in  powder,
by  thoroughly  moistening  them  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  them  to
stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and
gradually  pouring  Diluted  Alcohol  upon  them  until  two  pints  of  filtered
liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  used  for  the  same  purposes,
in  the  same  manner  and  dose,  as  the  preceding  one.

Tinctura  Senn.e  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Senna.  Elixir
Salutis.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Alexandria  Senna  two  ounces ;  Jalap,  in
powder,  one  ounce;  Fennel  Seeds,  bruised,  half  an  ounce  ;  Best  French


Tincture.  1271

Brandy  two  pints. Macerate for fourteen days, express, and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  dry  materials  in  powder,
by  thoroughly  moistening  them  with  Brandy,  allowing  them  to  stand  for
forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  Brandy  upon  them  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  excellent  purgative,  especially  for
children,  as  it  acts  mildly  and  pleasantly  ;  it  is  also  useful  in  cases  of
constipation  attended  with  flatulence.  The  dose  for  an  adult  is  from
half  a  fluidounce  to  a  fluidounce  ;  for  a  child  a  year  old,  a  fluidrachm.
It  may  be  given  in  a  little  sweetened  water.

Tinctura  Serpentari^e  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  Virginia
Snakeroot. Sudorific  Tincture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Virginia  Snakeroot,  in  powder,  Ipecacuanha,
Saffron,  Camphor,  and  Opium,  in  powder,  of  each,  two  ounces  ;  Holland
Gin,  or  Diluted  Alcohol  six  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,
and  filter  through  paper.

The  above  is  the  original,  and  undoubtedly  the  best  form  of  preparing
this  tincture,  yet  many  Eclectics  are  opposed  to  the  Opium,  and  substi-
tute in  its  place  Ladies  Slipper  Root  eight  ounces.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  powerful  sudorific,  and  is  used  in  all
cases  where  a  copious  perspiration  is  required,  or  where  it  is  desired  to
lessen  pain,  allay  nervous  excitability,  procure  sleep,  and  keep  up  a
determination  to  the  skin.  One  teaspoonful  in  some  warm  herb  tea,
repeated  every  hour,  aided  by  warm  infusions  and  bathing  the  feet,  will
soon  produce  copious  diaphoresis.  In  pleurisy,  a  mueh  larger  dose  may
be  given.  In  other  cases  it  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  ten  to  sixty
drops.  It  will  be  found  beneficial  in  after-pains,  painful  dysmenorrhea,
amenorrhea  from  recent  exposure  to  cold,  cramp  in  the  stomach,  hys-
teria, in  all  fevers  and  inflammatory  diseases,  etc.  The  tincture  cannot
well  be  made  by  percolation.

Tinctura  Stillingi^e. Tincture  of  Queen's  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  recent  Queen's  Root,  cut  into  small  pieces
and  bruised,  three  ounces  ;  Alcohol  one  pint.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,
express,  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  the  virtues  of  the  root,
and  may  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  it  in  scrofulous,  syphilitic,  and  rheu-
matic diseases.  It  is  likewise  beneficial  in  laryngeal,  bronchial,  and  all
pulmonary  affections.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty,  or  even  sixty
drops,  to  be  administered  in  sweetened  water.  It  may  likewise  be
advantageously  added  to  alterative  syrups  or  tinctures.


1272  Pharmacy.

Tinctura  Stramonii. Tincture  of  Stramonium.

Preparation. — Take  of  Stramonium  Seed,  bruised,  four  ounces;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Stramonium  Seed,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand
for  forty- eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually
pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  preparation  may  be  used  for  all  the  pur-
poses for  which  Stramonium  is  given.  The  dose  is  from  ten  to  forty
drops,  two  or  three  times  a  day,  gradually  increased,  if  required,  until
it  affects  the  system.

Tinctura  Strychnine  Composita. Compound  Tincture  of  Strychnia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Strychnia,  in  crystals,  sixteen  grains  ;  Distilled
Water,  Alcohol,  of  each,  seven  fluidounces  and  a  half ;  Acetic  Acid,
Compound  Tincture  of  Cardamom,  of  each,  half  a  fuidounce.  Dissolve
the  Strychnia  in  the  Alcohol  and  Acetic  Acid  mixed  together,  and  then
add  the  remaining  articles.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  Tincture  is  useful  in  impaired  spinal
energy,  or  spinal  exhaustion,  whether  the  result  of  excessive  study,
muscular  effort,  sexual  indulgence,  masturbation,  etc. ;  it  is  likewise
efficacious  in  paralysis,  constipation  debility  of  the  generative  organs,
malarious  diseases,  chronic  splenitis,  and  recent  diseases  of  the  prostate
gland.  It  is  contra-indicated  in  irritation  of  the  spinal  nerve.  Two
fluidrachms  of  the  tincture  contain  one  eighth  of  a  grain  of  strychnia.
The  dose  is  from  ten  to  thirty  drops,  three  times  a  day.

Tinctura  Symplocarpi. Tincture  of  Skunk  Cabbage.

Preparation. — Take  of  Skunk  Cabbage  Root,  in  powder,  three  ounces;
Diluted  Alcohol  one  pint.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and
filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Skunk  Cabbage  Root,  in  powder,  with  Diluted  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to
stand  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  grad-
ually pouring  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  one  pint  of  filtered  liquor
is  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tincture  of  Skunk  Cabbage  is  antispasmodic,
and  will  be  found  useful  in  asthma,  pertussis,  hysteria,  and  other  spas-
modic affections  ;  it  is  also  beneficial  in  irritable,  or  excitable  conditions
of  the  nervous  system.  The  dose  is  from  a  fluidrachm  to  half  a  fluid-
ounce,  repeated  as  often  as  required.

Tinctura  Tolutana. Tincture  of  Tolu.

Preparation. — Take  of  Balsam  of  Tolu  three  ounces;  Alcohol  two  pints.
Macerate  until  the  Balsam  is  dissolved ;  then  filter  through  paper.


Tincture.  1273

Properties  and  Uses. —  This  Tincture  possesses  the  properties  of  balsam
of  Tolu,  and  may  be  used  in  cough,  and  chronic  catarrhal  affections ;
also  as  an  addition  to  cough  and  expectorant  mixtures.  The  dose  is
from  half  a  fluidrachm  to  one  or  two  fluidrachms.

Tinctura  Toxicodendri. Tincture  of  Poison  Oak.

Preparation. — Take  of  fresh  Leaves  of  Poison  Oak  four  ounces  ;  Al-
cohol three  fluidounces.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
under  cover.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  may  be  used  for  all  the  purposes
for  which  the  poison  oak  is  given,  in  the  dose  of  from  three  to  ten  drops,
in  water.  It  should  be  kept  in  vials  well  stopped,  as  its  active  principle
becomes  dissipated  on  exposure. It  must  be  used  with  great  care.

Tinctura  Valerianae  Ammoniata. Ammoniated  Tincture  of  Valerian.

Preparation. — Take  of  Valerian,  bruised,  four  ounces;  Aromatic  Spirit
of  Ammonia  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter
through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Valerian,  in  powder,  with  Aromatic  Spirit  of  Ammonia,  allowing  it  to
stand  for  twenty-four  hours  in  a  covered  vessel,  then  transferring  it  to  a
percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon  it  Aromatic  Spirit  of  Ammonia
until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  is  used  as  an  antispasmodic  in  hysteria,
and  other  nervous  affections,  in  the  dose  of  one  or  two  fluidrachms,
given  in  sweetened  water,  milk  or  some  mucilaginous  fluid.

The  Aromatic  Spirit  of  Ammonia  (Spiritus  Ammonia  Aromalicus),
is  antacid,  stimulant,  and  aromatic;  and  is  used  in  sick  headache,
hysteria,  flatulent  colic,  fainting,  etc.,  in  doses  of  from  thirty  to  sixty
drops,  or  more,  in  sweetened  water.  It  is  made  as  follows :  Take  of
Muriate  of  Ammonia  five  ounces ;  Carbonate  of  Potassa  eight  ounces;
Cinnamon,  Cloves,  of  each,  bruised,  two  drachms ;  Lemon  Peel  four
ounces;  Alcohol,  Water,  of  each,  five  pints.  Mix  them,  and  distil  off
seven  pints  and  a  half. —  U  S.

Tinctura  Viburni  Composita.  Compound  Tincture  of  High  Cran-
berry Bark.

Preparation. — Take  of  High  Cranberry  Bark,  in  powder,  hvo  ounces;
Lobelia  Seed,  in  powder,  Skunk  Cabbage  Seed,  bruised,  of  each,  one
ounce ;  Stramonium  Seed,  bruised,  Capsicum,  Bloodroot,  of  each,  in
powder,  half  an  ounce;  Alcohol,  four  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,
express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  dry  materials,  in  powder,
by  thoroughly  moistening  them  with  Alcohol,  allowing  them  to  stand  in
a  covered  vessel  for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  perco-
lator, and  gradually  pouring  upon  them  Alcohol  until  four  pints  of
filtered  liquor  are  obtained.


1274  Pharmacy.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  is  stimulant  and  antispasmodic,
and  will  be  found  efficacious  in  asthma,  hysteria,  and  all  nervous  and
spasmodic  diseases.  I  have  effected  many  cures  of  asthma  (uncompli-
cated), with  this  remedy.  The  dose  is  from  twenty  to  sixty  drops,  three
times  a  day ;  or,  during  a  paroxysm,  as  often  as  required. — J.  K.

Tinctura  Xanthoxyli. Tincture  of  Prickly  Ash.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Prickly  Ash  Berries  eight  ounces;  Diluted
Alcohol  two  pints. Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express  and  filter.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moi.stenino-  the
Prickly  Ash  Berries,  in  powder,  with  Alcohol,  allowing  them  to  stand
for  forty-eight  hours,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and  gradu-
ally pouring  upon  them  Alcohol,  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Tincture  possesses  all  the  virtues  of  the
berries.  (  See  Prickly  Ash  Berries,  p.  971,  Part  II.)  In  cholera,  the  dose
is  from  half  a  fiuidounce  to  a  fluidounce,  repeated  as  often  as  required,
in  ordinary  cases,  from  one  to  four  fluidrachms,  given  in  water.  Prob-
ably a  tincture  of  the  oil  of  the  berries  will  effect  the  same  results.

Tinctura  Zingiberis. Tincture  of  Ginger.

Preparation. — Take  of  Ginger,  bruised,  eight  ounces;  Alcohol  two  pints.
Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter  through  paper.

This  Tincture  may  also  be  prepared  by  thoroughly  moistening  the
Ginger,  in  powder,  with  Alcohol,  allowing  it  to  stand  for  twenty-four
hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  pouring  upon
it  Alcohol  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained. —  U.  S.

Good  Jamaica  Ginger  should  be  used  in  preparing  this  Tincture.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tincture  of  Ginger  is  an  aromatic  carminative,
and  may  be  added  to  tonic,  purgative,  and  aromatic  preparations  with
advantage.  It  may  be  used  in  flatulency,  torpor  of  the  digestive  organs,
and  in  debilitated  conditions  of  the  alimentary  canal.  The  dose  is  from
ten  to  sixty  drops  in  sweetened  water,  milk,  wine,  or  mucilage,  as  the
indications  will  allow.  Its  chief  use  is  in  the  preparation  of  Syrup  of
Ginger.

TROCHISCI.

Troches.

Troches  or  Lozenges  are  medicinal  substances  in  powder,  destitute  of
any  very  disagreeable  flavor,  which,  by  means  of  sugar  and  mucilage
are  incorporated  into  small,  dry,  solid  masses,  usually  of  a  circular,
flattened  shape.  As  they  are  designed  to  be  held  in  the  mouth,  and
dissolved  gradually  in  the  saliva,  they  ought  not,  as  a  general  rule,  to  be
composed  of  medicines  which  act  feebly,  or  require  to  be  given  in  large
quantities. Gum  Arabic  and  Tragacanth  are  both  employed,  but  the


Tkochisci.  1275

latter  is  preferred  on  account  of  the  greater  tenacity  of  its  mucilage.
The  Dictionnuire  des  Drogues  gives  the  following  directions  for  preparing
them  :  The  best  gum  tragacanth  having  been  selected,  it  is  made  into
a  mucilage  with  cold  water,  and  strained  ;  the  sugar  havino-  been  mixed
with  the  other  powdered  ingredients,  is  thoroughly  incorporated  with  the
mucilage,  by  rubbing  upon  a  marble  slab,  and  is  formed  into  a  paste.
This  paste  is  then  rolled  out  on  the  slab,  its  adhesion  to  the  roller  being
prevented  by  powdering  over  it  from  time  to  time,  a  mixture  of  sugar
and  starch;  and  uniformity  of  thickness  is  effected  by  a  frame  of  wood  or
iron,  upon  which  the  ends  of  the  roller  are  placed.  The  extended
layer  of  paste  is  again  covered  with  the  mixture  of  sugar  and  starch,
and  the  troches  cut  by  means  of  a  tin-plate  punch,  which  gives  them  the
required  shape  and  size.  After  exposure  to  the  air  for  twelve  hours,  on
paper,  the  troches  are  placed  on  a  sieve  to  dry  in  a  drying  room  or
closet,  and  the  superfluous  powder  remaining  on  them  is  removed  by
means  of  the  sieve.

Lozenges  are  frequently  composed  of  extract  of  liquorice  and  gum
Arabic  with  sugar,  which  renders  them  quite  tough,  so  as  to  become
unmanageable  by  long  standing.  In  such  cases  the  best  mode  is  to
thoroughly  mix  the  articles  together,  and  then  add  the  sugar,  in  the
form  of  a  dense  syrup,  made  with  but  two-thirds  of  the  usual  quantity
of  water  required  for  simple  syrup,  mix  it  quickly,  and  while  yet  warm,
roll  the  mass  into  long  cylinders,  and  when  nearly  dry,  cut  them  of  the
required  size.

Trochisct  Acidi  Citbici. Troches  of  Citric  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  Citric  Acid  a  drachm;  Refined  Sugar  eight
ounces;  Oil  of  Lemons  twelve  minims ;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth,  a  suffi-
cient quantity.  Pulverize  the  Sugar  and  Acid,  add  the  Oil,  mix  them
thoroughly  and  with  the  Mucilage  beat  them  into  a  proper  mass  for
making  Lozenges  of  twelve  grains  each.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  agreeable  refrigerant  and  demulcent,
and  may  be  used  in  fevers,  colds,  influenza,  and  as  a  pleasant  mode  of
taking  citric  acid ;  they  must  not  be  used  too  freely,  as  the  stomach  will
thereby  become  deranged.

Trochisci  Acidi  Tartarici. Troches  of  Tartaric  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tartaric  Acid  a  drachm;  Refined  Sugar  four
ounces;  Oil  of  Lemons  ten  minims ;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth  a  sufficient
quantity.  Pulverize  the  Sugar  and  Acid,  add  the  Oil,  mix  them
thoroughly,  and  with  the  Mucilage  beat  them  into  a  proper  mass  for
making  Lozenges  of  ten  grains  each.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  lozenges  are  useful  as  a  refrigerant  and
demulcent  in  colds,  fevers,  etc.  Like  the  preceding  preparation,  the
stomach  will  become  deranged  by  too  freely  using  them.


1276  Pharmacy.

Trochisci  Capsici. Troches  of  Capsicum.

Preparation. — Take  of  Capsicum,  in  powder,  half  an  ounce ;  Sugai
six  ounces  ;  Mucilage  of  Gum  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the
Sugar  and  Capsicum  thoroughly  together,  and  with  the  Mucilage  beat
them  into  a  proper  mass  for  making  two  hundred  and  forty  lozenges.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  troches  will  be  found  useful  in  dryness
and  irritation  of  the  throat,  relaxed  uvula,  and  in  all  cases  where  capsi-
cum is  indicated. Each  troche  contains  one  grain  of  capsicum.

Trochisci  Capsici  et  Lobelia. Troches  of  Capsicum  and  Lobelia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Capsicum,  in  powder,  half  an  ounce  ;  Oil  of
Lobelia  twenty-four  minims  ;  Sugar  six  ounces  ;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth
a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  Sugar  and  Capsicum  thoroughly  together,
add  the  Oil,  and  with  the  Mucilage  beat  them  into  a  proper  mass  for
making  two  hundred  and  forty  lozenges.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  troches  are  stimulant  and  expectorant,
and  may  be  employed  wherever  such  a  combination  is  desired.  Each
troche  contains  one  grain  of  capsicum,  and  one-tenth  of  a  minim  of  oil
of  lobelia.

Trochisci  Crotonis. Troches  of  Croton  Oil.

Preparation. — Take  of  Croton  Oil  five  minims  ;  Starch  one  scruple;
Sugar  one  drachm;  Chocolate  two  drachms.  Mix  the  Oil  with  the  solid
ingredients  in  powder,  and  add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  Water  to  form  a
mass  of  proper  consistence,  for  thirty  lozenges.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  lozenges  are  cathartic ;  each  lozenge
contains  one-sixth  of  a  minim  of  croton  oil.

Trochisci  Dioscoreini. Troches  of  Dioscorein.

Preparation. — Take  of  Dioscorein  one  ounce ;  Ginger  half  an  ounce  ;
Oil  of  Peppermint  twenty-four  minim.s;  Sugar  six  ounces ;  Mucilage  of
Tragacanth  a,  sufficient  quantity .  Mix  the  Sugar,  Dioscorein  and  Ginger
thoroughly  together,  add  the  Oil,  and  with  the  Mucilage  beat  them  into
a  proper  mass  for  making  two  hundred  and  forty  lozenges.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  troches  are  useful  in  cases  of  colic,  flat-
ulency, borborygmi,  and  to  cure  as  well  as  prevent  a  return  of  bilious
colic. Each  troche  contains  two  grains  of  dioscorein. — /.  K.

Trochisci  Glycyrrhizjs  et  Opii.  Troches  of  Liquorice  and  Opium.
Wistar's  Cough  Lozenges.

Preparation. — Take  of  Opium,  in  powder,  half  an  ounce;  Extract  of
Liquorice,  Sugar,  Gum  Arabic,  of  each,  in  powder,  ten  ounces ;  Oil  of
Anise  a  fuidrachm.  Mix  the  powders  intimately,  add  the  Oil,  and
with  Water  form  them  into  a  mass,  to  be  divided  into  troches  weighing
each  six  grains. —  U.  S. (See  remarks  on  Troches, p.  1274.)


Trochisci.  1277

Properties  and  Uses. — These  lozenges  are  demulcent  and  anodyne,
and  will  be  found  useful  in  allaying  cough,  in  cases  where  opium  is
admissible.  Each  lozenge  contains  about  one-tenth  of  a  grain  of
opium.

Trochisci  Glycyrrhiza  Composita. Compound  Troches  of  Liquorice.

Preparation. — Take  of  Muriate  of  Ammonia,  in  powder,  one  drachm
and  a  half ;  Muriate  of  Morphia  six  grains  ;  Gum  Arabic,  Sugar,  Ex-
tract of  Liquorice,  of  each,  in  powder,  seven  drachms  ;  Oil  of  Sassafras
thirty  minims ;  Oil  of  Stillingia  twenty  minims ;  Tincture  of  Balsam  of
Tolu  three  fluidrachms.  Mix  the  powders  thoroughly  together,  then
add  the  Oils  and  Tincture,  and  with  Water  form  them  into  a  mass,  to  be
divided  into  one  hundred  and  eighty  troches.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  troches  are  very  valuable  in  cough,  irri-
tation or  tickling  of  the  throat,  laryngitis,  and  bronchitis.  Each  troche
contains  the  one-twentieth  of  a  grain  of  morphia. — J.  K.

Trochisci  Ipecacuanha. Troches  of  Ipecacuanha.

Preparation. — Take  of  Ipecacuanha,  in  powder,  half  an  ounce  ;  Sugar,
in  powder,  fourteen  ounces  ;  Arrow  Root,  in  powder,  four  ounces  ;  Muci-
lage of  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix  the  powders  intimately,
and  with  the  Mucilage  form  them  into  a  mass,  to  be  divided  into  troches
of  ten  grains  each. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  troches  are  expectorant,  and  will  be  found
useful  in  catarrhal  complaints.  Each  troche  contains  about  a  quarter  of
a  grain  of  ipecacuanha.

Trochisci  Magnesias. Troches  of  Magnesia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Magnesia  four  ounces  ;  Sugar  a  pound  ;  Nut-
meg, in  powder,  a  drachm  ;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity,
Rub  the  Magnesia,  Sugar,  and  Nutmeg  together  until  they  are
thoroughly  mixed  ;  then  with  the  Mucilage  form  them  into  a  mass,  to  be
divided  into  troches  each  weighing  ten  grains. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  are  antacid  and  laxative,  and  may  be
used  in  cases  of  acidity  of  stomach,  especially  when  attended  by  cos-
tiveness.

Trochisci  Mentha  Piperita. Troches  of  Peppermint.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Oil  of  Peppermint  a  fuidrachm  ;  Sugar,  in
powder,  a  pound;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity . Rub  the
Oil  with  the  Sugar  until  they  are  thoroughly  mixed  ;  then  with  the  Mu
cilage  form  them  into  a  mass,  to  be  divided  into  troches  each  weighing
ten  grains. —  U  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  are  carminative  and  antispasmodic,  and
will  be  found  useful  in  nausea,  flatulence,  griping  from  purgative  medi-
cines, and  slight  gastric  or  intestinal  pains.  If  eaten  too  freely  they
cause  derangement  of  the  stomach.


1278  Pharmacy.

Trochisci  Podophyllini. Troches  of  Podophyllin.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Podophyllin  one  scruple;  Leptandrin  four
scruples;  Oil  of  Sassafr as  a  fluidrachm  ;  Sugar  six  ounces ;  Mucilage  of
Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity.  Rub  the  Sugar,  Podophyllin,  and  Lep-
tandrin together  until  they  are  thoroughly  mixed,  then  add  the  Oil,  and
with  the  Mucilage  beat  them  into  a  proper  mass  for  four  hundred  and
eighty  lozenges.

Properties  and  Uses. — Cholagogue,  alterative,  and  purgative.  Patients
laboring  under  constipation,  hepatic  torpor,  dysentery,  or  other  diseases
in  which  the  above  combination  is  desired  or  indicated,  may  use  several
of  these  troches  a  day,  according  to  the  effects  which  they  produce.
Each  troche  contains  one-twenty-fourth  of  a  grain  of  podophyllin,  and
one-fifth  of  a  grain  of  leptandrin  ;  in  ordinary  cases,  twelve  troches  used
per  day,  will  maintain  regularity  of  the  bowels.  If  it  be  desired  to
have  these  lozenges  more  active,  two  or  three  scruples  of  podophyllin
may  be  added  for  the  same  number.

Trochisci  Rhei  et  Potass^e. Troches  of  Rhubarb  and  Potassa.

Preparation. — Take  of  Rhubarb,  in  powder,  two  ounces;  Bicarbonate
of  Potassa  one  ounce ;  Oil  of  Peppermint  a  fuidrachm ;  Sugar  twelve
ounces  ;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity.  Rub  the  Rhubarb,
Sugar,  and  Potassa  thoroughly  together,  then  add  the  Oil,  and  with  the
Mucilage  beat  them  into  a  proper  mass  for  five  hundred  lozenges.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  troches  may  be  used  by  persons  subject
to,  or  laboring  under  diarrhea,  dysentery,  cholera-morbus,  acidity  of
stomach,  heartburn,  etc.  They  will  also  prove  tonic  in  small  quantity.
From  six  to  twelve  may  be  used  daily.  Each  troche  contains  nearly  two
grains  of  rhubarb.

Trochisci  Sod^e  Bicarbonatis. Troches  of  Bicarbonate  of  Soda.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bicarbonate  of  Soda  four  ounces ;  Sugar,  in
powder,  a  pound ;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity.  Rub
the  Bicarbonate  of  Soda  with  the  Sugar  until  they  are  thoroughly  mixed;
then  with  the  Mucilage  form  them  into  a  mass,  to  be  divided  into  troches,
each  weighing  ten  grains. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  are  antacid  and  antilithic,  and  will  be
found  useful  in  uric  acid  gravel,  heartburn,  and  acidity  of  stomach.

Trochisci  Stillingia Composita. Compound  Troches  of  Stillingia.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oil  of  Stillingia  one  fuidrachm  ;  Oil  of  Prickly
Ash  Berries,  Oil  of  Sassafras,  of  each,  four  fluidrachms ;  Sugar  ten
ounces  ;  Mucilage  of  Gum  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity.  Rub  the  Oils
with  the  Sugar  until  they  are  thoroughly  mixed  ;  then  with  the  Mucil-
age form  them  into  a  mass  to  be  divided  into  four  hundred  and  eighty
lozenges.


Unguenta.  1279

Properties  and  Uses. — These  troches  form  a  very  agreeable  remedy
for  rheumatic,  syphilitic,  scrofulous,  bronchial,  and  laryngeal  affections,
and  may  be  used  somewhat  freely  by  patients  thus  afflicted.  Eight  loz-
enges contain  one  minim  of  oil  of  stillingia,  and  the  quantity  used  per
day  must  be  regulated  according  to  their  influence  on  the  stomach  and
bowels.  They  will  likewise  be  found  beneficial  in  chronic  affections  of
the  mucous  membranes. — J.  K.

Trochisci  Zingiberis. Troches  of  Ginger.

Preparation. — Take  of  Good  Jamaica  Ginger,  in  powder,  one  ounce ;
Sugar  seven  ounces  ;  Mucilage  of  Tragacanth  a  sufficient  quantity.  Mix
the  Sugar  and  Ginger  thoroughly  together;  then  with  the  Mucilage  form
them  into  a  mass  to  be  divided  into  lozenges  of  fifteen  grains  each.

Properties  and  Uses. — These  form  a  grateful  cordial  stimulant,  and
may  be  used  in  cases  of  flatulence,  debility  of  the  stomach,  etc.


UNGUENTA.
Ointments.
Ointments  are  Fatty  Substances,  containing  the  properties  of  certain
medicines,  and  are  designed  for  external  use  ;  they  are  softer  than
cerates,  being  of  a  consistence  resembling  that  of  lard  or  butter,  which
renders  them  of  easy  application  to  the  skin,  by  inunction.  They  are
most  commonly  prepared  with  lard,  which  should  be  entirely  free  from
salt  and  rancidity.  Lard  may  be  prepared  for  this  purpose,  by  melting-
it  in  twice  its  quantity  of  Boiling  Water,  stirring  the  mixture  constantly;
then  setting  it  aside  to  cool,  and  separating  the  Lard  when  it  has  solidi-
fied. This  forms  Prepared  Lard,  (Adeps  Suillus  Praiparatus).  Sub-
stances entering  into  the  formation  of  Ointments,  and  which  are  not  sol-
uble in  the  fatty  matter,  should  be  very  finely  powdered  previous  to
incorporation  with  it ;  or  if  they  are  soluble  in  alcohol  or  water,  they
may  frequently  be  advantageously  triturated  and  softened  with  a  small
quantity  of  one  of  these  solvents,  as  with  hard  extracts,  etc.  When
Ointments  are  long  kept  they  are  very  apt  to  become  rancid,  hence,  it  is
usually  preferable  to  prepare  them  in  small  quantities  at  a  time,  or  only
when  required  for  use.  Either  Benzoic  Acid,  or  Poplar  Buds,  if  not
objectionable,  or  incompatible  with  the  Ointment,  will,  when  added  to
it,  prevent,  in  a  great  degree  the  tendency  to  rancidity.  Ten  drops  of
the  Spirit  of  Nitric  Ether,  incorporated  with  an  ounce  of  Ointment,  will
remove  the  disagreeable,  fatty  odor  of  these  preparations.  According
to  Dr.  C.  W.  Wright,  Fats  and  Fixed  Oils  may  be  preserved  free  from
rancidity  and  disagreeable  odor  for  a  long  time,  by  melting  them  with
powdered  Slippery  Elm,  in  the  proportion  of  one  drachm  of  the  Bark  to
a  pound  of  the  Fat ;  after  ten  or  fifteen  minutes'  application  of  heat,  the
Fat  must  be  strained  off.  The  Elm  Bark  communicates  an  odor  to  the
Fat,  that  is  scarcely  distinguishable  from  that  of  the  kernel  of  the  hick-
ory-nut.


1280  Pharmacy.

Unguentum  Acidi  Muriatici. Ointment  of  Muriatic  Acid.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Muriatic  Acid  one  fluidrachm;  Spermaceti
Ointment  one  ounce. Mix  together  in  a  glass  or  porcelain  mortar.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  This  ointment  is  used  in  scald-head,  to  be
applied  night  and  morning,  after  the  scabs  have  been  removed  by  a
poultice.

Unguentum  Acidi  Nitrici. Ointment  of  Nitric  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  Olive  Oil  one  pound;  Prepared  Lard  four
ounces;  Nitric  Acid  five  and  a  half  Jiuidrachms.  Melt  the  Oil  and  Lard
together  in  a  glass  vessel,  and  when  they  begin  to  congeal,  add  the  acid,
stirring  the  mixture  constantly  with  a  glass  rod  until  it  stiffens.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  used  in  syphilitic  ulcers,  erup-
tive affections,  and  fistula  in  ano.

Unguentum  Acidi  Sulphurici. Ointment  of  Sulphuric  Acid.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Sulphuric  Acid  one  fluidrachm;  Prepared
Lard  one  ounce. Mix  together  in  a  glass  or  porcelain  mortar.

Properties  and  Uses. — Used  in  ringworm,  itch,  and  other  cutaneous
diseases,  also  in  rheumatism  and  neuralgia.

Unguentum  Acidi  Tannici. Ointment  of  Tannic  Acid.

Preparation. — Take  of  Tannic  Acid  two  drachms;  Lard  two  ounces.
Tritutrate  them  well  together.

Properties  and  Uses.  —  Astringent  and  antiseptic.  Useful  in  piles,
ulcers,  some  forms  of  cutaneous  disease,  and  where  such  indications  are
required.

Unguentum  Aconiti. Ointment  of  Aconite.

Preparation. — Take  of  Alcoholic  Extract  of  Aconite  one  drachm;  Lard
two  drachms.  Soften  the  Extract  with  a  small  quantity  of  Alcohol,  if
necessary,  and  mix  with  the  Lard.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  used  in  violent  neuralgic  and
rheumatic  pains.

Unguentum  Alkalinum. Alkaline  Ointment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Soda  two  drachms  ;  Tincture  of
Opium  one  drachm;  Lard  one  drachm.  Rub  together  in  a  porcelain  or
wedgewood  mortar.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  used  in  several  forms  of  cutaneous  dis-
ease, as  lichen,  lepra,  psoriasis,  ichthyosis,  porrigo  favosa,  etc.

Unguentum  Alkalinum  Camphoratum.  Camphorated  Alkaline  Oint-
ment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Carbonate  of  Potassa  one  scruple;  Camphor  six
grains  ;  Lard  seven  drachms. Rub  together  in  a  mortar.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  used  in  sycosis,  and  several
forms  of  cutaneous  disease.


Unguenta.  128  J

Unguentum  Ammoniacale.  Ammoniacal  Ointment.  Pomrnade  de
Gondret.

Preparation. — Take  of  Lard  six  drachms;  Suet  four  drachms;  Al-
mond Oil  two  drachms  ;  Stronger  Solution  of  Ammonia  twelve  fiuidrachms.
Melt  the  Lard,  Suet,  and  Oil  together,  then  add  the  Ammonia,  and
shake  the  whole  together  in  a  close  bottle.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  rubefacient,  and  vesicant ;
to  procure  its  vesicating  influence,  it  must  be  covered  with  a  compress
after  inunction.

Unguentum  Aqu^e  Ros.e.  Ointment  of  Pose  Water.  Cold  Cream.
Preparation. — Take  of  Spermaceti  ten  drachms;  Glycerin  four  fiui-
drachms; Oil  of  Almonds  two  fluidounces :  White  Wax  a  drachm ;  Oil
of  Roses  three  drops.  Melt  together,  by  means  of  a  water  bath,  the
Spermaceti,  Oil  of  Almonds,  and  Wax;  then  add  the  Glycerin,  in  which
the  Oil  of  Roses  has  been  placed,  and  stir  constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  delightful  cooling  ointment  much  em-
ployed as  an  application  to  irritated,  chapped,  and  abraded  surfaces,  as
chapped  lips,  hands,  etc.  It  was  formerly  made  of  Rose  Water  a  fluid-
ounce  ;  Oil  of  Almonds  two  fluidounces ;  Spermaceti  half  an  ounce  ;  White
Wax  a  drachm.  But  on  account  of  its  liability  to  rancidity,  and  the  sepa-
ration of  the  water  on  exposure,  the  above  formula  of  Mr.  Joseph  Laid-
ley  is  preferred.

Unguentum  Baptisia.  Ointment  of  Wild  Indigo.
Preparation. — Take  of  Wild  Indigo  Root  twenty  pounds  ;  Fresh  Butter
ten  pounds;  Beeswax  three  pounds ;  Tallow  one  pound  and  a  half ;  Di-
luted Alcohol  a  sufficient  quantity.  Macerate  the  Root,  in  powder,  in
Diluted  Alcohol  for  forty-eight  hours  ;  then  transfer  it  to  a  percolator,
and  gradually  pour  upon  it  Diluted  Alcohol  until  the  liquid  passes  nearly
tasteless.  Add  the  filtered  liquor  to  the  other  ingredients,  and  carefully
digest  with  heat,  until  the  Alcohol  and  Water  have  evaporated  ;  then
strain  the  mixture.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  cleansing,  detergent,  discu-
tient,  antiseptic,  etc. It  is  useful  in  many  cutaneous  affections,  erysip-
elas, scrofulous,  gangrenous,  and  all  other  forms  of  ulcer,  piles,  etc.
Unguentum  Belladonna. Ointment  of  Belladonna.
Preparation. — Take  of  Extract  of  Belladonna  two  drachms  ;  Lard,  or
Simple  Cerate  one  ounce. Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  anodyne  application,  and  may  be
advantageously  applied  in  local  neuralgia,  to  painful  joints,  to  dilate  the
pupil,  and  also  the  os  uteri,  and  to  the  denuded  spine  in  violent  tetanus,
delirium  tremens,  and  puerperal  convulsions.

The  Unguentum  Atropice,  for  similar  purposes,  is  made  by  triturating
Atropia,  five  grains,  with  Lard,  three  drachms. It  must  be  used  with
caution,  and  not  be  applied  on  abraded  surfaces.
81


12S2  Pharmacy.

Unguentum  Benzoini. Ointment  of  Benzoin.

Preparation. — Take  of  Benzoin,  in  coarse  powder,  one  ounce;  Fresh
Lard  twenty-five  ounces.  Heat  together  for  two  or  three  hours  in  a  water
bath,  and  then  strain.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  excellent  basis  for  ointments,  as
benzoin  resists  rancidity,  and  the  decomposition  of  metallic  salts  and
oxides. Poplar  buds  have  the  same  effect.

Unguentum  Canthaeidis. Ointment  of  Spanish  Flies.

Preparation. — Take  of  Spanish  Flies,  in  powder,  two  ounces;  Distilled
Water  half  a  pint;  Resin  Cerate  eight  ounces.  Add  the  Flies  to  the
Water,  boil  down  to  one  half,  and  strain  ;  then  mix  the  Cerate  with  the
strained  liquor,  and  evaporate  to  the  proper  consistence. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  intended  as  a  dressing  for  blisters,  to
keep  up  the  discharge  from  them,  and  not  to  produce  vesication.  It  is
rarely  employed  by  Eclectics.

Unguentum  Cer^e  Alb^e. Ointment  of  White  Wax.

Preparation. — Take  of  White  Wax  a  pound;  Lard  four  pounds.  Melt
together  and  strain.

Properties  and  Uses. — Emollient  and  protective ;  also  serves  as  a  basis
for  forming  other  ointments.

Unguentum  Cetacei. Spermaceti  Ointment.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Spermaceti  six  drachms;  White  Wax  two
drachms  ;  Olive  Oil  three  ftuidoimces.  Melt  the  articles  together  over  a
slow  fire,  and  stir  them  constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  mild  emollient  ointment,  employed  as
a  dressing  for  blisters,  wounds,  and  excoriated  surfaces.  As  it  is  apt  to
become  rancid  by  keeping,  it  should  be  made  in  small  quantities  at  a
time.

Unguentum  Cocculi. Ointment  of  Cocculus  Indicus.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  kernels  of  Cocculus  Indicus  two  ounces ;
Lard  ten  ounces.  Beat  the  kernels  well  in  a  mortar,  first  alone,  and  then
with  a  little  of  the  Lard ;  and  then  gradually  add  the  rest  of  the  Lard.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  employed  for  the  destruction
of  vermin,  and  in  the  cure  of  scabies,  and  ringworm  of  the  scalp.

Unguentum  Conii. Ointment  of  Poison  Hemlock.

Preparation. — Take  of  fresh  Hemlock  Leaves,  Lard,  of  each,  one
pound ;  Wax  two  ounces ;  Spirits  one  pint.  Slowly  simmer  together,
until  the  leaves  become  crisp,  and.  then  express  through  linen.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  mild  anodyne.  Useful  as  an  applica-
tion to  irritable  piles,  painful  glandular  swellings,  schirrous  tumors,
cancerous  and  other  painful  ulcers.

The  addition  of  one  drachm  of  the  Extract  to  one  ounce  of  Lard,  makes


Unguenta.  1283

a  more  efficient  preparation,  as  the  heat  employed  in  the  preparation  of
the  first  formula,  probably,  impairs  the  virtue  of  the  hemlock.

Unguentum  Creasoti. Ointment  of  Creosote.

Preparation. — Take  of  Creosote  half  a  fluidrachm ;  Lard  one  ounce.
Mix  them. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  used  in  some  cutaneous  dis-
eases, porrigo  of  the  scalp,  and  as  an  antiseptic  and  stimulant  to  indo-
lent or  gangrenous  ulcers.

Unguentum  Cucumis. Ointment  of  Cucumber.

Preparation. — Take  of  Green  Cucumbers  (suitable  for  table  use),
seven  pounds;  Pure  White  Lard  twenty-four  ounces;  Selected  Veal  Suet,
cut  in  pieces,  fifteen  ounces.  The  unpared  Cucumbers,  after  being
washed,  are  to  be  reduced  to  a  pulp  by  grating,  and  the  Juice  expressed
and  strained.  The  Suet  is  to  be  heated  over  a  salt-water  bath,  until  the
fat  is  fused  out  from  the  membranes ;  then  add  the  Lard,  and  when
liquefied  strain  the  mixture  through  muslin  into  a  wide-mouthed  earthen
vessel  capable  of  holding  a  gallon,  and  stir  it  until  it  commences  to
thicken,  when  one  third  of  the  Cucumber  Juice  is  to  be  added  and
beaten  with  the  ointment,  by  means  of  a  wooden  spatula,  until  its  odor
has  been  almost  wholly  extracted,  and  which  will  require  several  hours.
Then  allow  it  to  stand  until  the  fluid  separates,  which  must  be  removed
by  decantation,  and  add  another  third  of  the  Juice.  This  must  be  beaten
in  like  manner  until  exhausted,  then  decanted,  and  finally  the  last  third
added,  and  similarly  treated.  The  jar  is  then  to  be  closely  covered  and
placed  in  a  water-bath,  where  it  must  remain  an  hour,  or  until  the  fatty
matter  entirely  separates  from  the  exhausted  juice.  The  green  albu-
minous coagulum  which  floats  upon  the  surface  is  then  to  be  skimmed
off,  and  the  jar  put  aside  in  a  cool  place  that  the  ointment  may  solidify.
The  crude  ointment  is  then  to  be  carefully  separated  from  the  watery
liquid  on  which  it  floats,  melted  by  a  gentle  heat,  and  strained — a  part
into  a  jar  and  closely  sealed  for  keeping — the  remainder  into  a  mortar,
and  triturated  with  a  little  rose-water,  until  it  is  very  white  and  creamy,
for  present  use.  It  is  usual  to  keep  this  ointment  in  glass  jars  without
allowing  any  unfilled  interstices,  and  to  cover  it  with  rose-water  to  pre-
vent the  access  of  air.  Thus  prepared  Cucumber  Ointment  readily
keeps  from  season  to  season.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  emollient  application,  very  use-
ful for  chapped  lips  and  hands,  irritated  and  excoriated  surfaces,  etc.

Unguentum  Fuliginis. Ointment  of  Woodsoot.

Preparation. — Take  of  Woodsoot,  in  very  fine  powder,  half  an  ounce;
Lard  two  ounces. Triturate  them  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — Applied  on  cotton  batting  this  ointment  is  very
useful  in  burns,  and  erysipelatous  inflammations ;  and  is  also  beneficial
in  tinea  capitis,  and  several  cutaneous  diseases.


1284  Pharmacy.

Unguentum  Gall^e. Ointment  of  Galls.

Preparation. — Take  of  Galls,  in  powder,  an  ounce;  Lard  seven  ounces.
Triturate  them  together. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  useful  in  prolapsus  ani,  piles,
flabby  and  indolent  ulcers.  When  the  piles  are  irritable,  half  a  drachm
of  pulverized  opium  may  be  advantageously  added.

Unguentum  IodiniiCompositum. Compound  Ointment  of  Iodine.

Preparation. — Take  of  Iodine  half  a  drachm;  Iodide  of  Potassium  a
drachm;  Alcohol  a fuidrachm;  Lard  two  ounces.  Rub  the  Iodine  and
Iodide  of  Potassium  first  with  the  Alcohol,  and  then  with  the  Lard  until
they  are  thoroughly  mixed. —  U  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  used  as  a  local  application,
in  goitre,  scrofulous,  and  other  chronic  enlargements  and  in  opacities  of
the  cornea;  the  discoloration  of  the  skin  occasioned  by  its  use  gradually
disappears.  Applied  twice  a  day  to  enlarged  tonsils,  by  means  of  a
camel's  hair  pencil,  it  has  caused  the  enlargement  to  disappear  in  the
course  of  two  months.  It  probably  acts  through  the  medium  of  absorp-
tion. It  is  better  to  prepare  it  only  as  it  is  required  for  use.

Unguentum  Ipecacuanha. Ointment  of  Ipecacuanha.

Preparation. — Take  of  Ipecacuanha,  in  powder,  two  drachms;  Olive
Oil  two  fluidrachms;  Lard  half  an  ounce. Mix  together

Properties  and  Uses. — Rubbed  on  the  skin  for  a  few  minutes,  once  or
twice  a  day,  this  ointment  produces  an  eruption.  It  is  used  as  a
counter-irritant  in  diseases  of  the  throat,  and  in  pulmonary  affections  is
applied  to  the  chest.  When  it  is  desired  to  make  it  more  active,  Croton
Oil  a  fluidrachm  and  a  half,  may  be  added  to  the  above  formula.  If
rubbed  on  the  surface  for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes  at  a  time,  repeated
three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  covered  with  flannel  after  each  applica-
tion, it  will  produce  vesicles  in  thirty-six  hours.

Unguentum  Mezerei. Ointment  of  Mezereon.

Preparation. — Take  of  Mezereon,  sliced  transversely,  four  ounces;
Lard  fourteen  ounces;  White  Wax  two  ounces.  Moisten  the  Mezereon
with  a  little  Alcohol,  and  beat  in  an  iron  mortar  until  reduced  to  a  fibrous
mass  ;  then  digest  it  by  means  of  a  salt-water  bath,  with  the  Lard  and
Wax  previously  melted  together,  for  twelve  hours ;  strain  with  strong
expression,  and  allow  the  strained  liquid  to  cool  slowly,  so  that  any
undissolved  matters  may  subside.  From  these  separate  the  medicated
ointment. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  used  as  a  stimulating  application  to
obstinate,  ill-conditioned,  and  indolent  ulcers  ;  likewise  to  blistered  sur-
faces, in  order  to  maintain  the  discharge.

Unguentum  Myrica. Ointment  of  Bayherry.

Preparation. — Take  of  Bayberry  Tallow,  White  Turpentine,  of  each,
half  a  pound;  Olive  Oil  four  ounces. Melt  together  and  strain.


Unguenta.  1285

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  excellent  application  to  scrofu-
lous ulcers,  and  indolent  ulcers  generally.

Unguentum  Myrica  Compositum. Compound  Ointment  of  Bayberry.
Preparation.— Take  of  Bayberry  Tallow,  Sweet  Gum,  each,  half  a
pound;  Suet  a  pound. Melt  together  and  strain.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  very  advantageous  in  scrofu-
lous ulcers,  tinea-capitis,  porrigo  scutulata,  itch,  salt-rheum,  and  several
other  forms  of  cutaneous  disease ;  also  in  itch,  piles,  and  fistulous  ulcers.
In  fistula  and  some  cutaneous  diseases  the  addition  of  three  or  four
drachms  of  Sulphate  of  Zinc,  in  powder,  will  be  found  beneficial. — /.  K.

Unguentum  Phytolacca. Ointment  of  Poke.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Leaves  of  Poke,  collected  just  before  the
ripening  of  the  berries,  four  pounds  ;  Lard  one  pound  ;  Spirits  one  pint ;
Wax  two  ounces.  Mix,  and  slowly  simmer  together  until  the  Leaves  are
crisp,  and  then  express  through  linen.

An  ointment  is  sometimes  made  by  mixing  one  drachm  of  the  Pow-
dered Poke  Leaves  or  Root,  or  of  the  Extract  of  Poke,  with  one  ounce
of  Lard.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  used  as  an  application  to  ulcers,  por-
rigo, tinea-capitis,  and  other  cutaneous  affections,  and  as  a  discutient  to
various  tumors.

Unguentum  Piers  Liquids. Ointment  of  Tar.

Preparation.  — Take  of  Suet  one  pound;  Tar  one  pound.  Melt  the
Suet,  then  add  the  Tar,  and  stir  constantly  until  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  stimulant  application  in  various
scabby  and  scaly  eruptions,  particularly  in  psoriasis,  and  in  that  form  of
porrigo  usually  called  tinea-capitis,  or  scald-head.  In  this  last  named
disease,  it  should  be  applied  night  and  morning;  and  in  bad  cases  the
patient  should  constantly  wear  a  cap,  thickly  spread  with  the  ointment
upon  its  internal  surface.

Unguentum  Piperis  Nigri. Ointment  of  Black  Pepper.

Preparation. — Take  of  Prepared  Lard  a  pound;  Soot  four  ounces;  Tar
one  pint ;  Black  Pepper,  in  powder,  four  ounces.  Melt  the  Lard  and
Tar  together,  then  add  the  Soot  and  Pepper.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  used  in  tinea-capitis,  in  the  same  man-
ner as  the  preceding  ointment.

Unguentum  Plumbi  Compositum.  Compound  Lead  Ointment.  Mayer's
Ointment.

Preparation. — Take  of  Olive  Oil  two  pounds  and  a  half;  White  Tur-
pentine half  a  pound;  Beeswax,  Unsalted  Butter,  of  each,  four  ounces;
Red  Lead  one  pound;  Honey  twelve  ounces  ;  Powdered  Camphor  half  a
pound. Melt  tie  Olive  Oil,  White  Turpentine,  Beeswax  and  Butter


1286  Pharmacy.

together,  and  strain;  then  heat  them  to  nearly  the  boiling  point,  and
gradually  add  the  Red  Lead,  stirring  the  mixture  constantly  until  it  be-
comes black  or  brown.  Then  remove  from  the  fire,  and  when  it  has
become  somewhat  cool,  add  to  it  the  Honey  and  Camphor,  previously
mixed  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  very  beneficial  ointment  for  all
hinds  of  ulcers,  cuts,  wounds,  and  several  cutaneous  diseases.  It  is  of
a  more  solid  consistence  than  ointments  are  generally.  It  is  highly
prized  by  the  German  population,  who  have  held  it  for  a  long  time,  as  a
secret  among  themselves.  The  profession  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Jos.  P.
Mayer,  of  Cincinnati,  for  a  knowledge  of  it.

Unguentum  Potassii  Cyanureti. Ointment  of  Cyanuret  of  Potassium.

Preparation. — Take  of  Cyanuret  of  Potassium  twelve  grains;  Oil  of
Almonds  two  drachms;  Cold  Cream  two  ounces. Triturate  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  used  as  an  application  to  the  sound
skin,  in  neuralgia.

Unguentum  Potassii  Sulphubeti.  Ointment  of  Sulphuret  of  Potassium.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphuret  of  Potassium  three  drachms;  Carbo-
nate of  Soda  three  ounces;  Lard  three  ounces.  Triturate  thoroughly
together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  useful  in  ringworm,  itch,  and
other  forms  of  cutaneous  disease.

Unguentum  Sabin^e. Ointment  of  Savin.

Preparation. — Take  of  fresh  Savin  Leaves,  Yellow  Wax,  each,  eight
ounces;  Lard  two  pounds.  Boil  gently  together  until  the  leaves  are  crisp,
and  strain.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  preparation  is  stimulant,  and  is  used  for
maintaining  discharges  from  ulcers,  blisters,  etc.

Unguentum  Scrophulari^e. Ointment  of  Figwort.

Preparation. — Take  of  fresh  Figwort  Leaves  two  pounds  ;  Lard  one
pound ;  Tallow  half  a  pound.  Boil  together  until  the  Leaves  are  crisp,
and  then  strain  with  expression.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  useful  in  piles,  painful  tumors,
ulcers,  and  cutaneous  diseases ;  Dr.  W.  Stokes  considers  it  a  specific  in
gangrenous  pemphigus.

Unguentum  Simplex. Simple  Ointment.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  White  Wax  a  pound  ;  Lard  four  pounds.
Melt  them  together,  with  a  moderate  heat,  and  stir  them  constantly  till
they  are  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  emollient  ointment,  employed  as  a
mild  dressing  to  ulcers,  blisters,  and  excoriated  surfaces,  and  frequently


Unguenta.  1287

used  as  a  vehicle  for  the  application  of  more  active  substances ;  it  also
serves  as  a  basis  for  several  other  ointments.

Unguentum  Stramonii. Ointment  of  Stramonium.

Preparation. — Take  of  Extract  of  Stramonium  Leaves  a  drachm;  Lard
an  ounce.  Rub  the  Extract  with  a  little  Water  until  uniformly  soft,  and
then  with  the  Lard. —  U.  S.

This  ointment  may  likewise  be  made  as  follows,  but  the  preparation
is  inferior  to  that  made  according  to  the  formula  just  given :  Take  of
fresh  Stramonium  Leaves,  cut  in  pieces,  one  pound;  Lard  one  pound;
Yellow  Wax  three  ounces.  Boil  together  until  the  Leaves  become  crisp,
and  then  strain  with  expression.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  an  anodyne  ointment,  which  will  be
found  serviceable  in  irritable  ulcers,  burns,  scalds,  irritable  cutaneous
diseases,  painful  hemorrhoids,  and  as  a  discutient  to  indolent  tumors.

Unguentum  Stramonii  Compositum.  Compound  Ointment  of  Stra-
monium. Discutient  Ointment.

Preparation. — Take  of  the  Bark  of  the  Root  of  Bittersweet,  Stra-
monium Leaves,  Cicuta  Leaves,  Deadly  Nightshade,  Yellow  Dock  Root,
each,  two  ounces;  Lard  one  pound;  Venice  Turpentine  two  ounces;  Spirits
a  sufficient  quantity.  Bruise  the  Roots  and  Leaves,  cover  them  with
Spirits,  and  allow  them  to  digest  with  a  moderate  heat  for  four  hours,
then  add  the  Lard  and  continue  the  heat  until  the  Leaves  are  crisped.
Lastly,  strain  and  express  through  linen,  add  the  Turpentine,  and  stir
constantly  till  cold.

This  ointment  may  likewise  be  made  by  mixing  together,  two  ounces
each,  of  the  Ointments  of  the  articles  prepared  separately,  and  the
Turpentine.  The  Ointments  to  be  prepared  as  follows:  those  of  the
Yellow  Dock  Root,  and  Bittersweet  Bark,  to  be  made  by  beating  each
separate  article  in  the  recent  state,  with  Lard,  after  the  manner  for  pre-
paring Cucumber  Ointment ;  the  remaining  Ointments,  each  to  be  pre-
pared from  the  extracts  of  the  several  articles,  after  the  manner  for
preparing  Stramonium  Ointment.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  exceedingly  valuable  in  dis-
cussing scrofulous,  indolent,  and  all  glandular  tumors  or  swellings.  It
should  be  rubbed  on  the  parts,  about  thirty  minutes  at  each  application;
after  which  cover  the  part  with  cotton,  and  secure  it  by  a  proper  bandage.

Unguentum  Sulphuris. Ointment  of  Sulphur.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphur  a  pound ;  Lard  two  pounds;  Oil  of
Bergamot  two  and  a,  half  drachms. Mix  them.

Properties  and  Uses. — Sulphur  ointment  is  considered  a  specific  for
the  itch.  It  is  generally  applied  every  night  till  the  disease  is  cured;
and  usually  but  one-fourth  of  the  body  is  covered  at  a  time.  However,
it  has  been  applied  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  body,  daily,  without


1288  Pharmacy.

any  unpleasant  results. It  will  also be  found  useful  in  tinea-capitis,
crusta-lactea,  and  several  other  cutaneous  diseases.

Unguentum  Sulphuris  Compositum. Compound  Ointment  of  Sulphur.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphur  half  a  pound;  White  Hellebore,  in
powder,  one  ounce;  Nitrate  of  Potassa  a  drachm;  Soft  Soap  half  a  -pound;
Poke  Ointment  a  pound  and  a  half;  Oil  of  Bergamot  two  fluidrachms.
Mix  the  articles  thoroughly  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  ointment  is  more  irritating  than  the  simple
sulphur  ointment;  but,  notwithstanding  it  will  be  found  efficacious  in  the
treatment  of  itch,  especially  when  it  proves  very  obstinate  and  unyield-
ing to  the  milder  treatment.

Unguentum  Tabaci. Ointment  of  Tobacco.

Preparation. — Take  of  fresh  Tobacco,  cut  in  pieces,  an  ounce ;  Lard
a  pound ;  Yellow  "Wax  one  ounce.  Boil  the  Tobacco  in  them  over  a
gentle  fire  till  it  becomes  friable  ;  then  strain  through  linen.

Properties  and  Uses. — Tobacco  Ointment  forms  an  anodyne  applica-
tion, useful  in  various  cutaneous  eruptions,  especially  tinea-capitis,  in
irritable  ulcers,  painful  swellings,  etc.  In  using  it,  great  care  must  be
taken  not  to  produce  its  constitutional  narcotic  effects,  by  employing  too
large  quantities  of  it.  An  ointment  made  from  the  dried  leaves  is  of
but  little  value  ;  one  made  by  rubbing  twenty  drops  of  the  empyreu-
matic  oil  of  tobacco  with  an  ounce  of  simple  ointment,  forms  an  active
preparation.

Unguentum  Veratri  Albi. Ointment  of  White  Hellebore,

Preparation. — Take  of  White  Hellebore  Root,  in  powder,  two  ounces;
Oil  of  Lemons  twenty  minims ;  Lard  eight  ounces. Mix  them. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses.  This  ointment,  being  less  disagreeable  than
sulphur  ointment,  is  sometimes  employed  in  itch  with  benefit;  but  it
should  be  cautiously  applied  to  children.  The  substitution  of  Poke
Ointment  for  the  Lard,  will  render  it  still  more  certain  and  effective.

Unguentum  Veratria. Ointment  of  Veratria.

Preparation. — Take  of  Veratria  ten  or  twenty  grains;  Lard  an  ounce.
Triturate  the  Veratria  in  a  little  Olive  Oil,  and  then  add  the  Lard.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  powerful  local  stimulant,  very
useful  in  neuralgia,  amaurosis,  and  paralysis.  It  must  be  employed
with  care.

Unguentum  Zinci  Oxidi. Ointment  of  Oxide  of  Zinc.

Preparation. — Take  of  Oxide  of  Zinc  an  ounce;  Lard  six  ounces.  Mix
them.—  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  mild  astringent  ointment,  useful
as  a  local  application  in  chronic  ophthalmia  where  the  vessels  of  the  eye


Unguenta  — Veratria.  1289

are  relaxed,  in  several  eruptions  of  the  skin,  in  sore  nipples,  and  in
cases  of  excoriation  or  ulceration.

Unguentum  Zinct  Oxidi  Compositum.  Compound  Ointment  of  Oxide
of  Zinc.

Preparation. — Take  of  Olive  Oil  two  pounds;  Spermaceti  twelve  ounces;
White  Wax  four  ounces  ;  Oxide  of  Zinc  seven  ounces;  Benzoic  Acid  two
drachms  ;  Sulphate  of  Morphia  forty-eight  grains  ;  Oil  of  Roses  twenty
minims.  Rub  together  in  a  mortar,  until  no  specks  are  seen,  the  Oxide
of  Zinc,  Benzoic  Acid,  Sulphate  of  Morphia,  and  Oil  of  Roses.  Melt
the  Olive  Oil,  Wax,  and  Spermaceti  together,  and  add  the  above  tritu-
rated mass  to  it,  stirring  constantly  till  nearly  cold.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  mild  stimulating  and  astringent
preparation,  which  is  exceedingly  useful  in  acute  and  chronic  ophthalmia,
opacities  of  the  cornea,  nebula,  granulations  of  the  lids,  etc.  It  is  like-
wise useful  in  many  cutaneous  diseases,  and  may  be  advantageously
employed  as  a  dressing  to  wounds  and  indolent  ulcers.

It  is  somewhat  similar  to  a  preparation  which  has  been  extensively
sold  under  the  name  of  "Pettit's  Ophthalmic  Balsam  or  Eye  Salve,"  and
the  formula  of  which  is  as  follows  :  Take  of  White  Precipitate  three
ounces;  Oxide  of  Zinc  four  ounces;  Benzoic  Acid  two  drachms;  Sulphate
of  Morphia  forty-eight  grains;  Oil  of  Rosemary  twenty  drops.  Rub  these
thoroughly  together,  in  a  mortar,  until  they  are  well  incorporated,  and
then  add  them  gradually  to  a  warm  compound  made  by  melting  together
Olive  Oil  two  pounds;  Spermaceti  twelve  ounces;  White  Wax  four  ounces;
stirring  constantly  till  cold.

A  preparation  of  a  similar  character,  known  as  Brown  or  Ophthalmic
Ointment,  has  enjoyed  considerable  reputation  in  the  east,  in  the  treat-
ment of  Ophthalmic  diseases  ;  it  is  composed  of  Red  Precipitate  two  and
a  half  drachms;  Oxide  of  Zinc  one  drachm;  Fresh  Butter  three  ounces;
White  Wax  half  an  ounce;  Camphor,  dissolved  in  Olive  Oil,  one  drachm.
Mix. It  is  a  French  preparation.

Unguentum  Zinci  Sulphuratis. Ointment  of  Sulphate  of  Zinc.

Preparation. — Take  of  Sulphate  of  Zinc  one  scruple;  Fresh  Butter  two
drachms. Triturate  together.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  Ointment  is  very  beneficial  in  eruptions  of
the  skin,  fungous  growths,  gangrenous  and  indolent  ulcers,  fistula,  hem-
orrhoids, ulcerations  of  the  cornea,  etc.  If  it  acts  too  severely  it  may
be  rendered  milder  by  the  addition  of  butter  in  necessary  quantity.


VERATRIA.

Veratria.
Preparation. — Take  of  Cevadilla,  bruised,  two  pounds;  Alcohol  three
gallons;  Sulphuric  Acid,  Solution  of  Ammonia,  Purified  Animal  Char-


1290  Pharmacy.

coal,  Magnesia,  each,  a  sufficient  quantity.  Boil  the  Cevadilla  in  a  gallon
of  the  Alcohol,  in  a  retort  with  a  receiver  attached,  for  an  hour,  and  pour
off  the  liquor.  To  the  residue  add  another  gallon  of  the  Alcohol,
together  with  the  portion  recently  distilled  ;  again  boil  for  an  hour,  and
pour  off  the  liquor.  Repeat  the  boiling  a  third  time  with  the  remaining
Alcohol,  and  with  that  distilled  in  the  previous  operation.  Press  the
Cevadilla,  mix  and  strain  the  liquors,  and  by  means  of  a  water-bath
distil  off  the  Alcohol.  Boil  the  residue  three  or  four  times  in  Water
acidulated  with  Sulphuric  Acid,  mix  and  strain  the  liquors,  and  evapo-
rate to  the  consistence  of  syrup.  Add  Magnesia  in  slight  excess,  shake
the  mixture  frequently,  then  express,  and  wash  what  remains.  Repeat
the  expression  and  washing  two  or  three  times,  and,  having  dried  the
residue,  digest  it  with  a  gentle  heat  several  times  in  Alcohol,  and  strain
after  each  digestion.  Distil  off  the  Alcohol  from  the  mixed  liquors,
boil  the  residue  for  fifteen  minutes  in  Water  with  a  little  Sulphuric  Acid
and  Purified  Animal  Charcoal,  and  strain.  Having  thoroughly  washed
what  remains,  mix  the  washings  with  the  strained  liquor,  evaporate  with
a  moderate  heat  to  the  consistence  of  Syrup,  and  then  drop  in  as  much
Solution  of  Ammonia  as  may  be  necessary  to  precipitate  the  Veratria.
Lastly,  separate  and  dry  the  precipitate. —  U.  S.

History. — By  the  above  process,  a  Tincture  of  Cevadilla  is  first
obtained,  which  is  subsequently  evaporated  to  the  consistence  of  an
extract,  which  contains  the  veratria  combined  with  some  vegetable  acid.
The  veratria  is  dissolved  from  the  extract  by  the  acidulated  water,
which  converts  the  greater  portion  of  it  into  a  sulphate;  an  excess  of
the  native  acid  holding  the  remainder  in  solution.  The  sulphuric  acid
combines  with  the  magnesia,  when  added,  forming  a  sulphate  of  mag-
nesia, while  the  veratria  is  precipitated,  again  dissolved  by  alcohol,  and
purified  by  evaporation.  For  further  purification  it  is  again  dissolved  in
acidulated  water,  acted  upon  by  animal  charcoal,  and  finally  precipi-
tated by  ammonia.  A  drachm  of  impure  veratria  is,  by  the  above
method,  obtained  from  a  pound  of  cevadilla.

The  veratria  produced  by  this  process,  though  sufficiently  pure  for
medical  purposes,  is  not  wholly  free  from  other  principles ;  M.  Couerbe
states  that  Sabadillia  and  Veratrin  are  also  contained  in  it.  They  may
be  separated  as  follows  :  To  the  solution  of  the  impure  sulphate  of
veratria  obtained  by  the  above  process,  add  nitric  acid,  gradually,  by
drops,  and  decant  the  clear  liquor  from  the  abundant  precipitate  which
ensues.  To  this  liquor  add  a  weak  solution  of  potassa,  which  will  also
produce  a  precipitate  ;  wash  this  precipitate  with  cold  water,  and  dis-
solve it  in  boiling  alcohol.  On  evaporating  the  alcohol,  the  product
yields  the  sabadillia  to  boiling  water,  which  deposits  it  upon  cooling  ;  a
resini-ffum  of  sabadillia,  so  named  by  M.  Couerbe  remaining  in  solution.
After  the  action  of  the  boiling  water  upon  the  product,  if  this  be  again
acted  upon  by  ether,  the  veratria  will  be  dissolved,  and  may  be  obtained


Veratria.  1291

eutirely  pure  by  the  spontaneous  evaporation  of  the  ether.  The  remain-
ing undissolved  resinous  substance  is  called  Veratrin  by  M.  Couerbe.
Babadillia  is  a  white,  crystallizable,  most  intensely  acrid  substance,  fusible
by  heat,  readily  soluble  in  hot  water,  but  deposited  upon  cooling,  very
soluble  in  alcohol,  and  wholly  insoluble  in  ether.  It  is  capable  of  satu-
rating the  acids.  Simon  states  it  to  be  a  compound  of  resinate  of  soda
and  resinate  of  veratria.

Mr.  Jas.  Beatson,  of  the  U.  S.  Naval  Laboratory,  N.  Y.,  has  given  the
following  process  for  procuring  veratria,  which  he  considers  superior  to
any  other  in  use  :  Seventy-three  pounds  (avoirdupois)  of  sabadilla
were  rubbed  upon  a  coarse  wire  sieve,  which  separated  the  seed  from
the  capsules,  and  reduced  to  a  coarse  powder,  in  Swift's  drug  mill.
Finding  that  a  portion  of  the  veratria  was  still  retained  with  the  mem-
branous follicle,  he  also  passed  the  capsules  through  the  mill,  which,
from  their  elasticity,  were  but  coarsely  comminuted  ;  the  finer  portions
he  separated  with  a  coarse  sieve,  and  mixed  with  the  ground  seeds,
moistened  with  alcohol,  and  allowed  them  to  stand  for  twelve  hours.
He  then  introduced  them  into  a  displacement  apparatus,  and  exhausted
them  thoroughly  with  rectified  alcohol,  in  the  following  manner  :  Into
the  displacement  apparatus  he  introduced  thirty  gallons  of  rectified  alco-
hol, and  when  a  quantity  had  percolated  sufficient  to  fill  his  still,  he
commenced  distillation — returning  the  recovered  alcohol  into  the  dis-
placement apparatus  and  continuing  the  percolation  and  distillation,
until  the  seeds  were  thoroughly  exhausted — collected  all  the  alcohol  he
could  from  the  exhausted  seeds,  and  continued  the  distillation  until  the
tincture,  in  the  bottom  of  the  still,  was  of  a  syrupy  consistence,  poured
this,  while  hot,  into  eight  times  its  volume  of  cold  water,  threw  the  whole
upon  a  calico  filter,  and  washed  with  cold  water,  until  the  washings
ceased  to  indicate  the  presence  of  veratria ;  mixed  the  washings  with
what  passed  first  through  the  filter.and  added  liquor  ammonia?  in  excess
(about  four  pounds),  which  precipitated  the  veratria  with  a  little  of  the
coloring  matter.  Washed  the  precipitate  with  cold  water  which  removed
the  greater  portion  of  the  coloring  matter.  Dried  with  a  very  gentle
heat,  and  when  the  moisture  was  completely  expelled,  eleven  and  a
quarter  ounces  of  pure  veratria  were  obtained,  with  but  a  faint  shade  of
coloring  matter. — Am.  Jour.  Pharm.,  Vol.  xxvi,  p.  2,  1 854.

Pure  Veratria  is  white,  uncrystallizable,  pulverulent,  inodorous,  ex-
tremely acrid,  fusible  by  heat,  scarcely  soluble  in  cold  water,  soluble  in
a  thousand  parts  of  boiling  water,  which  it  renders  sensibly  acrid,  freely
soluble  in  alcohol,  less  so  in  ether,  neutralizing  the  acids,  forming
crystallizable  salts  with  several  of  them,  especially  the  muriatic  and
sulphuric.  The  ordinary  commercial  veratria  is  a  grayish-brown  or
grayish-white  powder,  of  an  overpowering,  bitter,  acrid  taste,  producing
a  sense  of  tingling  or  numbness  in  the  tongue,  and  powerfully  irritating
to  the  nostrils,  causing,  when  admitted  into  them,  violent  sneezing  and


1292  Pharmacy.

mucous  discharge.  According  to  Couerbe  the  composition  of  sabadillia
is  C20  H13  Oo  N,  and  that  of  pure  veratria  C3i  H22  06  N.  Veratria  may
be  used  in  the  uncorabined  state,  or  united  with  acids,  as  in  both  forms
it  produces  essentially  the  same  effects.

Veratria  is  uncrystallizable,  fusible,  combustible,  entirely  dissipated
by  a  red  heat,  becomes  intensely  red  upon  contact  with  concentrated
sulphuric  acid,  forms  a  yellow  solution  with  nitric  acid,  and  its  solution
in  dilute  acetic  acid  gives  white  precipitates  with  ammonia  and  the  infu-
sion of  galls.

Properties  and  Uses. — Veratria  is  a  powerful  irritant,  capable  of  pro-
ducing inflammation  in  the  parts  to  which  it  is  applied,  and  extending  a
peculiar  action  to  the  nervous  system.  Rubbed  upon  the  skin  it  excites
a  sensation  of  warmth,  and  a  peculiar  tingling,  which,  when  the  applica-
tion is  continued  for  a  considerable  length  of  time,  extends,  according  to
Turnbull,  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  body.  Sometimes  an  evanescent
blush  is  produced,  and  still  more  rarely,  an  eruption  upon  the  skin ;
but,  according  to  the  same  author,  no  marks  of  inflammation  are,  in
general,  evinced.  Upon  the  denuded  cutis,  however,  veratria  and  its
salts  are  powerfully  irritating,  so  much  so  as  to  prevent  their  advanta-
geous application  in  this  way.  In  the  mouth  and  fauces,  they  produce
an  almost  insupportable  sense  of  acrimony ;  and  snuffed  up  the  nostrils,
excite  violent  sneezing.  Magendie  informs  us  that  when  taken  inter-
nally, in  the  dose  of  a  quarter  of  a  grain,  they  promptly  produce  abun-
dant alvine  evacuations,  and  in  larger  doses,  provoke  more  or  less  violent
vomiting.  Dr.  Turnbull,  on  the  contrary,  says  that  he  has  very  seldom
found  them  to  purge,  even  when  largely  administered,  and  that  not
unfrequently  a  state  of  constipation  comes  on  during  their  employment,
requiring  the  use  of  aperient  medicine.  According  to  this  author,  their
first  effect,  when  given  in  moderate  doses,  is  a  feeling  of  warmth  in  the
stomach,  gradually  extending  itself  over  the  abdomen  and  lower  part
of  the  chest,  and  ultimately  to  the  head  and  extremities.  If  the  medi-
cine is  continued,  this  feeling  of  warmth  is  followed  by  a  sense  of
tingling,  similar  to  that  produced  by  the  external  use  of  the  medicine,
which  manifests  itself  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  and  sometimes  over
the  whole  surface,  and  is  frequently  accompanied  by  perspiration,  and
some  feeling  of  oppression.  Occasionally,  also,  diuresis  is  produced.  A
still  further  continuance  of  the  medicine,  or  the  use  of  large  doses,
excites  nausea  and  vomiting. It  occasions  no  narcotic  effects.

The  diseases  in  which  veratria  has  been  employed  are  chiefly  gout,
rheumatism,  and  neuralgia.  Dr.  Turnbull  has  found  it  useful,  also,  in
dropsy,  and  in  diseases  of  the  heart,  particularly  those  of  a  functional
character.  He  thinks  he  has  also  seen  it  do  good  in  organic  diseases  of
this  organ,  but  chiefly  by  acting  as  a  diuretic,  and  thereby  removing
effusion  in  the  pericardium. For  internal  use,  the  salts  of  veratria  are


Vina  Medicata.  1293

preferred.  From  one-twelfth  to  one-sixth  of  a  grain  may  be  given  in
the  form  of  pill,  and  repeated  every  three  hours  till  the  effects  of  the
medicine  are  experienced.  Dr.  Turnbull  prefers  the  tartrate,  as  less
disposed  to  irritate  the  stomach.  The  sulphate  or  acetate,  however,
may  be  used.  Any  one  of  these  salts  may  be  readily  prepared  by  treat-
ing veratria  with  water,  acidulated  with  the  acid  to  perfect  neutralization,
and  then  evaporating  to  dryness.

But  veratria  is  much  more  employed  externally  than  by  the  stomach,
and  is  applicable,  in  this  way,  to  all  the  complaints  already  mentioned.
It  may  be  used  either  dissolved  in  alcohol,  or  rubbed  up  with  lard,  or
other  unctuous  substance,  in  the  proportion  of  ten  to  twenty  grains  or
more  to  the  ounce.  Of  the  ointment  thus  prepared,  Dr.  Turnbull
directs  a  portion,  of  the  size  of  a  large  nut,  to  be  rubbed  upon  the  skin,
over  the  part  affected,  night  and  morning,  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes,
or  until  the  more  urgent  symptoms  are  relieved.  Veratria  may  be  used
in  this  way  to  the  amount  of  from  four  to  eight  grains  a  day.  Care  must
be  taken  that  the  cuticle  is  sound  over  the  parts  to  which  it  is  applied.
When  the  skin  is  irritable,  smaller  quantities  than  those  above  mentioned
must  be  used. —  U.  S.  Disp.


VINA  MEDICATA.

Medicated  "Wines.

By  Medicated  Wines  we  mean  the  tinctures  of  those  medicinal  agents
which  are  insoluble  in  water,  or  which  do  not  require  as  stimulant  a
solvent  as  rectified  or  proof  spirit,  but  which  are  capable  of  yielding
their  virtues  to  wine,  either  pure  or  diluted.  As  a  general  thing  vinous
tinctures  are  much  inferior  to  alcoholic,  on  account  of  their  liability  to
undergo  decomposition,  and  the  uncertainty  of  their  strength,  and  should,
therefore,  be  prepared  in  small  quantities,  without  heat,  and  kept  in
well  stopped  bottles  in  a  cool  place.  Bitters  and  cordials  have,  heretofore,
been  among  the  prominent  medical  agents  peculiar  to  Eclectic  practice,
a  few  of  which  are  yet  retained,  and  some  of  which  we  have  placed
under  the  present  head  in  order  to  avoid  the  introduction  of  a  new  class
of  pharmaceutical  preparations  ;  yet,  from  the  consequences  following  a
course  of  treatment  by  bitters,  viz  :  the  cultivation  of  a  taste  or  appetite
for  alcoholic  stimulus,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  even  these  will  eventually
be  dispensed  with  for  means  and  preparations  fully  as  efficacious,  and
without  the  evil  results  which  sometimes  occur  from  their  use.

Wines  owe  their  solvent  properties  to  the  alcohol  which  they  contain,
as  well  as  to  acid  which  they  usually  hold  in  greater  or  less  proportion  ;
and  in  the  selection  of  them  for  medical  purposes,  the  purest  qualities
only  should  be  selected  —  those  most  commonly  employed  are  Sherry,
Madeira,  and  Teneriffe.  Sherry  Wine  is  preferable  to  all  others  in  pre-
paring medicated  wines,  as  being  less  liable  to  change  or  decomposition;


1294  Pharmacy.

probably  native  toine  would  answer,  but  it  has  not  been  fully  tested  in
these  preparations.

Vinum  Cinchona  Compositum. Compound  Wine  of  Peruvian  Bark.

Preparation. — Take  of  Peruvian  Bark  two  ounces;  Wild  Cherry  Bark,
Sulphur,  of  each,  one  ounce;  Cinnamon,  Cloves,  Nutmegs,  of  each,  one
drachm  ;  Sherry  Wine,  or  Native  Wine  four  pints.  Macerate  for  seven
days  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  valuable  agent  in  intermittent  fever,
and  in  chronic  diseases  attended  with  symptoms  of  a  periodical  charac-
ter. The  dose  is  two  fiuidounces,  every  one,  two,  or  three  hours,  during
the  intermission. It  is  at  present  superseded  by  other  preparations.

Vinum  Colchici  Radicis. Wine  of  Colchicum  Root.

Preparation. — Take  of  Colchicum  Root,  well  bruised,  a  pound  ;  Sherry
Wine  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  with  occasional  agitation  ;
then  express  strongly  and  filter  through  paper.

Wine  of  Colchicum  Root  may  also  be  prepared  by  macerating  as
above,  then  transferring  to  a  percolator,  and,  after  the  liquor  has  ceased
to  pass,  pouring  «o  much  Wine  upon  the  residue  that  the  filtered  liquor
obtained  may  measure  two  pints. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  bulb  of  Colchicum  which  is  imported  into
this  country  is  very  variable  in  strength,  and  the  only  method  by  which
an  active  vinous  solution  of  it  can  be  ensured,  is  to  use  it  in  large  propor-
tion, as  given  in  the  formula,  so  as  to  be  certain  of  procuring  a  saturated
preparation.  It  is  employed  by  some  practitioners  in  gout,  gouty  rheu-
matism, and  neuralgia,  and  will  be  found  more  decided  in  its  influence,
if  given  in  connection  with  magnesia  or  its  sulphate.  In  neuralgia  it
maybe  beneficially  administered  in  combination  with  solution  of  sulphate
of  morphia.  Overdoses  may  occasion  serious  results.  The  dose  is  from
ten  minims  to  a  fluidrachm,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  or  oftener  in  severe
cases,  until  its  peculiar  effects  have  manifested  themselves.

Vinum  Colchici  Seminis. Wine  of  Colchicum  Seed.

Preparation. — Take  of  Colchicum  Seed,  bruised,  four  ounces;  Sherry
Wine  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  with  occasional  agitation  ;
then  express,  and  filter  through  paper. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — The  seeds  of  Colchicum  being  of  more  uniform
strength,  and  not  so  liable  to  injury  as  the  bulb,  do  not  require  therefore
to  be  used  so  largely  in  proportion  to  their  menstruum  as  the  bulb.
This  medicated  wine  may  be  employed  for  the  same  purposes  as  the
wine  of  the  bulb,  or  the  tincture  of  the  seeds.  In  overdoses  it  is  capa-
ble of  producing  death.  The  dose  is  one  or  two  fluidrachms.  To  obtain
their  full  medicinal  activity  the  seeds  should  always  be  bruised.

Vinum  Ergots. Wine  of  Ergot.

Preparation. — Take  of  Ergot,  bruised,  two  ounces ;  Sherry  Wine  a  pint.


Vina  Medicata.  1295

Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  with  occasional  agitation  ;  then  express  and
filter  through  paper. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  may  be  used  during  labor,  as  a  parturient,
in  doses  of  two  or  three  fluidrachms  ;  in  other  instances  it  may  be  given
in  doses  of  one  or  two  fluidrachms,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  gradu-
ally increased  if  desirable.

Vinum  H^ematoxyli  Compositum.  Compound  Wine  of  Logwood.
Golden  Tincture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Logwood  Chips,  Black  Hellebore,  bruised,  of
each,  four  ounces  ;  Sherry  Wine  three  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,
express,  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  cathartic,  tonic,  and  emmenagogue,  and
will  be  found  useful  in  chlorosis,  amenorrhea,  and  some  forms  of  dys-
menorrhea. The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  two  fluidounces,  three
times  a  day.

Vinum  Hydrastis  Compositum.  Compound  Wine  of  Golden  Seed.
Wine  Bitters.

Preparation.' — Take  of  Golden  Seal  Root,  Tulip  Tree  Bark,  Bitter
Root,  of  each,  bruised,  one  drachm;  Capsicum  half  a  drachm;  Sherry
Wine  four  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  with  occasional  agitation;
then  express,  and  filter. — T.  V.  M.

This  vinous  solution  may  also  be  prepared  from  the  same  dry  mate-
rials, by  covering  them  with  Sherry  Wine,  allowing  them  to  stand  for
one  week,  then  transferring  them  to  a  percolator,  and  gradually  adding
Sherry  Wine  until  four  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are  obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  forms  a  pleasant  bitter  tonic  solution;  it
may  be  administered  in  dyspepsia  and  other  complaints,  where  tonics  are
indicated.  It  is  sometimes  improperly  made  of  Malaga  Wine.  Dose,
from  half  a  fluidounce  to  two  fluidounces,  three  times  a  day.

A  similar  preparation  is  recommended  by  some  authors.  Take  of
Golden  Seal  Root,  Tulip  Tree  Bark,  Bitter  Root,  Orange  Peel,  each,  one
drachm;  Prickly  Ash  Berries,  in  powder,  half  a  drachm;  add  Boiling
Water  half  a  pint;  Pour  the  Boiling  Water  on  the  rest  of  the  articles
mixed  together,  and  let  them  stand  in  a  closely  covered  vessel  for  twenty-
four  hours,  and  add  Malaga  Wine  one  pint  and  a  half.  ( Good  sweet
Native  Wine  would  be  better.) Dose,  same  as  above.

Vinum  Ipecacuanha. Wine  of  Ipecacuanha.

Preparation. — Take  of  Ipecacuanha,  bruised,  or  in  powder,  two  ounces;
Sherry  Wine  two  pints.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  with  occasional
agitation ;  then  express  and  filter  through  paper.

Wine  of  Ipecacuanha  may  also  be  prepared  by  moistening  the  Ipeca-
cuanha, in  coarse  powder,  thoroughly  with  Wine,  allowing  it  to  stand


1296  Pharmacy.

for  twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  percolator,  and  pour-
ing Wine  gradually  upon  it  until  two  pints  of  filtered  liquor  are
obtained. —  U.  S.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  wine  possesses  all  the  medical  qualities  of
the  root,  and  as  an  emetic  is  sometimes  preferred  in  infantile  cases.  It
may  be  used  also  as  an  expectorant  or  diaphoretic.  Dose,  as  an  emetic
for  an  adult,  a  fluidounce ;  for  a  child  one  or  two  years  old,  a  fluidrachm,
repeated  every  fifteen  minutes  till  it  operates ;  as  an  expectorant  and
diaphoretic,  from  ten  to  thirty  drops.

Vinum  Phytolacca  Compositum.  Compound  Wine  of  Poke.  Rheu-
matic Liquid.

Preparation.  —  Take  of  Inspissated  Juice  of  Poke  Berries,  White
Turpentine,  of  each,  four  ounces ;  Sherry  or  Native  Wine  two  gallons.
Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  with  occasional  agitation,  and  filter.

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  an  excellent  preparation  for  chronic
rheumatism,  chronic  gonorrhea,  syphilitic  pains,  etc.  The  dose  is  from
half  a  fluidounce  to  a  fluidounce,  two  or  three  times  a  day.

Vinum  Sambuci. Wine  of  Elder. Hydragogue  Tincture.

Preparation. — Take  of  Elder  Bark,  bruised,  one  pound;  Sherry  Wine,
or  Native  Wine  one  gallon.  Macerate  for  fourteen  days,  express,  and
filter  through  paper.

This  medicated  wine  may  also  be  prepared  by  macerating  powdered
Elder  Bark,  in  Wine,  for  twenty-four  hours,  then  transferring  it  to  a  per-
colator, and  gradually  adding  Wine  until  one  gallon  of  filtered  liquor  is
obtained.

Properties  and  Uses. — Wine  of  Elder  is  useful  in  dropsical  affections,
especially  ascites,  and  dropsy  supervening  upon  scarlatina  or  other
exanthematous  diseases.  Dose,  two  ounces,  three  or  four  times  a  day.
This  preparation  may  be  made  for  immediate  use  by  digesting  the  articles
with  heat  for  an  hour.

Vinum  Symphyti  Compositum.  Compound  Wine  of  Comfrey.  Res-
torative Wine  Bitters.

Preparation. — Take  of  Comfrey  Root,  Solomon's  Seal  Root,  Spikenard
Root,  of  each,  bruised,  one  ounce;  Chamomile  Flowers,  Colombo  Root,
Gentian  Root,  of  each,  bruised,  half  an  ounce;  Sherry  Wine  four  pints ;
Boiling  Water  a  sufficient  quantity.  Place  the  Herbs  in  a  vessel,  cover
with  Boiling  Water,  and  let  the  compound  macerate  for  twenty-four
hours,  keeping  it  closely  covered ;  then  add  the  Sherry  Wine.  Macerate
for  fourteen  days,  express,  and  filter.

Malaga  Wine,  or  Metheglin,  which  are  sometimes  used  in  this  prepa-
ration, are  inferior  to  Sherry  Wine,  and  more  liable  to  decomposition.
The  addition  of  Sugar  to  this  Wine  of  Comfrey,  is  very  apt  to  disagree
with  many  persons,  and  thus  destroy  its  efficacy.


Vina Medicata.  1297

Properties  and  Uses. — This  is  a  most  valuable  tonic  in  all  diseases
peculiar  to  females,  especially  leucorrhea,  amenorrhea,  weakness  of  the
back,  etc.  The  dose  is  from  half  a  fluidounce  to  two  fluidounces,  three
or  four  times  a  day.

A  similar  preparation,  made  as  follows,  is  also  recommended :  Take
of  Spikenard  Root,  Solomon  Seal  Root,  Gentian,  Wild  Cherry  Bark  and
Peach  Root,  of  each,  bruised,  one  ounce  ;  add  Boiling  Water  four  pints,
simmer  slowly  to  one  pint ;  then  add  Native  Wine  four  pints.  Macerate
for  seven  days,  express,  filter,  and  add  Loaf  Sugar  two  ounces.  Dose,
as  above.

I  have  just  seen  some  specimens  of  what  are  called  "  Concentrated
Remedies,"  purporting  to  have  been  manufactured  at  some  establish-
ment in  the  city  of  New  York ;  among  them  were  Cypripedin,  Senecin,
Stillingin,  Irisin,  etc.,  each  in  the  form  of  powder,  together  with  several
other  reputed  concentrated  powdered  preparations.  Upon  an  examina-
tion, I  find  several  of  these  agents  to  be  sugar  of  milk  triturated,  proba-
bly, with  oils,  oleo-resins,  or  saturated  tinctures.  There  certainly  can
be  no  objection  to  the  trituration  of  concentrated  principles  with  sugar,
or  sugar  of  milk,  for,  I  believe,  they  are  frequently  employed  in  this
manner  by  many  Eclectics  ;  but  when  such  triturations  are  represented
and  sold  at  exorbitant  prices  as  the  genuine  concentrated  principles
themselves,  and  at  the  same  time  veiled  with  a  semblance  of  science,
scientific  research,  and  purity  of  intention,  every  honest  mind  will  find,
in  such  a  course,  much  to  condemn,  and  every  well-wisher  of  Eclecticism
must  object  in  the  strongest  terms.  The  imposition  is  an  insult  to  Eclec-
tics, and  to  say  the  least  of  it,  is  by  no  means  creditable  to  the  reputation
or  honesty  of  the  manufacturers.  Such  a  course,  if  not  eschewed  and
censured,  is  not  only  calculated  to  diminish  the  confidence  of  our  own
practitioners  in  the  value  of  concentrated  medicines,  but,  when  they  are
employed  or  tested  by  physicians  of  other  schools,  as  we  know  to  be  fre-
quently the  case,  it  must  cause  a  prejudice  against  them  as  inactive  or
worthless  agents,  as  well  as  give  rise  to  no  very  exalted  opinions  of  Eclectic
honesty,  science  or  acuteness.  Remedies  for  general  professional  use,
whose  method  of  preparation  is  kept  from  the  profession,  should  never
be  countenanced  by  its  members,  because  it  is  impossible  to  know  what
they  really  are,  to  determine  their  positive  value,  or  to  decide  to  what
extent  dishonesty  and  imposition  may  be  connected  with  them.  It  is
greatly  to  be  desired,  therefore,  that  all  friends  of  Eclecticism  will  be
upon  their  guard  relative  to  this  matter,  and  that  they  will  likewise  take
especial  pains  to  caution  those  of  other  schools,  who  have  the  liberality
and  manly  independence  to  fairly  and  impartially  test  the  value  and
utility  of  our  remedies,  in  order  that  Eclecticism  may  not  be  misrepre-
sented or  falsified  by  any  impositions  of  the  sort. — /.  K.
82


PART  IV,

APPENDIX.


EXPLANATION


OF THE PRINCIPAL  ABBREVIATIONS OCCURRING  IN PHARMA-
CEUTICAL FORMULAE.

R.  Recipe — Take.

F.  S.  A.  Fiat  secundum  artem — Let  it  be  made  or  prepared  according
to  the  rules  of  the  art.

M.  Misce — Mix.

M.  S.  D.  Misce,  signa,  da — Mix  the  medicine,  and  deliver  it  after-
ward, with  the  requisite  instruction,  to  the  patient  (or  nurse)  in  writing.

M.  F.  P.  Misce  fiat  pulvis — Mix  to  form  a  powder.

M.  F.  Mixt.  Misce  fiat  mixtura — Mix  to  form  a  liquid  mixture.

M.  F.  Pil.  Misce  fiant  pilulae — Mix  to  form  pills.

Div.  Divide — Divide.

Sol.  Solve — Dissolve.

Fasc.  j.  Fasciculus — An  armful.

Man.  j.  Manipulus — A  handful,  a  gripe.

Pugil.  j.  Pugillus  or  Pugillum — A  pinch.

Cyat.  j.  Cyathus — A  glassful.

Cochl.  j.  Cochlear  or  Cochleare — A  spoonful.

Gutt.  Gutta — Drop.

No.  1,2,  3,  etc.  The  number  of  pieces  or  parts.

Ana,  or  aa.  Of  each.

P.  Ae.  Partes  aequales — Equal  parts.

Q.  S.  Quantum  sufficit — As  much  as  will  suffice.

Q.  L.  Quantum  libet — As  much  as  you  like.

Q.  V.  Quantum  volueris — As  much  as  you  like.

lb.  Libra — A  pound.

3-  Uncia — An  ounce.

3-  Drachma — A  drachm  or  dram.

5-  Scrupulus — A  scruple.

Gr.  Granum — A  grain.

Pil.  Pilula— A  pill.
(1298)


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formuub.  1299

Pot.  Potio — A  potion.
Pulv.  Pulvis — A  powder.
Tine.  Tinctura — A  tincture.
Ext.  Extractum — An  extract.
Chart.  Chartula — A  small  paper.
Collyr.  Collyrium — An  eye-water.
Collutor.  Collutorium — A  mouth  wash.
Cong.  Congius — A  gallon.
0.  Oct.  Octarius — A  pint.
f3-  Fluiduncia — A  fluidounce.
f3.  Fluidrachma — A  fluidrachm.
V([ .  Minimum — A  minim.
Decoct.  Decoction — A  decoction.
Garg.  Gargarisma — A  Gargle.
Haust.  Haustus — A  draught.
Infus.  Infusum — An  infusion.
Mass.  Massa — A  mass.
Mist.  Mistura — A  mixture.
Ss.  Semis — A  half.


A  VOCABULARY

OF  THE  WORDS  MOST FREQUENTLY  OCCURRING  IN  THE PRE-
SCRIPTIONS OF  PHYSICIANS.


A,  aa,  or  ana,  of  each  ingredient ;  more  properly  expressed  by  the  gen-
itive case  plural  (singulorum)  of  each;  for  instance:
R. — Aquas  cinnamon,  tinct.  rhei.  aa  3ij,  means.

Take  of  cinnamon-water,  and  tincture  of  rhubarb,  of  each  two
drachms.

Abdomen,  the  belly.  Gen.  —  inis,  of  the  belly.  Dat. — ini,  to  the
belly.

Absente  febre,  while  the  fever  is  off.

Accurate  (adverb)  accurately.  Accurate  pensi,  Ace.  pen.,  weighed
with  the  utmost  exactness.  Accurate  misceantur,  Ace.  mis.,  mix
very  completely.

Aciditas,  sharpness.  Ad  gratam  aciditatem,  make  it  just  acid  enough
to  be  palatable,  and  not  too  sour.

Acme,  the  hight  of  the  fever  or  any  other  disease.

Ad to. Ad  duas  vices,  at  twice  taking. Ad  libitum,  as  you  like.

Adde,  add.  Addantur,  let  there  be  added.  Addendus,  to  be  added.
Addendo,  adding.


1300  Appendix.

Admoveauur,  i&t  there  be  applied — antur,  plural,  when  more  than  one
is  to  be  applied.

Adstante  febre,  while  the  fever  is  on.

JEger,  a  sick  person,  a  patient. ^Egra,  a  female  patient.

Aggrediente  febre,  when  the  fever  is  coming  on.

Aggressus,  an  attack. Aggressus  febris,  the  attack  of  a  fever.

Agitato  vase,  shaking  the  vial.

Albus,  white.

Aliquot,  some. Aliquoties,  sometimes.

Alter,  altera,  alterum,  the  other.

Alternus,  alternate.  Alternis  horis,  every  second  hour.  Alternis  die-
bus,  every  alternate  day.

Aluta,  leather.  Extende  super  alutam  mollem,  E.  S.  A.  M.,  spread  on
soft  leather.

Alvus,  the  belly,  the  bowels. Adstricta  alvo,  when  costive.

Amplus,  large. Cochleare  amplum,  a  tablespoonful.

Ante,  before. Ut  ante,  as  before.

Antemeridianus,  in  the  forenoon;  any  time  before  twelve  o'clock  at
noon.

Apparatus,  any  sort  of  a  preparation,  instruments,  or,  in  short,  every-
thing that  is  requisite  to  be  had  in  readiness  for  performing  any  sort
of  operation.  Also,  the  more  delicate  term  for  a  bladder  and  pipe
for  clysters.

Aperiens,  opening,  gently  purging.

Applicetur,  let  there  be  applied.

Aqua,  water.  Aquae,  of  water.  Aqua  bulliens,  Aqua  fervens,  boiling
water.

Armatus,  armed.  Fistula  armata,  an  apparatus  for  clysters ;  a  pipe  and
bladder.

Auris,  the  ear. Auri,  to  the  ear. Aures,  ears. Auribus,  to  the  ears.

Aut,  or.

B

Bene,  well. Bene  misceatur,  B.  M.,  let  it  be  well  mixed.

Bibat,  let  him  drink.

Biduum,  two  days. Omni  biduo  vel  tridud,  every  two  or  three  days.

Bihorium,  the  space  of  two  hours. Omni  bihorio,  every  two  hours.

Bis,  twice :  bis,  terve,  twice  or  thrice.

Bullio,  to  boil ;  bulliens,  boiling. Aquae  bullientis,  of  boiling  water.

Bulliant,  let  them  boil.

C.
Calefactus,  made  warm.
Capiat,  let  (the  patient)  take. Capt.  cochl.  iij  magn.,  three  tablespoon-

fuls  to  be  taken.
Catharticus,  purging.


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formulae.  1301

Caute,  cautiously.

Cerevisia,  beer. Cerevisia  Londinensis,  porter. Cerevisia  Lagenaria,

bottled  porter  or  stout.
Charta,  paper. Charta  cserulea,  blue  paper. Chartula,  a  little  piece  of

paper. Cola  trans  chartam,  filter  through  paper.
Cibus,  food.

Circa,  about. Circiter,  about.
Cito,  soon,  quickly. Citissime  (the  superlative  degree,)  as  quick as

possible.
Clausus,  clausa,  clausum,  covered. Vase  clauso,  in  a  covered  vessel.
Cochleare,  a  spoonful. Cochlearia,  spoonfuls. Coch.  magnum,  am-

plum, a tablespoonful. Co. infantulorum,  coch. modicum,  child's

spoonful,  a  dessertspoonful. Co.  parvum,  a  teaspoonful.
Coctio,  a  boiling. Sub  finem  coctionis,  toward  the  end  of  the  boiling  ;

when  almost  boiled.
Caeruleus,  blue. Charta  caerul.,  blue  paper. Unguentum  caeruleum,

mercurial  ointment.
Cola,  (imperat.  of  Colo,)  strain,  to  filter.

Colatus,  strained,  filtered. Colato  liquori,  to  the  strained  liquor.
Colatura,  a  straining. Colaturae,  to  the  strained  liquor.
Colatus,  let  be  strained. Colentur,  let  them  be  strained.
Collum,  a  neck.

Comp.,  Compositus,  compound.

Continuo,  to  continue. Continuantur  remedia,  go  on  with  the  same  me-
Contundo,  to  bruise. Contusus,  bruised.
Contusio,  a  bruise,  a  contusion.

Coquo,  to  boil. Coque,  boil. Coque  parum,  boil  a  little  while.
Coquantur,  let  them  be  boiled.

Cor,  the  heart. Scrobiculus  cordis,  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
Coxa,  Coxendix,  the  hip.
Cras,  to-morrow  ;  c.  m.  eras  mane,  early  to-morrow  morning ;  C.  M.  S.,

eras  mane  sumendus,  to  be  taken  early  to-morow  morning.
Crastinus  (adj.,)  of  to-morrow. In  usum  crastinum,  for  to-morrow's

use.
Cribrum,  a  sieve. Trans  cribrum,  through  a  sieve.
Cuius,  of  which. Cujus  capiat,  or  sumat,  of  which  (the  patient  is  to)

take.
Cum,  with.
Cyathus,  a  cup. Cyathus  vinarius,  a  wineglass. Cyath.  theat,  a  tea-


cup


full.


D.


Da,  give. Detur,  dentur  (plural,)  let  be  given.

De,  of. De  quo,  or  qua,  of  which. De  die,  in  a  day.


1302  Appendix.

Deauratus,  gilt. Deaurentur  pilulae,  let  the  pills  be  gilt.

Debilitas,  weakness.

Decern,  ten. Decimus,  the  tenth.

Debitus,  due.  Ad  debitam  spissitudinem,  to  a  proper  degree  of  thick-
ness, as  to  consistence.

Decubitus,  lying  down. Hora  decubitus,  at  bedtime.

Deglutio,  to  swallow.  Deglutiatur,  is  swallowed — etur,  let  be  swal-
lowed.

Dein,  deinde,  then ;  afterward.

Dejectio,  a  depositing,  or  putting  down,  also  a  going  to  stool ;  as,  post
duas  dejectiones  alvi,  after  two  motions.

Dejitio,  to  deposit.  Donee  alvus  bis  dejiciat,  until  the  patient  shall  have
had  two  stools.

Dexter,  the  right.  Manus  dextra,  the  right  hand.  Auri  dextro,  to  the
right  ear.

Dictus,  spoken  of,  said.

Dies,  a  day.  Die  in  a  day  ;  as  bis  die,  twice  a  day.  Diebus,  in  days  ;
as,  tertiis  diebus,  every  third  day.  Alternis  diebus,  every  alternate
day.

Dilutum,  diluted.

Dimidium,  the  half. Dimidius,  a,  urn  (adjective,)  half.

D.  P.,  Directione  propria,  with  its  proper  direction.

Diu,  a  long  time. Tere  diu,  rub  for  a  long  time.

Diuturnus,  long-continued.  Diuturna  trituratione,  D.  trit.  by  long  con-
tinued rubbing,  or  grinding  in  the  mortar.  Diuturna  coctione,  by  long
boiling.

Dolor,  pain. Dolores,  pains. Doloris,  of  the  pain.

Dolens,  pained. Parti  dolenti,  to  the  pained  part.

Donee,  until. Donee  liquescat.,  till  it  melts. Dum,  whilst.

Durante  dolore,  while  the  pain  continues.

E.
Eadem,  eandem,  the  same. Eodem,  in  the  same.
Effunde,  pour  out.
Effervescentia,  the  effervescence.
Effervescet,  effervesces.

Ejusdem,  of  the  same,  the  genitive  case  of  idem.
Enema,  a  clyster. Enemata,  clysters.
Erit,  shall  be.

Evanesco,  evanui,  to  disappear. Evanuerit,  shall  have  disappeared.
Exhibe,  Exhibeatur,  give. Exhibendus,  to  be  given.
Extendo,  to  extend,  also  to  spread. Extende  super  alutam,  spread  it  on

leather.
Extensus,  a,  um,  spread.


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formula.  1303

F.
Fac,  make. Fac  in  pilulas  xij,  make  into  twelve  pills.
Farina,  flour. Farina  seminis  lini,  linseed  meal.
Febris,  a  fever. Febre  durante,  while  the  fever  is  on.
Femur,  a  thigh.

Femoribus,  to  the  thighs. Femoribus  internis,  to  the  inner  sides  of  the

thighs.
Fervens,  boiling. Fervidus,  fervida,  hot.
Ferventis,  of  boiling. K  aq.  ferventis,  take  of  boiling  water.
Finis,  the  conclusion. Sub  finem  coctionis,  when  almost  boiled  enough.
Fiat,  make  (the  singular  number). Fiant,  make  (plural).
Fontana,  fountain. Aqua  fontana,  spring  water.
Formula,  prescription.
Fotus,  a  fomentation.
Fuerit,  shall  have  been  ;  as,  donee  alvus  soluta  fuerit,  until  a  motion  is

(or  shall  have  been)  procured.

G.

Gargarisma,  a  gargle.

Gelatina,  jelly. Gelatina ribesiorum,  currant  jelly. Gelatina  quovis,

any  sort  of  jelly.
Globulus,  a  little  ball. Globuli  Gascoigni,  Gascoign's  ball. Donee  glo-

buli  evanuerint,  until  the  globules  (of  quicksilver)  totally  disappear

(so  that  they  can  not  be  seen  even  with  a  microscope).
Gradatim,  by  slow  degrees.
Gratus,  grata,  gratum,  agreeable,  pleasant. Ad  gratum  aciditatem,  so

as  to  make  it  pleasantly  acid  without  being  too  sour. In  quovis  grato

vehiculo,  in  any  agreeable  vehicle.
Gutta,  a  drop. Guttae,  drops. Guttas,  drops.
Guttatim,  drop  by  drop.

H.

Hac,  this. Hac  nocte,  this  night. Hanc,  this. Sumat  hanc,  let  him

take  this.
Hactenus,  hitherto,  heretofore,  up  to  the  present  day.
Harum,  of  these. Harum  pilularum  sumat  tres,  of  these  pills  let  him

or  her  take  three.
Haustus,  a  draught.
Hebdomada,  a  week.
Heri,  yesterday. Ut  heri,  as  yesterday.
Hesternus,  of  yesterday. Hesterna  nocte,  last  night.
Hirudo,  a  leech. Hirudines,  leeches.
His,  in  these,  to  these. His  adde,  add  to  these.


1304  Appendix.

Hora,  an  hour. Horae,  of  an  hour. Horse,  (plural)  hours.

H.  S.  (hora  somni,)  at  the  hour  of  rest.

H.  S.  S.  (hora  somni  sumendus,)  to  be  taken  at  bedtime.  Hora  decu-
bitus, at  the  hour  of  going  to  rest,  bedtime.

Hora  vespertina,  in  the  evening.

Horae  unius  spatio,  in  the  space  of  one  hour.

Horae  \,  horae  quadrante,  quarter  of  an  hour.

Horis  intermediis,  at  intermediate  hours,  when  two  medicines  are  to  be
taken.  Horis  intermediis,  means  that  one  is  to  be  given  exactly  at
midtime  from  the  other:  suppose  a  draught  is  ordered  (to  be  taken
every  six  hours,)  and  a  powder  horis  intermediis,  that  is,  every  six
hours  intermediately,  then  a  draught  will  be  taken  at  six  o'clock  and
at  twelve,  and  a  powder  at  three  and  at  nine.

Hujusmodi,  of  this  sort,  like  these.

H.  P.  1ST.,  Haustus  purgans  noster,  a  formula  of  purging  draught  made
according  to  a  practitioner's  own  private  Pharmacopoeia,  and  is  pre-
pared so  as  to  keep  a  long  time  without  spoiling,  that  we  may  not
have  the  trouble  of  preparing  it  every  time  a  draught  is  wanted.
Mitt.  H.  P.  N.  3ij  ad  ij  Vices  C.  M.  S.  Mitte  Haustus  purgantis  nos-
tri  uncias  duas,  ad  duas  Vices  eras  mane  sumendus;  send  two  ounces
of  our  purging  draught,  to  be  taken  to-morrow  morning,  at  twice,
that  is  half  at  first,  and  the  remaining  half  in  an  hour  if  the  first
does  not  operate.

I.

Idoneus,  proper,  appropriate.

Idem,  eadem,  the  same.  Ejusdem,  of  the  same,  the  genitive  case  of
Idem.

Imponatur,  (sing.,)  let  there  be  put  on — nantur  (plural).

Imprimis,  first.

In,  in. In  die,  in  a  day.

Indies  (an  adverb,)  every  day,  daily.

Indicaverit,  shows,  indicates.

Infus.  panis  tostus,  toast  bread  water.

Infusio,  infusum,  an  infusion.

Infunde,  infundatur,  infuse.

Inter,  between.

Injectio,  injection.

Inquietudo,  restlessness. Ungente  inquietudine,  if  restless.

Injiciatur,  throw  in,  throw  up.  Injiciatur  enema,  let  a  clyster  be  ad-
ministered.

Injiciendus,  injiciendum,  to  be  administered.

Instar  (an  adverb,)  as  big  as.  Sumat  molem  instar  mucis  moschataa,
the  bigness  of  a  nutmeg  to  be  taken.

Intermedius,  intermediate.


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formula.  1305

Intemis,  the  inner  side.

J.

Jam,  already. Jampridem,  jamdudum,  some  time  ago,  heretofore.

Jugulum,  the  throat.

Jusculum, broth. Jusculum ovillum, mutton broth. Jus. bovinum,

beef  tea.
Juxta,  near  to.

L.

Lac,  milk. Lactis,  of  milk. Lacte,  in  milk.

Laevigatus,  levigated.

Lana,  flannel. Lana  nova,  new  flannel.

Languor,  faintness,  lowness.  In  languoribus,  in  the  fainting  fits,  when
low  and  faint.

Latus,  the  side.  Lateris,  of  the  side.  Lateri,  to  the  side.  Latus  do-
lens,  the  pained  side. Lateri  dolenti,  to  the  pained  side.

Latus,  lata,  latum  (adjective,)  broad.

Lectus,  a  bed. In  lecto,  in  bed.

Liber,  a  book.

Libet  (a  verb  impersonal,)  it  pleases. Ad  libitum,  just  as  you  please.

Libra,  a  pound. Libris,  libras,  pounds.

Linteum,  lint;  also  linen.

Liquesco,  to  liquefy,  to  melt. Donee  liquescat,  till  it  melts.

Liquidus,  liquid.  Sedes  liquidae,  loose  stools.  In  quovis  liquido,  in  any
liquid.

Londinensis,  of  London.  Pharmacopoeia  Londinensis,  the  London  Dis-
pensatory.

Lumborum,  of  the  loins.

M.

Magnus,  magna,  magnum,  large. Magnum  cochleare,  a  tablespoonful.

Major,  greater,  larger. Cochlearia  duo  majora,  two  tablespoonfuls.

Maximus,  the  greatest. Maxima  cura,  with  the  greatest  care.

Maxime,  chiefly.

Malleolus,  the  ankle. Malleolus  internus,  the  inner  ankle.

Mane,  in  the  morning.  Mane  primo;  valde  mane,  very  early  in  the
morning.

Manus,  a  hand. Manu  calefacta,  with  a  warm  hand.

Massa,  a  mass. Massa  pilularis,  a  mass  fit  for  forming  into  pills.

Matutinus,  in  the  morning  or  forenoon.

Mediocris,  middle-sized.  Pilulae  mediocris,  middle-sized  pills.  Coch-
leare mediocre,  a  dessertspoonful,  a  papspoonful,  or  a  child's  spoonful.
Mediocris  also  means  indifferent,  as  to  quality.

Medius,  middle. Media  nocte,  in  the  middle  of  the  night.


1306  Appendix.

Melior,  melius,  better.

Mica  panis,  crumb  of  bread.

Minatur,  minaretur,  threatens. Minante,  threatening.

Minimus,  very  small. Cochleare  minimum,  a  teaspoonful.

MinuLum,  *  a  minute.

Misce,  mix. Bene  misceatur,  let  it  be  well  mixed.

Mitte,  send.

Mittatur  (singular,)  let  it  be  sent. Mittantur  (plural,)  let  them  be  sent.

Mittatur  sanguis,  take  blood  away ;  i.  e.,  bleed  the  patient.

Mistura,  mixtura,  a  mixture.

Mitigatio,  mitigation,  alleviation. Donee  dolor  is  mitigatio  sit,  until  the

pain  is  easier.
Mitigatus,  a  um,  mitigated,  lessened.
Modicus,  middle-sized.

Modus,  a  manner. Modo  praescripto,  in  the  manner  directed.
Moles,  a  mass,  a  lump,  a  piece. Sumat  molem  instar  nucis  moschatae,

let  him  (or  her)  take  the  bigness  or  size  of  a  nutmeg.
Mollis,  molle,  soft.
Molestus,  troublesome. Molestor,  to  trouble,  to  be  troublesome. Mo-

lestante  dolore,  when  the  pain  is  troublesome. Molestante  tussi,  when

the  cough  is  troublesome.
Mora,  delay. Sine  mora,  without  delay.
Mos,  moris,  manner. More  solito,  in  the  usual  manner;  also,  in  the

same  manner  as  I  am  in  the  habit  of  prescribing  it  to  other  people.
Mortarium,  a  mortar. Mortario  aheneo,  in  the  brass  mortar. Mortario

marmoreo,  in  the  marble  mortar. Mort.  vitreo,  in  the  glass  mortar.

N.
Narthecium,  a  gallipot.
Nates,  the  buttocks.
Ne,  lest,  also,  do  not ;  as  ne  tradas  sine  nummo,  N.  T.  S.  N,  do  not

deliver  the  medicine  without  the  money.
Necnon,  also.

Niger,  nigra,  nigrum,  black.
Ni,  nisi,  unless.
Nihil,  nothing.
Nisus,  an  endeavor,  an  attempt,  a  straining,  a  motion,  a  straining  to

vomit,  or  go  to  stool.
Nimis,  nimium,  too  much.
Nodulus,  a  little  knot. Nodulo  ligati,  tied  up  in  a  piece  of  clean  rag.


*  The  word  minutum,  for  a  minute,  is  very  barbarous  Latin;  we  believe  there  is  no
such  word  ;  but  the  right  Latin  for  a  minute,  Sexagesima  pars  horae,  is  as  long
and  as  tiresome  to  write  as  "Semivitreous  oxide  of  lead,"  for  the  simple  word
"  Litharge."— Griffith.


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formulae  1307

Nomen,  nominis,  a  name. Signetur  nomine  proprio,  S.  N.  P.,  write  its

common  name  upon  the  label.
Novem,  nine.
Nonus,  the  ninth.
Novus,  nova,  novem,  new.
Novissime,  very  lately,  the  last  of  all.
Nocte,  at  night. Noctes,  nights. Nocte  maneque,  night  and  morning.

Alternis  noctibus,  every  second  night.
Nuper,  lately. Nuperrime,  very  lately.
Nucha,  the  nape  of  the  neck. Nuchae,  to  the  nape.
N.  M.,  Nux  moschata,  a  nutmeg. Sumat  magnitudinem  nucis  mos-

chatae,  take  the  bigness  of  a  nutmeg.

Numeri.

1.  or  j.  unus,  una,  unum,  one.

unius,  of  one.

2.  ij.  duo,  duae,  two.

duorum,  of  two
duobus,  in  two,  to  two.

3.  iij.  tres,  tria,  three.

tribus,  in  three,  to  three,
trium,  of  three,
ter,  three  times.
4 iv.  quatuor,  four.

quartus,  a,  urn,  fourth
quater,  four  times.

5.  v.  quinque,  five.

quintus,  fifth.

6.  vj.  sex,  six.

sextus,  sixth.

0.

Obstante,  hindering,  preventing.

Occasio,  occasion,  opportunity.

Octo,  eight.

Octavus,  eighth. Octava  quaque  hora,  every  eighth  hour.

Olim,  some  time  ago.

Olla,  a  pot,  a  gallipot.

Omnis,  all.  Omni  mane,  every  morning.  Omni  hora,  every  hour.
Omni  bihorio,  every  two  hours.  Omni  nocte,  every  night.  Omni  £
hora,  Omni  quadrante  horae,  every  quarter  of  an  hour.  Tere  omnia,
rub  all  together.

Omnino,  quite,  wholly,  entirely.

Optime,  very  well,  as  well  as  possible.

Optimus,  ma,  mum,  best.


7.

or  vij.  septem,  seven.

Septimus,  seventh.

septimana,  or

7  mana,  a  week.

8.

viij.  octo,  eight.

octavus,  eighth

9.

ix.  novem,  nine.

nonus,  ninth.

10.

x.  decern,  ten.

decimus,  tenth.

11.

xj.  undecim,  eleven.

12.

xij.  duodecim,  twelve.

20.

xx.  viginti,  twenty.

24.

xxiv.  viginti  quatuor,

twenty 'four.

1308  Appendix.

Opus,  need,  occasion. Si  opus  sit,  or  fuerit,  if  it  be  necessary.

Ovillum  jusculum,  mutton  broth.

Ovum,  an  egg. Vitell.  ovi,  the  yelk  of  an  egg. Ovorum,  of  eggs.

P.

Panis  biscoctus,  biscuit.  Panis  nauticus,  sea  biscuit.  Panis  tostus,
toast  bread.  Infus.  panis  tostus,  toast-bread  water.  Panis  triticus,
wheat  bread.

Pannus,  a  rag.  Pannus  linteus,  a  linen  rag.  Pannus  laneus,  Pannus
e  lana,  a  piece  of  flannel.

Paroxysmus,  a  paroxysm,  a  fit,  a  convulsion  fit.

Pars,  a  part. Partes,  parts. Parti  dolenti,  to  the  pained  part.

Partitus,  parted.  Partitus  vicibus  means,  that  you  are  not  to  give  a
medicine  all  at  once,  but  divide  the  dose  according  to  the  directions
most  commonly  previously  given ;  for  example,  if  a  purging  or  emetic
draught,  half  or  a  third,  (as  the  case  may  be,)  to  be  taken  at  first,
and  the  other  half  or  third  at  a  certain  distance  of  time,  if  the  former
quantity  be  not  found  sufficient  to  produce  the  desired  effect.

Parvus,  little. Cochleare  parvum,  a  teaspoonful.

Parum,  a  little. Parumper,  a  little.

Pauculum,  pauxillum,  paululum,  a  little.

Pectus,  the  breast. Pectoris,  of  the  breast.

Pediluvium,  a  bath  for  the  feet.

Per,  by,  or  through.

Pergo,  to  go  on  with.  Pergat  in  usu  medicinarum,  continue  the  medi-
cines as  before.

Pet \ completed,  perfected,  quite done,  gone  through  with ;  as,

V Peracta  operatione  emetici,  after  the  emetic  has  quite
Perfectus,  ) done  operating>

Perfricetur,  let  it  be  rubbed. Perfricandus,  to  be  rubbed.

Pensus,  weighed. Accurate  pensi,  weighed  exactly.

Perpetuus,  perpetual. Fiat  perpetuum,  keep  it  open,  (when  it  refers  to

a  blister).
Pluvialis,  also  pluviatalis  aqua,  rain  water.
Pharmacopoeia,  the  dispensatory.
Pollex,  the  thumb. Pollex  pedis,  the  great  toe.
Pomeridianus,  postmeridianus,  in  the  evening  or  afternoon,  time  of  the

day.
P.  R.  N.,  Pro  re  nata,  occasionally,  according  as  circumstances  may

occur,  according  as  the  symptoms  may  require.
Poculum,  a  cup.

Pomum,  an  apple. Pomi,  of  an  apple.
Pone,  behind. Pondere,  by  weight.


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formulae.  1309

Porro,  moreover. Post,  after. Postea,  then,  afterward.

P.  M.,  Post  meridiem,  afternoon,  in  the  afternoon,  after  twelve  o'clock
at  noon.

Potus,  drink,  beverage  of  any  kind.

Postulet,  postulent,  may  require,  demand.

Preecipue,  especially.

Prseparatus,  prepared.

Praeparo,  to  prepare. Prseparentur,  let  them  be  prepared.

Primus,  ma,  mum,  the  first.  Primo,  first  of  all.  Primo  mane,  very
early  in  the  morning.

Prior,  prius,  the  former,  the  first.

Priusquam,  before  that.

Pro,  for.  Pro  re  nata,  P.  R.  N.,  occasionally,  etc.  Pro  ratione,  accord-
ing to,  or  in  proportion  to ;  as  pro  ratione  aetatis,  according  to  the  age
of  the  patient.

Proprius,  a  um,  proper.  S.  N.  P.,  Signetur  nomine  proprio,  mark  it
with  its  proper  direction.

Pruritus,  an  itching. Pruriens,  itching. Dolichos  pruriens,  cowhage.

Psora,  the  itch.

Pulvis,  a  powder. Pulveres,  powders. Pulveribus,  in  powders.

Pulvis  subtilissimus,  the  very  finest  powder.

Purificatus,  a  um,  purified.

Pyxis,  pyxidis,  a  pill-box,  or  lozenge-box.

Q.

Quadrans, quadrantis, quadrante, quarter. Omni quadrante horse,

every  quarter  of  an  hour.
Quacum,  with  which.

Quamprimum,  as  soon  as  possible,  without  the  least  delay.
Quartus,  a,  um,  the  fourth.
Quaqua,  every. Quavis,  (fcem.)  with  any.
Quater,  four  times. Quatuor,  four. Quarta  pars,  a  fourth  part.

que,  (at  the  end  of  any  Latin  word,)  and.

Quem,  quam,  quod,  which,  (the  accusative  case).

Qui,  qua?,  quod,  which,  (the  nominative  case).

Quibus,  to  which,  with  which.

Quibusdam,  to  or  with  some. Cum  guttis  quibusdam,  with  a  few  drops.

Quilibet,  quaelibet,  quodlibet,  gen. Cujuslibet,  abl. Quolibet,  any.

Quiescat,  goes  to  rest,  is  easier.

Quinque,  five. Quintus,  a,  um,  the  fifth. Quinquies,  five  times.

Quinquina,  (cinchona,)  Peruvian  Bark.

Q.  s. q.  s.,  Quantum  sufficiat,  as  much  as  may  be  sufficient.

Quorum,  quarum,  of  which. Quos,  quas,  which. Quocum,  quacura,

with  which. Quovis,  with  any.


1310  Appendix.


R.


Ratio,  a  reason,  also  a  proportion. Pro  ratione  setatis,  according  to  the

age  of  the  patient. Pro  ratione  doloris,  according  to  the  urgency  of

the  pain.
Raucedo,  hoarseness.  ^t

Recipe,  take. Recipe,  (taken  substantively,)  a  prescription.
Regio,  a  region,  (an  anatomical  term  for  certain  parts  of  the  body);  as,

regio  epigastrica,  the  epigastric  region ;  regio  lumborum,  the  region  of

the  loins ;  appl.  emplastr.  regioni  umbilicali,  to  the  umbiUcal  region,

or  parts  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  navel.
Redigo, to reduce. Redige, reduce. Redigetur, may be reduced.

Redigatur,  let  it  be  reduced.
Redactus,  a,  um,  reduced. In  pulv.  redact.,  reduced  to  powder.
Refrixerit — pi.  int. — the  subjunctive  future  of  refrigesco,  to  cool.
Reliquus,  a,  um,  the  rest,  the  remaining  part.
Remedium,  a  remedy. Continuandur  remedia,  go  on  with  the  same

remedies  as  before.
Repetatur,  let  be  repeated,  repeat.
Repetendus,  to  be  repeated.
Respondeo,  responderit,  shall  have  answered. Donee  alvus  ad  sedes  ij

vel  iij  responderit,  until  two  or  three  stools  shall  have  been  procured.
Ribes,  currants. Gelatina  ribesiorum,  currant  jelly.
Ruber,  rubra,  rubrum,  red.
Rubus  idseus,  raspberry.
Retinendus,  to  be  retained,  or  kept.

S.

S.  V.  R.,  spiritus  vinosus  rectificatus,  rectified  spirit  of  wine.

S.  V.,  Ten,  or  tenuis,  proof  spirit.

Saepe,  often ;  ssepius,  oftener ;  saepissime,  very  often.

Saltern,  at  least.

Sanguis,  blood, — inis,  of  blood. Sanguinis  missura,  blood-letting.

Saphena  vena,  the  ankle  vein.

Scapula,  the  shoulder  blade. Inter  scapulus,  between  the  shoulders.

Scilicet,  to  wit,  namely.

Scrobiculus  cordis,  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

Secundus,  a,  um,  (adjective,)  second.

Secundum,  (preposition,)  according  to.

S.  A.,  Secundum  artem,  according  to  art;  that  is,  you  are  to  use  your

own  ingenuity  to  do  it  in  the  most  proper  and  scientific  way.
Sed,  but.

Sedes,  a  stool — plural,  stools.
Semi,  or  semis,  half. Semihora,  half  an  hour. Semidrachma,  half  a

drachm.


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formulae.  1311

Sesqui,  one  and  a  half;  as,  sesquihora,  an  hour  and  a  half.  Sesqui-
nuncia,  or  sescuncia,  an  ounce  and  a  half.  Sesquidrachma,  a  drachm
and  a  half.  Remember  well  to  attend  to  the  difference  between  these
two  words,  for  many  young  men,  by  not  knowing  that  sesqui  means
one  and  a  half,  but  confounding  it  with  semi,  have  made  bad  mistakes.

Semper,  always.

Semel,  once.

Septem,  seven.

Septimana,  a  week,  seven  days. Septimus,  seventh.

Sequens,  following.

Serum  lactis,  whey. In  sero  lactis  vinoso,  in  wine  whey.

Serum  is  also  the  watery  part  of  the  blood  which  separates  from  the  red
part,  or  crassamentum,  on  standing  until  cold.

Sex,  six;  Sextus,  sixth.

Si,  if. Sive,  or,  whether.

Signatura,  a  label  or  direction.

Signetur,  let  it  be  marked,  directed,  written  upon.

S.  N.  P.,  Signetur  nomine  proprio,  mark  it  with  the  name  it  is  usually
known  by.

Simul,  together;  as,  teranlur  simul,  let  them  be  rubbed  together.
Simul  ac,  at  the  same  time  that.

Sine,  without. Sine  mora,  without  delay.

Singultus,  hiccup.

Singulus,  a,  um,  each;  in  singulis,  in  each;  singulorum,  of  each.

Sinister,  tra,  trum,  the  left. Auri  sinistro,  to  the  left  ear.

Satis,  thirst ;  si  sitiat,  if  thirsty.

Solitus,  accustomed.

Solus,  alone ;  only.

Solutus,  a,  um,  dissolved,  also  loosened;  as,  donee  alvus  soluta  fuerit,
until  a  stool  is  procured.

Solve,  dissolve.

Somnus,  sleep. Hora  somni,  at  bed-time.

Spina,  the  spine,  the  backbone ;  also,  a  thorn.

Spissus,  thick. Spissitudo,  thickness  of  consistence.

Statim,  directly,  immediately.

Stent,  let  them  stand. Stet,  let  it  stand.

Sternutatorius  pulvis,  sneezing  powder,  snuff.

Stupa,  tow.

Sub,  subter,  under.  Sub  finem  coctionis,  when  the  boiling  is  almost
finished.  Sub,  prefixed  to  a  word,  implies  diminution,  or  a  process
not  completed ;  also,  in  many  words  has  the  same  signification  as  the
termination  ish  in  English  words,  as  subniger,  blackish,  not  quite
black.  Subtepidus,  lukewarm.  For  its  meaning  when  applied  to
terms  of  chemistry,  as  subcarbonas,  submurias,  the  pupil  must  study
his  chemical  nomenclature.


1312  Appendix.

Subactus,  a,  um,  subdued,  dissolved.

Subitus,  a,  um,  Subitaneus,  sudden. Subito,  (adv.,)  suddenly.

Subtepidus,  a  little  warm,  Mke warm.

Subige, dissolve  it,  make  it  unite. Subdue  quicksilver  with  lard  or

balsam  of  sulphur.
Subinde,  frequently,  now  and  then.
Subtilis,  subtle,  reduced  to  fine  powder. Pulv.  subtilissimus,  the  very

finest  powder.
Succ.  pom.  ferment.,  cider.

Sumat,  let  bim  take. Sumatur,  sumantur,  let  it  be  taken,  take.
Sudor,  sweet.
Superbibo,  to  drink  after  taking  anything ;  as,  chamomile  tea  or  warm

water  after  an  emetic ;  or  a  cup  of  water,  or  any  liquid  medicine,  to

wash  down  a  dose  of  any  sort  of  pills.
Superinfundo,  to  pour  upon.
Supra,  above. Supradictus,  above  mentioned.
Syncope,  a  fainting  fit.

T.

Tabellae,  tabula?,  lozenges.

Talis,  such. Sumat  talem,  let  him  take  such  a  one  as  this.

Talus,  the  ankle.

Tarn,  so. Tamen,  yet.

Tactus,  the  touch.

Taenia,  tbe  tapeworm,

Tempus,  temporis,  time.

Tempora,  the  temples. Temporibus,  to  the  temples. Tempori  dextro,

to  the  right  temple.  Tempori  sinistro,  to  the  left  temple.
Temperies,  temperamentum,  temperament,  degree  of  heat.
Tenacitus,  tenacity. Ad  debitam  tenacitatem,  of  a  proper  degree  of

tenacity  or  consistence.
Teneo,  to  hold. Tenendus,  to  be  held.
Tenuis,  weak,  thin,  small,  slender.
Tepefactus,  warmed,  made  warm.

Ter,  three  times,  thrice. Ter  quaterve,  three  or  four  times.
Teres, teretis,  round, taper;  also,  teres  is  a  name  for  the  long  and

round  worm  infesting  the  human  body,  qu.  d.  vermis  teres.
Tergum,  the  back. A  tergo,  behind.
Tero, to rub. Tere, (imperative,) nib. Terendus,  to  be  rubbed.

Terantur,  let  them  be  rubbed.
Tertius,  tertia,  tertium,  the  third.
Testacea,  the  prepared  powders  made  of  oyster  shells,  egg  shells,  crabs'

claws,  etc.
Thorax,  the  chest. Thoracis,  of  the  chest.


Abbreviations  in  Pharmaceutical  Formulae.  1313

Thus,  frankincense.

Tinea  capitis,  scald  head.

Torrefactus,  toasted.

Tres,  tria,  three ;  tribus,  in  three,  to  three.

Triduum,  three  days.

Trituratio,  a  grinding.  Trituratus,  triturated,  ground.  Tritus,  ground.
Trituratur  exactissima  minutes  decern,  Trit.  ex.  min.  dec,  T.  E.  M.
D.,  triturate  exactly  ten  minutes.  Trituratur  intime  commisceantur,
Trit.  int.  com.,  triturate  intimately  or  accurately  together.

T.  0.,  Tinctura  Opii,  what  is  commonly  called  Laudanum.

T.  0.  C,  Tintura  Opii  Camphorata,  Camphorated  Tincture  of  Opium,
formerly  called  Paregoric  Elixir.  This  tincture  is  now  called,  by  the
London  College,  in  the  late  reform  of  the  Pharmacopoeia,  edit.  1809,
Tinctura  Camphorae  Composita.

Trans,  through. Cola  trans  chartam,  filter  through  filtering  paper.

Tussis,  a  cough. Tussi  molestante,  when  the  cough  is  troublesome.

U.

Ultimus,  ultima,  um,  the  last.  Ultimo  praescript,  which  was  last  pre-

Umbilicus,  the  navel.

Una,  (an  adverb,)  together.

Uncia,  an  ounce. Unciam  cum  semisse,  an  ounce  and  a  half.

Undecim,  eleven.

Unus,  una,  unum,  one. Unius,  of  one. Uni,  to  one.

Urgente  tussi,  when  the  cough  is  troublesome.

Urgeo,  to  urge,  to  oppress,  to  be  troublesome,  or  painful.

Usus,  use.  Pergat  in  usu  remediorum,  continue  the  use  of  the  medi-
cine as  before.

Usque  ad,  up  to,  as  far  as.

Ut,  as,  that,  so  that ;  in  the  same  manner  as.

Utendus,  to  be  used.

Utatur,  let  him  make  use  of.

Uterque,  utraque,  utrumque,  both.  Utriusque,  of  both.  Utrique,  to
both,  to  either,  Admoveantur  hirundines  ij  tempori  utrique,  apply
two  leeches  to  each  temple.

Utriuslibet,  of  whichever  of  the  two,  or  more,  the  patient  likes  best.

V.

Vaccinatio,  the  act  of  inoculating  for  the  cowpock.
Variolse  vaccinae,  the  cowpock.
Vaccinum  lac,  cow's  milk.
Valde,  very,  very  much.

Valeo,  to  avail ;  si  non  valeat,  if  it  does  not  answer.
Variolse,  the  small-pox.
83


1314  Appendix.

Varicella,  the  chicken-pox.

Vas,  a  vessel. Vasis,  of  a  vessel. Vase  clauso,  in  a  covered  vessel.

Agitato  vase,  shaking  the  vessel.
Ve,  vel,  or ;  either :  -ve  is  never  at  the  beginning  but  the  end  of  a

word.
Vertebrae,  the  joints  of  the  neck,  back  or  loins  ;  the  vertebrae  altogether

form  that  column  of  bones  which  is  called  the  spine.
Verus,  true,  real,  genuine.
Vena,  vein. Vena  saphena,  the  ankle  vein.
Venaesectio,  bleeding. Fiat  venaesectio,  bleed  him.
V.  S.  B.,  Venaesectio  brachii,  bleeding  in  the  arm. Fiat  venaesectio  in

vena  saphena,  bleed  the  patient  in  the  ankle  vein, — or  it  may  be

understood,  to  bleed  wherever  you  can  find  the  best  vein,  at  the  top

of  the  foot,  to  get  blood  from.
Vespere,  in  the  evening.
Vespertinus,  in  the  evening ;  as,  hora  vi'a,  vespertina,  at  six  o'clock  in

the  evening.
Vehiculum,  a  vehicle ;  that  is,  whatever  liquid,  or  any  other  eatable  or

drinkable  we  take  a  medicine  in,  as  barley  water,  whey,  jelly,  or

panada,  etc.
Viginti,  twenty. Vicesimus,  vigesimus,  the  twentieth.
Vinosus,  vinarius,  of  wine. Cyathus  vinarius,  a  wineglass.
Vices,  turns;  ad  duas  vices  sumendus,  to  be  taken  at  twice:  that  is,

half  to  be  taken  at  first,  and  the  other  half  in  some  time  after.
Vicibus  partitis. See  Partitus,  in  P.
Vice,  in  the  room  of. Vix,  scarcely,  hardly. Ut  vix  sentiatur,  so  that

it  can  scarcely  be  perceivable.
Vitellus,  the  yelk  of  an  egg.

V.  0.  S.,  Vitelli  Ovi  Solutum,  dissolved  in  the  yelk  of  an  egg.
Vitrum,  a  glass. Vitreus,  made  of  glass.

Vires,  strength ;  si  vires  permittant,  if  the  strength  will  bear  it.
Vomitio,  a  vomiting. Vomitione  urgente,  when  the  vomiting  is  trouble-
some.
Vultus,  the  countenance.


COMPARISON  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  THERMOMETRY  SCALES.

The  Thermometer  always  used  in  this  country  is  that  of  Fahrenheit;
it  is  also  used  in  parts  of  Germany.

In  this  instrument  the  range  between  the  freezing  and  boiling  points
of  water  is  divided  into  180°,  and  as  the  greatest  possible  degree  of
cold  was  supposed  to  be  that  produced  by  mixing  snow  and  salt  together,
it  was  made  the  zero.  Hence,  the  freezing  point  became  32°,  and  the
boiling  point  212°.


Table  of  Proportionate  Doses.


1315


The  Centigrade  thermometer  places  the  zero  at  the  freezing  point  of
water,  and  divides  the  range  between  the  freezing  and  boiling  points  into
100°.  This  scale  has  long  been  used  in  Sweden,  under  the  title  of
Celsius's  thermometer,  and  is  generally  adopted  on  the  Continent.

Reaumur's  thermometer,  which  was  formerly  used  in  France,  divides
the  space  between  the  freezing  and  boiling  points  of  water  into  80°,  and
places  the  zero  at  the  freezing  point. It  is  now  little  employed.

Le  Lisle's  thermometer  is  used  in  Russia.  The  graduation  begins  at
the  boiling  point,  and  increases  toward  the  freezing  point.  The  boiling
point  is  marked  0°,  and  the  freezing  point  150°.

To  convert  the  degrees  of  Centigrade  into  those  of  Fahrenheit,  mul-
tiply by  9,  divide  by  five,  and  add  32.

To  convert  the  degrees  of  Centigrade  into  those  of  Reaumur,  multi-
ply by  4,  and  divide  by  5.

To  convert  the  degrees  of  Fahrenheit  into  those  of  Centigrade,  deduct
32,  multiply  by  5,  and  divide  by  9.

To  convert  the  degrees  of  Fahrenheit  into  those  of  Reaumur,  deduct
32,  divide  by  9,  and  multiply  by  4.

To  convert  the  degrees  of  Reaumur  into  those  of  Centigrade,  multi-
ply by  5,  and  divide  by  4.

To  convert  the  degrees  of  Reaumur  into  those  of  Fahrenheit,  multi-
ply by  9,  divide  by  4,  and  add  32.

TABLE  OF PROPORTIONATE  DOSES  FOR DIFFERENT  AGES.


GAUBIUS' TABLE.

Examples.

Under  -|  year,

l-15th

of

a

full

dose.

or

4

grains.

<<

1

<<

l-12th

u

tt

<<

5

tt

<<

2

<<

1  -8th

<<

tt

it

71

'"2

it

<<

3

"

l-6th

It

tt

<<

10

tt

<<

4

it

l-5th

a

tt

tt

12

tt

<<

7

tt

l-3d

H

tt

tt

20

tt

<<

14

tt

1-half

M

tt

tt

30

tt

«(

20

tt

2-3ds

It

it

tt

40

tt

«

21

"  the  full  dose

1  drachm.

a

63

tt

ll-12ths

it

tt

tt

55

grains.

<(

77

tt

5-6 ths

tt

a

tt

50

tt

<<

100

a

2-3ds

tc

n

tt

40

a

The  following  is  the  more  simple  rule  of  Dr.  Young :

"For  children  under  12  years,  the  dose  of  most  medicines  must  be

diminished  in  the  proportion  of  the  age  to  the  age  increased  by  12  ;

2
Thus,  at  2  years,  the  dose  will  be  l-7th  of  that  for  adults,  viz:

=!• At  21  the  full  dose  may  be  given."
7


1316


Appendix.


To  the  above  rule  there  are  certain  exceptions ;  thus  castor  oil  requires
to  be  given  in  larger  proportionate  doses,  while  opium  and  the  narcotics
generally  should  be  administered  in  smaller  proportionate  quantities.

Sex,  temperament,  and  idiosyncracy  have  also  a  modifying  effect  upon
the  dose,  and  they  should  always  be  kept  in  view  in  the  administration
of  medicines.  Females  usually  require  smaller  doses  than  males ;  and
persons  of  sanguine  temperament  bear  depletory  medicines  better  than
the  phlegmatic.

TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.
apothecaries'  weight, (u.  s.,  l.  e.,  d.)


19.

Ounces.

Drachi

IS.

Scruples.

Grains.

12 =

96

=

288

= 5760

3  1 =

8

=

24

= - 480

3  1

■—"

3
B  1

= 60

= gr.  20

AVOIRDUPOIS

WEIGHT.

?ounds.

Ounces.

Drachms.

Troy  Graius.

R>  1

= 16

=

256

=

7000

31

=

16

=

437.5

3  1

=

27.3437

RELATIVE VALUE OF TROT (OR APOTHECARIES') AND AVOIRDUPOIS  WEIGHTS.


Pound. Pound. Ounces.

Grains.

1  Troy, =

0 13

72.5  (Avoirdupois)

1  Avoirdupois,  =

1 2

280  (Troy.)

APOTHECARIES' OR WINE MEASURE.

(U. S., D.)

Gallon. Pints.

Fluidounces.

Fluidrachms.

Minims.

Cong.  1 = 8

= 128

=

1024 =

61440

01

= 16

=

128 =

7680

f3 1

=

8 =
f 3  1

480
TTL  60

IMPERIAL MEASURE.

Gallon.  Pints. Fluidounces. Fluidrachms.

Cong.  1 = 8 = 160 = 1280  =

0  1= 20 = 160  =

f3 1 = 8  =

f3  1  =


Minims.

76800

9600

480

60

Tti 1


Imp.  Grains.

=  70000

=  8750

=  437.5

=  54.7

=  0.91


French  Decimal  Weights  and  Measures.


1317


RELATIVE VALUE OF APOTHECARIES' AND IMPERIAL MEASURES.


Apothecaries'  Measure.


1  gallon

=

6

1  pint

=

1  fluidounce

=

1  fluidrachm

=

Imperial  Measure.

Gallon.

Pints.

1  gallon

=

1

1

1  pint

=

1

1  fluidounce

=

1  fluidrachm

=

Imperial  Measure.

[idoun<

jes. Fluidrachms.

Minims.

13

2

23

16

5

18

1

0

20

1

H

Apothecaries'  Measure.
Fluidounces Fluidrachms. Minims.

9  5  8


38
41
58


RELATIVE  VALUE OF APOTHECARIES'  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES  IN DISTILLED  WATER  AT 60°

FAHRENHEIT.


Pounds.

Ounces.

Drachms.

Scruples.

Grains.

1  gallon

—

10

1

4

0

8.88

1  pint

=

1

3

1

1

11.11

1  fluidounce

=

0

0

7

1

15.69

1  fluidrachm

=

0

0

0

2

16.96

1  minim

==

0

0

0

0

.9493

FRENCH  DECIMAL  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES  REDUCED  TO  ENGLISH.


MEASURES  AND WEIGHTS.


Milligramme

Centigramme

Decigramme

Gramme

Decagramme

Hectogramme

Killogramme

Myriagramme


English  Troy  Grains.

.0154

.1543

1.5434

15.4340

154.3402

1543.4023

= 15434.0234

=  154340.2344


lb.

oz.

dr.

gr-

0

0

2

34.3

0

3

1

43.4

2

8

1

14

16

9

4

20

1318


Appendix.


MEASURES OF LENGTH.

The  metre  being  at  32°,  and  the  foot  at  62°.


Millimetre

.

English  Inches.

.03937

Centimetre

=

.39371

Decimetre

==

3.93710

Miles.

Fur.

Yds. Ft.

Inches.

Metre

=

39.37100

=

0

0

1 0

3.371

Decametre

=

393.71000

=

0

0

10 2

9.710

Hectometre

=

3937.10000

=

0

0

109 1

1.100

Kilometre

=

39371.00000

=

0

4

213 1

11.000

Myriametre

=

393710.00000

=

6

1

156 1

2.000

MEASURES OF CAPACITY.

Millitre

_

English  Cubic  Inches.

.061028

__

Apothecaries'  Measure.

16.2318  minims.

Centilitre

=

.610280

=

2.7053  fluidrachms.

Decilitre

=

6.102800

=

3.3816  fiuidounces.

Litre

=

61.028000

==

2.1135  pints.

Decalitre

—

610.280000

—

2.6419  gallons

Hectolitre

=

6102.800000

Kilolitre

=

61028.000000

Myrialitre

=

610280.000000

APPROXIMATE  MEASUREMENTS.

A  teacup  is  estimated  to  contain  f3iv,  or  a  gill.

A  wineglass  "  "  fgij-

A  tablespoon  (cochlear  magnum)  "  fgss.

A  teaspoon  (cochlear  parvum) "  f3j.

TABLE  EXHIBITING  THE  NUMBER  OF DROPS  OE  DIFFERENT  LIQUIDS  EQUIVA-
LENT TO  A  FLUIDRACHM.

Liquid  medicines,  in  small  quantities,  are  frequently  estimated  by
drops,  which  are  often  incorrectly  considered  equivalent  to  a  minim,  or
the  sixtieth  part  of  a  fluidrachm.  The  drop  of  water  and  of  watery  fluids
is,  on  an  average,  about  this  size ;  but  this  is  by  no  means  the  case  with
all  liquids.  Even  in  the  same  liquid  the  size  of  the  drop  varies,  accord-
ing to  the  shape  of  the  vessel,  and  of  its  mouth,  from  which  it  is  dropped.
The  following  table  was  compiled  by  Mr.  E.  Durand,  of  Philadelphia.


Drops.

Acid,  acetic  (crystallizable) 120

Acid,  hydrocyanic  (medicinal) 45

Acid,  muriatic, 54

Acid,  nitric 84

Acid,  nitric,  diluted,  (1  to  7) 51

Acid,  sulphuric 90


Drops.

Acid,  sulphuric,  (aromatic) 120

Acid,  sulphuric,  diluted,  (1  to  7). . . 51

Alcohol  (rectified  spirit) 138

Alcohol,  diluted  (proof  spirit) 120

Arseuite  of  potassa,  solution  of,. . . . 57
Chloroform, 250  to  300


Composition  of  Mineral  Waters.


1319


Drops.

Ether,  sulphuric 150

Oil  of  aniseed,  cinnamon,  cloves,  pep-
permint, sweet  almonds,  and  olives  120
Tincture of assafcetida, foxglove,

guaiac,  and  opium 120

Tincture  of  chloride  of  iron 132

Vinegar,  distilled 78

Vinegar  of  colchicum 78

Vinegar  of  opium  (black  drop) 78


Drops.

Vinegar  of  squill, 78

Water,  distilled, 45

Water  of  ammonia  (strong) 54

Water  of  ammonia  (weak) 45

Wine  (Teneriffe) 78

Wine,  antimonial 72

Wine  of  colchicum 75

Wine  of  opium 78


A  TABLE  EXHIBITING  THE COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  NATURAL  MINERAL
WATERS  OP  EUROPE  AND  THE  UNITED  STATES.

1.  Carbonated  Waters,  are  such  as  contain  an  excess  of  carbonic
acid,  which  gives  them  a  sparkling  appearance  and  the  power  of  redden-
ing litmus  paper.  These  waters  frequently  contain  the  carbonate  of
iron,  lime  and  magnesia,  which  are  held  in  solution  by  the  excess  of
carbonic  acid,  and  which  are  deposited  when  the  water  is  boiled,  or  ex-
posed for  some  time  to  the  air.


Seltzer. —  (Germany.)

In  a  wine  pint.
Carbonic  acid,  cubic  inches 17

Solid  contents.
Carbonate  of  Soda,  grains 4

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, 5

Carbonate  of  Lime, 8

Chloride  of  Sodium, 17

Total,....  29

[Bergmann.

Pyrmont. — (  Germany.)
Temperature,  55°  F.

In  a  wine  pint.
Carbonic  Acid,  cubic  inches  26

Solid  contents.
Carbonate  of  Magnesia,  grains  10.0

Carbonate  of  Li  me, 4.5

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 5.5

Sulphate  of  Lime, 8.5

Chloride  of  Sodium, 1 .5

Oxide  of  Iron 0.6


Total,.


...  30.6

[Bergmann.


Carbonic  Acid,


Spa. — (Belgium. )
Temperature  50°  F.

In  a  wine  pint.
cubic  inches.  13


In  a  wine  pint.
Solid  contents.
Carbonate  of  Soda,  grains  1.5

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, 4.5

Carbonate  of  Lime, 1.5

Chloride  of  Sodium, 0.2

Oxide  of  Iron, 0.6

Total, 8.3

[Bergmann.

Mont  D'Or. — (France.)
Four  springs,  the  temperature  of  which
respectively,  is 107°, 109°,  113°, and

52°  F.

Madeleine  Spring.

In  a  Parisian  pint.

Carbonic  Acid, grains  4.64

Carbonate  of  Soda, 6.75

Sulphate  of  Soda, 2.04

Muriate  of  Soda, 5.18

Alumina 2.21

Carbonate  of  Lime, 4.14

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, :  1.36

Oxide  of  Iron, 0.40

Total,....  26.72

Vichy. — (  France. )
temperature  of  the  different
varies  from  72°  to  114°  F.
They  all  contain  carbonic  acid,  carbon-
ates of  lime,  magnesia,  and  soda,  sul-
phate of  soda  and  muriate  of  soda.


The

springs


1320


Appendix.


Sweet  Springs. — (Virginia.)
Temperature,  73°  F.


Carbonic  Acid,
Sulphate  of  Magnesia,
Muriate  of  Soda,
Muriate  of  Lime,
Sulphate  of  Lime,


In  a  quart.


•  grs.  12  to  15


In  a  quart.
Carbonate  of  Magnesia, "J
Carbonate  of  Lime,  I  grs.  18  to  24

Silicious  Earth,
Iron, grains  yz  to  1

[ROUELLE.


II.  Sulphureted  Watebs,  or  such  as  contain  sulphureted  hydrogen,
are  distinguished  by  their  peculiar  fetid  smell,  and  by  their  yielding
brown  precipitates  with  the  salts  of  lead  and  silver.


Aix-la-Chapelle. — (  Germany.}

Temperature,  110°  to  143°  F.

In  a  wine  pint.
Sulphureted  Hydrogen,  cu.  in.,  5.5

Solid  contents.
Carbonate  of  Soda,  grains  12

Carbonate  of  Lime, 4.75

Chloride  of  Sodium, 5


Total, 2175

[Bergmann.

Harrowgate,  Old  Well. — (JSng.)

Gaseous  contents.  In  a  wine  gallon.

Sulphureted  Hydrogen, cu.  in.  14

Carbonic  Acid, 4.25

Nitrogen, 8

Carbureted  Hydrogen, 4.15


Total, 30.40

Solid  contents.
Chloride  of  Sodium, grains  752

Chloride  of  Calcium, 65.75

Chloride  of  Magnesium, 29.3

Bicarbonate  of  Soda, 12.8


Total,....  859.75

White  Sulphur. — (  Virginia. )

Temperature,  62°  F.
Gaseous  contents.  In  a  wiue  gallon.

Sulphureted Hydrogen, cu. in. 2.5

Carbonic  Acid, 2

Oxygen, 1.448

Nitrogen, 3.552

Total, 9  5

Solid  contents.  In  a  pint.
Sulphate  of  Magnesia,  grains  5.588
Sulphate  of  Lime, 7.744


Solid  contents.  In  a  pint.

Carbonate  of  Lime, 1.150

Chloride  of  Calcium, 0.204

Chloride  of  Sodium, 0.180

Oxide  of  Iron, a  trace.

Loss, 0.410


Total,.. 15.276
[Prof.  W.  B.  Rogers.

Red  Sulphur. — (  Virginia)

Temperature,  54°  F.

Gaseous  contents.  In  an  imperial  gallon.

Sulphureted  Hydrogen, cu.  in.  4.54

Carbonic  Acid, 8.75

Nitrogen, 4.25

Solid  contents.  In  32  cubic  inches.

Sulphate  of  Soda,
Sulphate  of  Lime,
Sulphate  of  Magnesia, > grains  1.25
Carbonate  of  Lime,
Muriate  of  Soda,

[Prof.  W.  B.  Rogers.

-Salt  Sulphur. — (  Virginia.)
Temperature  49°  to  56°  F.

Gaseous  contents.  In  100  cu.  in.

Sulph.  Hydrogen, cu.  in.  1.10  to  1.50

Nitrogen, 2.05

Oxygen, 0.27

Carbonic  Acid, 5.65

Solid  contents.
Sulphate  of  Lime,  grains  36.755

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 7.883

Sulphate  of  Soda, 9.682

Carbonate  of  Lime, 4.445

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, 1.434

Chloride  of  Magnesium, 0.116

Chloride  of  Sodium, 0.683

Chloride  of  Calcium, 0.025


Composition  of  Mineral  Waters.


1321


Solid  contents.  Gaseous  contents. (Amount  not  given.)

Peroxide  of  Iron,  from  Protosulph.,  0.042  j  Sulphureted  Hydrogen,


An  azotized  organic  matter,  blend-
ed with  sulphur,  about, 4

Earthy  Phosphates, a  trace.

Iodine, "

[Prof.  W.  B.  Rogers.

Warm  Springs. — (  Virginia.)
Temperature,  98°  F.

Gaseous  contents.  In  a  gallon.

Sulphureted  Hydrogen,  cu.  in.  0.25

Nitrogen , - 3.25

Carbonic  Acid, 1.00

Solid  contents.

Muriate  of  Lime, grains  3.968

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 9.984

Carbonate  of  Lime, 4.288

Sulphate  of  Lime, 5.466

Soda, a  trace.


Carbonic  Acid,

Oxygen,

Nitrogen.


[Prof.  "W.  B.  Rogers.


Sharon  Springs. — (New  York.)

White  Sulphur.
Temperature,  48°  F.

In  a  wine  gallon
Sulphureted  Hydrogen, cu.  in.  20.5

Solid  contents.
Bicarbonate  of  Magnesia, grs.  24.0

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 34.0

Sulphate  of  Lime, 85.4

Hydrosulphate  of  Magnesia  and

Lime, 3.0

Chloride  of  Sodium  and  Magne-
sium, 2.7


Total,....  23.706
[Prof.  W.  B.  Rogers.

Blue  Sulphur. — (  Virginia.)

Solid  contents. (Amount  not  given.)
Sulphate  of  Lime,
Sulphate  of  Magnesia,
Sulphate  of  Soda,
Carbonate  of  Lime,
Carbonate  of  Magnesia,
Chloride  of  Magnesium,
Chloride  of  Sodium,
Chloride  of  Calcium,
Hydrosulphate  of  Soda  and  Magnesia,
Protosulphate  of  Iron,
Iodine,
Sulphur,
Organic  Matters.

III.  Chalybeate  Waters  are  characterized  by  their  inky  taste,  and
by  striking  a  blue-black  color  with  an  infusion  of  galls,  and  a  blue  color
with  ferrocyanuret  of  potassium.  The  iron  is  generally  in  the  state  of
carbonate  of  the  protoxide,  held  in  solution  in  the  water  by  excess  of
carbonic  acid.  By  standing  or  boiling,  the  carbonic  acid  is  driven  off,
and  the  protoxide,  by  absorbing  oxygen,  is  precipitated  as  a  hydrated
sesquioxide,  of  an  ochreous  color.


Total, 1.491

Magnesia  Springs.
Temperature,  48°  F.

In  a  wine  gallou.
Sulphureted  Hydrogen, cu.  in. 3.3

Solid  coutents.
Bicarbonate  of  Magnesia, grs.  30.5

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, : . .  22.7

Sulphate  of  Lime, 76.0

Hydrosulphate  of  Magnesia  and

Lime, 0.5

Chloride  of  Sodium and  Magne-
sium, 3.0


Total,... . 132.7


Tunbridge  Wells. — (England.)

Solid  contents.  In  a  wine  gallon.

Chloride  of  Sodium, grains  2.46

Chloride  of  Calcium, 0.39


Solid  contents. In  a  wine  gallon-
Chloride  of  Magnesium 0.29

Sulphate  of  Lime 1.41

Carbonate  of  Lime, 0.27


1322


Appendix.


Solid  contents.  In  a  wine  gallon.

Oxide  of  Iron, 2.22

Manganese,  Silica,  etc., 0.44

Loss 0.13

Total 7.61

[SdJDAMORE.

Brighton. — [England.)

In  a  wine  pint.

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in.  2.5

Solid  eonteuts.

Sulphate  of  Iron, grs.  1.80

Sulphate  of  Lime, 4.09

Chloride  of  Sodium, 1.53

Chloride  of  Magnesium, 0.75

Silica, 0.14

Loss 0.19

Total, 8.5

[Marcet.

Cheltenham. — [England.)

Chalybeate  Spring.

In  a  wine  pint.

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in. 2.5

Solid  contents.

Carbonate  of  Soda, grs. 0.5

Sulphate  of  Soda, 22.7

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 6

Sulphate  of  Lime, 2.5

Chloride  of  Sodium, 41.3

Oxide  of  Iron, 0.8

Total, 73.8

[Brande  &,  Parkes.

Bedford. — [Pennsylvania.)
Anderson's  Spring.

Temperature,  55°  F.

In  a  wine  gallon,

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in.  74

Solid  contents.
Sulphate  of  Magnesia,  grs.  80

Sulphate  of  Lime, 14.5

Chloride  of  Sodium 10

Chloride  of  Calcium,. 3

Carbonate  of  Lime, 8

Carbonate  of  Iron, 5

Total,....  120.5
[Dr.  Church.


IV.  Saline  Waters  comprise  those  which  contain  a  sufficient  amount
of  neutral  salts  to  give  them  a  marked,  and  generally  a  purgative


Or  according  to  J. Cheston  Morris. -
One  pint  of  the  water  evaporated  at  240°
F.,  yields  of  solid  residuum  : —

Carbonate  of  Lime 2.120

Sulphate  of  Lime, 11 .274

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 3.974

Sulphates  of  Alumina  and  Iron,  1.280

Sulphate  of  Soda, 3.092

Chloride  of  Sodium, 0.343

Free  Sulphuric  acid, 0.128

Organic  Matter  and  Silica, a  trace

Total,....  22.201


Schooley's  Mountain. — [JST.  J.)

Temperature,  50°  F.
Solid  contents.  In  a  wine  piut.

Muriate  of  Soda, grs.  0.43

Muriate  of  Lime, 2.40

Muriate  of  Magnesia, 0.50

Carbonate  of  Lime, 7.99

Sulphate  of  Lime, 0.65

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, 0.40

Silica, 0.80

Carbonate  of  Iron, 2.00

Extractive, 0.92

Loss, 0.41


Total,.


16.50


B Alston  Spa. — [ATew  York.)

Sans  Souci  Spring.

Temperature,  50°  F.
Solid  contents.  In  a  wine  Gallon.

Chloride  of  Sodium grs.,  143.733

Bicarbonate  of  Soda, 12.66

Bicarbonate  of  Magnesia, 39.10

Carbonate  of  Lime, 43.407

Carbonate  of  Iron, 5.95

Iodide  of  Sodium, 1.30

Silica, 1


Total.


247.15

[Steel.


Composition  of  Mineral  Waters.


1323


operation.  The  salts  most  usually  present  are  the  sulphates  and  carbonates
of  lime,  magnesia,  and  soda,  and  the  chlorides  of  calcium,  sodium,  and
magnesium.  Iodine  and  bromine  have  been  found  in  a  few  saline  springs;
and  some  of  them  contain  carbonic  acid  and  iron,  which  might  entitle
them  to  be  classified,  respectively,  with  the  carbonated  or  chalybeate
waters.


Plombieres. — (France.)

Temperature,  90°  to  144°  F.
Solid  contents.  In  a  pint.

Carbonate  of  Soda, grains  2.16

Sulphate  of  Soda, 2.33

Chloride  of  Sodium, 1.25

Carbonate  of  Lime, 0.50

Silica, 1-33

Animal  Matter, 1-50

Total, 9.07

[Vauquelin.

Carlsbad. — (Bohemia. )

Temperature,  165°  F.
Solid  contents.  In  a  -wine  pint.

Carbonate  of  Lime, grains 4.15

Sulphate  of  Soda, 41.51

Chloride  of  Sodium, 5.33

Carbonate  of  Soda, 11-76

Lithia  (Berzelius) a  trace

[Bergmann.

Seidlitz. — (Bohemia.)

Solid  contents.  In  a  wine  pint.

Sulphate  of  Magnesia,.,  grains  180

Sulphate  of  Lime, 5

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, 2.5

Carbonate  of  Lime, 0.8

Chloride  of  Magnesium, 4.5

Total,....  192.8

[Bergmann.

Cheltenham. — (England.)
Saline  Spring.
Solid  contents.  In  a  wine  pint.

Sulphate  of  Soda, grains  15

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 11

Sulphate  of  Lime, 4.5

Chloride  of  Sodium, 50

Total, 80.5

[Parkes  &  Brande.


Bath. — (England.)

Temperature,  100°  to  106°  F.

In  a  wine  pint.

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in.  1 .2

Solid  contents.

Carbonate  of  Lime, grs.  0.8

Sulphate  of  Soda, 1.4

Sulphate  of  Lime, 9-3

Chloride  of  Sodium, 3.4

Silica, °-2

Oxide  of  Iron, a  trace.

Total,.. 15.1
[Phillips.

Hot  Springs. — (  Virginia.)

Temperature  98°  to  106°  F.
Solid  contents  (the  quantity  not  given.)
Carbonate  of  Lime,
Carbonate  of  Magnesia,
Carbonate  of  Iron,
Sulphate  of  Lime,
Sulphate  of  Soda,
Sulphate  of  Magnesia,
Free  Nitrogen.

[Prof.  W.  B.  Rogers.

Saratoga. — (New  York.)

Congress  Spring.

Gaseous  contents  In  a  wine  gallon.

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in.  311

Atmospheric  Air, 7

Total,.... 318
Solid  contents.

Chloride  of  Sodium, grs.  385

Iodide  of  Sodium, 3.5

Bicarbonate  of  Soda, 8.982

Bicarbonate  of  Magnesia, 95.788

Carbonate  of  Lime, 98.098

Carbonate  of  Iron, 5.075

Silica, L5

Bromide  of  Potassium, a  trace.

Total,....  597.943
[Steel.


1324


Appendix.


Saratoga. — (Iodine  Spring.)

Gaseous  contents.  In  a  wine  gallon.

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in.  336

Atmospheric  Air, 4

Total, 340

Solid  contents.

Chloride  of  Sodium, grs.  187

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, 75

Carbonate  of  Lime, 26

Carbonate  of  Soda, 2

Carbonate  of  Iron, 1

Iodine, 3.5


Total, 294.5

[Prof.  Emmons.

Saratoga. — (Pavilion  Spring.)

Gaseous  contents.  In  a  wine  gallon.

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in.  359.05

Atmospheric  Air, 5.03


Saratoga. — (Union  Spring.)

Gaseous  contents.  In  a  wine  gallon.

Carbonic  Acid, cub.  in.  314.16

Atmospheric  Air, 4.62

Total, 318.78

Solid  contents.

Chloride  of  Sodium, grs.  243.620

Carbonate  of  Magnesia, 84.265

Carbonate  of  Lime, 41.600

Carbonate  of  Soda, 12.800

Carbonate  of  Iron, 5.452

Iodide  of  Sodium,  or  Iodine,. . .  3.600

Silica  and  Alumina, 1 .570

Bromide  of  Potassium, a  trace.


Total,

Solid  contents.

Chloride  of  Sodium, grs.

Carbonate  of  Soda,

Carbonate  of  Lime,

Carbonate  of  Magnesia,

Carbonate  of  Iron,

Sulphate  of  Soda,

Iodide  of  Sodium,

Alumina,

Silica,

Phosphate  of  Lime,

Bromide  of  Potassium,


364.08

187.68

4.92

52.84

56.92

3.51

1.48

2.59

0.42

1.16

0.19

a  trace.


Total, 311.71

[Da.  J.  R.  Chilton.


Total, 392.907

[Dr.  J.  R.Chilton.


Sea  Water. — (English  Channel.)

In  1000  grains.

Water, grs.  964.744

Chloride  of  Sodium, 27.059

Chloride  of  Potassium, 0.765

Chloride  of  Magnesium, 3.667

Bromide  of  Magnesium, 0.029

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 2.296

Sulphate  of  Lime, 1.407

Carbonate  of  Lime, 0.033


Total, 1000.000

[Schweitzer.


V.  Acidulous  Waters.  This  division  of  Mineral  Waters  is  intended
to  comprise  such  as  contain  a  free  acid,  other  than  carbonic  acid.  They
are,  comparatively,  of  rare  occurrence.  The  following  is  an  analysis  of
Sulphuric  Acid  Springs,  lately  brought  into  notice  :


Oak  Orchard  Springs. — (N. Y.)

In  a  gallon.

Free  Sulphuric  Acid, grs.  82.96

Sulphate  of  Lime, 39.60

Protosulphate  of  Iron, 14.32

Sulphate  of  Alumina, 9.68

Sulphate  of  Magnesia, 8.28


In  a  gallon.
Silica, 104

Organic  Extractive  Matters, 3.28

Total, 16.032

Dr.  J.  R.  Chilton.
The  Alum  Spring  of  Virginia,  is  also
stated  to  contain  free  sulphuric  acid.


VI.  Siliceous  Waters. These  Mineral  Waters  are  extremely  rare ;
and in those hitherto discovered,  the silica appears  to  have  been


Composition  of  Mineral  Waters.  1325

dissolved  by  means  of  Soda.  The  most  remarkable  of  these  are  the
boiling  springs  of  Geyser,  in  Iceland,  of  which  the  following  is  the
analysis,  as  given  by  Black. [Edin.  Phil.  Trans,  iii.  95.)

Solid  contents.  In  a  gallon.

Soda grs. 5.56

Alumina, 2.80

Silica, 31 .50

Muriate  of  Soda, 14.42

Sulphate  of  Soda, 8.57

Total,....  62.85


In  addition  to  the  above,  the  following  qualitative  analyses  have  been
recently  made  :


Sulphur  Spring.  [Nashville,  Tenn.)

Sulphureted  Hydrogen,

Carbonic  Acid,

Hydrochloric  Acid,

Sulphuric  Acid,

Magnesia  as  a  Sulphate,

Soda,  as  a  Hydrochlorate.

[Prof.  Bowen.


Sam's Creek  Spring.
County. )
Sulphureted  Hydrogen,
Carbonic  Acid,
Sulphate  of  Lime,
Hydrochlorate  of  Soda.


-[Davidson


[Prof.  Troost.


Tvree's  Springs. — [Davidson  Go.)

Sulphureted  Hydrogen,

Carbonic  Acid,

Sulphate  of  Lime,

Sulphate  of  Magnesia,

Carbonate  of  Lime,

Hydrochlorate  of  Soda.

[Prof.  Troost.


Shelby  Chalybeate  Spring.
[Nashville.)

Temperature  of  spring,  61°,  while  the
air  was  90.°
Carbonic  Acid,  free,
Carbonate  of  Iron,
Carbonate  of  Magnesia,
Carbonate  of  Lime,
Chloride  of  Sodium,
Sulphate  of  Magnesia.

[Richard  0.  Currey.

Bayley's  Spring. — [Florence, Ala.)

Carbonic  Acid,  324  cubic  inches in a

gallon,
Carbonate  of  Magnesia,
Carbonate  of  Soda,
Carbonate  of  Iron,
Carbonate  of  Potassa,  according  to  Prof.

Tuomey,
Iodine,  at  least  3  grains  to  the  gallon,

Chloride  of  Sodium.

[Richard  0.  Currey.


These  last  springs,  at  Florence,  are  noted  for  their  efficacy  in  scrofu-
lous and  dropsical  diseases.


1326


Appendix.


TABLES  OF SPECIFIC GKAYITIES,  ETC.


Relation  between  Specific  Gravities,  and  Degrees  of  Baume's  Hydrometer
for  Liquids  heavier  than  Water.


Sp.  Gr.

BaumS.

Sp.  Gr.

Baume.

Sp.  Gr.

Baume.

Sp.  Gr.

Baum6.

1.000

=  0

1.152

=  19

1.359

=  38

1.656

=  57

1.007

1

1.161

20

1.372

39

1.676

58

1.014

2

1.171

21

1.384

40

1.695

59

1.022

3

1.180

22

1.398

41

1.714

60

1.029

4

1.190

23

1.412

42

1.736

61

1.036

5

1.199

24

1.426

43

1.758

62

1.044

6

1.210

25

1.440

44

1.779

63

1.052

7

1.221

26

1.454

45

1.801

64

1.060

8

1.231

27

1.470

46

1.823

65

1.067

9

1.242

28

1.485

47

1.847

66

1.075

10

1.252

29

1.501

48

1.872

67

1.083

11

1.264

30

1.526

49

1.897

68

1.091

12

1.275

31

1.532

50

1.921

69

1.100

13

1.286

32

1.549

51

1.946

70

1.108

14

1.298

33

1.566

52

1.974

71

1.116

15

1.309

34

1.583

53

2.002

72

1.125

16

1.321

35

1.601

54

2.031

73

1.134

17

1.334

36

1.618

55

2.059

74

1.143

18

1.346

37

1.637

56

2.087

75

Relation  between  Specific  Gravities,  and  Degrees  of  Baume  s  Hydrometer
for  Liquids  lighter  than  Water.


Sp.  Gr.

Baume.

Sp.  Gr.

Baume.

Sp.  Gr.

Baume.

Sp.  Gr.

Baumg.

1.000

=  10

0.918

=  23

0.849

=  36

0.789

=  49

0.993

11

0.913

24

0.844

37

0.785

50

0.986

12

0.907

25

0.839

38

0.781

51

0.980

13

0.901

26

0.834

39

0.777

52

0.973

14

0.896

27

0.830

40

0.773

53

0.967

15

0.890

28

0.825

41

0.768

54

0.960

16

0.885

29

0.820

42

0.764

55

0.954

17

0.880

30

0.816

43

0.760

56

0.948

18

0.874

31

0.811

44

0.757

57

0.942

19

0.869

32

0.807

45

0.753

58

0.936

20

0.864

33

0.802

46

0.749

59

0.930

21

0.859

34

0.798

47

0.745

60

0.924

22

0.854

35

0.794

48

Hydro-metrical  Equivalents.


1327


HYDROMETRICAL  EQUIVALENTS,


100  parts

contain  of

1000  parts

Per  Cent,  of

Alcohol

contain  of

Alcohol.

Sp,  Gr.  at
60°  Fan.

Sp.  Gr.

Water.

Standard

Sites.

Baume.

Cartier.

Sp.  Gr.  796

796.

Ale.  Sp.

by  volume.

By  Weight.

Gr.  825.

Gay

Lussac.

796

100

0

46.5

43.48

100

797

99.5

.5

99.75

798

99

1

46

43.06

99.50

799

98.67

1.33

99.25

800

98.33

1.67

99

801

98

2

98.75

802

97.67

2.33

45

42.14

98.50

803

97.33

2.67

42

98.28

804

97

3

98.15

805

96.67

3.33

98

806

96.33

3.67

97.80

806.5

96.17

3.83

44

41.21

97.70

807

96

4

97.60

808

95.5

4.5

41

97.40

809

95

5

97.29

809.5

94.89

5.10

97.10

810

94.67

5.33

97

811

94.33

5.67

43

40.34

96.75

812

94

6

96.50

813

93.67

6.33

40

96.25

814

93.33

6.67

96

815

93

7

95.75

816

92.5

7.5

42

39.40

95.50

817

92

8

95.25

818

91.67

8.33

95

818.6

91.5

8.5

39

94.90

819

91.33

8.67

94.75

820

91

9

94.50

821

90.5

9.5

41

38.46

94.25

822

90

10

94

823

89.67

10.33

38

93.75

824

89.33

10.67

93.50

825

89

11

1000

63  0.  P.

40

37.55

93.25

826

88.5

11.5

993

62

93

827

88

12

988.5

61.5

37

92.6

828

87.67

12.33

984

61

39.5

92.3

829

87.33

12.67

979.5

60.5

39

36.63

92

830

87

13

975

60

91.7

831

86.5

13.5

970.5

59.5

38.5

36.17

91.35

832

86

14

966

59

36

91

833

85.67

14.33

961.5

58.3

90.65

834

85.33

14.67

957

58

38

35.72

90.3

835

85

15

953

57.5

90

836

84.67

15.33

949

57

37.5

35.26

89.7

837

84.33

15.67

944.5

56.5

89.35

837.6

84.25

15.75

942.5

56.3

35

89.20

1328


Appendix.


Sp.  Gr.  at
60?  Fah.

100  parts

Alcohol

Sp.  Gr.

796.

By  W

contain  of

Water,
eight.

1000  parts
contain  of
Standard
Ale.  Sp.
Gr.  825.

Sikca.

Baum£.

Cartier.

Per  Cent,  of

Alcohol.

Sp.  Gr.  796

by  volume.

Gay

Lussac.

838

84

16

940

56  0.  P.

89

839

83.5

16.5

936

55.5

37

34.80

88.75

840

83

17

932

55

88.5

841

82.67

17.33

928

54.5

36.5

88.25

842

82.33

17.67

924

54

34.94

88

843

82

18

920

53.5

34

87.65

844

81.67

18.33

916

53

36

33.88

87.3

845

81.33

18.67

912

52.5

87

846

81

19

908

52

86.7

847

80.5

19.5

903

51

36.5

33.42

86.35

848

80

20

898

50

86

849

79.67

20.33

893

49.5

85.65

850

79.33

20.67

888

49

35

33

85.3

851

79

21

883

48.5

85

852

78.5

21.5

878

48

34.5

32.43

84.7

853

78

22

873

47.5

84.35

854

77.5

22.5

868

47

84

855

77

23

862.5

46.5

34

32.04

83.65

856

76.5

23.5

857

46

83.3

857

76

24

853

45.5

33.5

31.58

83

858

75.67

24.33

849

45

82.7

859

75.33

24.67

844.5

45

82.36

860

75

25

840

45

33

31.13

82

861

74.67

25.33

836.5

44.5

31

81.7

862

74.33

25.67

833

44

81.3

862.5

74.16

25.84

830.5

43.75

32.5

30.76

81

863

74

26

828

43.5

80.8

864

73.5

26.5

823

43

80.3

865

73

27

818

42.5

32

30.21

79.96

866

72.5

27.5

813

42

79.6

867

72

28

810

41

79.3

867.5

71.83

28.17

808.5

40.5

31.5

29.78

79.15

868

71.67

28.33

807

40

79

869

71.33

28.67

802.5

39.5

78.65

870

71

29

798

39

31

29.29

78.3

871

70.5

29.5

792.5

38.5

78

872

70

30

787

38

29

77.7

873

69.5

30.5

781.5

37

30.5

28.83

77.35

874

69

31

776

36

77

875

68.67

31.33

772

35

76.5

876

68.33

31.67

768

34

30

28.38

76

877

68

32

762.5

33

75.65

877.5

67.75

32.25

759.25

32.5

28

75.5

878

67.5

32.5

757

32

75.3

878.5

67.25

32.75

753.75

31.5

29.5

27.91

75

879

67

33

751.5

31

74.8

880

66.5

33.5

746

30

74.3

881

66

34

742

29.5

29 1

27.44

74

Hydrometrical  Equivalents.


1329


100  parts  contain  of

1000  parts

Per  Cent,  of

Sp.  Gr.  at

Alcohol 1

contain  of

Alcohol.

60S  Fan.

Sp.  Gr. Water.
796.
By  Weight.

1

Standard
Ale.  Sp.
Gr.  825.

Sikes.

Baum6.

Cartier.

Sp.  Gr. 796

by  volume.

Gay

Lussac.

882

65.5

34.5

738

29  0.  P.

73.7

883

65

35

733.5

28.5

27

73.35

883.5

64.83

35.17

731.25

28.25

28.5

26.99

73.17

884

64.67

35.33

729

28

73

885

64.33

35.67

724

27.5

72.5

886

64

36

719

27

28

26.53

72

887

63.67

36.33

714

26

71.5

888

63.33

36.67

709

25

71

889

63

37

704

24.5

27.5

26.07

70.65

890

62.5

37.5

699

24

70.3

891

62

38

694

23

69.8

892

61.5

38.5

689

22

27

25.61

69.3

893

61

39

644.5

21

69

894

60.67

39.33

680

20

68.7

895

60.33

39.67

675.5

19.5

68.35

895.6

60.16

39.84

673.25

19.25

26.5

25.15

68.17

896

60

40

671

19

25

68

897

59.5

40.5

666.5

18

67.65

898

59

41

662

17

26

24.69

67.3

899

58.5

41.5

655.5

16

67

900

58

42

649

15

66.7

900.5

57.75

42.25

647

14.75

25.5

24.23

66.52

901

57.5

42.5

645

14.5

66.35

901.5

57.25

42.75

643

14.25

24

66.17

902

57

43

641

14

66

903

56.5

43.5

636

13

25

23.77

65.5

904

56

44

631

12

65

905

55.5

44.5

626

11.5

64.5

906

55

45

621

11

24.5

23.31

64

907

54.5

45.5

616.5

10.5

63.65

908

54

46

612

10

23

63.3

909

53.5

46.5

607

9

24

22.85

62.65

910

53

47

602

8

62.3

911

52.5

47.5

595.5

7.5

61.9

912

52

48

591

7

23.5

22.39

61.5

913

51.67

48.33

586

6

61

914

51.33

48.67

581

5

60.5

915

51.5

49

576

4

23

21.94

60

916

50.5

49.5

571

3

59.6

917

50

50

560.5

2

59.3

918

49.67

50.33

562

1

22.5

21.48

59

919

49.33

50.67

554

.5

58.5

920

49

51

550

Proof

58

921

48.5

51.5

545

1  U.  P.

22

21.02

57.5

922

48

52

540

2

57

923

47.5

52.5

535.5

3

21.5

20.56

56.5

924

47

53

531

4

56

926

46.5

53.5

526

5

55.5

84


1330


Appendix.


Sp.  Gr.  at
60°  Fah.

100  parts

Alcohol

Sp.  Gr.

796.

By  TV

contain  of

Water,
eight.

1000  parts
contain  of
Standard
Ale.  Sp.
Gr.  825.

Sikes.

liaume.

Cartier.

Per  Cent.  <

Alcohol,

Sp.  Gr.  79

by  volume

Gay

Lussac.

926

46

54

521

6  U.  P.

21

20.10

55

927

45.5

54.5

515.5

6.5

54.5

928

45

55

510

7

54

929

44.5

55.5

505

8

53.5

929.5

44.25

55.75

502.5

8.5

20.5

19.64

53.25

930

44

56

500

9

53

931

43.67

56.33

495.5

10

52.5

932

43.33

56.67

489

11

52

933

43

57

484

12

20

19.18

51.5

934

42.5

57.5

479

13

19

51

935

42

58

472.5

14

50.5

936

41.5

58.5

468

15

19.5

18.72

50

937

41

59

462

16

49.5

938

40.5

59.5

456

17

49

939

40

60

450

18

19

18.26

48.5

940

39.5

60.5

444

19

48

940.5

39.25

60.75

441

19.5

18

47.63

941

39

61

438

20

47.25

942

38.5

61.5

432

21

18.5

17.80

46.5

943

38

62

426.5

22

45.5

944

37.5

62.5

421

23

45

945

37

63

416

23.5

18

17.35

44.75

946

36.5

63.5

411

24

44

947

36

64

399

25

17

43.5

948

35.5

64.5

397

26

17.5

16.89

43

949

35

65

389.5

27

42.25

950

34.5

65.5

382

28

41.5

951

34

66

376

29.5

17

16.43

40

952

33.5

66.5

370

31

40.5

953

33

67

364

32.5

39.75

954

32.5

67.5

358

34

39

955

32

68

352

35

16.5

16.3

38.5

956

31.5

68.5

346

36

16

38

957

31

69

339.5

37.5

37.25

958

30

70

333

39

36.5

959

29.5

70.5

324

40.5

16

15.51

35.75

960

29

71

315

42

35

961

28.5

71.5

307.5

43.5

34.5

962

28

72

300

45

15.5

15

34

963

27

73

292.5

46.5

33

964

26.5

73.5

285

48

32

965

26

74

277.5

49.5

15

14.59

31

966

25.5

74.5

270

51

30

967

25

15

261.5

52.5

29

968

24

76

253

54

28

968.5

23.75

76.25

14.5

14.13

27.5

969

23.5

76.5

244.5

55.5

27

970

23

77 1

236

57

26

Hydrometrical  Equivalents.


1331


Sp.  Or.  at
60°  J'ah


971

972
973
974
975
976
977
978
979
980
981
982
983
984
985
986
987
988
989
990
991
992
993
994
995
996
997
998
999
1000


100  parts  contain  of

Alcohol

Sp.  Gr. | Water.


By  Weight.


22.5
22

21

20

19

18.5

18

17

16

15.5

15

14

13.5

13

12.5

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5.5

5

4

3.5

3

2

1

0


77.5
78
79
80
81

81.5
82
83
84
84.5
85
86
86.5
87
87.5
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
94.5
95
96
96.5
97
98
99
100


1000  parts

contain  of

Standard

Ale.  Sp.

Gr.  825.


227

218

209

200

195

190.5

183.5

175

163

150

143

135

128

120

112

105

98

90

82

75

67.5

60

52.5

45

37.5

30

22.5

15
7.5
0


Sikes.


58.5U.P.
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
73.5
75
76
77
78.5
80
81
82
83.5
85
87
89
90.5
92
93.5
95
95.5
96
97
98
99
100


BaumS


14


13.5


13


12.5


12


11.5


11


10.5


10


Cartier.


13.67


13.21


12.76


12.30


11.84


11.38


10.92


10.46


10


Per  cent,  of

Alcohol.

Sp. Gr.  796

by  volume.

Gay

Lussac.


25

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

11.25

10.5

9.75

9

8

7

6.5

6

5

4

3.5

3

2

1
.5

0


Table  of  the  Quantity  of  Liquid  Muriatic  Acid  of  sp.  gr.  1.2,  of  Muriatic  Acid
Gas,  and  of  Chlorine,  in  100  parts  of  Liquid  Acid  of  different  densities.


Liquid

Sp.  Gr.

Acid  of
Sp.  gr.  1.2.

Acid  Gas.

Chlorine.

1.2000

100

40.777

39.675

1.1910

95

38.738

37.692

1.1822

90

36.700

35.707

1.1721

85

34.660

33.724

1.1701

84

34.252

33.328

1.1620

80

32.621

31.746

1.1599

79

32.213

31.343

1.1515

75

30.582

29.757

1.1410

70

28.544

27.772

1.1308

65

26.504

25.789

1.1206

60

24.466

1  23.805

Sp.  Gr.


1.1102
1.1000
1.0899
1.0798
1.0697
1.0597
1.0497
1.0397
1.0298
1.0200
1.0100


Liquid

Acid  of
Sp.gr.  1.2.


55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5


Acid  Gas.


21.822

20.388

88.348

16.310

14.271

12.233

10.194

8.155

6.116

4.078

2.039


Chlorine.


22.426

19.837

17.854

15.870

13.887

1 1 .903

9.919

7.935

5.951

3.968

1.984


1332


Appendix.


Quantities  of  Anhydrous  and  of  Liquid Sulphuric  Acid contained  in
Mixtures  of  Oil  of  Vitriol  and Water  at  different  Densities. (Ure.)


Liq.  Acid

Specific

Sp.  Gr.

Dry  Acid  in

Specific

jic;.  Acid

Dry  Acid  in

Gravity.

1.8485
in  100.

100

Gravity.

in  100.

100.

1.8485

100

81.54

1.3884

50

40.77

1.8475

99

80.72

1.3788

49

39.95

1.8460

98

79.90

1.3697

48

39.14

1.8439

97

79.09

1.3612

47

38.32

1.8410

96

78.28

1.3530

46

37.51

1.8376

95

77.46

1.3440

45

36.69

1.8336

94

76.65

1.3345

44

35.88

1.8290

93

75.83

1.3255

43

35.06

1.8233

92

75.02

1.3165

42

34.25

1.8179

91

74.20

1.3080

41

33.43

1.8115

90

73.39

1.2999

40

32.61

1.8043

89

72.57

1.2913

39

31.80

1.7962

88

71.75

1.2826

38

30.98

1.7870

87

70.94

1.2740

37

30.17

1.7774

86

70.12

1.2654

36

29.35

1.7673

85

69.31

1.2572

35

28.54

1.7570

84

68.49

1.2490

34

27.72

1.7465

83

67.68

1.2409

33

26.91

1.7360

82

66.86

1.2334

32

26.09

1.7245

81

66.05

1.2260

31

25.28

1.7100

80

65.23

1.2184

30

24.46

1.6993

79

64.42

1.2108

29

23.65

1.6870

78

63.60

1.2032

28

22.83

1.6750

77

62.78

1.1956

27

22.01

1.6630

76

61.97

1.1876

26

21.20

1.6520

75

61.15

1.1792

25

20.38

1.6415

74

60.34

1.1706

24

19.57

1.6321

73

59.52

1.1626

23

18.75

1.6204

72

58.71

1.1549

22

17.94

1.6090

71

57.89

1.1480

21

17.12

1.5975

70

57.08

1.1410

20

16.31

1.5868

69

56.26

1.1330

19

15.49

1.5760

68

55.45

1.1246

18

14.68

1.5648

67

54.63

1.1165

17

13.86

1.5503

66

53.82

1.1090

16

13.05

1.5390

65

53.00

1.1019

15

12.23

1.5280

64

52.18

1.0953

14

11.41

1.5170

63

51.37

1.0887

13

10.60

1.5066

62

50.55

1.0809

12

9.78

1.4960

61

49.74

1.0743

11

8.97

1.4860

60

48.92

1.0682

10

8.15

1.4760

59

48.11

1.0614

9

7.34

1.4660

58

47.29

1.0544

8

6.52

1.4560

57

46.48

1.0477

7

5.71

1.4460

56

45.66

1.0405

6

4.89

1.4360

55

44.85

1.0336

5

4.08

1.4265

54

44.03

1.0268

4

3.26

1.4170

53

43.22

1.0206

3

2.446

1.4073

52

42.40

1.0140
U  1.0074

2

1.63

1.3977

51

41.58

1

0.8154

Specific  Gravities.


1333


Quantities  of  Anhydrous  and  of  Liquid  Nitric  Acid  contained  in  Mix-
tures of  Nitric  Acid  and Water  at  different  Densities. (  Ure.)


Liq.  Acid

Specific

Sp.  Gr.

Dry  Acid  in

Specific

Liq.  Acid

Dry  Acid  in

Gravity.

1.5  in

100.

100.

Gravity.

in  100.

100.

1.5000

100

79.700

1.2947

50

39.850

1.4980

99

78.903

1.2887

49

39.053

1.4960

98

78.106

1.2826

48

38.256

1.4940

97

77.309

1.2765

47

37.459

1.4910

96

76.512

1.2705

46

36.662

1.4880

95

75.715

1.2644

45

35.865

1.4850

94

74.918

1.2583

44

35.068

1.4820

93

74121

1.2523

43

34.271

1.4790

92

73.324

1.2462

42.

33.474

1.4760

91

72.527

1.2402

41

32.677

1.4730

90

71.730

1.2341

40

31.880

1.4700

89

70.933

1.2277

39

31.083

1.4670

88

70-136

1.2212

38

30.286

1.4640

87

69.339

1.2148

37

29.489

1.4600

86

68.542

1.2084

36

28.692

1.4570

85

67.745

1.2019

35

27.895

1.4530

84

66.948

1.1958

34

27.098

1.4500

83

66.135

1.1895

33

26.301

1.4460

82

65-354

1.1833

32

25.504

1.4424

81

64.557

1.1770

31

24.707

1.4385

80

63.760

1.1709

30

23.900

1.4346

79

62.963

1.1648

29

23.113

1.4306

78

62.166

1.1587

28

22.316

1.4269

77

61.369

1.1426

27

21.519

1.4228

76

60.572

1.1465

26

20.722

1.4189

75

59.775

1.1403

25

19.925

1.4147

74

58.978

1.1345

24

19.128

1.4107

73

58-181

1.1286

23

18.331

1.4065

72

57.384

1.1227

22

17.534

1.4023

71

56.587

1.1168

21

16.737

1.3978

70

55-790

1.1109

20

15.940

1.3945

69

54.993

1.1051

19

15.143

1.3882

68

54.196

1.0993

18

14.346

1.3833

67

53.399

1.0935

17

13.549

1.3783

66

52.602

1.0878

16

12.752

1.3732

65

51-805

1.0821

15

11.955

1.3681

64

51-068

1.0764

14

11.158

1.3630

63

50.211

1.0708

13

10.361

1.3579

62

49.414

1.0651

12

9.564

1.3529

61

48.617

1.0595

11

8.767

1.3477

60

47.820

1.0540

10

7.970

1.3427

59

47.023

1.0485

9

7.173

1.3376

58

46.226

1.0430

8

6.376

1.3323

57

45.429

1.0375

7

5.579

1.3270

56

44.632

1.0320

6

4.782

1.3216

55

43.835

1.0267

5

3.985

1.3163

54

43.038

1.0212

4

3.188

1.3110

53

42.241

1.0159

3

2.391

1.3056

52

41.444

1.0106

2

1.594

1.3001

51

40.647

1.0053

1

0.797

1334


Appendix.


Value  and  Atomic Composition of  Hydrochloric  Acid  at  Different

Densities.


D  A  V  T . J

rHOMSON.

(Temp.  40°  Bar.  30.)

Specific  Gravity.

100  grains  contain  of

Specific  Gravity.

Real  Acid  in  100  of

Atoms  of  Water

Hydroc.  Acid  Gas.

Liquid.

to  1  of  Acid.

1.21

42.43

1.203

40.66

6

1.20

40.80

1.179

37.00

7

1.19

38.38

1.162

33.95

8

1.18

36.36

1.149

31.35

9

1.17

34.34

1.139

29.13

10

1.16

32.32

1.128

27.21

11

1.15

30.30

1.119

25.52

12

1.14

28.28

1.112

24.03

13

1.13

26.26

1.106

22.70

14

1.12

24.24

1.100

21.51

15

1.11

22.30

1.096

20.44

16

1.10

20.20

1.090

19.47

17

1.09

18.18

1.086

18.59

18

1.08

16.16

1.082

17.79

19

1.07

14.14

1.087

17.05

20

1.06

12.12

1.05

10.10

1.04

8.08

1.03

6.06

1.02

4.04

1.01

2.02

Specific

Gravity  of

Acetic  Acid  at

different  degrees  of  Dilution.

THOMSON.

Atoms  of
Acid.

Atoms  of
Water.

Specific  Gravity
at  60°.

+

+

+

+

+
+
+
+
+


1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10


1.06296
1.07060
1.07084
1.07132
1.06820
1.06708
1.06349
1.05974
1.05794
1.05439


Specific  Gravities.


1335


Quantities  of

Ammonia

in  Solutions

Strengths  of  Solut

'ons  of  Ammonia

of  (liferent  Specific

Gravities.

of  different  Specific  Gravities,  and

their  respective  boiling  points.

DAVY.

D  ALT  0  N.

Specific

Grs.  of  Am-

Boiling

Vol.  of  Gas

100  part8

of  Ammonia.

Gravity.

monia  in  100

Point.

in  one  vol.

Specific  Grayity,

grs.  of  liquid.

8750

contain

32.50

850

35.3

26

494

8875

<<

29.25

860

32.6

38

456

9000

<<

26.00

870

29.9

50

419

9054

<<

25.37

880

27.3

62

382

9166

<<

22.07

890

24.7

74

346

9255

<(

19.54

900

22.2

86

311

9326

<<

17.52

910

19.8

98

277

9385

«

15.88

920

17.4

100

244

9435

<<

14.53

930

15.1

122

211

9476

<<

13.46

940

12.8

134

180

9513

<<

12.40

950

10.5

146

147

9545

<<

11.56

960

8.3

158

116

9573

(<

10.82

970

6.2

173

87

9597

«<

10.17

980

4.1

187

57

9619

<<

9.60

990

2.0

196

28

9612

<<

9.50

Quantity  of  Anhydrous  Potassa  con-
tained in  Solutions  of  different
Specific  Gravities.


D  A  LION,


Specific
Gravity.


1.68
1.60
1.52
1.47
1.44
1.42
1.39
1.36
1.33
1.28
1.23
1.19
1.15
1.11
1.06


Potassa
Per  cent.


51.2
46.7
42.9
39.6
36.8
34.4
32.4
29.4
26.3
23.4
19.5
16.2
13.0
9.5
4.7


Boiling  point.


329°

290

276

265

255

246

240

234

229

224

220

218

215

214

213


Quantities  of  Anhydrous  Soda  con-
tained in  Solutions  of  different
Specific  Gravities.


D  A  LT  ON.


Specific
Gravity.


1.85
1.72
1.63
1.56
1.50
1.47
1.44
1.40
1.36
1.32
1.29
1.23
1.18
1.12
1.06


Dry  Soda

Boiling  Point.

per  cent.

63.6

600°

53.8

400

46.6

300

41.2

280

36.8

265

34.0

255

31.0

248

29.0

242

26.0

235

23.0

228

19.0

224

16.0

230

13.0

217

9.0

214

4.7

213

1336  Appendix.

SPECIFIC  GRAVITIES  OF  SOME  OF  THE  PREPARATIONS  ORDERED  IN
THE  PHARMACOPEIAS.


The  London  Pharmacopoeia  directs  the  Specific  Gravity  to  be  taken  at  a  temperature  of  62°  Fahr.
The  Edinburgh,  Dublin  and  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeias,  at  60°  Fahr.

Sp.  Gr.

Acetum  Destillatum Edin.  1.005

Dublin  1.005

Acidum  Aceticum London  1.048

U.  S.  C1.063
\  to

Edin.  (1.0Q8

Dublin  1.074

Dilutum Dublin  1.005

Hydrocbloricum London,  U.  S. 1.160

Edin.  1.170

........  Dublin  1.160

Dilutum Edin.  1.050

U.  S.  1.046

— Dublin  1.080

Hydrocyanicum Dublin  998

Nitricum London,  U.  S. 1.500

Edin.  1.500

Dilutum London  U.  S. 1.080

Edin.  1.077

Dublin  1.280

Phosphoricum  Dilutum . . .  London  1.064

Sulphuricum London,  U.  S. 1.845

Edin.  1.845

Dublin  1.845

Sulphuricum  venale Dublin  1.850

Sulphuricum  Dilutum ....  London  1.110

Edin.  U.  S.  1.090

Dublin  1.084

Mther  Nitrosus .  Dublin  0.900

Sulphuricus '. .  London,  U.  S. 0.750

Edin.  0.735

Dublin  0.766

Alcohol London  0.815

U.  S.  0.835

Edin.  0.796

Dublin  0.810

Dilutum U.  S.  0.935

Aqua  Destillata L.  E.  D.  1.000

Ammonia? Edin.  0.960

Dublin  0.950

Acetatis Edin.  1.011

Dublin  1.011

Ammonia  Carbonatis Dublin  1.090

Barytae  Muriatis Dublin  1.230

Calcis  Muriatis Dublin  1.202

Potassse Edin.  1.072

Dublin  1.080

Carbonatis Dublin  1.320

Potassii  Sulphureti Dublin  1.117

Soda?  Carbonatis Dublin  1.024


Specific  Gravities.  1337

Sp.  Gr.

Liquor  Ammonias London  0.960

■  Fortior London,  U.  S. 0.882

Plumbi  Diacetatis London  1.260

Potassse London  1.063

Carbonatis London  1.473

Oleum  iEthereum London  1.05

U.  S.  1.096

Spiritus  iEthereus  Nitrosus Dublin  0.850

^Etheris  Nitrici London,  U.  S. 0.834

Edin.  0.847

Sulphurici Edin.  0.809

Ammonias London  0.860

U.  S.  0.831

Aromaticus London  0.914

Fcetidus London  0.861

Rectificatus London  0.838

, Edin.  0.838

\ \ Dublin  0.840

Tenuior  London  0.920

'  Edin.  0.912

'. \ Dublin  0.919

Tinctura  Ferri  Sesquichloridi London  0.992


FORMULA  FOR  COOLING  OR  FREEZING  MIXTURES.

(mb.  walker.)

frigorieic  mixtures.  without  ice.

Degree  of
Mixtures.  Parts. Thermometer  sinks.  r0Cd°Uced

Muriate  of  Ammonia, .... 5)

Nitrate  of  Potassa s£  From  +  50°  to  + 10°  -  40

Water, 16)

Muriate  of  Ammonia, .... 5^

Nitrate  of  Potassa, 5  1  From  _j_  5qo  to  _j_ 4.0  ==  4$

Sulpbate  of  Soda 8  j

Water 16J

Nitrate  of  Ammonia, . . . . 1) -pr0m  +  50°  to  + 4°  =  46
Water 1>

Nitrate  of  Ammonia, .... 1)

Carbonate  of  Soda, l£  From  +  50°  to  - 7°  =  57

Water, 1)

Sulphate  of  Soda, 3> From  _j_  5Qo  to  _  390  =  80

Diluted  Nitric  Acid, 2$

Sulpbate  of  Soda 6]

Nitrate  of  Ammonia, ....  4  .  From  _^_  5Qo  to  _  10o  ^  qq

Nitrate  of  Potassa, ^

Diluted  Nitric  Acid, 4J


1338


Appendix.


Mixtures.

Sulphate  of  Soda,
Nitrate  of  Ammonia,
Diluted  Nitric  Acid,

Phosphate  of  Soda,
Diluted  Nitric  Acid,


Phosphate  of  Soda,
Nitrate  of  Ammonia,
Diluted  Nitric  Acid,

Sulphate  of  Soda,
Muriatic  Acid,  . .

Sulphate  of  Soda,  .
Sulphuric  Acid,


Snow  or  pounded  Ice,
Salt


Parts. Thermometer  sinks.


5>  From  -f  5(X~  to  •
4>


Degree  of

cold
produced.

14°  =  64


I  From  -f-


50°  to  —  12°  =  G2


6V  From  +  50°  to
4>


U  From  +  50°  to
I  From  +  50°  to


21°  =  71

3°  =  53
3°  =  53


FRIGORIFIC  MIXTURES,  WITH  ICE.


Snow  or  pounded  Ice, .... J

Common  Salt, 2>

Muriate  of  Ammonia, . . . . 1}


Snow  or  pounded  Ice,


24^


Common  Salt, 10  1

Muriate  of  Ammonia, .... 5  j
Nitrate  of  Potassa, 5  J

Snow  or  pounded  Ice, ....  12}

Common  Salt 5>

Nitrate  of  Ammonia, .... 5)


ps,


to— 5°


to


120


to  —  18°


to  —  25°


Snow, S) -n .  OQO  ,

Diluted  Sulphuric  Acid ^  From +  32°  to

Snow 8) „  ,  QOO  ,

Muriatic  Acid, ^  From  +  32°  to -

Snow, 7) -,-,  . 00~  ,

Diluted  Nitric  Acid, 4J  From  +  32^  to  -

Snow, 4) „  . „_„  ,

Chloride  of  Calcium, 5^From  +  32oto-

Cryst.' Chloride  of  Calcium,! ! !  ^  From +  32°  to

pnoSa; :  :  :  :  :  :■::':  $^+3^0


23°  =  55


27°  =  59


30°  =  62


40°  =  72


—  50°  =  82


—  51°  =  84


Effects of Temperature.  1339

combination  of  frigorif1c  mixtures.

Degree  of
Mixtures.  Parts. Thermometer  sinks.  cold

produced.

Phosphate  of  Soda, 5)

Nitrate  of  Ammonia, 3V  From 0°  to  —  34°  —  34

Diluted  Nitric  Acid 4)

Phosphate  of  Soda, 3}

Nitrate  of  Ammonia 2 >  From  —  34°  to  —  50°  =  16

Diluted  Mixed  Acids 4)

wiT'Vo'n i - * at-/- 'a -i * 11  From 10°to-56°  =  46
Diluted  Sulphuric  or  Nitric  Acid,  . 3$

S??W» :,*•«: •' ;  •; S  From— (P  to  —  46°  =  46

Diluted  Nitric  Acid, 2$

Snow, J? From  _  200  to  —  60°  =  40

Diluted  Sulphuric  Acid, ... 1^

Snow 3? From  +  20°  to  —  48°=  68

Chloride  of  Calcium 4$

Snow 3) FrQm  _^_  1Qo  t0  _  540  _  64

Chloride  of  Calcium 4$

Snow, II  From  _|_  15°  to  —  68°  =  33

Chloride  of  Calcium, ^

Snow, ;H  From 0°  to  —  66°  =66

Cryst.  Chloride  of  Calcium, ... 2^

Snow,. ••••••••• H  From  —  40°  to  —  73°  =  33

Cryst.  Chloride  of  Calcium,  . . . 3$

Snow • -U  From— 68°  to  — 91°  =  23

Diluted  Sulphuric  Acid 10$


EFFECTS OF TEMPERATURE.  ^^

below  Zero.

Greatest  artificial  cold  produced  by  the  evaporation  of  a  mixture  of

solid  carbonic  acid  and  ether,  in  vacuo,  by  Faraday 160

Ditto,  in  the  open  air,  by  Thilorier, J35

Solid  compound  of  alcohol  and  carbonic  acid  fuses, 131

Greatest  artificial  cold  produced  by  Walker, 91

Strongest  nitric  acid  freezes,

Sulphuric  ether  congeals '

Liquid  Ammonia  freezes,

Mercury  freezes,

Proof  spirit  and  brandy  freeze,


1340  Appendix.

Degrees
above  Zero.

Solution  of  1  salt  in  3  water,  freezes, 4

Solution  of  1  salt  in  4  water,  freezes, 7

Mixture  of  1  alcohol  3  water,  freezes, 7

Solution  of  salammoniac  in  4  water, 8

Oil  of  turpentine  freezes, 16

Strong  wines  freeze, 20

Fluoric  acid  freezes, 23

Oils  of  bergamot  and  cinnamon, 23

Vinegar  freezes, 28

Milk  freezes, 30

Ice  melts 32

Olive  oil  freezes, 36

Glacial  acetic  acid  solidifies, 36

Medium  temperature  of  the  surface  of  the  globe, 50

Medium  temperature  of  England, 52

Oil  of  aniseed  freezes, 64

Lard  melts, from  90  to  97

Heat  of  human  blood, 98

Phosphorus  melts, 99

Stearine  from  hogs'  lard  melts 109

Spermaceti  melts, 112

Tallow  melts,  (Thomson,) 92

(Nicholson,) 127

Bees'  wax  melts, 142

Ambergris  melts,  (La  Grange,) 145

Potassium  melts,  (Pownes,) 150

(Darnell,) 136

Bleached  wax  melts,  (Nicholson,) 155

Sodium  perfectly  fluid, 200

Iodine  fuses,  (Gay  Lussac,) 210

(Fownes,) 225

Sulphur  fuses, 226

Camphor  fuses 303

Tin  fuses, 442

Bismuth  fuses, 476

Lead  fuses, 594

Zinc  fuses 700

Antimony  fuses, 809

Red  heat,  (Daniell,) 980

Heat  of  common  fire,  (Daniell,) 1140

Brass  fuses,  (Daniell,) 1869

Silver  fuses,  (Daniell,) 2233

Iron fuses, 3479

TEMPERATURES  AT  WHICH  CERTAIN  SOLIDS  AND  LIQUIDS  ARE  VOLATILIZED.

Liquid  sulphurous  acid  boils,  (anhydrous,") 14

Ether  boils 98

Fuming  sulphurous  acid  boils,  (solution,) 113


Effects of Temperature.  1341

Degrees

above  Zero,

Bisulphuret  of  carbon  boils, 126

Liquid  ammonia  boils 140

Pyroligneous  spirit  boils, 150

Alcobol  boils, 176

(Black,) 174

sp.  gr.  0.800,  (Henry,) 172

Water  boils 212

Phosphorus distils, (Pelletier,) 219

Water  saturated  with  sea  salt  boils, -. 225

Nitric  acid  boils,  (sp.  gr.  1.  5,) 187

White  oxide  of  arsenic  sublimes, 283

Oil  of  turpentine  boils,  (Ure,) 304

Petroleum  boils,  (Ure,) 316

Metallic  arsenic  sublimes, 540

Phosphorus  boils  in  close  vessels 554

Sulphur  boils, 570

Sulphuric  acid  boils,  (Dalton,) 590

(Black,) 546

(Fownes,) 620

Linseed  oil  boils 600

Mercury  boils, 662

BOILING  POINTS  OF  SATURATE!)  SOLUTIONS.

Degr.

Alum, 220

Muriate  of  ammonia, 236

Oxalate  of  ammonia, 218

Tartrate  of  ammonia, 230

Chloride  of  barium 222

Nitrate  of  baryta, 214

Acetate  of  copper, 214

Sulphate  of  copper, 216

Acetate  of  lead, 212

Chloride  of  calcium, 220

Bichloride  of  mercury, 214

Bicyanide  of  mercury, 214

Sulphate  of  nickel, 235

Chlorate  of  potass, ■ 218

Nitrate  of  potass, 238

Quadroxalate  of  potass, 220

Acetate  of  soda, 256

Nitrate  of  soda, 246

Biborate  of  soda 222

Carbonate  of  soda, 220

Phosphate  of  soda, 222

Nitrate  of  strontia 224

Sulphate  of  zinc, 220

Boracic acid, 218


13-12  Appendix.

temperatures  to  be  observed  in  certain  pharmaceutical  operations.

Iii  the  fermentation  of  saccharine  solutions,  the  highest  temperature  should
not  exceed  86°. (Thomson.)

The  lowest  temperature  at  which  they  will  ferment  is  38°. (Thomson.)

The  process  of  acetous  fermentation  is  best  conducted  at  a  temperature  of
above  86°.

The  temperature  requisite  to  coagulate  albumen  varies  with  the  state  of  dilu-
tion. If  the  quantity  of  albumen  be  so  great  that  the  liquid  has  a  slimy
aspect,  a  heat  of  145°  to  150°  suffices,  but  in  a  very  dilute  condition,  boiling  is
required. (Fownes.)

In  the  London  and  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeias:

When  a  boiling  heat  is  directed,  a  temperature  is  meant  of  212°,  F.

When  a  gentle  heat  is  directed,  a  temperature  is  meant  of  from  90°  to  100°.

The  specific  gravities  of  substances  ordered  in  the  London  Pharmacopoeia,
are  to  be  taken  at  a  temperature  of  62°.

A  water-bath  is  that  by  which  any  substance,  contained  in  a  proper  vessel,
is  exposed  either  to  hot  water,  or  the  vapor  of  boiling  water.  A  sand-bath  is
made  of  sand,  to  be  gradually  heated,  in  which  anything  is  placed  contained  in
a  proper  vessel.

Syrups  are  to  be  kept  in  a  place  where  the  temperature  never  exceeds  55°.

Vegetables,  shortly  after  they  have  been  gathered,  those  excepted  which
ought  to  be  fresh,  are  to  be  lightly  strewed,  and  dried  as  quickly  as  possible,
with  a  gentle  heat  (90°  to  100°);  keep  them  afterward  in  proper  vessels,
excluded  from  the  access  of  light  and  moisture.

In  the  Dublin  Pharmacopoeia:

By  the  term  superior  heat,  is  meant  some  degree  between  200°  and  212°.

When  a  medium  heat  is  directed,  a  temperature  is  meant  between  100°  and
200c.

When  an  inferior  heat  is  directed,  a  temperature  is  meant  between  90°  and
100°.

In  the  process  of  digestion,  an  inferior  heat  is  to  be  applied,  unless  it  should
be  otherwise  directed.  In  the  process  of  maceration,  a  heat  should  be  applied
between  60°  and  90°.

In  the  Dublin,  Edinburgh,  and  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeias:

Whenever  mention  occurs  of  the  specific  gravity  of  any  body,  its  tempera-
ture is  supposed  to  be  at  60°.


Chemical  Elements,  etc.


1343


CHEMICAL  ELEMENTS,  WITH  THEIR  SYMBOLS  AND  EQUIVALENTS.

Symbol.  Equivalent.

Aluminium, Al Phillips, 10

... /0  •-,  • ^  Graham, 13.72

Antimony,  (Stibium,) Sb Phillips, 65

.  .  Graham,  129.24

Arsemc> As Phillips, 38

„ .  Graham, 75.34

Barium, Ba 08

Bismuth, Bi 72

Boron, B Phillips, 20

„ .  Graham, 10.91

Bromine, Br 7g

Cadmium, Cd. 56

Calcium, Ca 20

Carbon, Q g

Cerium, Ce 48

Chlorine, CI. 36

Chromium, Cr 28

Cobalt, Co 30

Columbium,  )  T

Tantalum,) ia 18°

Copper,  (Cuprum,) Cu 32

Fluorine, F 18

Glucinium, G Phillips, 18

Graham, 26.54

Gold,  (Aurum,) Au , 200

Hydrogen, H 1

Iodine 1 126

Iridium, Ir 98

Iron,  (Ferrum,) Fe 28

Latanium, La

Lead,  (Plumbum,) Pb 104

Lithium, L 8

Magnesium, Mg 12

Manganese, Mn 28

Mercury,  (Hydrargyrum,) Hg Phillips,  202

Graham,  101.4-3

Molybdenum, Mo 48

Nickel, Ni 28

Nitrogen  or  Azote, N 14

Osmium, Os •••  100

Oxygen, • 0 8

Palladium, Pd 54

Phosphorus, P Phillips, 16

Graham, 31.44

Platinum, PI 98

Potassium,  (Kalium,)  K 40

Rhodium, K • 52

Selenium, Se 40

Siliciumor) gi (Phillips, 8

Silicon, J  (Graham, 22.22

Silver,  (Argentum,) Ag. 103

Sodium,  (Natrium,)- Na 24

Strontium, Sr 44

Sulphur, S 16

Tellurium, Te Phillips, 32

Graham, 64.25

Thorium, Th 60

Tin,  iStannum,) Sn 58

Titanium, Ti 24

Tungsten,  (Wolfram,) W.  ••■ 100

Uranium, U 217

Vanadium, V 68

Yttrium, Y 32

Zinc, Zn.  ••••. ™-.;iV *2

Zirconium, Zr Phillips, 32

Graham,  33.67


13U


Appendix.


THE  SOLUBILITY  OF  SALTS.


Name  of  Salt.


ALUMINA.


Acetate  of

Arseniate  of

Borate  of

Camphorate  of

Lactate  of

Muriate  of

Nitrate  of

Oxalate  of.

Phosphate  of

Seleniate  of

Sulphate  of

Sulphate  of,  and  Potash
Sulphate  of,  and  Soda.. .

Sulphite  of

Tartrate  of

Tartrate  of,  and  Potash.

Tungstate  of.

Urate  and  Lithate  of. . . .


AMMONIA.


Acetate  of

Arseniate  of

Binarseniate  of.

Arsenite  of

Benzoate  of

Boletate  of

Borate  of

Camphorate  of

Carbonate  of  (Sesqui) .


Chlorate  of

Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Ferrocyanide  of

Formate  of

Hydriodate  of  (or  Io-
dide of  Ammonium)

Hydrocyanate  of

Hydrosulphuret  of. . .
Hypophosphite  of . . . .

Hyposulphite  of

Iodate  of

Lactate  of

Mecouate  of

Molybdate  of


Muriate  of  (or  Chloride)
of  Ammonium) )


Nitrate  of

Oxalate  of.

Phosphate  of. . . .
Biphosphate  of.
Phosphite  of.. . .
Purpurate  of.. . .
Pyrolithateof...


Sp.  Gr.


3.9 to

3.97

1.245


1.645


1.71
1.6


1.52

1.58

1.582

1.8


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water


at  60<>  at  Boiling  point


Undetermined

Insoluble

Uncrystallizable

0.05

Uncrystallizable

Very  soluble

Very  soluble

Uncrystallizable

Insoluble

Insoluble

50

5.4  133.33

100

Insoluble

Uncrystallizable

Uncrystallizable

Insoluble

Insoluble


Very  soluble

Soluble

Soluble

Uncrystallizable

Soluble

38

%%

1  33

33 (Ure)

20 {Brande)

Very  soluble

Very  soluble

Difficultly  crystallizable

Very  soluble

Soluble

Very  soluble

Soluble

Very  deliquescent

Soluble  and  deliquescent

Very  soluble

Sparingly  soluble

Uncrystallizable

66

Soluble


36


100


50  100

4.5  40.84

25 (Brande)

Less  soluble

Very  soluble

0066  much  more

Soluble


Solubility  in 100  parts  Alco-
hol.


at  Boiling  point.


100  at  U%o


100
2.91


291


Readily  soluble


0.416


© 00  .


7.5  at  80°)  cP)  .900
4.75 do  >  *?■%>  872
1.5  do S  ifrih 834


19.16


Solubility  of  Salts.


1345


Name  of  Salt.


Sp.  Gr.


Suberate  of. . ,
Succinate  of...
Sulphate  of...
Sulphite  of. .
Tartrate  of. .
Tun  estate  of.


ANTIMONY.


Acetate  of

Benzoate  of

Tartrate  of

Potassio-tartrate  of.,


Acetate  of. ... .
Arseniate  of. .
Benzoate  of.. .
Carbonate  of..
Chloride  of. . .
Nitrate  of . . . .
Phosphate  of.
Sulphate  of. . .


Acetate  of

Antimoniate  of

Antimonite  of .......  .

Arseniate  of

Arsenite  of

Benzoate  of

Borate  of

Camphorate  of

Carbonate  of.

Chlorate  of

Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Ferrocyanuret  of

Hydriodate  of  (or  Io->

dide  of  Barium) )

Hydrosulphuret  of

Hypophosphite  of

Iodate  of ,

Lactate  of

Lithate  of


6.7


9.83


1.828


4.331


Muriate of  (or  Chlo
ride  of  Barium)  (A
hydrous)


-I


Muriate  of  (or  Chloride
of  Barium)  Ciyst.


Nitrate  of.


Oxalate  of. . . .
Phosphate  of.

85


2.825

2.83

2.9

i.2&6


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.


Solubility  in  100  parts  Alco-
hol.


at  Boiling  point.


Very  soluble
Very  soluble
50 (Brande)
100 (Ure)
60.03
Soluble


100
304.7


Soluble (Ure)
Soluble (Ure)
Very  soluble (Brande)
7  50


Soluble
Insoluble

Soluble

Insoluble

Deliquescent

Decomposed

Soluble

Decomposed


5  at  50°


10  at  212°
96


Insoluble

Slightly

Insoluble

Difficultly

Soluble

Very  sparingly

Very  sparingly

Very  nearly  insoluble

25

Very  sparingly

Difficultly  soluble

.0005  01

Very  soluble


11

Very  soluble
.33

Soluble
Insoluble


36.8


43 (Brande)

(  8.18  at  58.9°
J35.18  at  214.97^

Nearly  insoluble

Insoluble


50
1.6

68.5

78


at  Boiling  point -


2.91


Sparingly


(1  at  80°...,

0.29

]  0.18

[0.09

( 1.56  at  80°.
I  0.43

0.32

0.06

0.25


.900
.848
.834
.817

f.900

.848
.834


1346


Appendix.


Name  of  Salt.


Phosphite  of. . .
Pyrocitrate  of.
Sulphate  of. . . .
Sulphite  of . . . .
Tartrate  of . . . ,


Sp.  Gr.


4.3
1.694


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.


at  Boiling  point.


0.25
.006
Insoluble
Insoluble
Slightly


.02


Solubility  in  100  parts  Alco-
hol.


at  Boiling  point.


7.834


Acetate  of

Antimoniate  of

Arseuiate  of

Borate  of

Carbonate  of

Lactate  of

Muriate,  or  Chloride  of.

Nitrate  of

Oxalate  of

Sulphate  of

Tartrate  of


Acetate  of ,

Antimoniate  of

Arseniate  of. ,

Benzoate  of

Borate  of

Carbonate  of

Chlorate  of

Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Ferrocyanide  of

Fluoride  of

Formate  of

Hyposulphite  of.

Muriate,  or  Chloride  of..

Dichloride  of

Nitrate  of

Oxalate  of

and  Ammonia
and  Potassa
and  Soda

Phosphate  of

Subnitrate  of

Sulphate  of

Disulphate  of

Trisulphate  of

Sulphite  of  Protoxide...  .

Sulphate  of  and  Potassa
and  Ammonia

Ammonio  Subsulphate.

Tartrate  of

Bitartrate  of

Tartrate  of  and  potassa


8.895
1.78


Perchloride  of...
Protochloride  of..


1.815


2.174


1.4158


2.20


19.361


Soluble

Soluble

Insoluble

Scarcely

Insoluble

.026 (Ure.)

Very  soluble

Soluble

Insoluble
4 (Brande)..
Soluble


100  at  54)£°
Insoluble


(Ure) 20
Insoluble
Insoluble
Slightly
Insoluble
Insoluble
Soluble
Insoluble
Insoluble
Insoluble
Soluble
12
Soluble

Soluble

Nearly  insoluble

Deliquescent

Soluble  ?

Soluble?

Soluble  ?

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

25  50

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Soluble

Soluble

66.6

Soluble

Less  soluble

Soluble


100  at  176°


Soluble
Soluble


Solubility  of  Salts.


1347


Name  of  Salt.

Sp.  Gr.

Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.

Solubility  in  100  parts  Alco-
hol.

at  60° at  Boiling  point.

at  60° at  Boiling  point.

IRON.

7.788
1.368

Soluble

Uncrystallizable

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Soluble

Sparingly  soluble

(Very  soluble  and  un-

\ crystallizable

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Soluble

Scarcely

Insoluble

Soluble

Acetate  (Prot.)

Arseniate  of  (Prot. ) . . . .
Arseniate  of  (Per.)

3.

Citrate (Proto)

Citrate  (Bi  proto)

Citrate  (Per.)

Ferrocyanide (Prus-)

Gallate  of  Peroxide  of. . .

Lactate  of  Protox.  of . . . .

100  at  176°

Uncrystallizable

Very  soluble

Soluble

Scarcely

Insoluble

Nearly  insoluble

Nearly  insoluble

Insoluble

76.238 (Brande) 333.3

Uncrystallizable
Soluble

Soluble

0.25 (Dumas)
Soluble

2.6

Phosphate  of  Peroxide  of

Succinate  of  Peroxide  of
Sulphate  of  (Cryst.)

1.880
2.64

Soluble

Persulphate  of  and  Po->
Persulphate of anaV
Tartrate  (Proto,)  of.

Tartrate  of  and  Potassa..

Soluble

LEAD.

11.35

2.345
2.57

27 (Bostock) 29

12.5  (Brande)
Soluble

Soluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

>  Insoluble

Nearly  insoluble

Soluble

3.33 (Brande) 4.5

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

0.08 0.5

Soluble

Soluble (Ure.)

(6.4  to
\ 6.75

1.823

5.13

6.

Chloride  of  (fused)

134S


Appendix.


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.


Name  of  Salt.


Sp.  Gr.


Superlactate  of.

Malate  of

Molybdate  of. . .
Nitrate  of

Diuitrate  of


Oxalate  of.

Phosphate  of.

Phosphite  of

Succinate  of

Sulphate  of

Sulphite  of

Tannate  of

Tartrate  of

and  Potassa.


Acetate  of.


Antimoniate  of

Arseniate  of

Arsenite  of

Benzoate  of

Borate  of

Carbonate  of  (Anhyd.).

Chlorate  of

Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Fluoride


Hypophosphite  of.

Hyposulphate  of. . .
Hyposulphite  of.. .

Iodate  of

Iodide  of  calcium.

Malate  of

Molybdate  of


Muriate (or  Chloride
of  Calcium)


11.35


2.3908


1.005


2.7


3.15


Nitrate  of

Oxalate  of

Phosphate  of . . . .
Biphosphate  of. .
Subphosphate  of.

Succinate  of

Sulphate  of.

Sulphite  of

Tartrate  of

Tungstate  of. ... .


Acetate  of

Bicarbonate  of.
Borate  of


1.76


1.62


Soluble

Scarcely

Insoluble

13

(Scarcely  at 60°,  but
I  much  more  so  at  212°

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Not  absolutely  insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Almost  insoluble

Insoluble  (Berzelius)


at  Boiling  point


(Kirwan)


Soluble.


1.9009


Insoluble
Insoluble
Difficultly  soluble
Sparingly  soluble
Very  difficultly
Insoluble
Very  soluble
Soluble

Nearly  insoluble
Insoluble
Solubility  nearly  equal
at  all  temperatures
40.65 (Brande)  150

Very  soluble
20

Deliquescent
66
Insoluble

f200  at  32°

I  400  at  60°

1  almost  any  quantity  at

[220O JH

25 ,

Insoluble
Insoluble
Soluble

Almost  insoluble
Difficultly  soluble
0.301  at  50°
12.5

(Nearly  insoluble  at  60°
I but  .16  at  212°
Insoluble


100


1.53


Solubility  in 100  parts  Alco-
hol.


at  Boiling  point.


Soluble


Deliquescent
Slightly  soluble
Soluble


161.66


Solubility  of  Salts.


1349


Name  of  Salt.


Carbonate  of

Chloride  of  Lithium.. . .

Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Nitrate  of

Oxalate  of

Binoxalate  of

Phosphate  of

Sulphate  of

Tartrate  of

and  Potassa
and  Soda.. .


Sp.  Gr.


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.


at  Boiling  point.


Solubility  in  100  parts  Alco-
hol.


Insoluble


Acetate  of... . .
Arseniate  of..,
Arsenite  of. . .
Benzoate  of.. .

Borate  of

Carbonate  of.
Chlorate  of. .


Very  deliquescent

Very  soluble

Very  difficultly  soluble

Very  deliquescent

Very  deliquescent

Less  soluble

Insoluble

Soluble

Easily  soluble

Easily  soluble

Easily  soluble


at  Boiling  point.


2.3

1.378


2.566


Chloride  of  Magnesium


Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Iodide  of  Magnesium.

Malate  of

Molybdate  of


Nitrate  of.


1.6


Very  soluble
Deliquescent
Difficultly  soluble
Soluble
Insoluble
Very  slightly
Very  soluble

200 (Brande)


Very  soluble

Difficultly  soluble

Soluble

3.56 {Brande)

6.66


1.736


100.


Oxalate  of

Phosphate  of

and  Ammonia

Succinate of

Sulphate  of  (dry)

Sulphate  of  (cryst.)... . .
and  ammonia
and Potassa
and Soda...


Sulphite  of

and  Ammonia

Tartrate  of

Tunestate  of.


1.55


8.35


1.76
1.696


1.38


Nearly  insoluble

6.66

Sparingly  soluble

Uncrystallizable

33.192  73.57

68.042  150.71

Soluble

Soluble

33.3

5

Difficultly  soluble

Insoluble

Soluble


'50

50  at  80°

21.25


(Nearly  insoluble  in
\  pure  alcohol  11  sp.
( gr.  -840


1  at  80°  (Kirwan)


MANGANESE.


Acetate  of. ■  •■•  •••'

Ammonio-chlonde  of..
Ammonio-sulphate  of.

Antimoniate  of

Arseniate  of.

Benzoate  of

Carbonate  of

Chromate  of  ....•••  ■

Nitrate  of

Oxalate  of

Phosphate  of


Soluble

Soluble

Moderately  soluble

Insoluble

Deliquescent  (Brande)

Insoluble

Soluble

Very  soluble

Insoluble
Nearly  insoluble


Soluble


Soluble


1350


Appendix.


Name  ol  Salt.


MANGANESE.


Sp.  Gr.


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.


at  Boiling  point.


Succinate  of 1 (Ure)

Sulphate  of 2.877 31 (Ure.)

50 (Brande)

Hyposulphate  of Deliquescent

Sulphite  of Insoluble

Tungstate  of | Insoluble


13.568


Acetate  of  (Prot.).
Acetate  of  (Per.)..

Arseniate  of

Benzoate  of

Borate  of

Bichloride  of


Chloride  of. . .
Chromate  of...

Citrate  of.

Bicyanuretof .
Fluoride  of. . .
Molybdate  of.


2.66
5.2

(Hasen-
fratz)
6.5

Graham
7.176


Nitrate  (Prot.)

Nitrate  (Per.)

Oxalate  of  (Proto.)

Oxalate  of  (Per.)

Sulphate  of  (Proto.). . .

Sulphate  of  (Per.)

Sulphate  of  (Sub.)

Tartrate  of

and  Potassa


0.16 (Braconnot)

Readily  soluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

6.25 (Brande)


33.3


Solubility  in 100  parts  Alco-
hol


at  Boiling  point.


4.98


6.444


.00833  at  212° (Dumas)

Insoluble

Insoluble

54
Soluble
Very  sparingly

Soluble and decom-
posed by  excess.
Do.  do.

Scarcely
Insoluble

0.20  0.33

Decomposed
.005  0.33

Insoluble
Soluble


42.6  85.2

10.74  at  50O
Sp'ts.  sp.  gr.  .915
43.66  at  50°
Spt's.  sp.  gr.  .818
(Graham)


8.666


Acetate  of ,

Arseniate  of

Carbonate  of

Chloride  of

Nitrate  of  Protox

and  Ammonia

Oxalate  of

Phosphate  of

Sulphate  of.

and  Ammonia

and  Potassa. .

and  Iron

Tartrate  of


PLATINUM.


Protochlorideof

Perchloride  of

Protochloride  of )

and  Ammonium^
and  Potassium....
and  Sodium


Very  soluble
Soluble (Ure)
Insoluble
Soluble  in  hot  water

50

Soluble

Insoluble

Nearly  insoluble

33.3  185.71

25

11.1

Soluble

Very  soluble


23.000


Soluble


Soluble.
Soluble  .

Soluble.


Soluble

Uncrystallizable.


(Easily  soluble,  also  in
\ Ether

Insoluble

Insoluble
Very  soluble


Solubility  of  Salts.


1351


Name  of  Salt.


Bichloride  of

and  Ammonium
and  Potassium..

and  Sodium

and  Barium. . . .

Proton  itrate  of

Pernitrate  of

Protosulphate  of.

Persulphate  of


Acetate  of

Ammonio-oxalate  of. .
Ammonio-sulphate  of.
Ammonio-tartrate  of. .

Antimoniate  of.

Antimonite  of.

Arseniate  of

Binarseniate  of.

Arsenite  of

Beuzoate  of

Bibenzoate  of

Borate  of. ,

Camphorate  of

Carbonate  of

Bicarbonate  of

Chlorate  of

Chromate

Bichromate

Citrate  of

Columbate  of

Ferrocyanide  of

Iodide  of  Potassium. .

Iodate  of

Molybdate  of


Chloride  of  Potassium. .


Nitrate  of..


Oxalate  of.

Binoxalate  of

Quadroxalate  of

Phosphate  of

Diphosphate  of.

Biphosphate  of.

Hypophosphite  of

Hyposulphate  of

Hyposulphite  of

and  Silver
Succinate  of.


Sulphate  of....
Bisulphate  of.


Sp.  Gr.
23.000


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water


at  Boiling  point


Very  sparingly

Very  sparingly

Soluble

Soluble
Soluble
Soluble
Soluble

I  Very  soluble.. . .


1.706


2.6
2.085


2.6

1.98


1.83


1.98


2.073


2.85


2.67


100

Soluble

13

Very  soluble

Slightly

Soluble

Uucrystallizable

18.86  at  40°

Uncrystallizable

Very  soluble

10  3

Soluble

1  25

100

25  83

6.03  60  at  188>^c

48  extremely

10  much  more

Very  soluble

Uncrystallizable

33.3  100

143  at  65° (G.  Lussac)

7.14 (Brande)

Soluble

$29.21  at  66.83°  \
}59.26  at 229.28°$ "*'

29.31  at  64°
'236.45  at  207°
285. at  238°
i50 (Ure)
30 {Brande)
10 (Brande) (Ure  100)
66.66
Difficultly  soluble
Soluble  in  hot  water
Very  soluble
Very  deliquescent

Difficultly  sol.  at  60°
readily  at  212
Deliquescent
Difficultly
Very  soluble
(10.57  at 54°
J26.33  at  214°
(  50  at 40°
5200  at  220°


Solubility  in  100  parts  Alco-
hol.


at  Boiling  point.


Soluble


(Very  soluble,  also  in
) Ether


.200


3.75
Insoluble


Insoluble


Sparingly


2.083

4.62  at  80°.

1.66

0.38


2.76  at  80°)


Very  soluble


S.gr
ofSp


J  .900
1  .812
[.834

2X83

(.900

}.872

2.91


1352


Appendix.


Name  of  Salt.


Sp.  Gr.


Sulphite  of

Tartrate  of

Bitartrate  of

Tartrovinate  of. . .

Tungstate  of.

Nitro-tungstate  of.


Acetate  of

Arseniate  of

Arsenite  of

Borate  of

Chlorate  of

Chromatc  of

Citrate  of ,

Molybdate  of

Chloride  of  (Fused)....

Nitrate  of  (Cryst.)  .

Oxalate  of

Phosphate  of

Succinate  of

Sulphate  of

Sulphite  of ,

Hyposulphite  of

and  Potassa

Tartrate  of

and Potassa.


1.706

1.586
1556
1.95


Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.


Solubility  in 100  parts  Alco-
hol.


at  Boiliug  poiat,


100

100

1.05  6.66

10  any  quantity

Uncrystallizable

(Ure) 5


10.474


5.45
3.521


7.3


SODA.


Acetate  of

Arseniate  of

Binarseniate  of

and  Potassa

Benzoate  of

Biborate  of

Carbonate  of

Bicarbonate  of

Chlorate  of

Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Iodide  of  Sodium

Iodate  of

Molybdate  of

Muriate  of  (or  Chloride
of  Sodium)


Nitrate  of.


Oxalate  of. ,

Phosphate  of

and  ammonia
Biphosphate  of ,


2.1
1.76


Very  difficultly  soluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Difficultly  soluble

25 (Cheneviz)

Very  slightly

Insoluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

100  200

Insoluble

Insoluble

Soluble

1.15

Very  little  soluble

Soluble

Difficultly  soluble

Soluble

Soluble


at  Boiling  point.


0.416
2.91


25


35


150


1.740
1.62


50
100


1.986


(10 (Thomson.)

)25 (Ure.)

Soluble

Soluble

Very  soluble

8.033

50

7.6

33.3

Very  soluble

100  or  more  (Brandc)

173

7.3

Soluble

Equally  soluble  at  all

temperatures.  (Berz.)

33.3  at 60°) n
100 ..,  tooo? Dumas

50

73

173


1.33
1.50


at  123°

at 60°"  Berzel.
at 32°) Gay
at  212°$ Lussac
80 at 32°
22.7  at 50°
55 at 61°
^218.5  at  246°  J
Sparingly  soluble
25  50

Soluble
Very  soluble


■Marx


Sol.  in  sp.  rect.
Sparingly


Insoluble
8  at  80°)
6.


10.5  at 80°)  s.gr.
.0.38...'...)  SP*8-


.958
(.900
J  872
{.834


Solubility  of  Salts.


1353


Name  of  Salt.

Sp.  Gr.

Solubility  in  100  parts  Water.

Solubility  in  100  parts  Alco-
hol.

.it  60° at  Boiling  point.

at  60° at  Boiling  point.

SODA.

Very  soluble

Soluble
i  48.28  at  64°
J322.12  at  91°
(16.73  at 64°) n
^50.65  at 9l4  Jf*
(42.65  at  217°^  L,ussac

41.6 91

50

Soluble

25

Sulphate  of  (cryst.)

Sulphate  of  (dry)

1.44

Insoluble

Insoluble

Sulphate  of  &  Ammonia
Sulphite  of

2.95

Insoluble

Tartrate  of

1.980

56.37 (Thomson)

20

Soluble

25 50

Insoluble

and  Fotassa

(Sol.  in  sp.  rect.but  spa-
ringly in  absolute  alc'l

BTRONTIA.

(0.625 at 60O)

)5.  at  212° S { '
2 50
Very  soluble
Sparingly  soluble
Sparingly  soluble
0.76
0.0651  at  212°

3.66

Soluble

2.83

50..

Soluble

Insoluble (Brande)

Soluble

25

Soluble

25

113
0.52
Insoluble
Soluble
Very  soluble
Soluble
0.026  at  212°
20 (Gay  Lussac)
22.22 66.66
0.67  at  170

Insoluble

1.837

TIN.

7.3

Soluble

Insoluble

Insoluble

Uncrystallizable

Scarcely

Soluble

Insoluble

Soluble

Crystallizable

Uncrystallizable

Soluble

Very  soluble

and  Potassa

1354


Appendix.


Name  of  Salt.


Acetate  of

Antimoniate  of

Borate  of

Chromate  of

Citrate  of

Chlorate  of

Chloride  of

Iodide  of

Iodate  of

Lactate  of

Nilrate  of

Molybdate  of

Oxalate  of

Phosphate  of ,

Succinate  of

Sulphate  of ,

Sulphite  of

Hyposulphite  of ,

Sulphate  of  and  Nickel

Tartrate  of

Tartrovinate  of ,

Trisulphate  of


Sp.  Gr.


6.861

to  7.2


1.537


2.0


1.98


Solubility  in  10U  parts  Water.


at  Boiling  point.


Solubility  in 100  parts Alco
bol.


at  Boiling  point.


Very  soluble
Very  sparingly
Insoluble
Sparingly
Scarcely
Very  soluble

Very  soluble

Soluble

Difficultly  soluble

2 (Ure)

Deliquescent

Insoluble

Nearly  insoluble

Uncrvstallizable

Soluble

140 (Dumas)

81.81  at  220°

Soluble

33.33

Difficultly  soluble

Soluble

Soluble


100  at  54>g°


Insoluble
Soluble


Sparingly  soluble


SOLUBILITY OF ACIDS, BASES, ETC.


Arsenious

Vitreous
Opake. .

Benzoic

Boracic

Citric

Gallic

Oxalic  (Cryst.).. . .

Succinic  (Cryst.)..

Tartaric


Brucia. . . .
Cinchonia.
Morphia  . .
Quinia ....
Strychnia..
Camphor. .
Su°;ar  Pur..


3.7385
3.699


1.0345


1.6


0.9887
1.5tol.6


1.78  (Graham) 9.68
2.9 (Graham)  11.47

.50
3.9  33.3

133.33  200

5  33.33

11.5

4  33.33

150 (Brande) 200


20  at  176°  (Henry)
Soluble


74  at  166°
Soluble


.1177  0.2

Insoluble  0.04

Nearly  insoluble 1
Nearly  insoluble 0.5
0.04 (Graham)  0.15

0.229

200


75  at  176C
24}£  at  176°


Show  Colors for Druggists'  Shop  Windows.  1355

SHOW COLORS FOR DRUGGISTS' SHOP WINDOWS.

BLUE.

No.  1. — Sulphate  of  copper  gj,  sulphuric  acid  gss,  water  gx.

No.  2.— Ammonio-sulphate  of  copper,  ammonio-nitrate  of  nickel  (see  No.  5)
and  water.

No.  3. — Prussian  blue  gr.  x.,  oxalic  acid  gr.  xx.,  water  gxvj.

No.  4. — Dissolve  nickel  in  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  add  ammonia  in  excess  and
dilute  with  water.

No.  5. — Dissolve  nickel  in  diluted  nitric  acid,  add  ammonia  in  excess  and
dilute  with  water.

No.  6. — To  the  green  color  made  by  formula  No.  8  under  that  color,  add
sufficient  aqua  ammonia  to  make  it  blue.

GREEN.

No.  1. — Sulphate  of  copper  gij,  chloride  of  sodium  giv,  water  gxx.

No.  2. — Dissolve  gj  of  nickel  in  gvj  of  nitric  acid,  and  add  Ov  of  water.

No.  3. — Dissolve  nickel  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  and  dilute  with  water.

No.  4. — Dissolve  sulphate  of  copper  in  water  and  add  bichromate  of  potassa
until  the  required  color  is  produced.

No.  5. — Dissolve  ammonio-sulphate  of  copper  in  water,  and  add  bichromate
of  potassa  until  the  required  color  is  produced.

No.  6. — Dissolve  sulphate  of  copper  in  water,  and  add  nitric  acid  until  the
required  color  is  produced.

No.  7. — Dissolve  distilled  verdigris  with  acetic  acid,  and  dilute  with
water.

No.  8. — Dissolve  a  copper  cent  in  nitric  acid,  and  add  enough  of  the  solu-
tion to  water  or  proof  spirit,  to  give  it  the  right  shade.

LILAC.

No.  1. — Dissolve  zaffre  (impure  oxide  of  cobalt)  in  hydrochloric  acid,  filter
and  add  carbonate  of  ammonia  in  excess  ;  to  this  add  ammonio-sulphate  of
copper  until  the  required  color  is  produced.

No.  2. — Dissolve  zaffre  in  hydrochloric  acid,  filter,  and  add  carbonate  of
ammonia  in  excess  ;  to  this  add  ammonio-nitrate  of  nickel  (see  Blue,  No.  5)
until  the  required  tint  is  produced.

ORANGE.

No.  1. — Dissolve  bichromate  of  potassa  in  water  until  the  required  tint  is
produced.

No.  2. — The  same  as  the  last  but  adding  some  oil  of  vitriol  or  hydrochlo-
ric acid.

PINK.

No.  1. — Dissolve  gij  of  zaffre  in  gyj  of  hydrochloric  acid,  filter,  add  solu-
tion of  carbonate  of  ammonia  in  excess ;  then  add  fgj  of  liquor  potassa?,  and
dilute  with  water,  to  produce  the  required  color.

No.  2. — Nitrate  of  cobalt  may  be  used,  with  carbonate  of  ammonia,  in  the
same  way  as  the  last.


1356  Appendix.


pubpl  E.


No.  1. — Sulphate  of  copper  gj,  carbonate  of  ammonia  gjss,  water  Oijss.
No.  2. — The  last  color,  with  a  small  quantity  of  the  Pink  No.  1.


No.  1. — Macerate  powdered  cochineal  in  spirit  of  hartshorn,  and  dilute  it
with  water.

No.  2. — Dissolve  carmine  in  solution  of  ammonia,  and  dilute  it  with  water.

No.  3. — Wash  the  best  madder  two  or  three  times  with  cold  water,  then
macerate  it  in  solution  of  carbonate  of  ammonia,  filter  the  solution,  and  dilute
it  with  water.

No.  4. — Dissolve  madder  lake  in  solution  of  carbonate  of  ammonia.

No.  5. — Add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  tincture  of  iodine  to  alcohol  or  proof
spirit  to  produce  the  desired  color.  Should  it  fade  renew  the  color  by  adding
more  tincture  of  iodine.

VIOLET.

Ammonio-sulphate  of  copper,  diluted  with  water,  and  enough  of  the  pink
color  No.  1  to  produce  the  required  tint.

YELLOW.

No.  1. — Bichromate  of  potassa  3VJ,  carbonate  of  potassa  31V,  water  gxvj.

No.  2. — Add  a  sufficient  quantity  of  tincture  of  iodine  to  alcohol  or  proof
spirit  to  make  a  bright  straw  color.

N.  B.  Alcohol  answers  better  for  colors  than  water  or  proof  spirit,  as  there
is  seldom  any  precipitate  or  decomposition  ;  beside,  as  it  does  not  freeze  in
winter,  there  is  no  breaking  of  the  show-bottles,  which  is  apt  to  ensue  when
water  is  used.


INDEX.


A

Abbreviations,  table  of  1298
Abelmoschus  esculen-

tus 141

Abelmoschus  moscha-

tus 141

Abies  Americana ....  588

Abies  balsamea 142

Abies  canadensis  ....  143

Abies  excelsa 144

Abies  larix 146

Abies  nigra 146

Abies  picea 147

Abietis  resina 145

Absinthine 249

Absolute  alcohol 188

Acacia 147

Acacia  Arabica 147

Acacia  catechu 149

Acacia  vera 147

Aceta ..1004

Acetate of  ammonia,

solution  of 1018

Acetate  of  iron 1087

Acetate  of  lead 743

Acetate  of  morphia. .  .1135
Acetate of morphia,

solution  of 1136

Acetate of oxide of

ethyle 1007

Acetate  of  potassa. .  .1180
Acetate  of  quinia. . .  .1206

Acetate  of  soda 886

Acetated  tincture  of  blood-
root  compound  ....  1270
Acetated tincture of

opium 1266

Acetic  acid 155

Acetic acid, dilut-
ed  1005,1020

Acetic acid, diluted,

impure 151

Acetic  ether ...1007

Acetous emetic  tinc-
ture  1270

Acetum 151

Acetum  Britannicum. 151
Acetum  destillatuml51,

1005
Acetum  Gallicum.  . . . 151

Acetum  lobelise 1006

Acetum  sanguinarise.1006

Acetum  scilke 1006

Acetum  vini 151


Achillea  millefolium.  153
Achillea  ptarmica  . . . 155

Achilleic  acid 154

Achilleine 153

Acid,  acetic 155

Acid,  achilleic 154

Acid, aromatic sul-
phuric 170

Acid,  benzoic 157

Acid,  carbonic  . . . ; .  .1021

Acid,  carthamic 302

Acid,  caryophyllic. .  .1151

Acid,  chelidonic 330

Acid,  chromic 158

Acid,  chrysophanic . . 803

Acid,  cinchonic 357

Acid,  cinnamic 1 152

Acid,  cinnamonic 1152

Acid,  citric 159

Acid,  colombic 373

Acid,  copaivic 397

Acid,  crotonic 689

Acid,  cyano-hydric  . . 162
Acid, diluted ace-
tic 1005,  1020

Acid,  diluted acetic,

impure 151

Acid, diluted phos-
phoric 169

Acid, diluted sul-
phuric 171

Acid,  elaidic 668

Acid,  erucic 876

Acid,  eugenic 1151

Acid,  ferric 467

Acid,  gallic 159

Acid,  gambogic 485

Acid,  glacial  phospho-
ric....... 170

Acid,  guaiacic 513

Acid,  hemidesmic  . . .  531

Acid,  hydriodic 161

Acid,  hydrochloric.  . .  161
Acid,  hydrocyanic  ...  162
Acid,  hyperiodic  ....  561

Acid,  iodic 561

Acid,  iodous 561

Acid,  kinic 357

Acid,  lactic 163

Acid,  lactucic 587

Acid,  meconic 714

Acid,  muriatic 161

Acid,  myrrhic 271

Acid,  myristicic 649


Acid,  myronic 877

Acid,  nitric 165

Acid,  nitro-hydrochlo-

ric 167

Acid,  nitro-muriatic  .  167

Acid,  oxalic 168

Acid,  palrnic 681

Acid,  parillinic 884

Acid,  phosphoric, di-
luted 169

Acid,  phosphoric,  gla-
cial 170

Acid,  picrotoxic 219

Acid,  polygalic 757

Acid,  prussic 162

Acid,  pyroligneous.  .  .  156

Acid,  quercitric 791

Acid,  quiuic  . , 357

Acid,  rhabarbic 803

Acid,  sabadillic 950

Acid,  smilasperic. . . .  531

Acid,  succinic 916

Acid, sulphuric, aro-
matic 170

Acid,  tannic 172

Acid,  tartaric 174

Acid,  valerianic 946

Acid,  veratric 950

Acidum  aceticmn. . . .  155
Acidum  aceticum  em-

pyreumaticum 156

Acidum  benzoicum  . .  157

Acidum  chromicum  . .  158

Acidum  citricuru  ....  159

Acidum  gallicum....  159

Aciduni  hydriodicum.  161
Acidum hydrochlori-

cum 161

Acidum hydrocyani-

cum 162

Acidum  lacticum  ....  163

Acidum  nitricum  ....  165
Acidum nitro-hydro-

chloricum 167

Acidum  oxalicum  . . .  168
Acidum  phosphoricum

dilutum 169

Acidum pyroligne-

um 156

Acidum sulphuricum

aromaticum 170

Acidum sulphuricum

dilutum 171

Acidum  tannicura  . . .  172
(1357)


1358


Index.


Acidura  tartaricum  . .  174
Acidum  valerianicum  946

Aconite 175

Aconite  liniment. ..  .1112

Aconitina 177

Aconitum  napellus..  175
Aconitum  panicula-

tura 175

Acorus  calamus. ... . 178

Aetata  alba 179

Actaea  rubra 179

Actsea  spicata ....... 179

Adder's  tongue 453

Adder's  violet 509

Adeps 180

Adeps  suillus  praepa-

ratus 180,  1279

Adhesive  plaster. . .  .1039
Adhesive  and  strength-
ening plaster 1039

Adiantum  pedatum. . 181

jEsculaceae 33

yEsculus  glabra 182

^Esculus  hippocasta-

num 182

JSther  aceticus 1007

^Ether  hydriodicus.  .1008
^Ether  sulphuricus  .  .1011

^Etherea 1007

African  kino 581

Agaric 18;)

Agaric,  white 183

Agaric  of  the  oak  . .  .  183
Agave  Americana  . . .  184
Agave  Virginica  ....  184
Agrimonia  eupatoria. 185

Agrimony 185

Ague  bitters 1268

Ague  root 191

Air,  fixed 1021

Ajuga  chamaepitys  . .  185
Albany  beech  drops 780

Albumen  ovi 700

Albumen,  vegetable 935

Alcohol 187

Alcohol,  absolute. . . .  188

Alcohol,  amylic 190

Alcohol,  amylicum  . . 190

Alcohol,  diluted 187

Alcohol  dilutum  ....  187
Alcohol,  methylic...  905
Alcoholic extract of

aconite 1047

Alcoholic extract of

belladonna 1050

Alcoholic extract of

henbane 1056

Alcoholic extract of

mix  vomica 1060

Alcoholic extract of

poison-hemlock  . .  .1052
Alcoholic extract of

poke 1061

Alcoholic extract of

stramonium 1065

Alcoholic extract of

unicorn  root 1047

Alcoholic  potassa. . .  .1179


Aldehyd 151,1010

Alder,  black 772

Alder,  common 195

Alder  leaved  dogwood  402

Alder,  smooth 195

Alder,  spotted 521

Alder,  tag 195

Aleppo  scammony  . .  393

Aletridin 1047

Aletrin 192

Aletris fariDosa 191

Alexandria  senna. . . .  309

Algaceae 137

Alkaline  ointment. .  .1280
Alkaline ointment,

camphorated 1280

Alismaceas 120

Alisma  plantago 192

Alkaline  wash 1124

Allium  cepa 194

Allium  sativum 193

Allspice 654

Allspice,  wild 275

Almond 212

Almond,  cutting  .... 719
Almond  oil  soap  ....  850

Almonds,  bitter 212

Almonds,  saponaceous

cream  of 213

Almonds,  sweet 212

Alnuine 196

Alnus  rubra 195

Alnus  serrulata 195

Aloe,  American 184

Aloe,  false 184

Aloe  Socotrina 196

Aloe  spicata 196

Aloe,  spiked 196

Aloe  vulgaris 197

Aloes 196

Aloes,  Barbadoes. ...  197

Aloes,  Cape 197

Aloesin 199

Aloine 200

Alpinia  cardamomum  201

Alsine  media 909

Alterative  syrup  . . .  .1236
Althaea  officinalis...  202

Althaea  rosea 203

Altingiacete 112

Alum 204

Alum,  burnt 205

Alum,  dried 205

Alum  root 496,  533

Alum  whey 205

Alumen 204

Alumeu  exsiccatum. .  205

Alumen  ustum 205

Alumina  and  potassa,

sulphate  of 204

Amaranth . 205

Arnaranthaceae 100

Amaranthus  hypochon-
driasis  205

Amaryllidacese 123

Amber 916

Amber,  oil  of.  ..916,  1164
Amber,  oil  of, rectifiedl  1 64


Ambrosia  artemisiaa-

folia 207

Ambrosia  elatior  ....  207
Ambrosia  trifida. . . .  206

Ambrosine 206

Amentaceae 110

American  agave 184

American  Aloe, .. .  .  184
American  broomrape  696
American  centaury. .  827
American  Colombo. . .  473
American  foxglove  . .  498
American  gentian...  494
American  Greek-vale-
rian 754

American  hellebore. .  951

American  holly 555

American ipecacuan-
ha...... 463

American  ivy 212

American  larch 588

American  mezereon . .  444
American  poplar  . . .  762
American  sanicle. . .  533
American  sarsaparilla  237

American  senna 306

American  silver  fir. . 142

American  valerian 424

Amidin 216

Ammonia 209

Ammonia, carbonate

of 1015

Ammonia,  chloro-hy-

drate  of 210

Ammonia,  muriate  of  210
Ammonia, prepara-
tions of 1015

Ammonia, sesquicar-

bouate  of 1015

Ammonia,  solution  of  1016
Ammonia,  stronger  so-
lution of 1018

Ammonia,  water  of.  .1016
Ammoniac,  gum  ....  207
Ammoniacal  ointmentl281

Ammoniacum 207

Ammonia?  acetatis  li-
quor  1018

Ammoniae  carbonas.  .1015
Ammoniae  hydrochlo-

ras 210

Ammoniae  liquor. . .  .1016
Ammoniae  liquor  for-

tior 1018

Ammoniae  murias. . .  210
Ammoniated  tincture

of  castor 1249

Ammoniated  tincture

of  valerian 1273

Ammonio-citrate of

iron 1088

Amorphous soft  sul-
phur  919

Ampelopsis  quinque-

folia 212

Amygdala  amara. . . .  212
Amygdala  dulcis, .. .  212
Amydalae  oleum 213


Index.


1359


Amygdalin 213

Amygdaline  soap 850

Amygdalus  communis  212
Amygdalus  Persica  .  214
Amyle,  liydrated  ox-
ide  of 190

Amylic  alcohol 190

Amylin 216

Amylum 215

Amyridaeeae 36

Anacardiaceae 29

Anacyclus  pyrethrum  217
Anagallis  arvensis. . .  217
Anamirta  cocculus. . . 218

Andira  iuermis 219

Andromeda angusti-

folia 221

Andromeda  arborea. .  220
Andromeda  mariana.  221
Andromeda  nitida. ..  221
Andromeda  ovalifolia  221
Andromeda  polifolia.  221
Andromeda pulveru-

lenta 221

Andromeda  speciosa.  221
Anemone,  meadow. . .  221
Anemone  nemorosa. .  221

Anemone  patens 221

Anemone  pratensis. .  221
Anemone  pulsatilla. .  221

Anemone,  wood 221

Anemonine . .  221

Angelica  archangelica  222
Angelica atropurpu-

rea 222

Angelica  lucida 222

Angelica,  purple. . . . 222

Angelica  tree 238

Angelica  triquinati. .  222

Angola  weed 813

Angustura 481

Angustura,  false 482

Anhydrous  alcohol. . . 188

Animal  charcoal 300

Anise 730

Aniseed,  star 731

Anodyne  liniment. .  .1116

Anonaceae 15

Antennaria dioicum. .  223
Antennaria  margarita-

ceum 223,509

Antennaria plantagi-

neum 223

Anthemis  cotula 624

Anthemis  nobilis 223

Anthemis  pyrethrum.  217
Anthoxantum  odorat-

um 931

Antibilious  physic. . .  1203
Antidyspeptic  pills..  .1169
Antispasmodic  clysterl043
Antispasmodic tinc-
ture  1263

ApiacesB  51

Apis  mellifica 625

Apium  petroselinum.  225
Apocynaceae  ........ 96

Apocynin 227


Apocynum androsae-

mifolium 226

Apocynum  cannabin-

™ 227

Apothecaries'  measurel316
Apothecaries'  weight  1316

Appendix 1298

Apple 787

Apple  Peru 429

Application  of  heat. . 991
Approximate  measure-
ments 1318

Aqua 229

Aqua  acidi  carbonici.1020

Aqua  ammonias 1016

Aqua  amygdalae  ama-

rse 1021

Aqua  calcis 1022

Aqua  camphorae 1023

Aqua  cinnamomi. . .  .1023

Aqua  destillata 1023

Aqua  foenicu]  i 1025

Aqua  fortis 165

Aqua  florum  aurantii .  1025
Aqua  hedeomae  pule-

gioides 1024

Aqua menthas pipe-
rita;  1024

Aqua  menthae  viridis  1024
Aqua  picis  liquidae.  .1024

Aqua  pimentae 1024

Aqua  regia 167

Aqua  rosae 1025

Aqua  sambuci 1025

Aqua  sapphirina. . . . 420

Aquas  medicata 1020

Aquifoliaceae 77

Arabin 148

Araceae 118

Aralia  hispida 236

Aralia  nudicaulis 237

Aralia  racemosa 238

Aralia  spinosa 238

Araliaceae 57

Arbor  vitae 929

Arbutin 241

Arbutus  uva  ursi ....  240

Archil 814

Arctium lappa. .....  239

Arctostaphylos uva

ursi 240

Arctuvin 241

Areca  catechu 150

Argel 309

Argeuti  nitras 242

Aristolochiahastata. .  245
Aristolochiahirsuta. .  245
Aristolochia  reticulata  245
Aristolochia  serpenta-

ria 244

Aristolochia  tomento-

sa 246

Aristolochiaceae 99

Armenian  cement 209

Arnica  montana 247

Arnicina 248

Aromatic  spirit  of  am-
monia 1273


Aromatic  tincture  of

guaiacum 1257

Arrowroot 620

Arrowroot  plant 620

Arrow-wood 958

Arrow-wood,  Indian .  454
Artanthe  elongata...  733
Artemisia  abrotanum.  250
Artemisia  absinthium  249
Artemisia  santonica. .  250
Artemisia  vulgaris. . .  250
Artichoke,  garden .  .  .  422
Artichoke,  Jerusalem  423
Artificial  camphor. . . 685

Artificial  musk 643

Artificial  seltzer  water  1020

Artificial  tannin 796

Artificial system of

Linnaeus 138

Arum  triphyllum. . . .  252
Asagrae  officinalis ....  950

Asarabacca 253

Asarin 254

Asarite 254

Asarone 254

Asarum  camphor .  254

Asarum  Canadense.  .  254
Asarum  Europaeum . .  253

Asclepiadaceae 97

Asclepias alba 256

Asclepias  cornuti.  . . . 256
Asclepias,  flesh-color-
ed 255

Asclepias  glabra....  256
Asclepias  incarnata. .  255
Asclepias pseudosar-

sa 531

Asclepias  pulchra. . .  256
Asclepias  syriaca. . . .  256
Asclepias  tuberosa. . .  257

Asclepidin 258

Asclepione 257

Ascletine 258

Ash,  black 475

Ash,  blue 476

Ash-colored  cantharis  295

Ash,  flowering 693

Ash,  white 475

Ash,  prickly 969

Asparagin 259

Asparagus 259

Asparagus  officinale.  259

Asparamide 259

Aspen 762

Asphaltum 720

Aspidium  filix  mas..  260

Assafcetida 263

Aster  aestivus 265

Aster  cordifolius. . . .  265

Aster  puniceus 265

Asteraceae 63

Astragalus  aristatus. .  262
Astragalus  Creticus. .  262
Astragalus  gummifer.  262
Astragalus  massilien-

sis 261

Astragalus strobuli-
ferus 262


1360


Index.


Astragalus tragacan-

tha 261

Astragalus  verus  ....  261
Atropa  belladonna  . . .  266

Atropia 267

Aurantiacese 30

Avena  sativa 269

A  venae  farina 269

Avens,  European....  500

Avens,  water 499

Avens,  white 499

Avens,  purple 499

Avoirdupois  weight.  .1316
Axungia 180

B

Baking  powders 121 6

Balm 629

Balm  of  Gilead  ..142,762

Balmony i . . 331

Balm,  parturient 1233

Balsam,  Canada 142

Balsam  groundsel  . . . 869
Balsam  of  copaiba. . .  396

Balsam  of  fir 142

Balsam  of  Peru 650

Balsam  of  Tolu 652

Balsam, Pettit's  oph-
thalmic 1289

Balsam,  poplar 761

Balsam,  pulmonary  .  .1228

Balsam,  styptic 687

Balsam  weed 557

Balsam,  white 509

Balsamacese 112

Balsaminacese 27

Balsamito  651

Balsamodendron  rnyr-

rha 270

Bamboo  brier 882

Baneberry 179

Baptisia  alba 274

Baptisia  serratifolia. .  274
Baptisia  tinctoria ....  272

Baptisin 273

Barbadoes  aloes 197

Barbadoes  petroleum. 721

Barbadoes  tar 721

Barberry 278

Barilla 890

Bark,  cabbage  tree. . . 219

Bark,  Caribasan 356

Bark,  pale 353

Bark,  Peruvian 347

Bark,  pitaya 356

Bark,  red 354

Bark,  yellow 353

Barks,  Carthagena  349,355

Barley 537

Barosma  crenata 274

Barosma  crenulata. . . 274
Basilicon  ointment. . .  1028

Bastard  saffron 302

Bateman's  drops 1267

Bath,  cold 233

Bath,  foot 235

Bath,  head 236

Bath,  hip 235


Bath,  plunge 235

Bath,  shallow 235

Bath,  shower 236

Bath,  sitz 235

Bath,  spirit  vapor  . . . 903

Bath,  vapor 236

Bath,  warm 232

Bayberry 644

Bayberry  plaster 1035

Bayberry  wax 645

Beadtree 627

Bearberry 240

Bear's-bed 761

Bear's-foot 528

Bear's-oil 682

Beaver  tree 617

Bebeerin 656

Bebeeru 656

Beech  drops 695

Beech  drops,  Albany.  780

Beef's  gall 465

Beef  marrow  soap  . . 851

Beggar's  lice 424

Beggar's  tick 280

Belladonna 266

Bellwort 943

Benjamin  bush 276

Benne 871

Benzoic  acid 157

Benzoin 276

Benzoin  odoriferum. .  275

Benzoinum 276

Berberidaceaa 17

Berberina 278,373

Berberis  vulgaris  ....  278

Beth  root 932

Betulalenta 279

Betulacese 110

Bicarbonate  of  potas-

sa 1181

Bicarbonate  of  soda.  1214
Bicarbonate of soda,

troches  of 1278

Bichromate of  potas-
sa. 1183

Bidens  bipinnata  .... 280

Bidens  connata 280

Bidens  frondosa 280

Bidens  tripartita 280

Big-leaved  ivy 578

Bignonia sempervi-

rens 488

Bilberry 944

Bin-oxalate  of  potassa  701

Birch,  black 279

Birch,  cherrv 279

Birch,  sweet 279

Birch,  mahogany .  279

Bird's  nest 639

Birth-root 932

Bisulphate  of  potassall84
Bitartrate  of  potassa.  765
Bitter  almond  water.  .1021

Bitter  almonds 212

Bitter  almonds,  oil  of  213
Bitter  candy  tuft .... 553

Bitter  cassava  ......  570

Bitter  cucumber 413


Bitter  polygala 755

Bitter  root 226

Bitter  quassia 728

Bitters,  ague 1268

Bitters,  Bone's 1260

Bitters,  wine 1295

Bitters,  restorative

wine 1296

Bittersweet 895

Bittersweet,  climbing  317
Bittersweet,  false. .. .  317

Bitterweed 206

Black  alder 772

Black  ash 475

Blackberry 819

Blackberry,  low 819

Black  birch 279

Black  cantharis 295

Black  cherry 266

Black  cohosh 342

Black  currant 811

Black  currant,  wild . .  812

Black  drop 717

Black  haw 959

Black  hellebore 527

Black  larch 588

Black  liniment 1115

Black  locust 812

Black  mustard 875

Black  oak 790

Black  oxide  of •

iron 467,1098

Black  pepper 736

Black  pitch 740

Black  powder 1204

Black  pursely 461

Black  root  . . .' 593

Black  rosin 796

Black  salve 1036

Black  Sampson 822

Black  snakeroot..342,  848

Black  spruce 146

Black  tea 928

Black  walnut 573

Black  whortleberry  . .  944

Black  willow 837

Bladdernut 907

Bladderwrack 477

Blessed  thistle 317

Bloodroot 843

Bloodroot,  vinegar  of  1006
Blooming  spurge  ....  460»
Bloodwort,  striped. . .  534

Blue  ash 476

Blue  bells 754

Blue  cohosh 312

Blue  flag 567

Blue  fringed  gentian.  494

Blue  gentian 494

Blue  lobelia 609

Blue,  Prussian 1091

Blue  violet 960

Blue  vitriol 419

Blue  whortleberry  . . .  944
Blunt-leaved  dock  ...  823

Bog-bean 633

Boletus  ignarius 183

Boletus  laricis .......  183


Index.


1361


Bone's  bitters 1260

Boneset 456

Boraginaceae 90

Borate  of  soda 887

Borax 887

Borax  loi ion 1125

Borax  lotion  with  mor-
phia 1125

Bordeaux  turpentine.  684
Boswellia  serrata  ....  690
Boswt'llia  thurifera  . .  690

Botany  bay  kino 581

Bougies 1029

Bouncing  bet 852

Bowman's  root. .  .460,  501

Box 282

Boxberry 486

Box,  dwarf »...  283

Boxwood 402

Brake,  bnckhorn 698

Brake,  rock 760,778

Brake  root 760

Brake  winter 779

Bran 935

Brandy,  domestic 189

Brandy  mixture 1131

Brassicaceae 21

Brayera anthelminti-

oa 281

Brazilian  sarsaparilla  881
Brimstone,  horse  ...  918
Bristle-stem sarsapa-
rilla  237

British  gum 216

British  oil 721

British  vinegar 151

Broad -leaved  dog-
wood 402

Bromated  aloine 200

Bromide  of  potassiumll92

Bronchial  elixir 1084

Brooklime 957

Broom,  common 426

Broom,  piue  ........ 731

Broomrape,  American  696

Brown  gum-tree 582

Brown  ointment 1289

Brucea  ferruginea 4d2

Biucia 1223

Bryaceae 1 36

Buchu 274

Buckbean 633

Buckeye 182

Buckhorn  brake 698

Buckthorn 797

Buckwheat 759

Bugle I**6

Bugle  weed 609

Burdock 239

Burgundy  pitch 144

Burning  bush 454

Burning  fluid 733

Burnt  alum 205

Burnt-  sponge 907

Bush  honeysuckle  . . .  437
Bush  whortleberry. . . 944

Butea  frondosa 582

Buttercup 795

86


Butterfly  weed 257

Butternut 572

Butterweed 450

Button  bush 322

Button  snakeroot  452,  598
Buxussempervirens. .  282
Buxus  suffruticoaa. . .  283


Cabbage,  meadow  . . .  922

Cabbage,  skunk 921

Cabbage  tree  bark  . . .  219
Caducous  polygala  .  . 757

Caffein 378

Caffein,  citrate  of  ... .  380

Cahinca 335

Calamine  cerate 1028

Calamus 178

Calamus  draco 846

Calcined  deer's  horn.  401
Calcined  magnesia. . .  612
Calendula  officinalis. 283

Calico  bush 578

Calisaya  bark 353

Calx 284

Camphene 685

Camphor 286

Camphor,  artificial. . .  685
Camphor,  asarum ....  254
Camphor  liniment. .  .1114

Camphor  water 1023

Camphora 286

Camphorated  alkaline

ointment 1280

Camphorated  mixture

of  oils .1130

Camphorated  soap  li-
niment 1116

Camphorated  tincture

of  opium 1267

Canada  balsam 142

Canada  fleabane 450

Canada  pitch 143

Canada  snakeroot  . . .  254

Canada  thistle 365

Canada  turpentine. . . 142

Cancer  root 695

Cancer  wintergreen. . 487

Candytuft,  bitter 553

Cane,  sugar 827

Canella 288

Canellae 37

Canella  alba 288

Canker-lettuce 786

Canna 289

Canna  coccinea 289

Canna  edulis 289

Canna  starch 289

Cannabis sativa 290

Canthaiidal  collodion  385

Cantharides 291

Cantharidin 293

Cantharis  albida 295

Cantharis  atrata 295

Cantharis  cinerea 295

Cantharis  marginata.  295
Cantharis  Nuttalli . . .  295
Cantharis  officinalis..  291


Cantharis  vesicatoria.  291

Cantharis vittata 294

Caoutchouc 29o

Caoutchouc  liuiment.1114
Caoutchouc, vulcan-
ized 296

Caoutchoucine 296

Cape  aloes 197

Caprifoliaceaj 58

Capsicin 298

Capsicum  annuum...  297
Capsicum  baccatum. .  298
Capsicum  frutescens.  298
Capsicum  minimum. .  298
Capsicum,  oil  of,  ethe-
real 299

Capsicum,  troches  of.  1276
Capsicum  and  lobelia,

troches  of 1276

Capsules  of  gelatin.  .  503
Caracas  sarsaparilla.  . 882

Caraway 303

Carbo  animalis 300

Carboligni 301

Carbonate  of  ammo-
nia  1015

Carbonate  of  iron,  pre-
cipitated 1102

Carbonate  of  iron,  sac-
charine 1087

Carbonate  of  lime 409

Carbonate  of  magnesia  613
Carbonate  of  potassa  1185
Carbonate  of  potassa,

pure 1186

Carbonate  of  potassa,

solution  of 1187

Carbonate  of  soda. .. .  889
Carbonate of soda,

dried 1216

Carbonic  acid 1021

Carbonic  acid  water.  .1020

Cardamom 201

Caribean  bark 356

Carmine 375

Carolina  pink 901

Carotin 434

Carpenter's  square. . .  859
Carpus  Americana... 699

Carrageen 340

Carrageenin 340

Carrot  cataplasm- ..  .1026

Carrot,  wild 433

Carthagena  barks

349,  350,  355

Carthamic  acid 302

Carthamine 302

Carthamus  tinctorius. 302

Carum  carui 303

Carvacrol 1150

Carvene 1150

Caryophyllaceae 24

Caryophillic  acid.... 1151

Caryophillin 305

Caryophyllus aroma-

ticus 304

Caryota  urens 835

Cascarilla 412


1362


Index.


Cascarillin 413

Cassava 570

Cassia  acutifolia 307

Cassia  chamaecrista. .  307

Cassia,  dwarf 307

Cassia  elongata 307

Cassia  fistula 305

Cassia  lanceolata. . . .  308
Cassia  Marilandica.. .  306

Cassia  obovata 307

Cassia,  purging 305

Cassina 557

Cassine 311

Castile  soap 850

Castil Ion's  powders. .  836

Castor 311

Castor  oil 679

Castoreum 311

Castorin 312

Cataplasm,  carrot. . .  .1025
Cataplasm,  charcoal.  .1025
Cataplasm,  cranberry  1026

Cataplasm,  elm 1027

Cataplasm,  flaxseed.  .1026
Cataplasm,  lobelia. .  .1026
<5ataplasm,  poke-root.  1027
Cataplasm, stramoni-
um  1027

Cataplasm,  yeast 1026

Cataplasma  carbouis.  1025
Cataplasma  dauci ....  1 026
Cataplasma  fermenti .  1 02o

Cataplasma  lini 1026

Cataplasma  lobelias.  .1026
Cataplasma  oxycocci  1026
Cataplasma  phytolac-

cae 1027

Cataplasma  stramonii.  1027
Cataplasma ulnii. . .  .1027

Cataplasmata 1025

Cataplasms 1025

Catechu 149

Cathartic  clyster 1042

Cathartin 310

Catmint 658

Catnip 658

Cattail  flag 938

Caulophyllin 313

Caulophyllum thalic-

troides 312

Caustic,  lunar 242

Caustic  of  Filhos....  285

Caustic  potassa 1178

Caustic,  vegetable. . .  .1188

Caustic.  Vienna 285

Cayenne  pepper 297

Oeanothine 316

Ceanothus  American-

us 315

Cedar  apples 577

Cedar,  false  white 929

Cedar,  oil  of 1156

Cedar, red 577

Celandine,  great 329

Celastraceae 34

Celastrus  scandens. . .  317
Cement,  Armenian. .  .  209
Cement,  diamond 209


Centaurea  Benedicta.  317
Centaury,  American.. 827
Cephaelis  ipecacuanha  318
Cephalanthus  occiden-
tals 332

Cephalic  powder 1204

Cera  alba 323

Cera  flava 323

Cerain 324

Ceramiacoae 137

Cerasus  serotina 773

Cerasus  Virginiana. .  773

Cerata 1027

Cerate,  calamine 1028

Cerate,  croton  oil....  1028

Cerate,  resin 1028

Cerate,  savin e 1028

Cerate,  simple 1029

Cerate,  spermaceti. .  .1028

Cerate,  Turner's 1028

Cerates 1027

Ceratum  calaminae. .  .1028

Ceratum  cetacei 1028

Ceratum  crotonis. . .  .1028
Ceratum  resin®. ....  .1028

Ceratum sabinae 1028

Ceratum  simplex 1029

Cerei... 1029

Cereoli 1029

Cerevisiae  fermentum..325

Oerin 324

Cetaceum 326

Cetin 327

Cetraria  Islandica. . . 328

Cetrarin 328

Cevadilla 949

Chalk 409

Chalk,  prepared 409

Chalybeate  waters... 236

Chamomile 223

Chamomile,  German.  224
Chamomile,  Roman. .  223
Chamomile,  Spanish.  217
Chamomile,  wild....  624
Champagne,  imitation  966

Charcoal 301

Charcoal,  animal....  300
Charcoal  cataplasm.  .1025
Checkerberry . . .  .4":6, 635

Chelery thine 330

Chclidoitic  acid 330

Chelidonin 330

Chelidonium  majus.. 329

Chelidoxanthin 330

Chelone  glabra, 331

Chemical  elements,
with  their  symbols
and equivalents. . .  1343

Chenopodiaceas 100

Chenopodium  ambro-

soides 333

Chenopodium  anthel-

minticum 332

Chenopodium  botrys. 333

Cherry  birch 279

Cherry,  ground ,  724

Cherry,  wild 773

Cherry,  winter 724


Chian turpentine  . . .  732

Chickweed 909

Chickweed,  red 217

Chicory 342

Cliimaphila  maculata  334
Chimaphi  la  umbel  lata  333

China  root 882

Chiococca  racemosa.  . 335
Chlorate  of  potassa.  .1187
Chloride  of  iron,  tinc-
ture of 1254

Chloride  of  sodium.. 893
Chlorinated  soda,  solu-
tion of 1123

Chloroform 335

Chloroformum 335

Chloro-hydrate  of  am-
monia 210

Chocolate  root 499

Choice  dielytra 405

Cholera mixture,

Greenhows' 1257

Cholera  pills 1170

Chondrin 502

Chondrus  crispus. . . . 340

Christmas  rose 528

Chromic  acid 158

Chrysanthemum leu-

canthemum 341

Chrysanthemum par-

thenium 786

Chrysophanic  acid. . . 603

Chulariose 829

Churrus 290

Cichorium  endivia. . .  342
Cichorium  intybus. .  . 342

Cicily,  sweet 697

Cicuta  maculata 390

Cider 789

Cimicifuga  racemosa. 342

Cimicifugin 345

Cinchona 347

Cinchona  acutifolia.  .  351
Cinchona  amygdalifo-

lia 351

Cinchona  asperifolia.  351
Cinchona  australis. .  .  351
Cinchona  Boliviana.  .  343
Cinchona  caduciflora.  351
Cinchona  calisaya.  . .  347
Cinchona carabayen-

sis 351

Cinchona  cava 351

Cinchona  Chomeliana  351
Cinchona  Condamiuea  348
Cinchona  cordifolia. .  349
Cinchona  crassi folia. .  351
Cinchona  dichotoma  .  351
Cinchona  glnndulifera  351
Cinchona  hirsuta. . .  .  351
Cinchona  lanceolata. .  350
Cinchona  lancifolia  .  .  349
Cinchona  lucurnsefolia  350
Cinchona  macrocalyx  351
Cinchona  macrocarpa  351
Cinchona  magnifolia.  350
Cinchona  micranfha.  348
Cinchona  Muzoucnsis  351


Cinchona  nitida 350

Cinchona  oblongifolia  351
Cinchona  ovalifolia  . . 350

Cinchona  ovata 350

Cinchona  pelalba 351

Cinchona  pubescens.  350
Cinchona purpuras-

cens 351

Cinchona  rotundifolia  351
Cinchona  scrobiculata  351
Cinchona  stenocarpa. 351

Cinchona  villosa 351

Cinchonaceae 61

Cinchonia 361

Cinchonia,  Kinate  of.  358
Cinchonia,  sulphate  of  362

Cinchonic  acid 357

Cinnamic  acid 1152

Cinnamonic  acid 1152

Cinnamomum  aroma-

ticuna 363

Cinnamomum culila-

wan 364

Cinnamomum  Lourei-

rii 364

Cinnamomum  niti-

dum 364

Cinnamomum  tamala  364
Cinnamomum Zeyla-

nicum 363

Cinnamon 363

Cinnamon-colored  fern  698

Cinnamon  water 1023

Cinnamyle 1152

Cinquefoil 771

Cirsium  arvense 365

Cissampelos  glaberri-

ma 366

Cissampelos  pareira. . 365

Cissampelin 366

Cistaceae 23

Cistus  Canadensis  . . .  525
Citrate  of  caffein  ....  380

Citrate  of  iron 1088

Citrate of iron and

quinia 1089

Citrate of magnesia,

solution  of 1121

Citrate  of  potassa,  so-
lution of 1123

Citrate  of  quinia  . . .  .1206
Citrate  of  strychnia.  .1223

Citric  acid 159

Citric  acid,  syrup  of.  1227
Citric  acid,  troches  of  1275

Citrus  acida 368

Citrus  aurantium. . . .  366

Citrus  bigaradia 367

Citrus  limetta 369

Citrus  liraonum  . ... 368

Citrus  vulgaris 367

Claret  wine 964

Clarified  honey 626

Cleavers 483

Clematis  dioica 371

Clematis  viorna, 371

Clematis  Virginiana.  370
Clematis  vitalba 371


Index.

Climbing  bittersweet.  317
Climbing  staff-tree... 317

Cloves 304

Clover,  red 930

Clover,  white  melilot. 931

Clover,  winter 635

Clover,  yellow  melilot  931

Clusiaceaj , 37

Clyster, antispasmo-
dic  1043

Clyster,  cathartic 1042

Clyster  of  aloes,  com-
pound  1042

Clyster of  assafetida,

compound 1042

Clyster of black co-
hosh, compound. .  .1042
Clyster of lobelia,

compound 1043

Clyster  of  opium  . . .  .1043
Clyster  of  senna,  com-
pound 1043

Clyster  of  turpentine,

compound 1043

Clyster of Prickly

Ash 1044

Clysters 1040

Cnicin 318

Cnicusarvensis 365

Cnicus  benedictus  . . .  317
Cnidium  Canadense  .  867
Cnidium  palustre. . . . 866

Coakum 725

Cobweb 927

Cocash 265

Coccoloba  uvifera. . . .  582
Cocculus  Indicus. . . .  218
Cocculus palmatus. .  372

Coccus  cacti 374

Cochineal 374

Cochleariaarmoracia.  376
Cochlearia  officinalis. 377

Cockleburr 186

Codeia 712

Cod-liver  oil 673

Coffea  Arabica 377

Coffee 377

Coffee,  wild 933

Cohosh,  black 342

Cohosh,  blue 312

Cohosh,  red 179

Cohosh,  white 179

Colchicia 383

Colchicum 381

Colchicum  autumnale  381

Colcothar 1102

Cold  bath 233

Cold  cream 1281

Colic  root 191,440

Collection  and  preser-
vation of  plants  . . .  981
Collinsonia Canaden-
sis 384

Collinsonia  cordata  . .  384
Collinsonia  ovata. .. .  384
Collinsonia  scabra...  384
Collinsonia  verna. .. .  384
Collodion 384


1363

Collodion, canthari-

dal 385

Colocynth 413

Colocynthin 414

Cologne 1162

Colombo 372

Colombic  acid 373

Colombin 373

Colophony 796

Coltsfoot 254,  938

Coltstail 450

Columbo,  American. .  473

Comb  flower 822

Comfrey 920

Comfrey,  wild 424

Common  alder 195

Common  brake 778

Common  liniment  ...1113

Common  mallow 619

Common  nettle 940

Common  polypody  . . 760

Common  salt 893

Common  silk-weed  . . 256

Common  soap 850

Common  strengthen-
ing plaster 1034

Common  water 229

Common  winter  cher-
ry 724

Comparison  of  the  dif-
ferent thermometric

scales 1314

Compass  weed 874

Composite 63

Composition  of  vege-
tables 994

Compound  acetated
tincture  of  blood-
root 1270

Compound  cajeput  li-
niment 1114

Compound capsicum

liniment 1115

Compound capsicum

plaster 1034

Compound  cajeput

mixture .".1128

Compound  clyster of

aloes 1042

Compound clyster of

assafetida ,  1042

Compound clyster  of

black  cohosh 1042

Compound  clyster of

lobelia 1043

Compound  clyster of

senna 1043

Compound  clyster of

turpentine 1043

Compound  copaiva

mixture  1129

Compound,  diuretic.  .1111
Compound electuary

of  senna 1031

Compound  ethereallo-

tion 1125

Compound  extract  of
colocynth 1051


1364


Index.


Compound fluid ex-
tract of  gentian. . .  .1075

Compound fluid ex-
tract of  lobelia 1078

Compound fluid ex-
tract of  sarsaparilla  1080

Compound  infusion  of
crauesbill 1111

Compound  infusion  of
golden  seal 1111

Compound  infusion  of
parsley 1110

Compound  infusion  of
sage .....1112

Compound  infusion  of
trailing  arbutus  . .  .1111

Compound  lead  oint-
ment  1285

Compound  liniment  of
oil  of  amber 1117

Compound  liniment  of
ammonia 1113

Compound  liniment  of
oils 1116

Compound  liniment  of
stillingia 1116

Compound  liniment  of
turpentine 1117

Compound liquorice
mixture 1130

Compound  lobelia  lo-
tion  1126

Compound lotion of
golden  seal 1126

Compound lotion of
zinc 1128

Compound  mixture  of
bloodroot 1131

Compound  mixture  of
camphor 1128

Compound  mixture  of
oils 1131

Compound  myrrh lo-
tion  1127

Compound ointment
of bay  berry 1285

Compound ointment
of  iodine 1284

Compound ointment
of  stramonium  ....1287

Compound ointment
of  sulphur 12S6

Compound ointment
of  oxide  of  zinc... 1289

Corn  pound pills of
aconite 1169

Compound pills of
aloes 1169

Compound  pills  of  as-
safetida  1170

Compound pills of
black  cohosh 1171

Compound pills  of

camphor 1170

Compound  pills  of
copaiba 1172

Compound  pills  of

dandelion 1177


Compound pills of
eupurpurin 1172

Compound pills of
ferrocyanuret of
iron 1173

Compound pills of

gamboge 1170

Compound pills of

high-cranberry  . . .  .1178
Compound pills of

hyoscyamus 1174

Compound pills of

iron 1173

Compound pills of

leptandrin 1175

Compound pills of

motherwort 1174

Compound pills of

podophy llin 1 175

Compound pills of

poke 1175

Compound pills of

pteleiu 1176

Compound pills of

quiuia 1176

Compound pills of

soap 1177

Compound pills of

water-pepper 1176

Compound pills of

wild  indigo 1170

Compound pills of

valerian 1177

Compound plaster of

belladonna 1034

Compound  powder  of

baybeiry 1204

Compound  powder  of

camphor 1201

Compound  powder  of

charcoal 1201

Compound  powder  of

golden  seal 1201

Compound  powder  of

hydrastin 1202

Compound  powder  of

ipecacuanha 1202

Compound  powder  of

ipecacuanha and

opium 1202

Compound  powder  of

jalap 1203

Compound  powder  of

leptandrin 1203

Compound  powder  of

lobelia 1203

Compound  powder  of

mandrake 1204

Compound  powder  of

pleurisyroot 1200

Compound  powder  of

podophylliu 1204

Compound  powder  of

quinia 1205

Compound  powder  of

rhubarb 1205

Compound  powder  of

xanthoxylin 1206


Compound  powder  of

yellow  ladies  slip-
per 1201

Compound  resin  plas-
ter  ...1039

Compound  soda  lotionll27
Compound solution

of  iodine 1120

Compound spirit of

lavender 1261

Compound syrup of

horseradish 1230

Compound syrup of

partridgeberry  ....  1233
Compound syrup of

poke 1234

Compound syrup of

queen's  root 1238

Compound syrup of

rhubarb  and  potas-

sa 1234

Compound syrup of

sarsaparilla 1236

Compound syrup of

spikenard 1228

Compound syrup of

turkey-corn 1230

Compound syrup of

yellow  dock 1235

Compound  tar  plaster  1035
Compound  tincture  of

assafetida 1245

Compound  tincture  of

benzoin 1246

Compound  tincture  of

black  cohosh 1249

Compound  tincture  of

blue  cohosh 1249

Compound  tincture  of

bloodroot 1270

Compound  tincture  of

camphor 1217

Compound  tincture  of

cardamom 1248

Compound  tincture  of

cinnamon 1251

Compound  tincture  of

coichicum 1252

Compound  tincture  of

gentian 1256

Compound  tincture  of

golden  seal 1257

Compound  tincture  of

high  cranberry

bark 1273

Compound  tincture  of

iodine 1259

Compound  tincture  of

lobelia 1262

Compound  tincture  of

lobelia  and  capsi-
cum  1263

Compound  tincture  of

myrrh 1264

Compound  tincture  of

Peruvian  bark 1250

Compound  tincture  of

quinia 12G8


Index.


1365


Compound  tincture  of

rhubarb 1269

Compound  tincture  of

senna 1270

Compound  tincture  of

strychnia 1272

Compound  tincture  of

tamarac 1260

Compound  tincture  of

Virginia  snakeroot.1271
Compound  troches  of

liquorice 1277

Compound  troches  of

queen's-root 1278

Compound wine of

comf  rey 1296

Compound wine of

golden  seal 1295

Compound wine of

logwood 1295

Compound wine of

Peruvian  bark 1294

Compound wine of

poke 1296

Compound  wormseed

mixture 1129

Comptonia asplenifo-

lia 386

Concentrated  linimentlll6
Cone-disk sunflower. 821

Confeclio  rosae 1030

Confectio  sennas 1030

Confectio  sennse  com-

posita 1031

Confection  of  roses..  1030
Confection  of  senna.  .1030

Confectiones 1030

Confections 1030

Conia 388

Coniferae 115

Conium  maculatum  . .  387

Conium  mixture 389

Conserve  of  roses. . .  .1030

Conserves 1030

Contrayerva 445

Convallaria  multiflora  390
Convallaria  racemosa  391

Convolvulaceae 92

Convolvulus  pandura-

tus 391

Convolvulus  scammo-

nia 393

Cold  weed 942

Cooling  lotion 1127

Cooling  wash 1 125

Copaiba 396

Copaifera  Beyrichii. . 396

Copaifera  bijuga 396

Copaifera  cordifolia. .  396
Copaifera  coriacea  . . .  396
Copaifera  Guianensis  396
Copaifera  Jacquini  . .  396
Copaifera  Jussieui. . .  396
Copaifera  Langsdorffi  396

Copaifera  laxa 396

Copaifera  Martii 3:

Copaifera  multijuga
Copaifera  nitida. ..


396
396


Copaifera  oblongifolia  396
Copaifera  officinalis. .  396
Copaifera  Sellowii...  396

Copai  vie  acid 397

Copper, crystallized

acetate  of 419

Copper,  diacetate  of. .  419
Copper,  subacetate  of  418
Copper,  sulphate  of. .  419

Copperas 1103

Coptis  trifolia 399

Cordial,  Godfrey's  ...1268

Cordial,  mother's .1233

Cordial,  neutralizing.  1234

Coriander 4U0

Coriandrum  sativum.  400

Corn,  Indian 974

Corn,  crow 191

Corn,  turkey 405

Cornaceae 57

Cornine 403

Cornu  cervinae  calcina-

tum 401

Cornus  circinata 402

Cornus  Florida 402

Cornus  sericea 404

Corsican  moss 476

Corydallia 406

Corydallis  cucullaria.  406
Corydallis  formosa. .  . 405

Corylaceae 108

Cossoo 281

Cotton 510

Cotton,  gun 384

Cough  drops 1131

Cough  mixture 1236

Cowhage 643

Cowparsnep 532

Crampbark 958

Crampbark,  hydro-al-
coholic extract  of.  .1066

Cranberry, high 957

Cranberry  cataplasm.  1026
Cranberry,  upland. . . 240

Cranesbill 496

Crassulacea?, 49

Crawley 780

Cream,  cold 1281

Cream  of  tartar 765

Cream  of  tartar,  solu-
ble 888

Creasote 407

Creasotum 407

Creta  preparata 409

Crocus  sativus 410

Croton  Eleuteria 412

Croton micans 413

Croton  oil 688

Croton  oil  cerate 1028

Croton  oil  liniment.  .1115
Croton  oil,  troches  of  1276

Croton  pavana 689

Croton tiglium 688

Crotonic  acid 689

Crow  corn 191

Crowfoot 496,794

Oniciferas 21

Crystal  mineral 768


Crystallized foliated

earth  of  tartar. . . .  886
Crystals  of  tartar..  765
Crystals  of  Venus. .  419
Crystallized  acetate  of

copper 419

Cubebin 735

Cubebs 734

Cuckolds 280

Cucumber 416

Cucumber,  bitter 413

Cucumber  ointment.  .1283
Cucumber,  squirting. 635

Cucumber  tree 618

Cucumber,  wild 635

Cucumis  citrullus. . . .  415
Cucumis  colocynthis. 413

Cucumis  melo 416

Cucumis  sativus 416

Cucurbitaceas 48

Cucurbita  citrullus. .  415
Cucurbita  lagenaria.. 416

Cucurbita  pepo 415

Cudbear 814

Culver's  physic 593

Cumin  seed 417

Cuminum  cyminum. . 417

Cunila  mariana 417

Cupping, dry 520

Cupri subacetas 418

Cupri  sulphas 419

Cupuliferae 108

Curcuma angustifolia  621

Curcuma  longa 421

Curcumin 421

Currants,  black 811

Currants,  red 811

Currants,  wild  black..  812

Cursed  thistle 365

Cusparin 482

Custard  apple 942

Cutch 149

Cutting  almond 719

Cyano-hydric  acid... 162
Cyanuret  of  potassiumll93

Cycas  circinalis 835

Cycas  revoluta 835

Cydonia  vulgaris....  422

Cydonin 422

Cynanchum  Monspeli-

acum 394

Cyanclium  oleaefolium  309

Cynara  scolymus 422

Cvnoglossum amplex-

"icaule 424

Cvnoglossum Morri-

"soni 424

Cvnoglossum officin-
ale 423

Cypripediumacaule.  . 425
Cypripedium arietin-

um 425

Cypripedium candid-

um 425

Cypripedium  parviflo-

nun 425

Cypripedium pubes-
cens 424


1366


Index.


Cypripedium specta-

bile 425

Cytisin 247

Cytisus laburnum...  247
Oytisus  scoparius. . . .  426

D

Daisy,  ox-eye 341

Dandelion 925

Daphne gnidium ....  428

Daphne  laureola 428

Daphne  mezereum. . . 427

Daphnin 428

Dasystoma pedicula-

ria 498

Datura stramonium..  429

Datura  tatula 430

Daturia 431

Daucus  carota 433

Dead  tongue 665

Deadly  nightshade  266,898

Decocta 1031

Decoctions 1031

Deerberry 486,635

Deer's  horn,  calcined.  401

Delphinia 435

Delphinium  consolida  434
Delphinium  staphisa-

gria 434

Determination  of  spe-
cific gravities 986

Devil's  bit 529,  598

Dewberry 819

De wees' tincture of

Guaiacum 1257

Dextrine 216

Dhak-tree  kino 581

Diacetate  of  copper. .  419

Diachylon 1038

Diamond cement....  209
Diaphoretic  powder.  .  1202

Diastase ...216,  538

Dielytra  formosa 405

Diervilla  Canadensis.  437

Diervilla  trifida 437

Digitalin 439

Digitalis  purpurea...  437
Diluted acetic

acid 1005,  1020

Diluted  alcohol 187

Diluted phosphoric

acid 169

Diluted  sulphuric  acid  171

Dioscoreacese 127

Dioscorea  villosa 440

Dioscorein 441

Dioscorein,  troches  of  1276

Diosma  crenata 274

Diospyros  Virginiana  443

Dirca  palustris 444

Discutient  ointment.  .1287
Dispensing  of medi-
cines 992

Displacement,  method

of 991

Distillation,  apparatus

for 1069

Distillation  in  vacuo.  .1068


Distilled  oils 1139

Distilled  vinegar.  151, 1005
Distilled  water.. 229,  1023

Dittany 417

Dittany,  mountain...  417
Diuretic compound.  .1111

Diuretic  drops 1129

Diuretic  pills 1177

Division,  mechanical.  987
Dock,  blunt  leaved...  823
Dock,  great  water. . . .  823

Dock,  water 823

Dock,  yellow 823

Dogfennel 624

Dogrose 814

Dogsbane 226

Dog's  tooth  violet. . . .  453

Dogwood 402

Dogwood, alder-leaved  402
Dogwood, broad-
leaved 402

Dogwood,  pond 322

Dogwood, round-
leaved 402

Dogwood,  swamp. . . .  404

Domestic  brandy 189

Domestic  gin 189

Dorema  ammoniacum  207
Dorstenia  Brasiliensis  446
Dorstenia  contrayerva  445
Dorstenia  Drakena. . .  446
Dorstenia  Houstonia.  446
Doses of medicines,

table  of 1315

Double  spruce 146

Double  tansy 924

Douche 234

Dow's  physic 167

Draconin 847

Dracontium  fcetidus. .  921

Dragon  root 252

Dragon's  blood 846

Dragon's  claw 780

Dried  alum 205

Dried carbonate of

soda 1216

Dried  sulphate  of  ironll05
Drimys  Chilensis. . . .  447

Drimys  Winteri 446

Drooping  starwort  . . . 529

Drops,  table  of_ 1147

Drupacese . . . .' 44

Dry  cupping 520

Drying  oils 667

Dulcainarin 896

Dwale 266

Dwarf  box 283

Dwarf  cassia 307

Dwarf  elder 236

Dwarf  nettle 941

Dwarf  sumach 808

Dyer's  oak 792

Dyer's  saffron 302

Dysentery  weed 424

E

Ebenaceae 78

Ecbalium  elaterium.  .  636


Echinospermum Vir-

ginicum 424

Effects  of  temperaturel339

Egg 700

Elaidic  acid 668

Elaidin 668

Elastic,  gum 295

Elaterin 638

Elaterium 637

Elatine 206

Elder 841

Elder,  dwarf 236

Elder,  European 841

Elder  flowers 841

Elder  flower  water. .  .1025

Elder,  prickly 238

Elder,  wild 237

Elecampane 558

Electuary,  lenitive. .  .1030
Electuary  of  senna  .  .1030
Electuary of senna,

compound 1031

Electuary,  pile 1031

Eleoptene 670

Elixir  of  opium,  sub-
stitute for Mc

Munn's 1266

Elixir  of  vitriol 170

Elixir,  paregoric 1267

Elixir  proprietatis  . .  .1244

Elixir  salutis 1270

Elm  cataplasm 1027

Elm,  slippery 939

Emetia 320

Emetic  powder 1203

Emetic  tincture 1270

Emetic  tincture, ace-
tous 1270

Emetine 320

Emmenagogue  pills.  .1173
Emmenagogue pow-
der 1204

Emplastra 1032

Emplastrum  Belladon-
nas 1033

Emplastrum Bella-
donna compositum  1034
Emplastrum capsici

compositum .  .1034

Emplastrum extracti

acouiti  radicis 1034

Emplastrum  myrire8.1035
Emplastrum Picis

compositum 1035

Emplastrum  plumbi  .1037
Emplastrum plumbi

oxidi  rubrum 1036

Emplastrum  resinae.  .1039
Emplastrum resina?

compositum 1039

Emulsin 213

Enema  aloes  composi-

ta 1042

Enema aftsafcetidsB

composita 1042

Enema  catharticum  .  .1042
Enema ciruicifugae
composita .1042


Index.


1367


Enema  lobelise com-

posita 1043

Enema  opii 1043

Enema  sennas  compo-

sita 1043

Enema terebinthinas

composita 1043

Enema  xanthoxyli. .  .1044

Enemata 1040

Epigaea  repens 447

Epilobiuni angustifo-

lium 448

Epilobium  spicatum.  448
Epiphegus  American-

us 695

Epiphegus  Virginiana  695

Epsom  salts 615

Equisetaceae 134

Equisetum  hyemale.  .  448
Equisetum  laevigatum  449
Equisetum  robustum.  449
Erechthites hicracifo-

lius 449

Ergot 861

Ergot,  oil  of 864

Ergotin 864

Ericaceae 74

Erigeron  annuum. . . .  451
Erigeron  Canadense.  450
Erigeron heterophyl-

lura 451

Erigeron  Philadelphi-

cum 451

Erigeron  purpureum  .  452
Erigeron  pusilum. .. .  450
Erigeron  strigosum  . . 452

Erucic  acid 876

Eryngium aquaticum  452

Eryngo,  water 452

Erysimum  officinale. .  879
Erythrouium Ameri-

canum 453

Erythroretin 803

Essence  of  anise 1265

Essence  of  caraway.  .1265
Essence  of  cinnamon.  1265
Essence of pepper-
mint 1265

Essence  of  spearmint  1266
Essence  of  sassafras.  .1266
Essential  oils... 669,  1139
Essential salt of  le-
mons 702

Ether 1011

Ether,  acetic 1007

Ether,  hydriodic 1003

Ether,  pyroligneous. .  905
Ether,  spirit  of  nitric.  1009

Ether  sulphuric 1011

Ethereal oil of xan-

thoxylum 971

Ethers 1007

Ethvle,  acetate  of  ox-
ide of 1007

Ethvle,  hydrate  of  ox-
ide of 187

Ethyle,  oxide  of 1011

Eucalyptus  mannifera  C94


Eucalyptus resinifera  582

Eugenic  acid 1151

Eugenia 305

Euonymine 455

Euonymus  American-

us 455

Euonymus  atropurpu-

reus 454

Eupatorin 457

Eupatorine 458

Eupatorium aromati-

cum 455

Eupatorium hyssopi-

foliuna 460

Eupatorium  leucolep-

sis 460

Eupatorium perfolia-

tum 456

Eupatorium purpure-
um  457

Eupatorium  teucrifoli-

um 459

Eupatorium  verbenae-

folium 459

Euphorbia  corollata. .  460
Euphorbia  hypericifo-

lia 461

Euphorbia  ipecacuan-
ha 463

Euphorbia  maculata. .  462

EuphorbiaceaB 106

Euphorbium 464

Euphrasia  officinalis.  465

Eupurpurin 459

European  avens 500

European  elder 841

European goldenrod. 900

European  holly 556

European  pennyroyal  523
European  walnut. . .  .  573
Evaporating  lotion.  ..1125
Exoslemma  Caribaea.  356
Exostemma floribun-

da 356

Expectorant tincture,

King's 1262

Explanation  of  abbre-
viations 1298

Expression  989

Extract,  fluid  neutral-
izing  1079

Extract  of  aconite,  al-
coholic 1047

Extract  of  antibilious

physic,  fluid 1082

Extract  of  belladonna,

alcoholic 1050

Extract  of  bitterroot,

hydroalcoholic  . . .  .1048
Extract  of  bittersweet  1054
Extract of black co-
hosh, fluid 1071

Extract  of  black co-

hosh,hydroalcoholicl051
Extract of  blackroot,

fluid 1077

Extract  of  blackroot,
hydroalcoholic  . . .  .1059


Extract  of  bloodroot,

hydroalcoholic  . . .  .1063
Extract of blue co-
hosh, hydroalcoho-
lic 1050

Extract of  blue  flag,

fluid ^.1076

Extract  of blue flag,

hydroalcoholic 1056

Extract  of  boneset. .  .1054
Extract of buchu,

fluid 1071

Extract  of  burdock..  .1048
Extract  of  butternut.. 1058
Extract  of  chamomile  1048
Extract  of  chamomile,

fluid 1070

Extract of cinchona,

fluid 1072

Extract  of  colocynth.  .1051
Extract  of  colocynth,

compound 1051

Extract  of  cotton  bark  1054
Extract  of  cramp  bark,

hydroalcoholic  . . .  .1066
Extract of cubebs,

fluid 1073

Extract  of  dandelion.  1066
Extract  of  dandelion,

fluid 1085

Extract  of  dogwood.  .1052
Extract of dogwood,

fluid 1072

Extract  of  elecampane,

hydroalcoholic 1055

Extract  of  ergot,  fluid  1074
Extract  of  gentian ....  1054
Extract of gentian,

fluid 1075

Extract of gentian,

fluid compound. .  .1075
Extract  of  goldenseal,

hydroalcoholic . .  .1056
Extract of henbane,

alcoholic 1056

Extract of henbane,

fluid 1076

Extract  of  high-cran-
berry, hydroalco-
holic  106b'

Extract  of  ipecacuan-
ha, saecharated-al-

coholic 1232

Extract  of  jalap 1057

Extract of life  root,

fluid 1081

Extract of lobelia,

fluid 1077

Extract of lobelia,

fluid  compound. . .  .1078
Extract  of  logwood. .  .1055

Extract  of  lupulin 1060

Extract  of  motherwort,

hydroalcoholic  . . .  .1059
Extract of nux-vom-

ica,  alcoholic 1060

Extract  of  partridge
berry 1060


1368


Index.


Extract  of  pleurisy-
root,  hydroalcoholic  1049

Extract  of  poison-hem-
lock, alcoholic 1052

Extract  of  poke,  alco-
holic  1061

Extract  of  prickly  ash,
fluid 1086

Extract  of  queen's-
root,  fluid 1084

Extract  of  queen's
root,  hydroalcoholic  1064

Extract  of  rliatany. .  .1058

Extract  of  rhubarb.  .  .1063

Extract  of  rhubarb,
fluid 1079

Extract  of  rhubarb  and

potassa,  fluid 1079

Extract  of  sarsaparilla,
fluid  compound.. .  .1080

Extract  of  scammony.  395

Extract  of  scullcap,
fluid 1080

Extract  of  scullcap,
hydroalcoholic 1064

Extract  of  senna,  fluid  1081

Extract  of  senna  and
jalap,  fluid 1082

Extract  of  senna  and
rhubarb,  fluid 1082

Extract  of  shrubby
trefoil,  hydroalco-
holic  1062

Extract  of  spigelia  and
senna,  fluid 1084

Extract  of  stramoni-
um, alcoholic 1065

Extract  of  sumach,
fluid 1080

Extract  of  trailing
arbutus,  fluid 1074

Extract  of  turkey  corn,
hydroalcoholic 1053

Extract  of  unicorn  root,
alcoholic 1047

Extract  of  valerian,
fluid 1086

Extract  of  Virginia
snakeroot, fluid... 1083

Extract  of  water  pep-
per  1062

Extract  of  water  pep-
per, fluid 1078

Extract  of  water  plan-
tain, hydroalcoholicl06l

Extract  of  wild  indigo,
hydroalcoholic 1049

Extract  of  yellow-clock,
hydroalcoholic 1063

Extract  of  yellow  la-
dies' slipper,  fluid. 1073

Extract  of  yellow  la-
dies' slipper,  hydro-
alcoholic 1053

Extracta 1044

Extracta  fluida 1067

Extracts 1044

Extracts,  fluid 1067


Extractum  aconiti  al-

coholicum 1047

Extractum  aletris  alco-

holicum 1047

Extractum  anthemidisl048
Extractum  anthemidis

fluidum .1070

Extractum apocyni

hydroalcoholicum.  .1048

Extractum  arctii 1048

Extractum asclepiae

hydroalcoholicum.  .1049
Extractum baptisia?

hydroalcoholicum.  .104'9
Extractum  belladonnas

alcoholicum 1050

Extractum buchu

fluidum 1071

Extractum  caulophylli

hydroalcoholicum.  .1050
Extractum  ciinicifuerae

fluidum T..1071

Extractum  cimicifugae

hydroalcoholicum.  .1051
Extractum cinchona?

fluidum 1072

Extractum  colocynthi-

dis .1051

Extractum  colocynthi-

dis  compositum. . .  .1051
Extractum  conii  alco-
holicum  1052

Extractum cornus

Florida? 1052

Extractum cornus

Florida?,  fluidum..  .1072
Extractum corydalis

hydroalcoholicum.  .1053
Extractum cubebae

fluidum 1073

Extractum cypripedii

fluidum .1073

Extractum cypripedii

hydroalcoholicum . .  1053
Extractum Dulcama-
ra?  1054

Extractum epigaea?

fluidum 1074

Extractum ergotae

fluidum 1074

Extractum  eupatorii.  .1054
Extractum  gentiana?. .  1054
Extractum gentiana?

fluidum 1075

Extractum gentianae

fluidum composi-
tum 1075

Extractum glycyr-

rhiza? 507

Extractum  gossypii.  .1054
Extractum  haeinatoxy-

li 1055

Extractum  helenii  hy-
droalcoholicum. ...  .1055
Extractum hydrastis

hydroalcoholicum.  .1056
Extractum  hyoscyami
alcoholicum 1056


Extractum  hyoscyami
fluidum 1076

Extractum iridis
fluidum 1076

Extractum  iridis  hy-
droalcoholicum . . .  .1056

Extractum  jalapae. . .  .1057

Extractum  juglandis. .  1058

Extractum  krameria?..1058

Extractum  leonuri  hy-
droalcoholicum. . . .1059

Extractum  leptaiidra?
fluidum 1077

Extractum  leptandra?
hydroalcoholicum.  .1059

Extractum lobeliae

fluidum 1077

Extractum  lobeliae
fluidum  composi-
tum  1078

Extractum  lupulina?.  .1060

Extractum  mitchellae.1060

Extractum  nucis  vom-
icae alcoholicum. .  .1060

Extractum  phytolacca?
alcoholicum 1061

Extractum  plantaginis
cordatae  hydroalco-
holicum 1061

Extractum  polygoni.  .1062

Extractum  polygoni
fluidum 1078

Extractum  ptelea?  hy-
droalcoholicum ....  1062

Extractum  rhei 1063

Extractum  rhei  flui-
dum  1079

Extractum  rhei  et  po-
tassa? fluidum 1079

Extractum  rhus  flui-
dum  1080

Extractum  rumecis
hydroalcoholicum  .1063

Extractum  sanguinaria?
hydroalcoholicum .1063

Extractum  sarsaparil-
la? fluidum  composi-
tum  1080

Extractum  Scutellaria?
fluidum.. 1080

Extractum  Scutellariae
hydroalcoholicum.  .1064

Extractum  senecii  flui-
dum  1081

Extractum  senna?  flui-
dum 1081

Extractum  senna?  et
jalapa?  fluidum 1082

Extractum  senna?  et
rhei  fluidum 1082

Extractum  serpentaria?
fluidum 1083

Extractum  spigelia?  et
sennae  fluidum. ..  .1084

Extractum  stillingia?
fluidum 1084

Extractum  stillingia?
hydroalcoholicum.  .1064


Index.


1369


Extractum stramonii

alcoholicum 1065

Extract  urn  taraxaci. .  .1006
Extractum taraxaci

fluidum 1085

Extractum Valeriana?

fluidum ....1086

Extractum  viburni  hy-

droalcoholicum.  . .  .1066
Extractum  xanthoxyli

fluidum 1086

Eyebright 461,465

Eye-salve,  Pettit's. .  .1289


Fabaceae 38

Factitious  scammony.  394
Fahtiestock's vermi-
fuge  1131

False  aloe 184

False  angustura 482

False  bittersweet 317

False  grape 212

False  gromwell 691

False  sarsaparilla. . . .  237

False sunflower 524

False  unicorn  root. .. . 529

False  valerian 868

False  white  cedar 929

False  wintergreeu. . . . 786

Farkleberry 944

Fel  bovinum 465

Female  fern 760

Female  regulator 868

Fennel 471

Fennel,  dog 624

Fennel,  sweet 471

Fennel  water 665,  1025

Fern,  cinnamon-color-
ed 698]

Fern,  female 760

Fern,  male 260

Fern  root 760

Fern,  royal  flowering. 698

Fern, sweet 386

Fern,  winter 779

Ferrated tincture of

Peruvian  bark 1250

Ferri  acetas 1087

Ferri  acetatis,  tinctural253
Ferri  ammonio-citras  1088
Ferri  carbonas  saccha-

ratum 1087

Ferri  chloridi,  tinctural254

Ferri  citras 1088

Ferri  et  morphias  tar-

tras 1089

Ferri  et  quiniae  citras.  1089
Ferri  et  quiniae  tavtrasl090
Ferri  et  saliciniae  tar-

tras 1090

Ferri  ferrocyanuretural091

Ferri  iodidum 1092

Ferri lactas 1094

Ferri oxidum hydra-
turn 1095

Ferri  oxidum  nigrum  1098
Ferri  phosphas 1099


Ferri  pulvis 1100

Ferri  sesquioxidum.  .1102
Ferri  subcarbonas. . .  .1102

Ferri  sulphas 1 103

Ferri  sulphas  exsicca-

tum 1105

Ferri  sulphuretum.  .  .1105

Ferri  tannas 1107

Ferri  valerianas 1107

Ferric  acid 467

Ferrocyanuret  of  iron.  1091
Ferrocyanuret  of po-
tassium 769

Ferrocyanuret  of  qui-

nia 1206

Ferro-tartrate  of  mor- ■

phia .1089

Ferro  tartrate of  qui-

nia 1090

Ferro-tartrate  of sali-

cin 1090

Ferrum 466

Fever-bush 275

Fever-few 785

Fever-root 780,  933

Fever-weed 498

Few-flowered  crawley  780

Fibrin,  vegetable 935

Ficus  carica 469

Ficus  elastica 295


F%

Figwort

Filices

Filix  mas

Filtration  by  displace-
ment 991

Fine  leaved  water  hem-
lock 665

Fireweed 449

Firing 470

Five-finger -  771

Five-leaf 212

Fit-plant 639

Fixed  air 1021

Fixed  oils 667

Flag,  blue 567

Flag,  cat- tail 938

Flag,  sweet 178

Flaxseed 601

Flaxseed  cataplasm.  .1026
Fleabane,  Canada. ..  . 450
Fleabane, Philadel-
phia 451

Fleabane, various

leaved 451

Flesh  colored  asclepias  255

Flies,  potato 294

Flies,  Spanish 291

Flixweed 880

Florentine  orj-is . . 568

Flowers  of  benzoin . . . 157
Flowers  of  sulphur. .

Flowering  ash

Flowering  cornel...
Flowering  raspberry

Fluid,  burning

Fluid  extract  of  anti


Fluid  extract  of  black

cohosh 1071

Fluid  extract  of  black

root 1077

Fluid  extract  of  blue

fla? 1076

Fluid  extract  of  buchul071
Fluid  extract  of  cham-
omile 1070

Fluid  extract  of cin-
chona  1072

Fluid  extract  of  cubebsl073
Fluid  extract  of  dan-
delion  1085

Fluid  extract  of  dog-
wood 1072

Fluid  extract  of  ergot  1074
Fluid  extract  of  gen-
tian  1075

Fluid  extract  of  gen-
tian, compound. .  .  .1075
Fluid  extract  of  hen-
bane 1076

Fluid extract  of  life-
root 1081

Fluid  extract  of  lobe-
lia  1077

Fluid  extract  of  lobe-
lia, compound 1078

Fluid  extract  of  prick-
ly ash 1086

Fluid extract of

queen's  root 1084

Fluid  extract  of  rhu-
barb  1079

Fluid  extract  of  rhu-
barb and  potassa. .  .1079
Fluid  extract  of  sarsa-
parilla, compound.  1080
Fluid  extract  of  scull-
cap  1080

Fluid  extract  of  senna  1081
Fluid  extract  of  senna

and  jalap 1082

Fluid  extract  of  senna

and  rhubarb 1082

Fluid  extract  of  spige-

lia  and  senna 1084

Fluid extract of  su-
mach  1080

Fluid  extract  of  trail-
ing arbutus 1074

Fluid  extract  of  vale-
rian  1086

Fluid  extract  of  Vir-
ginia snakeroot. . .1083
Fluid  extract  of  water

pepper 1078

Fluid  extract  of  yellow

ladies'-slipper 1073

Fluid  extracts 1067

Fluid  neutralizing  ex-

693 tract 1079

402  !  Fluid  preparations. . .  990

8-21  ;  Fly-trap 853

733  I  Foeniculum  dulce 472

I  Foeniculum  officinale.  471


469
859
134

260


bilious  physic 1082  |  Fceniculum  vulgare. .  471


1370


Index.


Foliated  earth  of  tarfai-1180

Foot  bath 235

Formula of freezing

mixtures 1337

Forinvl,  terchloride  of  335

Foxglove 437

Foxglove.  American  .  .  498
Fragaria  Canadensis.  473
Fragaria  grandiflora. .  473

Fragaria  vesca 472

Fragaria  Virgin: ana.  . 473

Frankincense 145,  690

Frasera  Carolinensis.  473

FraseraWalteri 473

Fraxinus  acuminata.  .  475
Fraxinus  Americana..  475
Fraxinus  excelsior....  694
Fraxinus  parviflora.. .  694
Fraxinus  polygamic.  476
Fraxinus uuadrangu-

lata 476

Fraxinus  sambucifolia  475
French decimal
weights  and  mea-
sures 1317

French  rose 816

French  vinegar 151

Friar's  balsam 1246

Fringed  poly  gala. .. .  755

Fro-  lily 664

Frost  plant 525

Frost  weed 525

Fruit  sugar 829

Fucus helminthocor-

ton 476

Fucus  vesieulosus. . . . 477

Fuligo  ligni 478

Fuligo splendens. . . .  478

Fuligokali 479

Fumaria officinalis... 479

Fumariaceae 20

Fumitory 479

Fungacese 138

Fusel  oil 190

G
Gaduin 674

Gaduus  morrhua 673

Galbanum 480

Galbanum  officinale. .  480
Galipea  officinalis. .. .  481

Galium  aparine 483

Galium  asprellum. .  ..  483

Galium  trifidum 483

Galium  verum 483

Gall,  beef's 465

Gall,  ox 465

Gallic  acid 159

Galls 792

Gatnbir  or  Gambeer. . 149

Gamboge 484

Gambogia 484

Gambogic  acid 485

Garcinia  cambogia. . . 484

Garden  angelica 222

Garden  art i choke  ....  422

Garden  balsam 557

Garden  endive 342


Garden  marygold . . . .  283
Garden  nightshade. . . 898

Garden  sorrel 702

Garget 725

Garlic 193

Gas, hvdrosulphuric

acid." 1106

Gaullheria  hispidula.  487
Gaultheria procum-

bens .• 486

Gayfeather 598

Gelatin,  capsule?  of.  .  503
Gelseminum  nitidum.  488
Gelseminum semper-

virens 488

Gentian 492

Gontian,  blue 494

Gentian, blue-fringed  494

Gentian,  horse 933

Gentian,  marsh 494

Gentian,  ochroleucous  494
Gentian,  soap  wort.. . .  494
Gentian,  straw  colored  434
Gentian,  yellowish-
White 494

Gentian  a  Catesbei  . . .  494

Gentiana  crinita 494

Gentiana  lutea 492

Gentiana  oehroleuca.  494
Gentiana  pneumonan-

the 494

Gentiana  saponaria  .  . 494

Gentianaceae 94

Gentianin 493

Geoffroya  inermis. . . . 219

Geraniacese 26

Geraniin 495

Geranium 496

Geranium  maculatum  496
Gerauium Robertiau-

um 498

Geranium,  spotted...  496
Gerardia  pedicularia.  498
German chamomile.. 224

Germander 185

Geum  rivale 499

Geum  urbanum 500

Geum  Virginianum. .  499
Giant  Solomon's  seal.  390
Giant  whortleberry. .  .  944
Gigartina helmintho-

corton 476

Gill  over  the  ground.  659
Gillenia  stipulacea  . .  501
Gillenia  trifoliata. . . . 500

Gin, domestic .' 189

Ginger 979

Ginger,  Indian 254

Ginger,  syrup  of 1239

Ginger,  tincture  of  . .  .1274
Ginger,  troches  of. . .  .1279

Ginger,  wild 254

Ginseng 703

Glacial phosphoric

acid 170

Glauber's  salt 892

Glechoma  hederacea. .  659
Globe  flower 322


Glucose 829

Glue 502

Glue,  liquid 165

Gluten 935

Glycerin 501

Glycerin  lotion 1 L25

Glycerina 504

Glycyrrhiza  glabra. .  . 506
Glycyrrhiza  lepidota, 50S

Glycyrrhiziu 507

Gnaphalium margari-

taceum 509

Gnaphalium polyce-

phalum 5M9

Godfrey's  cordi  il 1268

Golden-rod, European  900
Golden-rod,  hard-leaf. 900
Golden-rod,  rigid  ....  900
Golden-rod, sweet-
scented  899

Golden  seal 544

Golden senecio 868

Golden  tincture 1295

Goldthread 399

Gombo 141

Gondret's vesicating

ointment 1281

Goodyera  pubescens. .  509

Goosegrass 483

Gossypiuro Barba-

dense 511

Gossvpiumherbaceum  510

Gourd 416

Graminaceae 131

Grana  mo.>chala 141

Grape 962

Grape,  false 212

Grape  sugar 829

Gravel  weed. 437,  417,  691

Gravel  root 457

Great  celandine 329

Great  rag-weed 206

Great  stinging  nettle. 940
Great  water  dock  ....  823

Greek  valerian 755

Greek  valerian,  Ame-
rican 754

Green  salve 1035

Green  tea 927

Green  vitriol 1103

Greenhow's cholera

mixture .1257

Groats 270

Grossulacete 49

Ground  cherry 724

Ground  holly 333

Ground ivy 659

Ground  laurel 447

Ground  lily 932

Ground  moss 761

Ground  pine 185

Ground  raspberry. .. . 544
Ground  squirrel-pea. . 571

Gruel,  oatmeal 269

Guelder-rose  tree  ....  957

Guaiac 514

Guaiaci  resina 514

Guaiacic  acid 513


Index.


1371


Guaiacin 515

Guaiacum 512

Guaiacum  arborourn.  .  513
Guaiacum  officinale..  512
Guaiacum  sanctum. . . 513

Gum  ammoniac 207

Gum  Arabic 147

Gum  Arabic,  mucilage

of 149

Gum,  British 216

Gum  elastic 295

Gum hemlock 143

Gum,  sweet 603

Gun  cotton 384

Gunjah 290

Gunpowder 516

Gutta  percha 516

Guttiferse 37

H

Hackmetack 588

Haemastasis 521

Haematoxylon  Canipe-

chianum 518

Haemodoraceae 126

Haeniospasis 520

Haemospastic  medica-
tion 520

Haemostatic,  Pagliari's  277

Haircap moss 761

Hamamelaceae ....... 51

Hamamelis  Virginica.  521
Hard Carthagena

bark 349,  355

Hardhack 384,902

Hardleaf  golden-rod.  . 900

Hardwater 229

Hastate  knotgrass. . . .  759

Hawkweed 534

Hawkweed, veiny-
leaved  534

Hazel  wort 253

Head bath 236

Heal  all 384,  859

Heart-leaved  plantain  741

Heart  liverleaf 532

Hebradendron  cambo-

gioides 484

Hedeoma  pulegioides. 522

Hedera  Helix. 523

Hederia 524

Hed^e  mustard 879

Hedysarum  Alhagi. . . 694

Helenin 559

Helenium  autumnale. 524
Helianthemum Cana-
densis 525

Helianthemum  corym-

bosum 526

Helianthus  annuus...  526
Helianthus  tuberosus  423
Hellebore,  American. 951

Hellebore,  black 527

Hellebore,  white 948

Hellebore,  swamp 951

Helleborus  fetid  us..  . 528

Helleborus  niger 527

Helleborus  orientalis.  528


J  Kelonias ...  529

Hflonias  bullata 530

Helonias  dioica 529

Helonias officinalis.. 949

Hematin 519

Hematoxylin 519

Hemidesmic  acid....  531
Hemidesmus  Indicus  530
Hemlock  dropwort.  . .  665
Hemlock,  fine  leaved

water 665

Hemlock, gum 143

Hemlock,  oil  of 143

Hemlock,  parsley. . . .  867

Hemlock,  poison 387

Hemlock,  spruce 143

Hemlock,  water 390

Hemp 290

Hemp,  Indian 227

Hemp,  white  Indian.  255

Henbane 548

Henbane,  yellow 724

Hepar , 1197

Hepatica  acutiloba. . .  532
Hepatica  Americana.  532

Hepatica  triloba 532

Heracleum  lanatum. .  532
Herb  Christopher. ... 179

Herb Robert 498

Herpetic  wash 1126

Heuchera  Americana.  533
Heuchera  caulescens.  534
Heuchera  pubescens..  534
Hevea  Guianensis.. . .  295
Hibiscus  abelmoschus  141
Hibiscus  esculentus. . 141

Hibiscus,  marsh 203

Hibiscus  moscheuto3.  203
Hibiscus  palustris. . . .  203
Hieracium  venosum. .  534
Hierochloa  borealis.. . 931

High  angelica 222

High  cranberry 957

High  stalked  crawley  781

Hip  bath 235

Hip  tree 814

Hippocastanaeeae  .... 33

Hircin 872

Hirudo  decora 536

Hirudo  medicinalis.. .  536
Hirudo  officinalis. .. . 535

Hoarhound 623

Hoarhound,  water...  609
Hoarhound,  wild.... 459

Hogweed 207

Holly,  American 555

Holly,  European 556

Holly,  ground 333

Hollyhock 203

Holly  thistle 317

Honduras  sarsaparilla  883

Honey 625

Honey,  clarified 626

Honeysuckle,  bush.. . 437

Hood  wort 860

Hop  hornbeam 699

Hops 540

Hordein 538


Hordeum  distichon.. . 537
Hordeum  vulgare. .  . . 537

Horse  brimstone 918

Horsecane 206

Horsechestnut 182

Horsefly  weed 272

Horse  gentian 933

Horsemint 639

Horseradish 376

Horsetail 448

Horseweed.  ..206,  384,  450

Hot  drops 1264

Hound's  tongue 423

Houseleek 867

Humulus  lupulus .... 540

Hunn's  drops 1128

Hundred-leaved  rose. 815

Huntsman's  cup 853

Hydragogue  powder.  .1204
Hydragogue  tincture.  1296

Hydrangea 542

Hydrangea  arborescens  542

Hydrangea,  wild 542

Hydrangea  vulgaris. . 542

Hydrastin 546

Hydrastis  Canadensis  544

Hydrate  of  lime 285

Hydrate  of oxide of

ethyle 187

Hydrate  of  potassa.  .1178
Hydrated oxide of

amyle 190

Hydrated  oxide  of  iron  1095
Hydrated  peroxide  of

iron 1095

Hydrated  sesquioxide

iron 1095

Hydriodate of mor-
phia  1139

Hydriodate  of  potassa  1196
Hydriodic  acid. .  .161,  561

Hydriodic  ether 1008

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  bitter  root 1048

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  black  cohosh ....  1051
Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  black  root 1059

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  blood  root 1063

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  blue  cohosh 1050

Hydroalcohol  ic  extract

of  blue  flag 1056

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  cramp  bark 1066

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  elecampane 1055

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  golden  seal 1056

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  high  cranberry.  .1066
Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  motherwort 1059

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  pleurisy  root 1049

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  queen's  root....  1064


1372


Index;


Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  scullcap 1064

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  shrubby  trefoil .  .1062
Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  turkey  corn 1053

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  water  plantain.  .1061
Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  wild  indigo 1049

Hydroalcoholic  extract

of  yellow  dock. . .  .1063
Hydroalcoholic  extract
of yellow ladies'

slipper 1053

Hydrochlorate  of  am-
monia 210

Hydrochlorate  of  mor-
phia  1136

Hydrochloric  acid...  161
Hydrocyanic  acid. ..  .  162
Hydrogen,  sulphuret-

ed 1106

Hydrosulphuric acid

gas 1106

Hyoscyamia 550

Hyoscyamus  niger.  . . 548

Hypericaceae 24

Hypericum perfora-
tum 551

Hyperiodic  acid 561

Hyssop 552

Hyssop,  prairie 785

Hyssopus  officinalis. .  552

I

Iberis  amara 553

Ice  plant 639

Ice  vine 3G5

Iceland  moss 328

Ichthyocolla 553

Ictodes  feet  id  us 921

Ilexaquifolium 556

Ilex  opaca 555

Ilex  vomitoria 556

Ilicin 556

Illicium  anisatum. . .  .  731
Imitation  champagne  966
Impatieus  balsamina.  557

Impatiens  fulva 557

Impatiens  pallida. .. .  557
Imperial  measure. . .  .1316
Impure  acetic  acid.  . .  151
Impure dilute acetic

acid 151

Indelible  ink 243

India  senna 310

Indian  arrow  wood.. .  454

Indian  corn 974

Indian  cup-plant 873

Indian  ginger 254

Indian  hemp 227

Indian  hemp,  white.  . 255

Indian  physic 500

Indian  pipe 639

Indian  posy 509

Indian  rubber 295

Indian  sarsaparilla.. . 530


Indian  tobacco 606

Indian  turnep 252

Indigo,  prairie 274

Indigo,  wild 272

Infusa 1108

Infusion  of  cranesbill,

compound 1111

Infusion  of  goldenseal,

compound 1111

Infusion of parsley,

compound .1110

Infusion  of  sage,  com-
pound .1112

Infusion  of  trailing  ar-
butus, compound.  .1111

Infusions 1108

Infusum  apii  composi-

tum 1110

Infusum  epigaeae  com-

positum 1111

Infusum  geranii  com-

positum 1111

Infusum hydrastis

compositum 1111

Infusum  sal  viae  com-
positum  1112

Injections 1040

Ink 158

Ink,  indelible 243

Ink,  red 375,  520

Ink  root 908

Inspissated  juices. . .  .1044

Inspissation 1044

Inula  helenium 558

Inulin 559

Iodic  acid 561

Iodide  of  iron 1092

Iodide  of  iron,  solu-
tion of 1118

Iodide  of  morphia. ...  1 139
Iodide  of  potassium.  .1195

Iodide  of  quinia 1206

Iodine 559

Iodine,  compound  so-
lution of 1120

Iodine, compound

ointment  of. 1284

Iodine, compound

tincture  of. 1259

Iodine,  tincture  of.  ..1258

Iodinium 559

Iodous  acid 561

Ipecacuanha 318

Ipecacuanha,  Ameri-
can 463

Ipecacuanha,  sacchar-
ated  alcoholic  ex-
tract of 1232

Ipecacuanha  spurge. .  463
Ipecacuanha, troches

of 1277

Ipecacuanha,  wild  463,  933

Ipomaea  jalapa 564

Iridaceae 127

Iridin 569

Iris  Florentina 568

Iris  lacustris  568

Iris  versicolor 567


Iris  Virginica 568

Irish  moss 340

Iron 466

Iron,  acetate  of 1087

Iron,  ammonio-citrate

of 1088

Iron  and  morphia,  tar-
trate of 1089

Iron and quinia, ci-
trate of 1089

Iron  and  quinia,  tar-
trate of 1090

Iron  and  salicin,  tar-
trate of 1090

Iron, black oxide

of 467,1098

Iron  by  hydrogen 1 100

Iron,  citrate  of 1088

Iron,  dried  sulphate  of  1105
Iron,  ferrocyanuretof  1091

Iron  filings 468

Iron, hydrated oxide

of 1095

Iron,  hydrated perox-
ide of 1095

Iron,  hydrated  sesqui-

oxide  of 1095

Iron,  iodide  of 1092

Iron,  lactate  of. 1094

Iron,  lactate  of  protox-
ide  of 1094

Iron,  magnetic oxide

of 467

Iron,  phosphate  of. .  .1099

Iron,  powder  of 1100

Iron,  precipitated  car-
bonate of 1102

Iron,  preparations  of.  1087
Iron,  protoxide  of. . . . 468

Iron,  prussiate  of .1091

Iron,  red  oxide  of. . .  .1102

Iron,  reduced 1100

Iron, saccharine car-
bonate of 1087

Iron, sesquioxide

of 468,  1102

Iron,  solution  of  iodide

of 1118

Iron,  solution  of  nitrate

of 1119

Iron,  solution  of  perni-

trate  of 1119

Iron,  solution  of  terni-
trate  of  sesquioxide

of 1119

Iron,  solution  of  ter-

sulphate  of 1096

Iron,  subcarbonate  of.  1102

Iron,  sulphate  of 1103

Iron,  sulphate  of  pro-
toxide of 1103

Iron,  sulphuret  of.  ..1105
Iron,  syrup  of  protoni-

trateof 1119

Iron,  tannate  of 1107

Iron,  teroxide  of 467

Iron,  tincture  of  ace-
tate of 1253


Indej


1373


Iron,  tincture  of  chlo-
ride of 1254

Iron,  tincture  of  muri-
ate of 1254

Iron,  valerianate  of.  .1107

Iron  weed 956

Iron  wood 699

Irritating  plaster 1035

Isinglass 553

Isonandra gutta 516

Ivory -black 300

Ivy 523,578

Ivv>  big-leaved 578

Ivy,  ground 659

Ivy,  poison 809

J

Jack  in  the  pulpit. . .  252

Jacob's  ladder. , 754

Jalap 564

Jalap,  resin  of 1057

Jalap,  wild 391

Jamaica  Kino 581

Jamaica  pepper 654

Jamaica  sarsaparilla.  88U

Jamestown weed....  429

Janipha manihot. . . .  570

Jatropha  curcas 689

Jatropha  elastica....  295

Jatropha  manihot. .. .  570

Jeffersonia  diphylla. .  571

Jerusalem  artichoke. .  423

Jerusalem  oak 332

Jessamine,  white  ....  490

Jessamine,  wild 488

Jessamine,  yellow  . . ,  488

Jewel-weed 557

Job's  tears,  wild 691

Joepye 457

Juglandaceae 107

Juglandin 574

Juglans  cinerea 572

Juglans  nigra 573

Juglans  regia 573

Juniper 574

Juniperus  communis.  574

Juniperus  sabina....  576

Juniperus Virginiana  577

Justice's  weed 460

K

Kali,  tartarized 1191

Kalmia  angustifolia. .  580

Kalmia  glauca 580

Kalmia  latifolia 578

Kelp 560,  890

Kidney  liver-leaf  ....  532
Kinate  of  cinchonia. .  358

Kinate  of  quinia 358

King's expectorant

tincture ».  .1262

Kinic  acid 357

Kino 580

Kino,  African 581

Kino,  dhak-tree 581

Kino,  Jamaica 581

Kino,  South  American  581
Knotwoed,  spotted ....  758


Kousso 281

Krameriacete 23

Krameria  triandria. . .  583

L

Labarraque's  disinfect-
ing fluid 1123

Labiatffi 84

Labrador  tea 591

Lacmus 813

Lactate  of  iron 1094

Lactate  of  lime 1107

Lactate  of  protoxide  of

iron 1094

Lactate  of  quinia. . .  .1206

Lactic  acid 163

Lactin 833

Lactuca  altissima. . . . 586
Lactuca  elongata  .... 5K6

Lactuca  sativa 585

Lactuca  scariola 586

Lactuca  virosa.  .,... . 585

Lactucarium 586

Lactucic  acid 587

Lactucin 587

Ladies'  slipper 557

Ladies' slipper,  showy  425
Ladies'  slipper,  stem-
less 425

Ladies'  slipper,  white-
flowered  , 425

Ladies' slipper, yel-
low 424

Ladies' thumb 758

Lake  water 230

Lambkill 578

Lamiacea? 84

Lappa major 239

Lappa  minor 239

Larch 146

Larch,  American 588

Larch,  black 588

Larix  cedrus 694

Lard 180

Lard,  prepared.  .180,  1279
Large flowering

spurge 460

Large  spotted  spurge. 461

Larix  Americana 588

Larkspur 434

Laudanum 1266

Laudanum, Rousseau's  717
Laudanum, Syden-
ham's 717

Lanracea? 102

Laurel 578

Laurel,  ground 447

Laurel,  mountain  .... 578
Laurel,  narrow-leaved  580

Laurel,  sheep 578

Laurel,  spurge 428

Laurel,  swamp 580

Laurus  benzoin 275

Laurus  camphora. . . .  286

Laurus  sassafras 589

Lavandula  spica 590

Lavandula  vera 590

Lavender 590


Lavender,  sea 908

Lead,  acetate  of 743

Lead  plaster 1037

Lead,  red 745

Lead,  red  oxide  of. . . 745

Lead,  sugar  of 743

Lead,  superacetate  of. 743

Leather  flower 371

Leatherwood 444

Lecanora  tartarea....  813
Ledum  latifolium. . .  . 591

Ledum  palustre 591

Leech 535

Leguminosa? 38

•  Lemon 368

Lemon  syrup 1227

Lemon,  wild 746

Lentive  electuary. ..  .1030

Lentisk " 739

Leontice  thalictroides  312
Leontodon  taraxacum  925
Lconurus  cardiaca.  . . 592

Leopard's  bane 247

Leptandra 593

Leptandra  Virginica  . 593

Leptandrin 595

Letheon 1013

Lettuce 585

Lettuce,  canker 786

Lettuce  op ium 586

Lettuce, strong-scent-
ed 585

Lettuce,  wild 586

Leucanthemum vul-

gare 341

Lever  wood 699

Levigation 988

Liatris  cylindracea. . .  598
Lialris  giaminifolia.  .  598
Liatris  odoratissima. . 598

Liatris  scariosa 598

Liatris  spicata 598

Lichenacese 137

Lichenin 329

Life  everlasting,  pearl-
flowered 223,  509

Life  root 868

Lignum  cnlubrinum. .  912
Ligustrum  vulgare. . . 599

Liliaceee 123

Lilium  candidum.... 600

Lily,  ground 932

Lily,  meadow 600

Lily,  white  600

Lily,  white  pond  ....  663
Lily,  yellow  pond. . . . 664

Lime 284

Lime,  carbonate  of. . . 409

Lime,  hydrate  of 285

Lime,  lactate  of 1107

Lime,  liniment  of. . .  .1114

Lime,  milk  of 285

Lime,  saccharate  of. . 832

Lime-water 1022

Limes 368

Linaceae 25

Lini  oleum 602

Liniment,  aconite 1112


1374:


Index.


Liniment,  anodyne  .  .1116

Liniment,  black 1115

Liniment,  camphor..  .1114
Liniment,  camphorat-
ed soap 1116

Liniment,  caoutchouc.  1114
Liniment,  common.  .  .1113
Liniment compound,

of  ammonia 1113

Liniment, compound

cajeput 1114

Liniment, compound

capsicum 1115

Liniment compound,

of  oil  of  amber 1117

Liniment compound,

of  oils 1116

Liniment compound,

of  stillingia 1116

Liniment compound,

of  turpentine 1117

Liniment,  concentrat-
ed  ...1116

Liniment,  croton  oil.  .1115
Liniment  of  ammonia  1113

Liniment  of  lime 1114

Liniment  of  oils 1115

Liniment  of  opium. .  .1116
Liniment, rheumatic.  .1115

Liniment,  white 1117

Liniment,  verdigris.  .1113
Liniment,  volatile. . .  .1113

Linimenta 1112

Liniments 1112

Linimentum  aconiti.  .1112
Linimentum aconiti

radicis 1112

Linimentum  aeruginis  1113
Linimentum  ammoniaelll3
Linimentum  ammomae

compositum 1113

Linimentum cajuputi

compositum 1114

Linimentum  calcis. .  .1114
Linimentum campho-

ras 1114

Linimentum caout-

chouci 1114

Linimentum capsici

compositum 1115

Linimentum  crotonis.1115
Linimentum nigrum.  1115

Linimentum  olei 1115

Linimentum  olei  com-
positum 1116

Linimentum  opii 1116

Linimentum saponis

camphoratum 1116

Linimentum  stillingias

compositum 1116

Linimentum succini

compositum 1117

Linimentum terebin-

thinas  compositum.  1117
Linnaean  classes and

orders 138

Linseed  oil 602

Linum  usitatissimum .  601


Lion's  foot 654

Liquidambar styraci-

rlua 603

Liquid  glue 165

Liquid  physic,  white  167
Liquid, rheumatic.-.  .1296

Liquid  storax 915

Liquids from solids,

separation  of.  ..989,  991
Liquids, separation

of 989,991

Liquor  ammonias  . . .  .1016
Liquor  ammonias  ace-

tatis 1018

Liquor  ammoniae  for-

tior 1018

Liquor  ferri  iodidi.  . .  1118
Liquor  ferri  nitratis.  .1119
Liquor  iodini  composi-

tus 1120

Liquor  magnesias ci-

tratis 1121

Liquor morphias  ace-

tatis 1136

Liquor morphias hy-

drochloras 1137

Liquor morphias sul-

phatis 1139

Liquor  potassae 1121

Liquor potassae car-

bonatis 1187

Liquor  potassae  citra-

tis 1123

Liquor  sodae  chlorin-
ates.. 1123

Liquorice 506

Liquorice  and  opium,

troches  of 1276

Liquorice, compound

troches  of 1277

Liquors 1118

Liquores 1118

Liriodendrin 605

Liriodendron  tulipife-

ra 604

Litharge  plaster 1037

Lithospermum pul-

chrum 781

Lithospermum Virgi-

nianum 691

Litmus 813

Liver  of  sulphur 1197

Liverleaf,  heart 532

Liverleaf,  kidney  ....  532

Li  verwort 532

Lobelia 606

Lobelia,  blue 609

Lobelia  cardinalis. . .  609
Lobelia  cataplasm. .  .1026

Lobelia  inflata 606

Lobelia,  oil  of . 606

Lobelia,  red 609

Lobelia  syphilitica. . .  609
Lobelia,  vinegar  of. .  .1006

Lobeliaceas 74

Lobelina 607

Locust 812

Locust,  black 812


Locust,  yellow 812

Logwood 518

Long-leaved  pine  .... 731

Long  pepper 7;i6

Loose  strife 610

Loranthaceas 58

Lotio  aetheris  compos-
ite 1125

Lotio  alkalina 1124

Lotio  boracis 1125

Lotio  boracis  cum  mor-
phias 1125

Lotio  glycerini 1125

Lotio  hydrastis  com-

posita 1126

Lotio  hydrastis  et  aco-
niti 1126

Lotio  juglandis 1126

Lotio  lobeliae  compos-

ita 1126

Lotio  myrrhas  compos-

ita 1127

Lotio  refrigerans 1127

Lotio  sassafras 1 127

Lotio  sodii  composita  1127
Lotio  zinci  composita  1128

Lotion,  borax 1125

Lotion, borax with

morphia 1125

Lotion,  cooling 1127

Lotion, compound

ethereal 1125

Lotion,  compound lo-
belia 1126

Lotion, compound

myrrh 1127

Lotion, compound of

golden  seal 1126

Lotion,  compound  so-
da  1127

Lotion, compound

zinc ....1128

Lotion,  evaporating.  .1125

Lotion,  glycerin 1125

Lotion  of  golden  seal

and  aconite 1126

Lotion,  sassafras 1127

Lotion,  walnut 1126

Lotiones 1124

Lotions 1124

Lousewort 498

Low  blackberry 819

Lovely  bleeding 205

Low  mallow 620

Lozenges 1274

Lozenges,  Wistar's. .  .1276

Lunar  caustic 242

Lungwort 781

Lungwort,  Virginian.  781

Lupulin 541

Lupulin,  extract  of  .  .1060

Lupulite 541

Lycoperdon  proteus. .  340
Lycopersicon  esculen-

tum 896

Lycopus  Europasus..  610
Lycopus  Virginicus.  609
Lyre-leaved  sage 841


Index.


1375


Lyth  acera 46  I

Lytlvrura salicaria.  .  .  610  ;

Lythrum  vertieiUatum  (ill  i

L\  tta  vesicatoria. . .  21)1

M

Mace 649

Maceration yji

Macrotin 345

Macrotys  racemosa. .  .  342
Mad-dog  weed  ...192,  960

Madder 817

Madeira  wine 964

Magnesia 612

Magnesia,  calcined  ..  612
Magnesia,  carbon  ate  of  613
Magnesia,  solution  of

citrate  of 1121

Magnesia,  sulphate  of  615
Magnesia,  troches  of.  1277

Magnesia  usta 612

Magnesia?  carbonas..  613
Magnesiae  sulphas...  615
Magnetic  oxide  of  iron  467

Magnolia 617

Magnolia  acuminata.  . 618

Magnolia  glauca 617

Magnolia, sweet 617

Magnolia  tripetala...  618
Magnolia  umbrella. . . 618

Magnoliaeeae 14

Mahogany  birch 279

Maidenhair 181

Male  fern 260  I

Mallow,  common  .... 619

Mallow,  low 620  !

Mallow,  marsh 202  |

Malva  rotundifolia. . . 620

Malva  sylvestris 619

Malvacese 32

Man  in  the  ground. . . 391

Man  of  the  earth 391

Mandioca 570

Mandrake 746

Manna 693

Mannite 695

Maple,  vine 630

Maranta  allouya 621

Maranta  arundinacea. 620

Maranta  Indica 621

Maranta nobilis 621

Marantaeeae 121

Marchantia polymor-

pha 532

Marl'le,  white 623

Margaric  acid 849

Margarin 181,  668

Marjoram,  sweet 693

Marjoram,  wild 692

Mormoi'  album 623

Marrubium  vulgare  . . 623

Marsh  gentian 494

Mareh  hibiscus 203

Marsh  rosemary 908

Marsh  parsley &67

Marsh  smallage 8bb

Marsh  tea 591

Marsh  trefoil b3^


Marsh  water 231

Machinal  low 202

Manna  cotula 624

Marvgold,  garden 283

tfort 222,  532

Mastich 739

Masticin 740

Materia  Medica 141

Malicin 734

Matico 733

Matricaria  chamomilla  224
Matricaria  parthenium  786

May  apple 746

May  flower 447

May  weed 624

Mayer's  ointment . . .  .1285
McMunn's elixir of

opium 1266

Meadow  anemone ....  221
Meadow  cabbage .... 922

Meadow  lily 600

Meadow  saffron 381

Meadow  sage 841

Meadow  scabish 265

Meadowsweet 902

Mealy  starwort 191

Mealy  tree 958

Measurement  approxi-
mate 1318

Measures  and  weights  985

Mecharaeck 391

Mechanical  division. .  987

Meconic  acid 714

Meconin 713

Medicated  waters. . .  .1020

Medicated  wines 1293

Medicines, preserva-
tion of 984

Mel 625

Mel  ^Egypticum 1113

Mel  despumatum. . . .  626
Melaleuca  cajuputi..  .1148

Melanthacese 128

Melanthium  dioicum. 529

Melia  azedarach 627

Meliacese 37

Melilot  clover 931

Melilotus  officinalis. .  629
Melissa  officinalis ....  629
Meloe  vesicatorius. . . 291

Menisperine 630

Menispermaceae 16

Menispermin 219

Menispermum Cana-

dense 630

Menispermum coccu-

lus _ 218

Mentha  piperita 631

Mentha  pulegium .... 523

Mentha  viridis 632

Menyanthes trifoliata  633

Menyanthin 634

Mertensia  Virginica.  .  781
Mesembryantnemum

crystallinnm 640

Method of displace-
ment 991

Methyle 905


Methylic  alcohol 905

Mezereon 427

Mezereon,  American .  444
Mild  volatile  alkali..  1015

Milfoil 153

Milk  of  lime 2s5

Milk  pursely 461

Milk,  sugar  of 833

Milk-weed... 226,  256,  460
Milk-weed,  swamp..  255
Mindererus,  spirit  of.  1018

Mineral,  crystal 768

Mineral  tar 720

Mineral  water... 229,  1020
Mineral  waters.. 229,  1319

Minium 745

Mint,  spirits  of 1264

Mistletoe 961

Mistura  cajuputi  com-

posita 1128

Mistura camphorse

composita 1128

Mistura chenopodii

composita 1 129

Mistura  copaiba?  com-
posita 1129

Mistura glycyrrhizse

composita 1 130

Mistura  olei  camphor-

ata 1130

Mistura  olei  compositall31
Mistura sangumaria

composita 1131

Mistura  spiritus villi

Gallici 1131

Mistura? 1128

Mitchella  repens  .... 634

Mixture,  brandy 1131

Mixture, compound

cajeput 1128

Mixture, compound

camphor 1128

Mixture, compound

copaiba 1129

Mixture,  compound  li-
quorice  1130

Mixture, compound

wormseed 1129

Mixture,  conium 389

Mixture,  cough 1236

Mixture,  neutral-. . .  .1123
Mixture  of  bloodroot,

compound 1131

Mixture  of  oils,  cam-
phorated 1130

Mixture  of  oils,  com-
pound 1131

Mixture,  worm 1129

Mixtures 1128

Mocha  senna 310

Molasses 830

Momordica elateriura  635

Monarda  didyma 639

Monarda  punctata.  . .  639
Monarda  squarrosa. .  . 639

Monardin 1160

Monkshood 175

Monotropa  uniflora. .  639


1376


Index.


Moonseed 630

Moosewood 444

Morphia 1131

Morphia,  acetate  of..  .1135
Morphia,  ferro-tartrate

of 1089

Morphia,hydriodateofll39
Morphia, hydrochlo-

rate  of 1136

Morphia,  muriate  of.. 1136
Morphia,  nitrate  of.  ..1139
Morphia,  phosphate  ofll39
Morphia,  preparations

of 1131

Morphia, solution of

acetate  of 1136

Morphia, solution of

muriate  of 1137

Morphia, solution of

sulphate  of 1139

Morphia,  sulphate  of. 1138
Morphia,  tartrate  of.  .  1139

Morphias  acetas 1135

Morphia;  hydrochlorasl  136

Morphia;  murias 1136

Morphia;  sulphas 1138

Mortars 987

Morns  alba 640

Morus  nigra 640

Moms  rubra 640

Moschus 642

Moss,  Corsican 476

Mess,  ground 761

Mo.ss,  hair-cap 761

Moss,  Iceland 328

Moss,  Irish 340

Mo>>,  Tartarean 813

Mother  of  thyme 930

Mother's  cordial 1233

Motherwort 592

Mountain  dittany. . .  .  417

Mountain  laurel 578

Mountain  pink 447

Mountain  strawberry. 473

Mountain  tea 486

Mouth  root 399

Mucilage  of  gum  Ara-
bic 149

Mucuna  pruriens. . . . 643

Mucuna  prurita 644

Mug-wort 250

Mulberry,  red 640

Mullein 954

Muriate  of  ammonia. .  210
Muriate  of  iron,  tinc-
ture of 1254

Muriate  of  morphia..  .1136
Muriate of  morphia,

solution  of 1137

Muriate  of  quinia. . .  .1206

Muriate  of  soda 893

Muriatic  acid 161

Musci 136

Musk 642

Musk,  artificial 643

Muskmelon 416

Mustard,  black 875

Mustard,  hedge 879


Mustard,  volatile  oil  of  876

Mustard,  white * .  875

Mutton  tallow 872

Myosotis  Virginica.. .  424
Myrica  Carolinensis. . 646

Myrica  cerifera 644

Myrica  gale 646

Myrica  Pennsylvania  646

Myricaceae 110

Myricin 324, 646

Myristica  moschata. . 647

Myristicaceae 17

Myristicic  acid 649

Myristicin 649

Myronate  of  potassa. .  877

Myronic  acid 877

Myrospermum Perui-

ferum 650

Myrospermum tolui-

ferum 652

My  rosy  ne 878

Myroxylon Pemifer-

um 650

Myroxylon  toluiferum  652

Myrrh 270

Myrrhic  acid 271

Myrrhin 271

Myrtaceae 45

Myrtle  wax 645

Myrtus  pimenta 653

N

Nabalus  albus 654

Nabalus  serpen taria. .  655

Naphtha 720

Naphtha,  wood 905

Narcein 713

Narcotin 711

Narcotina 711

Narthex  assafoetida. .  263
Narrow leaf  Virginia

thyme 785

Narrow-leaved laurel  580

Native  wine 966

Natural orders of

plants 11

Neats-foot  oil 672

Nectandra  Rodiaei.. . . 655

Nepeta cataria 658

Nepeta  citriodora. . . .  629
Nepeta  glechoma.  .  . . 659

Nephritic  plant 71 9

Neroli,  oil  of 367

Nerve  powder 1201

Nerve  root 424

Net-leaf  plantain 509

Nettle,  common 940

Nettle,  dwarf 941

Nettle,  great-stinging  940
Nettle-leaved vervain  955

Nettle,  stingless 942

Neutral  mixture 1123

Neutralizing  cordial.  1234
Neutralizing extract,

fluid 1079

Neutralizing  powder.  1205

New  Jersey  tea 315

Nicotia 661


Nicotiana  tabacum. . . 659

Nicotianin 662

Nicotina 661

Nightshade,  black...  898
Nightshade,  common.  898
Nightshade,deadly266, 898
Nightshade,  garden. .  898
Nightshade,  woody. .  895
Nitrate  of  iron,  solu-
tion of 1119

Nitrate  of  morphia. .  .1139
Nitrate  of  potassa  . . .  766
Nitrate  of  quinia. ..  .1206

Nitrate  of  silver 242

Nitrate  of  soda 767

Nitre 766

Nitre,  sweet  spirit  of.  1009

Nitric  acid 165

Nitric ether, spirit

of 1009

Nitro-hydrochloric

acid 167

Nitro  muriatic  acid.. 167

Noah's  ark 424

Norway  pine 144

Norway  spruce-fir.. . . 144

Nuphar  advena 664

Nutmeg 647

Nux  vomica 912

Nymphaceae 18

Nymphaea  odorata. . . 663

O

Oak,  black 790

Oak,  dyer's 792

Oak,  Jerusalem 332

Oak,  poison 808

Oak,  red 789

Oak,  white 789

Oat. 269

Oatmeal 269

Ochroleucous  gentian  494

GEnanthe  crocata 665

(Enanthe phellandri-

um 665

Oenothera  biennis.  ..  .  666
Officinal  directions.  . . 981

Oil,  benne 871

Oil,  British 721

Oil,  castor 679

Oil,  cod-liver 673

Oil,  croton 688

Oil,  flaxseed 602

Oil,  fusel 190

Oil,  neats-foot 672

Oil,  olive 677

Oil,  phosphoreted. . . .  723
Oil,  potato-spirit  ....  190

Oil,  rock 721

Oil,  seneca 721

Oil,  vermifuge ...  1131

Oil  of  almonds 212

Od  of  amber 916

Oil  of  amber,  rectified  1164

Oil  of  anise 1147

Oil  of  bergamot 1148

Oil  of  bitter  almonds .  213
Oil  of  cajeput 1148


Index.


1377


Oil  of  capsicum,  ethe-
real 299

Oil  of  caraway 1150

Oil  of  cassia 1152

Oil  of  cedar... 1156

Oil  of  chamomile, . .  .1147

Oil  of  cinnamon 1152

Oil  of  cloves 1150

Oil  of  copaiba 1153

Oil  of  cubebs 1154

Oil  of  ergot 864

Oil  of  fennel 1155

Oil  of  fireweed 1154

Oil  of  fleabane 1154

Oil  of  hemlock 143

Oil  of  horsemint 1160

Oil  of  juniper 1156

Oil  of  lavender 1157

Oil  of  lemons 1157

Oil  of  lobelia 606

Oil  of  mustard,  vola-
tile 876

Oil  of  neroli 367

Oil  of  origanum 1160

Oil  of  pennyroyal  ...1156
Oil  of  peppermint  . .  .1159

Oil  of  pimento 1161

Oil  of  rosemary 1162

Oil  of  roses 1161

Oil  of  rue 1162

Oil  of  sassafras. ....  .1163

Oil  of  savin 1163

Oil  of  spearmint 1159

Oil  of  spike 1157

Oil  of  star-aniseed. .  .1147

Oil  of  stillingia 910

Oil of sweet marjo-
ram  693,  1160

Oil  of  tansy 1165

Oil  of  tar 740

Oil  of  thyme.... 930, 1160

Oil  of  turpentine 684

Oil  of  valerian 1165

Oil  of  vitriol 171

Oil  of  winter-green.  .1155

Oil  of  wormseed 1151

Oil  of  xanthoxylum. .  971
Oil of xanthoxylum,

ethereal 971

Oil  nut 572

Oils 667

Oils,  distilled... 669,  1139

Oils,  drying 667

Oils,  essential... 669,  1139

Oils,  fixed 667

Oils,  volatile.... 669,  1139
Ointment,  alkaline. .  .1280
Ointment, alkaline

camphorated 1280

Ointment,ammoniacall281
Ointment,  basilicon.  .1028

Ointment,  brown 1289

Ointment, compound

lead 1285

Ointment,  discutient.1287
Ointment,  Mayer's. .  .1285
Ointment  of  aconite.  .1280
Ointmeut  of  bayberry .  1284
87


Ointment  of  bayberry,
compound. ........  1285

Ointment  of  benzoin..  1282
Ointment  of  black  pep-
per  1285

Ointment  of  cocculus

indicus 1282

Ointmeut  of  creosote.  1283
Ointment of cucum-
ber  1283

Ointment  of  cyanuret

of  potassium 1286

Ointment  of  figwort.  .1286

Ointment  of  galls 1284

Ointment of iodine,

compound 1284

Ointment  of  ipecacu-
anha 1284

Ointment  of  mezereon  1284
Ointment  of  muriatic

acid 1280

Ointment  of  nitric  acidl280
Ointment  of  oxide  of

zinc 1288

Ointment  of  oxide  of

zinc,  compound.. .  .1289
Ointment of poison

hemlock 1282

Ointment  of  poke. . .  .1285
Ointment  of  rose  waterl281
Ointment  of  savin. . . .  1286
Ointment  of  Spanish

flies 1282

Ointment  of  stramoni-
um  .1287

Ointment  of  stramoni-
um, compound  ....  1287
Ointment  of  sulphate

of  zinc 1289

Ointment  of  sulphur.  1287
Ointment  of  sulphur,

compound 1288

Ointment  of  sulphuret

of  potassium 1286

Ointment of  sulphu-
ric acid 1280

Ointment  of  tar 1285

Ointment of tannic

acid 1280

Ointment  of  tobacco..  1288
Ointment  of  veratria.1288
Ointment  of  white  hel-
lebore 1288

Ointment of white

wax .......1282

Ointment  of  wild  indi-
go  1281

Ointment  of  woodsoot  1283
Ointment,  ophthalmic  1289

Ointment,  simple 1286

Ointment,  spermaceti  1282

Ointments 1279

Okra 141

Old  field-balsam 509

Olea 667

Olea  destillata 1139

Olea  fixa 667

Olea  volatilia, 669


Oleaceee 98

Oleicacid 849

Olein 180,668

Oleum  amygdala?  .  . . 213

Oleum  anisi 1147

Oleum  anthemidis.  .  .1147

Oleum  badiani 1147

Oleum  bergamii 1148

Oleum  bubulum  .... 672

Oleum  buxi 283

Oleum  cajuputi 1148

Oleum  cari 1150

Oleum carui 1150

Oleum  caryophylli,  .1150
Oleum  chenopodii. .  .1151
Oleum  cinnamomi. . .  1152

Oleum  copaiba? 1153

Oleum  cubebse 1154

Oleum  erechthiti  ....  1154

Oleum  erigeroni 1154

Oleum  fceniculi 1155

Oleum  gaultherias. .  .  .1155

Oleum  hedeoma? 1156

Oleum  juniperi 1156

Oleum juniperi Vir-

ginianae 1156

Oleum  lavandulse. . .  .1157

Oleum  limonis 1157

Oleum  lini 601

Oleum  menthse  piperi-
ta? .1159

Oleum menthse viri-

dis 1159

Oleum  monarda? 1160

Oleum  morrhuae 673

Oleum  olivae 677

Oleum  origani 1160

Oleum  pimentae 1161

Oleum  ricini 679

Oleum  rosae 1 1 61

Oleum  rosmarini  . . .  .1162

Oleum  ruta? 1162

Oleum  sabinae 1163

Oleum  sassafras 1163

Oleum  succini 916

Oleum  succini  rectifi-

catum 1164

Oleum  tanaceti 1165

Oleum  tartari  per  de-

liquum 1185

Oleum  terebinthinae. . 684

Oleum  thymi 930

Oleum tiglii 688

Oleum Valerianae. . .  .1165

Olibanum 690

Olive  oil 677

Olivin 677

Onagraceae 47

One-berry 635

Onion 194

Onosmodium Caroli-

nianum 692

Onosmodium hispid-
urn 691

Onosmodium strigo-

sum 692

Onosmodium  Virgini-
anum 691


1378


Index.


Ophthalmic balsam,

Pettit's 1289

Ophthalmic  ointment.  1289

Opium 704

Opodeldoc 1116

Opuntiacochenillifera  374

Orange 366

Orange-flower  water. .  1025

Orchidacese 1 2 1

Orchil 814

Orchilla  weed 813

Orders  of  plants,  natu-
ral 11

Origanum 692

Origanum  majorana.  .  693
Origanum  vulgare. .. .  692

Ornus  Europsea 693

Ornus  rotundifolia. . . 694

Orobanehacese 81

Orobanche  Americana  696
Orobanche  uniflora.. .  696
Orobanche  Virginiana  695

Orris,  Florentine 568

Oryza  saliva 696

Osmorrhiza longisty-

lus 697

Osmunda cinnamo-

mea 698

Osmunda  regalis 698

Osmunda  spectabilis. 698

Ostrya  Virginica 699

Otto  of  roses 1161

Ova-ova 639

Ovum 700

Oxalic acid 168

Oxalidaceae 26

Oxalis  acetosella 701

Oxalis  stricta 702

Oxalis  violaceae 702

Oxide  of  ethyle 1011

Ox  balm 384

Ox  gall 465

Ox-eye  daisy 341


Pogonia  officinalis. . . .  702
Pagliari's  haemostatic  277

Palo  bark 353

Paletouch-me-uot. . . .  557

Palm  soap 851

Palma  Christi 680

Palmacese .. 130

Paimic  acid 681

Palmin 681

Panax  quinquefolium  703

Pansy 961

Papaveracete 19

Papaver  somniferum.  704

Papaverina 714

Papaw 942

Pappoose  root 312

Paramorphia 712

Paregoric  elixir 1267

Pareira  brava 365

Parigliu 884

Parilla,  yellow 630

Parilliuic  acid 884

Parsley 225


Parsley,  hemlock....  867

Parsley, marsh 867

Parsley,  poison 3t?7

Partheniuna  Lntegrifo-

lium 719

Pari  ridge-berry  ..  .486,  634

Partridge  pea 307

Parturient  balm 1233

Paul's hetony 609

Paste,  Vienna 285

Pea,  sensitive 307

Pen,  wild  turkey 405

Peach 214

Pear-leaf  wintergreen  786

Pearl-ash 1185

Pearl-barley 538

Pearl-sago 835

Pearl-flowered life

everlasting 223,  509

Pellitory  of  Spain.... 217

Pelosin 366

Pennyroyal 522

Pennyroyal, European  523
Pennyroyal  water. . .  .1024

Peony 702

Pepper,  black 736

Pepper,  Cayenne  .... 297

Pepper,  Jamaica 654

Pepper,  long 736

Pepper,  water 758

Peppermint 631

Peppermint, troches  of  1277
Peppermint  water.. .  .1024

Percolation 991

Periploca  Indica 531

Persimmon 443

Peru,  balsam  of 650

Peruvian  bark 347

Petroleum 720

Petroleum,  Barbadoes  721
Petroleum  rangoon..  721
Petroselinum  sativum  225

Pettit's  eye  salve 1289

Pettit's ophthalmic

balsam 1289

Petty-morrel 238

Peucedanum monta-

mim 866

Phaeroetin 803

Pharmacy 981

Pharmaceutical  equiv-
alents, table  of. . .  .1343

Phellandrine 665

Phellandrium aqua-

ticum 665

Philadelphia  fleabane  451

Phloridzin 788

Phoenix  farinifera. ..  . 835

Phosgene 733

Phos.ph.ate  of  iron... 1099
Phosphate  of  morphia  1139
Phosphate  of  quinia.  .1206
Phosphate  of  soda. .  .1218

Phosphorated  oil 723

Phosphoric  acid,  dilu-
ted 169

Phosphorus 722

Physaline 724


Physalis  alkekengi..  724
Physalis  viscosa....  724
Physeter  macroccpha-

lus 326

Physic,  autibilious.  .  .1203
Physic,  white  liquid.  167
Phytolacca  decandra. 725

Phytolaccaceae 102

Phytolaccin 727

Picrsena  excelsa 727

Picroglycion 897

Picrotoxic  acid 219

Picrotoxin 219

Pigeon-berry 725

Pile  electuary 1031

Pills 1165

Pills,  antidyspeptic.  .1169

Pills,  cholera 1170

Pills,  diuretic 1177

.Pills,  emmenagogue.  .1173
Pills  of  aconite,  com-
pound  1169

Pills of aloes, com-
pound  1169

Pills of assafetida,

compound 1170

Pills  of  black  cohosh,

compound 1171

Pills  of  camphor,  com-
pound  1170

Pills of  carbonate  of

iron 1172

Pills  of  copaiba 1171

Pills  of  copaiba,  com-
pound  1172

Pills of dandelion,

compound 1177

Pills of eupurpurin,

compound 1172

Pills  of  ferro-cyanuret

of  iron,  compound.  .1173
Pills  of  gamboge,  com-
pound  1170

Pills  of  high  cranber-
ry, compound 1178

Pills  of  hyoscyamus,

compound 1174

Pills  of  iodide  of  iron  1173
Pills of iron, com-
pound  1173

Pills of leptandrin,

compound 1175

Pills of motherwort,

compound 1174

Pills  of  podophyllin,

compound 1175

Pills of poke, com-
pound  1175

Pills  of  ptelein,  com-
pound 1176

Pills of soap, oorn-

pound 1177

Pills of sulphate of

quinia 1176

Pills of sulphate of

quinia,  compound  .1177
Pills  of  valerian,  com-
pound  H77


Index.


1379


Pills  of  water-pepper,
compound 1176

Pills  of  wild indigo,
compound 1170

Pills,Vallet's  ferrugin-
ous 1172

Pilulse 1165

Pilulae aconiti com-
posites  1169

Pilulse  aloes  compos-
itae 1169

Pilulse assafoetidae
compositae 1170

Pilulae  baptisiae  cotn-
positae 1170

Pilulae  cambogiae  com-
positae  1170

Pilulae camphorae

compositae 1170

Pilulae cimicifugoe
compositae 1171

Pilulae  copaiba? 1171

Pilulae copaibas  com-
posite  1172

Pilulae eupurpurini
compositae 1 172

Pilulos  ferri  carbonatisll72

Pilulae  ferri  compositaell73

Pilulae ferri  ferro-cy-
anureti  compositae.  1173

Pilulae  ferri  iodidi  . .  .1173

Pilulae hyoscyami
compositae 1174

Pilulae leonuri com-
positae  1174

Pilulae leptandrini
compositae 1175

Pilulae phytolaccpe
compositae 1175

Pilulae podophyllini

compositae 1175

Pilulae  polygoni  com-
positae  1176

Pilulae pteleini com-
positae  1176

Pilulae quiniae com-
positae  1177

Pilulae quiniae sul-

J)hatis 1176
ulae  saponi  compos-
itae  1177

Pilulae taraxaci com-
posite  1177

Pilulae  Valerianae  com-

positae 1177

Pilulae viburni com-
positae  1178

Pimento 653

Pimento  water 1024

Pimpernel,  red 218

Pimpernel,  scarlet.. . .  218
Pimpinella  anisum... . 730

Pinacae 115

Pine  broom 731

Pine  drops 780


Pine,  silver 147  i

Pine,  princes' 333

Pine,  yellow-pitch... 731
Pine  apple  strawberry  473

Pink,  Carolina 901

Pink-root 900

Pink,  mountain 447

Pink,  winter 447

Pinus  microcarpa. . . . 588

Pinus  palustris 731

Pinus pendula 588

Piper  angustifolium. .  733

Piper  cubeba 734

Piper  longum 736

Piper  nigrum 736

Piperaceae 109

Piperin 738

Pipsissewa 333

Pistachia  lentiscus . . .  739

Pitania 356

Pitaya  bark 356

Pitch,  black 740

Pitch,  Burgundy 145

Pitch,  Canada 143

Pitch-pine, yellow,.. 731

Pix  liquida 740

Pix  nigra 740

Plantaginaceae 80

Plantago cordata. . . . 741

Plantago  major 742

Plantain 742

Plantain,  heart  leaved  741

Plantain,  net  leaf 509

Plantain,  water. .  .192,  741

Plantain,  white 223

Plants,  collecting  of. .  981
Plants,  natural  orders

of 11

Plants,  preserving  of.  981

Plaster,  adhesive 1039

Plaster,  bayberry. . .  .1035
Plaster, common

strengthening 1034

Plaster, compound

capsicum 1034

Plaster, compound

resin 1039

Plaster,  compound  tar  1035
Plaster,  irritating. . .  .1035

Plaster,  lead 1037

Plaster,  litharge 1037

Plaster, red oxide of

lead 1036

Plaster,  resin 1039

Plaster,  sear-cloth. . .  .1034
Plaster  of  belladonna.  1033
Plaster  of  belladonna,

compound 1034

Plaster of extract of

aconite  root 1034

Plasters 1032

Plasters,  spreading  of  1032

Pleurisy  root 257

Plurubawinaceae 81

Plum..: 775

Plumbi  acetas 743


Podophyllin 748

Podophyllin, troches

of 1278

Podophyllum  montan-

urn 748

Podophyllum  peltatum  748
Pointed  cleavers .... 483

Poison  ash . 809

Poison  hemlock 387

Poison  ivy 809

Poison  oak 808

Poison parsley 387

Poison  sumach 809

Poison  vine 809

Poison  wood 809

Poke 725

Poke  root  cataplasm.  .1027

Polemoniaceae 92

Polemonium ccerule-

um 755

Polemonium  reptans.  754

Polygara  amara 755

Polygala,  bitter 755

Polygala,  caducous  .  .  757
Polygala  chamoebuxus  757
Polygala,  fringed....  755
Polygala  paucifolia. . .  755
Polygala polygama. . 755

Polygala  rubella 755

Polygala  sanguinea. .  757

Polygala  senega 756

Polygalaceae 22

Poly  gal  ic  acid 757

Polygalin 757

Polygonaceae 101

Polygonatum  multiflo-

rum 390

Polygonum  arifolium.  759
Polygonum  fagopyrum  759
Polygonum hydropi-

per 758

Polygonum  persicaria  758
Polygonum  punctatum  758

Polypod,  rock 760

Polypodium  vulgare.  760
Polypody,  common. . .  760
Polytrichum junipe-

rum , 761

Pomaceae 44

Pomegranate 782

Poinmade  de  Gondret  1281

Pond  dogwood 322

Pond  lily,  white 663

Pond  lily,  yellow. ... 664
Poor man's weather-
glass 218

Poplar 604

Poplar,  American .... 762

Poplar,  balsam 761

Poplar,  tacamahac. . . .  761

Poplar,  white 604,  762

Poplar,  yellow 604

Poppy .". 704

Populin 763

Populusbalsaniifera.  .  761
Populus  Candicans. . . 762


Pine ground 185

Pine'  lonw-leaved 731 Plumbi  oxidi  rubrum. 745 Populus  grandidentata  763

Pine'  Norway 144  '  Plunge  bath 235  I  Populus  tremuloides.  762


1380


Index.


Porcelia  triloba 942

Porphyroxin 714

Port,  wine 964

Potash,  hydriodate  of  1196

Potassa 1178

Potassa,  acetate  of.  ..1180
Potassa,  alcoholic. . .  .1179
Potassa  and  soda,  tar-
trate of  1217

Potassa, bicarbonate

of 1181

Potassa,  bichromate  of  1183
Potassa,  binoxalate  of  701
Potassa,  bisulphate  of  1184
Potassa,  bi tartrate  of.  765
Potassa,  carbonate  of.  1185

Potassa,  caustic 1178

Potassa,  chlorate  of.  .1187
Potassa,  cum  calce. . .  285
Potassa,  hydrate  of. .  .1178
Potassa,  nitrate  of . . . .  766
Potassa, preparations

of.... 1178

Potassa,  pure  carbon-
ate of 1186

Potassa,  quadroxalate

of 702

Potassa,  sesquicarbon-

ate  of 1188

Potassa,  solution  of  .  .1121
Potassa, solution of

carbonate  of 1187

Potassa, solution of

citrate  of 1123

Potassa,  sulphate  of.  .1189
Potassa, sulphate of

with  sulphur 1190

Potassa,  sulphuret  of.  11 97
Potassa,  tartrate  of. .  .1191
Potassa  with  lime. . . .  285

Potassae  acetas  ..... .1180

Potassae  bicarbonas.  .1181
Potassae  bichromas. .  .1183
Potassae  bisulphas. .  .1184
Potassae  bitartras. . . .  765

Potassae  carbonas. . .  .1185

Potassae  carbonas  pu-

rus 1186

Potassae  chloras 1187

Potassae  hydras 1178

Potassae  nitras 766

Potassae  sesquicarbon-

as 1188

Potassa?  sulphas 1189

Potassae  sulphas  cum

sulphure 1190

Potassa?  tartras 1191

Potassii  bromidum. .  .1192
Potassii  cyanuretum .1193
Potassii  ferroc  vanuret-

um ." 769

Potassii  iodidum 1195

Potassii  sulphuretum.1197

Potassium 763

Potassium,  bromide  of  1192
Potassium,  cyauuretofll93
Potassium, ferrocyan-

uret  of 769


Potassium,  iodide  of.  .1195
Potassium, sulphuret

of 1197

Potato  fly 294

Potato-spirit,  oil 190

Potato,  wild 391

Potentilla  Canadensis  771
Potentilla  purnila. . .  .  771
Potentilla  reptans. .. .  771
Potentilla  sarmentosa  771
Potentilla  simplex...  771
Potentilla  tormentilla  771

Pothos  foetidus 921

Powder,  antibilious.  .1203

Powder,  black 1204

Powder,  cephalic  . . .  .1204
Powder,  diaphoretic.  .1202

Powder,  emetic 1203

Powder, emmena-

gogue 1204

Powder,  hydragogue.  .1204

Powder,  nerve 1201

Powder,  neutralizing.  1205
Powder of bayberry,

compound 1204

Powder of camphor,

compound 1201

Powder of charcoal,

compound 1201

Powder  of  golden  seal,

compound 1201

Powder  of  hydrastin,

compound 1202

Powder of ipecacu-
anha, compound. . .  1202
Powder of ipecacu-
anha and opium,

compound 1202

Powder  of  iron 1100

Powder  of  jalap,  com-
pound  1203

Powder  of  leptandrin,

compound 1203

Powder of lobelia,

compound  . . .". ,1203

Powder  of  mandrake,

compound 1204

Powder of pleurisy

root,  compound. . .  .1200
Powder  of  podophyl-

lin,  compound 1204

Powder of quinia,

compound 1205

Powder of rhubarb,

compound 1205

Powder  of  xanthoxy-

lin,  compound 1206

Powder  of  yellow  la-
dies-slipper, com-
pound  1201

Powder,  styptic  1102, 1205
Powdering, methods

of 987,1200

Powders 1199

Powders,  baking 1216

Powder,  seidlitz 174

Powders,  soda 174

Powders,  yeast 1216


Prairie  hyssop 785

Prairie  indigo 274

Prairie  senna 307

Precipitated  carbonate

of  iron 1102

Prenanthes  albus 654

Prenanthes serpenta-

ria 655

Preparations  of  ammo-
nia  1015

Preparations  of  iron.  .1087
Preparations  of mor-
phia  1131

Preparations  of  potas-
sa  1178

Preparations of qui-
nia  1206

Preparations  of  soda.  .1214

Prepared  chalk 409

Prepared  lard. .  .180,  1279
Preservation  of  medi-
cines 981

Preserved vegetable

juices 1241

Prickly  ash 969

Prickly  ash  berries. . .  971
Prickly  ash,  Southern  238

Prickly  elder 238

Pride  of  China 627

Pride  of  India 627

Prideweed 450

Prince's  feather 205

Prince's  pine 333

Prinos  verticillatus... .  772

Primulaceae 80

Prim 599

Primrose,  tree 666

Privet 599

Progress  in  Pharmacy  994

Proof  spirit 187

Protein 936

Protoxide  of  iron 468

Provins  rose 816

Prunes 775

Prunus  domesticus. . .  775
Prunus  Virginiana. . .  773

Prussian  blue 1091

Prussiate  of  iron 1091

Prussic  acid 162

Pseudomorphia 715

Ptelein 777

Ptelea  trifoliata 776

Pteris  aquilina 778

Pteris  atropurpurea. .  778
Pterocarpus  erinaceus  582
Pterocarpus marsupi-

um 580

Pterocarpus santalin-

us 779

Pterospora  andromeda  780
Pterospora  elatior. . . .  781
Pterospora  flaviculis.  781
Pterospora  leucorrhiza  780
Pterospora  pauciflora  780

Puccoon,  red 843

Puccoon,  yellow 544

Puff-ball 340

Pulmonaria  officinalis  781


Index.


1381


Pultnouaria Virgin-

ica 781

Pulmonary  balsam. .  .1228

Pulveres 1199

Pulverization  of  medi-
cines  987,  1200

Pulvis asclepiae

compositus 1200

Pulvis camphorae

compositus 1201

Pulvis carbo ligni

compositus 1201

Pulvis cypripedii

compositus 1201

Pulvis hydrastini

compositus 1202

Pulvis hydrastis

compositus 1201

Pulvis ipecacuanha

compositus 1202

Pulvis  ipecacuanhas  et

opii  compositus. . .  .1202
Pulvis jalapse

compositus 1203

Pulvis leptandrini

compositus 1203

Pulvis lobelia?

compositus 1203

Pulvis myricae

compositus 1204

Pulvis  nigrum 1204

Pulvis  nitratis 516

Pulvis podophylli

compositus 1204

Pulvis podophyllini

compositus 1204

Pulvis pyrius 516

Pulvis quinia?

compositus 1205

Pulvis rhei

compositus 1205

Pulvis  stypticus 1205

Pulvis xanthoxylini

compositus 1206

Pumpkin 415

Punica  granatum . 782

Punicin 784

Purple  cone-flower. .  .  822
Pure  carbonate  of  po-

tassa 1186

Pure  Prussian  blue..  .1091

Pure  water 229

Purging  cassia 305

Purple  angelica 222

Purple  avens 499

Purple  stramonium..  430
Purple  willow  herb.  . 610

Pursely,  black 461

Pussy  willow 837

Pycnanthemum 785

Pycnanthemum aris-

tatum •  •  •  •  785

Pycnanthemum inca-

nuin '°">

pycnanthemum ,pilo-

sura .-  • 785

Pycnanthemum Vir-

ginicum 78d


Pyrethrum partheni-

um 785

Pyritic  sulpur 918

Pyro^lycerin 505

Pyrola  rotundi folia. .  786

Pyrola  umbellata. . . .  333

Pyroligneous  acid..  . .  156

Pyroligneous  ether. . .  905

Pyroxilic  spirit 905

Pyrus  malus 787

Q

Quadroxalate of po-

tassa 702

Quassia 727

Quassia  amara 727

Quassia  excelsa 727

Quassia 729

Queeu  of  the  meadow  457

Queen's  delight 910

Queen's  root 910

Queen's  root,  troches

of 1278

Quercia 790

Quercitric  acid 791

Quercitrin 791

Quercitron 790

Quercus  alba 789

Quercus  infectoria. . .  .792
Quercus  pedunculata. 790

Quercus  rubra 789

Quercus  tinctoria. . . .  790

Quince 422

Quinia 1206

Quinia,  acetate  of. . .  .1206
Quinia  and morphia,

tartrate  of 1212

Quinia and salicin,

tartrate  of 1213

Quinia,  citrate  of.  . .  .1206
Quinia, ferrocyanuret

of 1206

Quinia,  ferro-citrate  ofl089
Quiaia, fcrro-tartrate

of 1090

Quinia,  iodide  of 1206

Quinia,  kiuate  of . . . .  358
Quinia,  lactate  of.  . .  .1206
Quinia,  muriate  of. .  .1206
Quinia,  nitrate  of. . .  .1206
Quinia, preparations

of 1206

Quinia,  phosphate  of  1206
Quinia,  sulphate  of..  .1207
Quiaia,  tanaate  of.  .  .1206
Quinia,  valerianate  of  1213
Quinia? et morphias

tartras. 1212

Quinia? et salicinia?

tartras 1213

Quiniae  sulphas 1207

Quiniae  Valerianae. .  .1213
Quinic  acid 357

R

Raccoon  berry 746

Ragged  cup 873

Ragweed 207


Ragweed,  great 206

Ragwort 868

Rain  water 229

Raisins 967

Ram's  head 425

Rangoon  petroleum.. 721

Ranuuculacea? 12

Rauunculus  acris....  795
Ranunculus  bulbosus  794
Ranuaculus  flammula  795
Ranunculus  repens.. .  795
Ranunculus  sceleratus  795

Raspberry 819

Raspberry,  ground. .  . 544
Raspberry,  rose-flow-
ering 821

Rattle-bush 272

Rattle-root., 342

Rattlesnake  leaf. ....  509
Rattlesnake's mas-
ter  184,452,598

Ratlesuake  root 654

Rattlesaake  weed. . . . 534
Rattlesaake.violet  453,  961
Rectified oil of am-
ber...  1164

Rectified  spirit 187

Red  bark 354

Red Carthagena

bark 350,355

Red  cedar 577

Red  chickweed 217

Red  clover 930

Red  cockscomb 205

Red  cohosh 179

Red  curraat 811

Red  ink ....375,520

Red  lead 745

Red  lobelia 609

Red  mulberry 640

Red  oak 789

Red  osier 404

Red  oxide  of  iron. . .  .1102
Red  oxide  of  lead. .. . 745
Red  oxide  of  lead  plas-
ter  1036

Red  pepper 297

Red  pimpernel 218

Red  puccoou 843

Red  raspberry 819

Red  root 315

Red  roses 816

Red  sandal  wood ....  779

Red  saunders 779

Red-stalked  aster. . . .  265

Red- sunflower 822

Red  willow 404

Reduced  iron .1100

Red  mace 938

Resia 795

Resia  cerate 1028

Resin  of  jalap 1057

Resin  of  scammony. 394

Resin  plaster 1039

Resina 795

Resina  alba 795

Resina  flava 795

Resina  jalapae 1057


1382


Index.


Restorative  wine  bit-
ters  1296

Rhabarbic  acid 803

Rhamnaceae 35

Rhamnus  catharticus  797
Rhamnus  frangula. . .  797

Rhatany 583

Rheum  australe 799

Rheum  Caspicum. . . .  800
Rheum  compactum. . .  799
Rheum  crassinervium  800
Rheum  hybridum.  .. .  800
Rheum  leucorrhizum .  800
Rheum Moorcraftia-

num 800

Rheum  palmatum.. . .  798
Rheum  Rhaponticum  799
Rheum  speciforme.  . .  800
Rheum  undulatum. . .  799
Rheum  Webbianum.  . 800

Rheumatic  drops 1247

Rheumatic  liniment.  .1115

Rheumatic  liquid 1296

Rheumatic  tincture.  .1247

Rheumatic  weed 265

Rheumatism  root....  571
Rhododendron  crysan-

thum 805

Rhododendron maxi-
mum 805

Rhododendron punc-

tatum 805

Rhododendron, yellow  805

Rhubarb 798

Rhubarb  and  potassa,

troches  of 1278

Rhubarb,  Chinese.. . . 801
Rhubarb, Dutch-
trimmed 801

Rhubarb,  European . . 801

Rhubarb,  French 802

Rhubarb,  Persian....  800
Rhubarb,  Russian  . . .  800

Rhubarb,  Turkey 800

Rhus  copallinum  ....  808

Rhus  glabrum 806

Rhus  pumilum 810

Rhus  radicans 809

Rhus  toxicodendron. . 808

Rhus  typhinum 808

Rhus  venenata 809

Rhus  vernix 807

Rhusine 809

Ribes  floridum 812

Ribes  nigrum 811

Ribes  rubrum 811

Rice 696

Rich  weed 206,384

Ricini,  oleum 679

Ricinus  communis. . . 679

Rigid  goldenrod 900

River  water 230

Robiniapseudo-acacia  812

Robin's  rye .-. .  761

Roccella  fusiformis.. .  813
Roccella  tinctoria. . . .  813
Rochelia  Virgiuiana..  424
Rochellesalt 1217


Roche's  embrocation  .1165

Rock  brake 760,778

Rock  oil 721

Rock  polypod 760

Rock  rose 525

Rock  salt 893

Roll  sulphur 917

Roman  chamomile. . .  223
Roman  wormwood. . . 207

Rosa  canina 814

Rosa  centifolia 815

Rosa  gallica 816

Rosacea? 41

Rosae  oleum 1161

Rose  bay 448

Rose,  Christmas 528

Rose-colored  silkweed  255

Rose,  dog 814

Rose -flowering rasp-
berry 821

Rose,  French 816

Rose,  hundred-leaved  815

Rosemary 817

Rosemary,  marsh. . . .  908

Rose,  Provins 816

Rose,  red 816

Roses,  oil  of 1161

Roses,  otto  of 1161

Rosewater 1025

Rosewillow 404

Rosin 795

Rosin,  black 796

Rosin  soap 851

Rosin  weed 874

Rosin,  white 795

Rosin,  yellow 795

Rosmarinus  officinalis  817
Round-leaved  cornel.  402
Round-leaved dog-
wood 402

Round-leaved  pyrola.  786
Rousseau's  laudanum  717
Royal-flowering  fern.  698
Rubbing  wet  sheet. . .  234
Rubia  tinctorium. . . .  817

Rubiacese 59

Rubus  odoratus 821

Rubus  strigosus 819

Rubus  trivialis. . .  < . . 819

Rubus  villosus 819

Rudbeckia  laciniata. .  821
Rudbeckia  purpurea. 822

Rue 825

Rumex  acetosa 822

Rumex  acetosella. . . .  823
Rumex  aquaticus. . . .  823
Rumex Britannica. . .  823

Rumex  crispus 823

Rumex  obtusifolius. .  823
Rumex  vesicarius. . . .  702

Rush,  scouring 448

Russian  rhubarb 800

Ruta  graveolens 825

Rutaceae 29

Rutulin 839

Rye 861

Rye,  Robiu's 761

Rye,  smut 861


Rye,  spurred 861

S

Sabadilla 949

Sabadillia 1290

Sabadillic  acid 950

Sabbatia  angularis...  827
Saccharate  of  lime. . . 832
Saccharated alcoholic
extract of ipecacu-
anha  1232

Sacchari  fcex 830

Sacchari  syrupus  em-

pyreumaticus 830

Saccharine carbonate

of  iron 1087

Saccharum  commune.  830
Saccharum  lactis. . . .  833
Saccharum  non-purifi-

catum 830

Saccharum officinar-

um 827

Saccharum  purum...  830
Saccharum  Saturni. . .  743

Safflower 302

Saffron 410

Saffron,  bastard 302

Saffron,  dyer's 302

Sagapenum 833

Sage 839

Sage,  lyre-leaved  .... 841

Sage,  meadow 841

Sage,  wild 841

Sago 834

Sago meal 835

Sago  palm 834

Sago,  pearl 835

Sagueris  Rumphii 834

Sagus  inermis 834

Sagus  laevis 834

Sagus  Ruffia 835

Sagus  Rumphii 834

St.  John's  wort 551

Sal  aeratus 1182

Sal  ammoniac 210

Salde  duobus 1190

Sal  diureticus 1181

Sal  enixum 1184

Sal  mirabile 1220

Sal  polychrest 1190

Salprunelle 766

Sal  vegetabile 1191

Salicaceae Ill

Salicin 838

Salicin, ferro-tartrate

of 1090

Saline mixture 167

Saline  wash 1127

Salix  alba 836

Salix  Babylonica  ....  837

Salix  caprea 837

Salix  fragilis 837

Salix  nigra 837

Salix  pentandra  ....  837

Salix  purpurea 837

Salix  Russelliana. . . .  837

Salseparin 884

Salt 893


Index.


1383


Salt,  Glauber's 892

Salt  of  sorrel 701

Salt  of  tartar 1186

Salt  petit; 7G6

Salt- rhuu  in  weed 331

Salt,  Rochelle 1217

Salt,  rock • 893

Salts,  Epsom 615

Salve,  black 1036

Salve,  green 1035

Salve,  Pettit's  eye 1289

Salvia  Bengalensis.  . . 840

Salvia  horminum 840

Salvia  lyrata 841

Salvia  officinalis 839

Salvia  poinifera 840

Salvia  sclarea 840

Sambucus  Canadensis  841

Sambacus nigra 841

Sampson snake-
root 265,  494

Sandal  wood,  red 779

Sanguinaria  Canaden-
sis 843

Sanguinarin 845

Sanguinarina 845

Sanguis draconis.... 846

Sanicle 848

Sanicula  Marilandica.  848

Santalin 779

Santonin 250

Santonin, brown or

impure 250

Sapindacea? 33

Sapo 849

Sapo  amygdalimis  . . . 850

Sapo  animalis 851

Sapo  durus 850

Sapo  mollis 850

Sapo terebinthinae.  . . 851

Sapo vulgaris 850

Sapo  Windsor 851

Saponaceous  cream  of

almonds 213

Saponaria officinalis. 852

Saponin 852

Sapotaceae 79

Sarracenia 853

Sarracenia  Drummon-

dii 854

Sarracenia  rlava 854

Sarracenia  heterophyl-

la 854

Sarracenia psyttacina  854
Sarracenia  purpurea. . 853

Sarracenia  rubra 854

Sarracenia  variolaiis. 854

Sarraceniacese 19

Sarsaparilla 880

Sarsaparilla.American  237
Sarsaparilla,  Brazilian  881
Sarsaparilla, bristle-
stem  237

Sarsaparilla,  Caracas. 882

Sarsaparilla,  false 237

Sarsaparilla, Hondu-
ras 88^

Sarsaparilla,  Indian . .  530


Sarsaparilla,  Jamaica  880
Sarsaparilla, Vera

Cruz 881

Sarsaparillin 881

Sassafras 589

Sassafras  lotion  ....  1 127
Sassafras,  oil  of.  ...1163
Sassafras,  swamp. . . .  617
Satureja  hortensis. . . .  856
Satureja  roontana. . . .  856

Saunders,  red 779

Savin 576

Savin  cerate 1028

Savory,  summer 856

Savory,  winter 856

Saxifragacese 50

Scabious 450

Scammony 393

Scaiumony,  extract  of  395
Scammony, factitious  395

Scarlet  berry 895

Scarlet  pimpernel.  .. . 218

Scilla  maritima 857

Scillitin 858

Scillitina 858

Scitaminese 117

Scoke 725

Scouring  rush 448

Scrofula  weed 509

Scrofulous  syrup 1235

Scrophularia lanceo-

lata 859

Scrophularia  Marilan-
dica 859

Scrophularia  nodosa. . 859

Scrophulariaceaj 82

Scullcap S60

Scurvygrass 377

Scutellaria  hyssopifo-

lia 861

Scutellaria  integrifolia  861
Scutellaria  lateriflora.  860

Scutelline 861

Sea-islaDd  cotton  plant  511

Sea  lavender 908

Sea-side  grape 582

Sea  water 236

Seawrack 477

Sear-cloth  plaster. ..  .1034

Secale  cereale 861

Secale  cornutum.... 861

Seidlitz  powders 174

Selinum  Canadense. .  867
Selinuin  palustre....  866
Semen  abelmoschii. .  .  141
Sempervivum tecto-

rum 867

Seneca  grass 931

Seneca  snakeroot  .... 756

Senecio aureus 868

Senecio  balsam  iue. . . . 869

Senecio,  golden 868

Senecio  gracilis 869

Senecio  hieracifolius.  449
Senecio  lahceolatus. .  869
Senecio obovatus....  869

Senecin 870

Senegin 757


Seneka 756

Seneka  oil 721

Seneka  snakeroot.... 756

Senna 307

Senna,  Alexandria...  309
Senna,  American....  306
Senna  and  jalap,  fluid

extract  of 1082

Senna, India 310

Senna,  Mocha 310

Senna,  prairie 307

Senna,  Tripoli 310

Sensitive  pea 307

Separation of li-
quids  989-991

Separation of mixed

substances 989

Separation of solids

from  liquids  ...989-991
Sesamum  Indicum.  .  .  871
Sesamum  orientale. . .  871
Sesquicarbonate of

ammonia 1015

Sesquicarbonate  of  po-

tassa 1188

Sesquicarbonate  of  so-
da  1215

Sesquioxide of

iron, 468,  1102

Sesquioxide of iron,

hydrated 1095

Seven  barks 542

Sevurn 872

Sexual  system  of  Lin-
naeus 138

Shallow-bath 235

Shave  grass 448

Sheep  laurel 578

Sheep  sorrel 702,  823

Sheep  tallow 872

Shell-lac  splints 905

Sherry  wine 964

Shin-leaf 786

Shower-bath 236

Showy  ladies-slipper. 425

Shrubby  trefoil 776

Sickle  grass 759

Side-saddle  flower. . .  853
Signs and abbrevia-
tions, table  of 1298

Silkweed,  common. . .  256
Silkweed,  rose-colored  255
Silkweed,  swamp. . .  .  255

Silky  cornel 404

Silphium gummife-

rum 874

Silphium  laciniatum.  874
Silphium  perforatum  873

Silver-fir 147

Silver-fir,  American. . 142

Silver  leaf 910

Silver,  nitrate  of 242

Silver  pine 147

Simaruba 874

Simaruba  excelsa. . . .  727
Simaruba  officinalis. .  874

Simarubaceae 28

Simple  cerate 1029


1384


Index.


Simple  ointment 1286

Simple  syrup 1227

Sinapis  alba 875

Sinapis  nigra 875

Sinapisin 878

Sipeerina 656

Siphonia  cahuchu.. . .  295

Siphonia  elastica.  . . .  205

Sisymbrium  officinale  879

Sisymbrium  sophia. .  880

Sitzbath 235

Skunk  cabbage 921

Skunk  weed 922

Slippery  elm 939

Sloe 959

Small  cleavers 483

Small  spikenard 237

Smart-weed 758

Smilacese 128

Smilacin 884

Smilaciua  racemosa. .  391

Smilasperic  acid 531

Smilax  China 882

Smilax  medica 881

Smilax  officinalis. . . .  880

Smilax  papyraceae . . .  881

Smilax  sarsaparilla. .  881

Smilax  syphilitica...  880

Smooth  alder 195

Smut  rye 861

Snakehead 331

Snakeroot 244

Snakeroot,  black  ....  342
Snakeroot,  button  452,  598
Snakeroot,  Canada. . .  254
Suakeroot, Samp-
son  265,  494

Snakeroot,  seneka  . . .  756

Snakeroot,  Virginia. .  244

Snakeroot,  white 455

Snakewood 912

Snapping  hazelnut.. .  521

Sneezewort 155,  524

Snowball 957

Snowball,  wild 315

Snowberry 335

Snowdrop,  yellow. . . .  453

Snow  water 229

Soap 849

Soap,  amygdaline. . . .  850

Soap,  beef-marrow. . .  851

Soap,  Castile 850

Soap,  common 850

Soap liniment,  cam-
phorated 1116

Soap,  palm 851

Soap,  soft 850

Soap,  Starkey's 851

Soap,  tincture  of.. . .  .  851

Soap,  transparent. . . .  851

Soap,  Windsor 851

Soapwort 852

Soapwort  gentian. .. .  494

Socotrine  aloes 196

Soda 1214

Soda,  acetate  of 886

Soda  and  potassa,  tar-
trate of 1217


Soda  ash 890

Soda,  bicarbonate  of.  .1214

Soda,  borate  of 887

Soda,  carbonate  of. . . .  889
Soda,  dried  carbonate

of 1216

Soda, Labarraque's

liquid 1123

Soda,  muriate  of 893

Soda,  nitrate  of 767

Soda,  phosphate  of..  .1218

Soda  powders 174

Soda,  preparations  of  1214
Soda,  sesquicarbonate

of .1215

Soda,  solution  of  chlo-
rinated  1123

Soda, subphosphate

of 1220

Soda,  sulphate  of . . . .  892

Soda,  tartarized 1217

Soda,  valerianate  of.  .1220

Soda,  vitriolated 892

Soda  water 1020

Sodae  acetas 886

Soda?  bicarbonas 1214

Sodae  boras 887

Sodae  carbonas  ......  889

Sodas  carbonas  exsicca-

tus ..1216

Sodas  et  potassae  tar-

tras 1217

Sodae  murias 893

Sodae  phosphas 1218

Sodas  sulphas 892

Sodae  valerianas 1220

Sodii  chloridum 893

Sodium 885

Sodium,  chloride  of. . 893

Soft  soap 850

Soft  water 229

Solanaceae 93

Solania 896

Solanum  dulcamara. .  895
Solanum  lycopersicon  896

Solanum  nigrum 898

Solanum  Virginianum  898
Solenostemma  argel. .  309

Solidago  odora 899

Solidago  rigida 900

Solidago  virgaurea. . .  900
Solids from liquids,

separation of.  .989 — 991

Solomon's  seal 390

Solomon's  seal,  giant's  390
Solubility  of  salts...  1344
Soluble  cream  of  tar-
tar 888

Soluble  tartar 1191

Solution  of  acetate  of

ammonia 1018

Solution  of  acetate  of

morphia 1136

Solution  of  ammonia.  1016
Solution  of  ammonia,

stronger 1018

Solution  of  carbonate

of  potassa 1187


Solution  of  chlorinated

soda 1123

Solution  of  citrate  of

magnesia 1121

Solution  of  citrate  of

potassa 1123

Solution  of  hydrochlo-

rate  of  morphia. . .  .1137
Solution  of  iodide  of

iron 1118

Solution of iodine,

compound 1120

Solution  of  muriate  of

morphia 1137

Solution  of  nitrate  of

iron 1119

Solution  of  pernitrate

of  iron 1119

Solution  of  potassa  .  .1121
Solution of  sulphate

of  morphia 1139

Solution  of  ternitrate

of  iron 1119

Solution  of  tersulphate

of  iron 1096

Solution  of  the  impure

hyponitrite  of  oxide

of  ethyle  in  alcohol  1009

Solutions 1118

Sonchus  oleraceus...  449

Soot 478

Sorrel 822

Sorrel,  garden 822

Sorrel,  salt  of 701

Sorrel-sheep 702,823

Sorrel-tree 220

Sorrel,  wood 701

South  American  kino  581
South  American  salt-
petre 766

Southern  prickly  ash  238

Southern  wood 250

South  sea  tea 557

Sow  thistle 449

Spanish  chamomile. .  217

Spanish  flies 291

Spanish  needles 280

Spatterdock 664

Spearmint 632

Spearmint  water 1024

Speckled  jewels 557

Specific  gravity 986

Specific gravity of

acetic  acid 1334

Specific  gravity  bottle  986

Speedwell 956

Speedwell,  tall 593

Spermaceti 326

Spermaceti  cerate. . .  .1028
Spermaceti  ointment.  1282

Spice  bush 275

Spicewood 275

Spider's  web 927

Spigelia and senna,

fluid  extract  of 1084

Spigelia  Marilandica. 900

Spike,  oil  of 1157

Spiked  aloe 196


Index.


13S5


Spikenard 238

Spikenard,  small  ....  237

Spindle  tree 451

Spiraea  tomentosa.  .  . .  1)02
Spirit of ammonia,

aromatic 1273

Spirit of lavender,

compound 1261

Spirit  of  Mindererus.1018
Spirit  of  nitre,  sweet.  1009
Spirit  of  nitric  ether.  .1009

Spirit  of  sea  salt 1G1

Spirit  of  turpentine. . . 684

Spirit  of  wine 187

Spirit,  proof 187

Spirit,  pyroxilic 905

Spirit,  rectified. ....  187
Spirit  vapor  bath. . . .  903

Spirits  of  mint 1264

Spiritus  aetheris  nitri-

ci. .....1009

Spiritus ammonia?

aromaticus 1273

Spiritus  pyroxilicus. .  905

Splints,  shell-lac 905

Sponge 906

Sponge,  burnt 907

Spongia 906

Spongia  officinalis. . . 906

Spongia  xista 907

Spongy Carthagena

bark 349

Spoonwood 578

Spotted  alder 521

Spotted  geranium  . . .  496
Spotted  knotweed  . . .  758

Spotted  spurge 462

Spotted  wintergreen. .  334

Spring  water 230

Spruce  beer 147

Spruce,  double 146

Spruce,  essence  of . . . .  147
Spruce  fir,  Norway. . . 144

Spruce,  hemlock 143

Spunk 184

Spurge 463

Spurge,  blooming. .. .  460
Spurge,  ipecacuanha.  463
Spurge,  large-flower-
ing 460

Spurge,  large-spotted. 461

Spurge  laurel 428

Spurge olive 427

Spurge,  spotted 462

Spurred  rye 861

Square  stalk 859

Sqnaw-mint 522

Squaw  root 312,  342

Squaw  vine 635

Squaw  weed 265,  868

Squill 857

Squill,  syrup  of 1237

Squill,  vinegar  of. . .  .1006
Squirting  cucumber.  . 635

Staff  vine 317

Stagger  weed 405

Stalagmitis Cambogi-

oides 484


Staphisain 435

Staphylea  trifolia 907

Star  flower 265

Stargrass 191

Starch 215

Starch,  canna 289

Starkey's  soap 851

Statice  Caroliniana. . .  908
Statice  limonium. . . . 908

Stavesacre 434

Stearic  acid 849

Stearin 181,  668

Stearopteue 670

Steeple  bush 902

Stellaria  media 909

Stemless  ladies'  slip-
per 425

Stephensia  elongata. .  733

Stickwort 186

Stillingia,oil  of 910

Stillingia  sylvatica. . .  910

Stillingin 911

Stimulating  eye- water  1127

Stingless  nettle 942

Stink  weed 429

Stonemint 417

Storax 914

Storax,  liquid 915

Stramonium 429

Stramonium cata-
plasm 1027

Stramonium,  purple. .  430
Strasburg  turpentine. 147

Strawberry 472

Strawberry,  mountain  473
Srawberry,  pineapple.  473
Strawberry,  wild  ....  473
Straw-colored genti-
an  494

Strengthening plas-
ter  1034,  1039

Striped  bloodwort...  534
Stronger solution of

ammonia 1018

Strong  scented  lettuce  585

Strychnia 1221

Strychnia,  citrate  of.  .1223
Strychnia,  tartrate  of.  1223
Strychnos  nux  vomica  912

Styptic  balsam 687

Styptic  powder.  1102, 1205

Styracaceae 79

Styrax  benzoin 276

Styrax officinale 914

Subacetate  of  copper.  418
Subcarbonate  of  iron. 1102
Sublimed  sulphur...  917
Subphosphate  of sodal220

Succinic  acid 916

Succinum 916

Succory 342

Succory,  wild 342

Sudorific  tincture  .  . .  .1271

Suet 872

Sugar 827

Sugar,  brown 830

Sugar  cane 827

I  Sugar,  grape 829


Sugar-house  molasses

Sugar  of  ergot 829

Sugar  of  lead 743

Sugar  of  milk 833

Sugar,  purified 830

Sulphate of alumina

and  potassa 204

Sulphate  of  bebecrina  656
Sulphate  of  cinchonia  362
Sulphate  of  copper. .  .  419
Sulphate  of  iron  ....  1103
Sulphate  of  iron,  driedll05

Sulphate  of  kali 1190

Sulphate  of  magnesia  615
Sulphate  of  morphia.  1138
Sulphate  of  morphia,

solution  of 1139

Sulphate  of  potassa.  .1189
Sulphate of potassa

with  sulphur 1190

Sulphate  of  protoxide

of  iron 1103

Sulphate  of  quinia. .  .1207

Sulphate  of  soda 892

Sulphate  of  zinc 974

Sulpho-sinapisin  .... 878

Sulphur 917

Sulphur,  flowers  of. .  917

Sulphur,  liver  of 1197

Sulphur  lotum 917

Sulphur,  ointment  of.  1287
Sulphur ointment,

compound 1288

Sulphur,  roll 918

Sulphur, soft amor-
phous 919

Sulphur  sublimatum.  917
Sulphur,  sublimed... 917

Sulphur  vivum 918

Sulphur  volcanic  ....  918
Sulphur, washed. ...  917

Sulphuret  of  iron 1105

Sulphuret  of  potassi-
um  1197

Sulphureted hydro-
gen 1106

Sulphuric acid, aro-
matic 170

Sulphuric  acid,  dilut-
ed 171

Sulphuric  ether 1011

Sulphurous  waters. . .  236

Sumach 806

Sumach,  dwarf 808

Sumach, poison 809

Sumach,  swamp 810

Sumach,  velvet 808

Summer  savory 856

Sunflower 526

Sunflower,  false 524

Sunflower,  red 822

Sunflower,  swamp.  .  . 524

Sunflower  syrup 526

Superacetate  of  lead . .  743
Swamp  beggar's-tick 280

Swamp  dogwood 404

Swamp  hellebore....  951
Swamp  laurel 580


1386


Index.


Swamp  milkweed. .. . 255

Swamp  sassafras 617

Swamp silk  weed. .-. .  255

Swamp  sumach 810

Swamp  willow-herb. . 611

Sweet  almonds. 212

Sweet  birch 279

Sweet  cassava 570

Sweet  cicely 697

Sweet fennel 471

Sweet  fern 386

Sweet  flag 178

Sweet  gum 603

Sweet magnolia 617

Sweet  marjoram 693

Sweet  principle  of  oils  504
Sweet  scented  clover.  931
Sweet  scented  golden-
rod 899

Sweet scented life-
everlasting 509

Sweet  spirit  of  nitre.  .1009

Sweet  violet 960

Sydenham's  laudanum  717
Symphytum  officinale  920
Symplocarpus  fcetidus  921

Syrup 1227

Syrup, alterative. ..  .1236

Syrup,  lemon 1227

Syrup  of  assafetida.  .1229
Syrup  of  bloodroot. .  ,1236
Syrup  of  citric  acid.  .1227
Syrup  of  cinnamon.  .1229

Syrup  of  garlic 1228

Syrup  of  ginger 1239

Syrup  of  horseradish,

compound 1230

Syrup  of  ipecacuanha  1231

Syrup  of  lobelia 1232

Syrup  of  partridge-ber-
ry, compound 1233

Syrup  of  poke,  com-
pound 1234

Syrup  of  protonitrate

of  iron 1119

Syrup  of  queen's  root.  1238
Syrup  of  queen's  root,

compound 1238

Syrup  of  rhubarb  and

potassa,  compound.  1234
Syrup  of  sarsaparilla,

compound 1236

Syrup  of  seneka 1237

Syrup of spikenard,

compound 1228

Syrup  of  squill 1237

Syrup  of  tolu 1239

Syrup  of  turkey-corn,

compound 1230

Syrup  of  wild  cherry

bark 1234

Syrup  of  yellow  dock,

compound 1235

Syrup,  scrofulous 1235

Syrup,  simple 1227

Syrup,  sunflower.  .\  .  526

Syrupi  1225

Syrups  1225


Syrupus 1227

Syrupus  acidi  citrici.1227

Syrupus  allii 1228

Syrupus araliaB  com-
positus 1228

Syrupus  assafcetidae.  .1:229
Syrupus  cinnamomi. .  1229
Syrupus cochleariae

compositus 1230

Syrupus corydallis

compositus 1230

Syrupus  ipecacuanhrel231

Syrupus  lobelise 1232

Syrupus mitchellse

compositus 1233

Syrupus phytolaccae

compositus 1234

Syrupus  pruni  Virgin-

ianaa 1234

Syrupus  rhei  et  potas-
sa? compositus 1234

Syrupus  rumecis  com-
positus 1235

Syrupus  sanguinarias  1236
Syrupus sarsaparilke

compositus 1236

Syrupus  scilhe 1237

Syrupus  senegse 1237

Syrupus  simplex 1227

Syrupus  stillingiaa. . .  1238
Syrupus stillingiae

compositus 1238

Syrupus  tolutanus. .  .1239
Syrupus  zingiberis..  .1239

T
Tabacum 659

Table  of  doses  for  dif-
ferent ages 1315

Table  of  drops 985

Table  of  drops  of  oil

in  a  fluidrachm. . .  .1147
Table  of  mineral  wa-
ters  1319

Table  of  pharmaceuti-
cal equivalents.. .  .1343
Table of signs and

abbreviations 1298

Table  of  specific  grav-
ities  1326

Table  of  specific  grav-
ity of  volatile  oils. 672
Table  of  weights  and

measures 1316

Tacamahac 761

Tacamahac  poplar. . . 761

Tag  alder 195

Tall  ambrosia 206

Tall  cone  flower 821

Tall  speedwell 593

Tallow 872

Tamarac 588

Tamarind 923

Tamarindus  Indica. .  923

Tamarix  Gallica 694

Tanacetum  crispum. .  924
Tanacetum  vulgare..  924
Tannate  of  iron 1107


Tannate  of  quinia. .  .1206

Tannic  acid 172

Tannin 172

Tannin,  artificial..., 796

Tansy 924

Tansy,  double 924

Tapioca 570

Tar 740

Tar,  Barbarloes 721

Tar,  mineral 720

Tar,  oil  of 740

Tar  plaster, compoundl035

Tar  water 1024

Taraxacin 926

Taraxacum dens-leo-

nis 925

Tartar,  cream  of 765

Tartar,  crystals  of. . .  765

Tartar,  salt  of 1186

Tartar,  soluble 1191

Tartarean,  moss 813

Tartaric  acid 174

Tartaric  acid,  troches

of... 1275

Tartarized  kali 1191

Tartarized  soda 1217

Tartrate  of iron  and

morphia 1089

Tartrate  of iron  and

quinia 1090

Tartrate  of iron and

salicin 1090

Tartrate  of  morphia.. 1139
Tartrate  of  potassa..  .1191
Tartrate of potassa

and  soda 1217

Tartrate  of  quinia  and

morphia 1212

Tartrate  of  quinia  and

salicin 1213

Tartrate  of  strychnia.  1223

Tea 927

Teaberry 486

Tea,  black 928

Tea,  green 928

Tea,  Labrador 591

Tea,  marsh 591

Tea,  mountain 486

Tea,  New  Jersey 315

Tea,  South  Sea 557

Tela  araneas 927

Temperature, effects

of 1339

Terchloride  of  formyle  335
Terebinthina Cana-
densis 142

Terebinthina,  Chi  a...  732
Terebinthina, Ven-

eta 146,  732

Terebinthina?  oleum. 684
Ternitrate  of  iron,  so-
lution of 1119

Ternstromiaceae.. . . . . 31

Teroxide  of  iron 467

Terra  Japouica 149

Testa  praeparata 410

Tetterwort 329

TheaBohea 928


Index.


1387


Thea  Chinensis 927

Thea  viridis 92S

Thebaiu 713

Thermometers, com-
parative value  of  the

degrees  of 1314

Thirhbleweed 8^1

Thiosinnamin B76

Thistle,  blessed 317

Thistle,  Canada 365

Thistle,  cursed 365

Thistle,  holy 317

Thorn  apple 429

Thorough  wort 456

Thridace 587

Throat  root 499

Thuja  occidentals. . .  929

Thus 145

Thyme 930

Thyme,  mother  of. . . 930
Thyme, narrow leaf

Virginia 785

Thyme,  wild... 930

Thyruelacea? 104

Thymus  serpyllus. . . 9"30
Thymus  vulgaris....  930

Tickweed 522

Tiglii  oleum 688

Tinctura  aconiti  folio-
rum 1244

Tinctura aconiti ra-

dicis 1244

Ti  nctura  aloes 1244

Tinctura aloes et

myrrhse 1244

Tinctura araliae spi-

nosae 1245

Tinctura  arnica? 1245

Tinctura  assafcetidae.  .1245
Tinctura assafcetidae

composita 1245

Tinctura  belladonnas.  1246
Tinctura benzoini

composita 1246

Tinctura  camphorae.  .1246
Tinctura camphorae

composita  , 1247

Tinctura  cannabis  In-

dica? ....1247

Tinctura  cantharidis.1247

Tinctura  capsici 1247

Tinctura  cardamomi.1248
Tinctura cardamomi

composita 1248

Tinctura  castorei 1248

Tinctura  castorei  am-

nioniata 1249

Tinctura  catechu 1249

Ti  nctura caulophylli

composita 1249

Tinctura  cimicif ugaB .  1242
lira cimicifugae

composita 1249

Tinctura  cinchonas.  .  .1250
Tinctura cinchonas

composita 1250

Tinctura  cinchona?  fer-

rata 1250


Tinctura  cinnamomi .  1251
Tinctura cinnamomi

composita 1251

Tinctura  cocci  cacti.  .1252
Tinctura colchici  com-
posita 1252

Tinctura colchici se-

minis 1252

Tinctura  Colombo?.  .  .1252
Tinctura  corydalis. .  .1253

Tinctura  digitalis 1253

Tinctura  ergota? 1253

Tinctura  ferri  acetatisl253
Tinctura  ferri  chloridil254
Tinctura  gelsemini..  .1255
Tinctura gentianae

composita 1256

Tinctura  guaiaci 1256

Tinctura  guaiaci  alka-

lina 1257

Tinctura  guaiaci  aro-

matica 1257

Tinctura  hydrastis. .  .1257
Tinctura hydrastis

composita 1257

Tinctura  hyoscyami..  1258
Tinctura  hyperici. . .  .1258

Tinctura  iodini 1258

Tinctura  iodini  com-
posita 1259

Tinctura  iridis 1259

Tinctura  kalmia? 1259

Tinctura  kino 1260

Tinctura  krameriae..  .1260
Tinctura lavandulae

composita 1261

Tinctura  laricis  com-
posita 1260

Tinctura  leptandra?.  .1261

Tinctura  lobelia? 1262

Tinctura  lobelia?  com-
posita 1262

Tinctura lobelia? et

capsici  composita.  .1263
Tinctura  lupulini. . .  .1263
Tinctura  mentha?  viri-
dis  1264

Tinctura  myrrha?. . .  .1264
T  i  nc  Lu  ra  my  rrhae  com-
posita  1264

Tinctura  nucis  vomi-
ca?  1264

Tinctura  olei  anisi. .  .1265
Tinctura  olei  carui..  .1265
Tinctura olei cinna-

momi 1265

Tinctura  olei mentha?

piperita? 1265

Tinctura  olei  mentha?

viridis 1266

Tinctura olei sassa-
fras  1266

Tinctura  opii 1266

Tinctura  opii  aceta 'a.  1266
Tinctura opii cam-

pliorata 1267

Tinctura pinus peu-
dula?  composita. . .  .1260


Tinctura podophylli.1268
Tinctura  polygoni.  .  .126b
Tinctura  quinia?  com-
posita 126S

Tinctura  rhei 1269

Tinctura  rhei  compos-
ita 1269

Tinctura  sanguinaria?  1269
Tinctura sanguinaria?

acetata  composita.  .1270
Tinctura sanguinaria?

composita 1270

Tinctura  senna?  com-
posita 1270

Tinctura serpentaria?

composita 1271

Tinctura  stillingia? . . .  1271
Tinctura  stramonii. .  .1272
Tinctura strychnia?

composita 1272

Tinctura  symplocarpi  1272

Tinctura  tolutana 1272

Tinctura  toxicodendri  1273
Tinctura Valeriana?

ammoniata 1273

Tinctura  viburni  com-
posita 1273

Tinctura  xanthoxyli.  .1274
Tinctura  zingiberis.  .1274

Tinctura? 1240

Tincture,  acetous  eme-
tic  1270

Tincture,  antispasmo-
dic  1263

Tincture,  emetic 1270

Tincture,  golden 1295

Tincture,  hydragogue  1296
Tincture, King's ex-
pectorant 1262

Tincture  of  acetate  of

iron 1253

Tincture of aconite

leaves 1244

Tincture of aconite

root 1244

Tincture  of  aloes 1244

Tincture  of  aloes  and

myrrh 1244

Tincture  of  assafetida  1245
Tincture  of  assafetida,

compound 1245

Tincture  of  belladonnal246
Tincture of benzoin,

compound 1246

Tincture  of  black  co-
hosh 1242

Tincture  of  black  co-
hosh, compound. .  .1249
Tincture  of  black  root  1261
Tincture  of  bloodroot.  1269
Tincture  of  bloodroot,

compound 1270

Tincture  of  bloodroot,

compound  acetated.1270
Tincture of blue co-
hosh, compound.  .  .1249
Tincture  of  blue-flag.  1259
Tincture  of  camphor.  1246


1388


Index.


Tincture  of  camphor,

compound ,  .1247

Tincture  of  cardamoml248
Tincture  of  cardamom,

compound 1248

Tincture  of  castor. . .  .1248
Tincture of castor,

ammoniated 1249

Tincture  of  catechu.  .1249
Tincture of cayenne

pepper  1247

Tincture  of  chloride  of

iron 1254

Tincture  of  cinnamon .  1251
Tincture  of  cinnamon,

compound 1251

Tincture  of  cochineal  1252
Tincture  of  colchicum,

compound 1252

Tincture  of  colchicum

seed..., 1252

Tincture  of  Colombo . .  1252
Tincture  of  ergot. . .  .1253
Tincture  of  foxglove.  1253
Tincture of gentian,

compound 1256

Tincture  of  ginger.  .  .1274
Tincture of golden

seal 1257

Tincture of golden

seal,  compound. . .  .1257
Tincture  of  guaiacum  1256
Tincture  of  guaiacum,

aromatic 1257

Tincture  of  guaiacum,

Dewees' ,...1257

Tincture  of  henbane.  .1258
Tincture  of  high  cran-
berry bark, com-
pound 1273

Tincture of India

hemp 1247

Tincture  of  iodine. .  .1258
Tincture of iodine,

compound 1259

Tincture  of  kino 1260

Tincture  of  leopard's

bane 1245

Tincture  of  lobelia. .  .1262
Tincture  of  lobelia  and
capsicum, com-
pound 1263

Tincture of lobelia,

compond L262

Tincture  of  lupulin.  .1263
Tincture  of  mandrake  1268
Tincture  of  muriate  of

iron 1254

Tincture  of  myrrh...  1264
Tincture of myrrh,

compound 1264

Tincture  of  mix  vomi-
ca  1264

Tincture  of  oil  of  anisel265
Tincture  of  oil  of  cara-
way 1265

Tincture  of  oil  of  cin-
namon  1265


Tincture  of  oil  of  pep-
permint  1265

Tincture  of  oil  of  sas-
safras 1266

Tincture of oil of
spearmint 1266

Tincture  of  opium. .  .1266

Tincture of opium,
acetated 1266

Tincture of opium,
camphorated 1267

Tincture  of  Peruvian
bark 1250

Tincture  of Peruvian
bark,  compound. .  .1250

Tincture  of  Peruvian
bark,  ferrated 1250

Tincture of poison-
oak 1273

Tincture of prickly-
ash 1274

Tincture  of  prickly  el-
der  1245

Tincture of queen's
root 1271

Tincture of quinia,
compound 1268

Tincture  of  rhatany.  .1260

Tincture  of  rhubarb.  .1269

Tincture of rhubarb,
compound .1269

Tincture of senna,
compound 1270

Tincture  of  sheep  lau-
rel 1259

Tincture  of  skunk  cab-
bage  1272

Tincture  of  soap 851

Tincture of Spanish
flies 1247

Tincture  of  spearmint  1264

Tincture  of  stramoni-
um  1272

Tincture  of  St.  John's
wort 1258

Tincture  of  strychnia,
compound 1272

Tincture of taniarac,
compound 1260

Tincture  of  tolu 1272

Tincture of turkey-
corn 1253

Tincture of  valerian,
ammoniated 1273

Tincture of Virginia
snake-root, com-
pound 1271

Tincture  of  water  pep-
per  1268

Tincture  of  yellow  jes-
samine 1255

Tinctures 1240

Tinder 183

Tobacco 659

Tobacco,  Indian 606

Tobacco  ointment. . ,  .1288

Tobacco,  wild 606

Tolene 653


Tolu,  balsam  of 652

Tomato 896

Toothache  bush 970

Toothache tree 238

Tormentil 771

Tormentilla  erecta. . .  771
Tormentilla  officinalis  771

Touch-me-not 557

Touchwood 183

Tons  les  mois 289

Tragacanth 261

Tragacanthin 262

Trailing  arbutus  ....  447
Transparent  soap. . . . 851

Tree,  primrose 666

Trifolium  pratense... 930

Trilliacea? 130

Trillium  erectum....  932
Trillium erythrocar-

pum 932

Trillium  grandiflorum  932

Trillium  nivale 932

Trillium  pendulum..  932

Trillium  sessile 932

Triosteum  angustifoli-

um 934

Triosteum  perfoliatum  933

Tripoli  senna 310

Triticum  hybernum.. 934

Troches  1274

Troches  of  bicarbonate

of  soda 1278

Troches  of  capsicum.  1276
Troches of  capsicum

and  lobelia 1276

Troches  of  citric  acid.  1275
Troches  of  croton  oil.  1276
Troches  of  dioscorein .  1276
Troches  of  ginger. . . . 1279
Troches  of  ipecacuan-
ha  1277

Troches of liquorice

and  opium 1276

Troches of  liquorice,

compound 1277

Troches  of  magnesia.  1277
Troches  of  peppermintl277
Troches  of  podophyl-

lin ....1278

Troches of queen's

root,  compound. . .  .1278
Troches of rhubarb

and  potassa 1278

Troches of tartaric

acid 1275

Trochisci 1274

Trochisci  acidi  citrici  1275
Trochisci  acidi tarta-

rici 1275

Trochisci capsici 1276

Trochisci capsici et

lobelia; 1276

Trochisci  crotonis 1276

Trochisci  dioscoreini.1276
Trochisci  glycyrrhizae

composita •.  - .  .1277

Trochisci  glycyrrhiza

et  opii 1276


Index.


1389


Trochisci ipecacuan-
has  1277

Trochisci  magnesia;.  .1277
Trochisci  menthas  pi-
perita;  1277

Trochisci  podophylli-

ni 1278

Trochisci  rhei  et  po-

tassae 1278

Trochisci  sodas  bicar-

bonatis 1278

Trochisci stillingiae

composita 1278

Trochisci  zingiberis.  .1279

Trumpet  weed 457

Tuber  root 257

Tulip tree 604

Turkey  corn 405

Turkey  pea,  wild. . . .  405
Turlington's  balsam.  .1246

Turmeric 421

Turmeric  root 544

Turner's  cerate 1028

Turnip,  Indian 252

Turpentine,  Bordeaux  732
Turpentine,  Canada. .  142
Turpentine,  Chian. . .  732
Turpentine,  European  684
Turpentine,  oil  of.. . .  684
Turpentine,  spirit  of.  684
Turpentine, Stras-

burgh 147

Turpentine,Venice  146,732
Turpentine,  white... 732

Turtle-bloom 331

Turtle-head 331

Tussilago  farfara  ....  938

Twin  leaf 571

Typha  latifolia 938

Typhaceas 120

U

Ulmacea; 105

Ulmus  fulva 939

Umbel 424

Umbelliferas 51

Umbrella  tree 618

Uncaria  gambir 150

Uncrystallizable  sugar  829

Unguenta ... 1279

Unguentum  acidi  mu-
riatic!  ......1280

Unguentum  acidi  ni-
tric!  .......1280

Unguentum  acidi  sul-

phurici 1280

Unguentum  acidi  tan-
nic!  .....1280

Unguentum  aconiti..  .1280
Unguentum alkalin-

um ...1280

Unguentum alkalin-

um  camphoratum.  .1280
Unguentum  ammoni-

acale 1281

Unguentum aquas

rosas  . . ./ 1281

Unguentum  baptisias. .  1281


Unguentum  belladon-
na; 1281

Unguentum  benzoini.1282
Unguentum canthari-

dis 1282

Unguentum  ceras  albasl282
Unguentum  cetacei..  1282
Unguentum  cocculi.  .1282
Unguentum  conii. . .  .1282
Unguentum  creasoti.  .1283
Unguentum  cucumis.1283
Unguentum  fuliginis.1283
Uirguentum  gallas. .. .  .1284
Unguentum iodini

compositum 1284

Unguentum ipecacu-
anhas  1284

Unguentum  mezerei.  .1-284
Unguentum  myricas.  .1284
Unguentum myricas

compositum 1285

Unguentum  phytolac-

cas 1285

Unguentum picis li-

quidas 1285

Unguentum piperis

nigri 1285

Unguentum plumbi

compositum 1285

Unguentum potassii

cyanureti 1286

Unguentum potassii

sulphureti 1286

Unguentum  resinas  al-
bas  1028

Unguentum  sabinas  .  .1286
Unguentum scrophu-

larias 1286

Unguentum  simplex..  1286
Unguentum  stramonii  1287
Unguentum  stramonii

compositum 1287

Unguentum  sulphuris  1287
Unguentum  sulphuris

compositum 1288

Unguentum  tabaci. .  .1288
Unguentum  veratri  al-

bi 1288

Unguentum  veratrias.1288
Unguentum  zinci  ox-

idi 1288

Unguentum  zinci  ox-

idi  compositum 1289

Unguentum  zinci  sul-

phatis 1289

Unkum 869

Unicom  root 191

Unicorn  root,  false. . .  529
Upland  cranberry. .. .  240
Uraspermum  Claytoni  697

Ursin 241

Urtica  dioica 940

Urtica  pumila 942

Urtica  urens 941

Urticaceas 112

Uva  passa 967

Uva  ursi 240

Uvaria  triloba 942


Uvularia  perfoliate.. . 943

V

Vaccinium  arboreum.  944
Vaccinium corymbo-

sum 944

Vaccinium  dumosum.  944
Vaccinium  frondosum  944
Vaccinium Pennsyl-

vanicum 944

Vaccinium  resinosum  944
Vaccinium  vitis  Idaea  944

Valerian 945

Valerian,  American. .  424
Valerian, American

Greek 754

Valerian,  false 868

Valerian,  Greek 755

Valerian,  oil  of 1165

Valerian  officinalis...  945
Valerianate  of  iron . . .  1107

Valerianaceas 63

Valerianate  of  quinia  1213
Valerianate  of  soda.  .1220

Valerianic  acid 946

Vallet's ferruginous

pills 1172

Vanilla 947

Vanilla  aromatica. . . .  947

Vanilla  grass 931

Vanillacea; 122

Vapor  bath 236

Vapor  bath,  spirit.. . .  903
Variolaria  dealbata. .  813
Various-leaved flea-
bane  451

Vegetable  albumen. . .  935
Vegetable  caustic. ...  1188
Vegetable  charcoal... 301

Vegetable  fibrin 935

Vegetable  juices,  pre-
served  1241

Veiny-leaved hawk-
weed 534

Velvet  leaf 365

Velvet  sumach 808

Venice  turpentine  146,  732
Vera  Cruz  sarsaparilla  881

Veratria 1289

Veratric  acid 950

Veratrin 1290

Veratrum  album 948

Veratrum  angustifoli-

um 952

Veratrum  luteum 529

Veratrum  officinale. .  949
Veratrum parviflo-

rum 952

Veratrum  sabadilla. .  949

Veratrum  viride 951

Verbascum  thapsus. .  954

Verbena  hastata 955

Verbena  officinalis. . . 955

Verbena  spuria ^  955

Verbena  urticifolia.. . 955

Verbenaceas . . , 84

Verdigris 418

Verdigris  liniment. .  .1113


1390


Index.


Vermifuge, Fahne-

^  stock's 1131

Vermifuge  oil 1131

Vernonia  fasciculata.  956
Vernonia novebora-

censis 956

Vernonia  prselta 956

Vernonia  tomentosa. .  956
Veronica  agrestis. .. .  957
Veronica  anagallis. . .  957
Veronica  beccabunga.  957
Veronica  officinalis. .  956
Veronica  peregrina. .  957
Veronica  scutellata. . .  957
Veronica  Virginica. . .  593

Vervain 955

Vervain, nettle-leav-
ed  955

Viburine 958

Viburnum  dentatum.  958
Viburnum  opulus. .. .  957
Viburnum  oxycoccus.  957
Viburnum prunifoli-

um 959

Viburnum  roseum,. . .  957
Vienna caustic or

paste 285

Vina  medicata 1293

Vine,  maple 630

Vinegar 151

Vinegar,  British 151

Vinegar,  distilled  151,1005

Vinegar,  French 151

Vinegar  of  bloodroot  1006
Vinegar  of  lobelia. . .  .1006
Vinegar  of  squill. . .  .1006

Vinegar,  wine 151

Vinegars 1004

Vinum 963

Vinum  cinchona?  com-

posituru 12-94

Vinum  colchici  radi-

cis 1294

Vinum  colchici  semi-

nis 1294

Vinum  ergot® 1291

Vinum haematoxyli

compositum 1 295

Vinum  hydrastis  com-
positum  1295

Vinum  ipecacuanha?.  1295
Vinum phytolacca?

compositum 1295

Vinum  sambuci 1296

Vinum  symphyti  com-
positum  1296

Viola  odorata 960

Viola  ovata 961

Viola  pedata 960

Viola  tricolor 961

Violace;e 23

Violet,  bloom 960

Violet  blue 960

Violet,  dog's  tooth. . .  453
Violet,  rattlesnake  453,961

Violet,  sweet 960

Violia 961

Virginia  snake-root. .  224


Virginia  thyme,  nar-
row leaf. 785

Virginian  creeper.  .. .  212
Virginian  lungwort.  .  781
Virginian  mouse  ear. 424

Virgin's  bower 370

Viscum  album 961

Viscum  flavescens. . .  961
Viscum  verticillatum  961

Vitaceaj 33

Vitellus  ovi 700

Vitis  vinifera 962

Vitriol,  blue 419

Vitriol,  elixir  of 170

Vitriol,  green 1103

Vitriol,  oil  of 171

Vitriol,  white 975

Vitriolated  soda 892

Vitriolated  tartar 1190

Vocabulary  of  Latin
terms  used  in  medi-
cine 1298

Volatile  alkali,  mild.  1015
Volatile  liniment.  ..  .1113

Volatile  oils 669,  1139

Volatile  oil  of  mus-
tard 876

Volcanic  sulphur. . .  . 918
Vulcanized caout-
chouc 296

W

Wafer  ash 776

Wahoo 454

Wake  robin 252,  932

Walnut,  black 573

Walnut,  European . . .  573

Walnut  lotion 1126

Walnut,  white 572

Warm  bath 232

Wash,  alkaline 1124

Wash,  cooling 1125

Wash,  herpetic 1126

Wash,  saline 1127

Washed  sulphur 917

Washes 1124

Water 229

Water,  artificial  Selt-
zer  1020

Water  avens 499

Water  beggar's  tick..  280
Water,  hitler  almond.  1021

Water, camphor 1023

Water, carbonic  acid.  .  102')
Water,  cinnamon  . . .  .1023
Water,  distilled. 229,  1023

Water  dock 823

Water dropwort 665

Water,  elder  flower.  .1025

Water,  eryngo 452

Water  fennel. . .  .665,  1025

Water,  hard 229

Water  hemlock 390

Water hemlock, fine

leaved 665

Water  horehound ....  609

Water,  lake 230

Water,  lime 1022


Water,  marsh 231

Watermelon 415

Water,  mineral.  .229,  1020
Water  of  ammonia.  .  .1016
Water,  orange-flower.  1025
Water,  pennyroyal.  .  .1024

Water  pepper 758

Water,  peppermint.  .  .1024

Water,  pimento 1024

Water  plantaiD. .  .192,  741

Water,  rain 229

Water,  river 230

Water,  rose 1025

Water,  sea 236

Water  shamrock 633

Water,  snow 229

Water,  soda 1020

Water,  soft 229

Water,  spearmint. ..  .1024

Water,  spring 230

Water,  tar 1024

Water,  well 230

Waters,  chalybeate. . . 236
Waters,  medicated. .  .1020
Waters,  mineral,  com-
position of 1319

Waters,  sulphurous.. 236

Wax,  bayberry 645

Waxberry 644

Wax,  myrtle 644

Wax,  white 323

Wax-work 317

Wax,  yellow 323

Web,  spiders 927

Weeping  willow 837

Weights  and  measures  985
Weights  and  measures,

tables  of 1316

Well  water 230

Wet  sheet  packing.  . . 233

Wheat 934

White  agaric 183

White  ash 475

White  avens 499

White  balsam 509

White  bay 617

White  cohosh 179

White  clover 931

White-flowered  ladies'

slipper 425

White  hellebore 948

White  Indian  hemp..  255

White  jessamine 490

White  leaf 902

White  lettuce 654

White  lily 600

White  liniment 1117

White  liquid  physic.  . 167

White  marble 623

White  melilot  clover.  931

White  mustard 875

White  oak 789

White  plantain 223

White  poison-vine... 490

White  pond-lily 663

White  poplar 604,762

White  rosin 795

White  snakeroot 455


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE


NLM 011^3157 3
