Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. VI (Lord Kingsborough (Edward King), 1831)
======================================================================
Kingsborough's Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. 6. Completes the 9-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

aa 

as +e 

be 

EA ch ates 

ANTIQUITIES OF MEXICO: 

FAC-SIMILES 

ANCIENT MEXICAN PAINTINGS AND HIEROGLYPHICS, 

PRESERVED 

IN THE ROYAL LIBRARIES OF PARIS, BERLIN, AND DRESDEN ; 
| IN THE IMPERIAL LIBRARY OF VIENNA ; 
IN THE VATICAN LIBRARY ; 
IN THE BORGIAN MUSEUM AT ROME ; 
IN THE LIBRARY OF THE INSTITUTE AT BOLOGNA ; 
AND IN THE BODLEIAN LIBRARY AT OXFORD. 

TOGETHER WITH 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN, 

By M. DUPAIX: 

WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE 

SCALES OF MEASUREMENT AND ACCOMPANYING DESCRIPTIONS. 

THE WHOLE ILLUSTRATED BY MANY VALUABLE 

Hiuedited sHanusceripts, 

By LORD KINGSBOROUGH. 

THE DRAWINGS, ON STONE, BY A. AGLIO. 

IN SEVEN VOLUMES. 

VOL. VI. 

LONDON: 

PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET, 

PUBLISHED BY ROBERT HAVELL, 77 OXFORD STREET; 

AND 

COLNAGHI, SON AND CO., PALL MALL EAST. 

M.DCCC.XXXI. 

a 

a 
iy 

habbet. 

% &% 

Cane 

Gy & 

Llin€ 

Howse 

Labbee 

Cane 

WwW | KN 

Lint 

SSP ABIL WY IAN IL AQAIKA| AS 

House 

SSCP ASINNIABRIAQI RA 

AA] ws 

habbit 

SH, AAlLYNVILADIAAIAK | AAl]Wws] LL 

Ks 

WH PRK |] & 

Cane 

Nw 
Ss 

Flint 

X 
RN 

BDH®l AA 

House 

SEN 

Lrabliel 

RN 

Cane 

& %& 

QS2alrXNN 

SS) 

Soe! ASlLNWNI AS 

Flint 

we |XX 

House 

Ltabbrt 

SHA! AK | AG 

QA] QQ IRA 

Cane 

IN 
Q 

Flint 

S1ouse 

Leabotl 

SH)! S®AlANI XS 

Cane 

So laaluy aan! QAQn!] RK] AG 

NA SS &S&&/aalrur 

Flint 

S 
Ss 

House 

- 
Ss 

HRIRKR] AA] wr 

DAAIAGAIRE | AA] xwewf{[rd 

Rabbit 

w\ 
SES 

Cane 

ww 
Q 

YN] as 

SQeiINN 

SGI AQ VVUsIAH!] AQIKRA] Qalars 

Lliné 

NG 
& 

House 

%, 

S 

dX 

IN 
N 

BN} 

cS 

Leabbit 

ISN 

. 

NN 

© 

Cane 

& 

x 
Ss 

Llint 

ISO 

House 

XX 
SS) 

WA 

were |XX 

L600 

Rabbit 

| SEBO0F 

Cane 

LOOX 

Flint 

SHI SSIVNYH Jas QQ IRA! AAI&SAINA 

C03 

flouse 

Ss 

AK 1A] Se} 

NN SS] owl eae INS Jam slag /Ax [aa 

LO0L, 

Leabbit 

SS 

L603 

Cane 

LX 
SS) 

Flint 

Slouse 

KA 

QN BH] ASQ 

SSX 

SSINNIHBAIAQAISBR | AQ &s&s 

SHILASINNUIASHIE|EQINA TAY 

Liabht 

Cane 

Flint 

House 

BHI AAIKRA] AA] &w 

IN 
SS) 

VNI|E RA! AQ; RE | AG 

LPeaboet 

Cane 

©&1/&a 

LE bia 

NN 
8s 

Louse 

Se] aalNwun»1fjAAlIAAISRR | AG] ArA®X 

Liab bit 

Cane 

AH! AKIRA] AW] ww] NA 

Flint 

House 

YANIEBaA!Q{AlRR] AA] aes] NA 

SSixng 

SHlaAaaSiI NY! AAI QAGQAIKRAK] AAQILwese 

<a 

my 
oul 
Wa 

An PAG aN AD. AX. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF THE HIEROGLYPHICAL PAINTINGS OF 
THE COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 

Tue History and Foundation of the Capital of Mexico here commences, which was founded and 
peopled by the Mexicans, who were at that time named Mecitis; the origin of whose empire, and 
the lives and actions of whose kings, are truly and briefly declared in this history, accordingly as they 
are successively signified by the paintings and hieroglyphics which follow. 

In the year thirteen hundred and twenty-four after the advent of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
the Mexicans arrived at the site of the capital of Mexico; and as they found the place and situation 
agreeable, after having for many years wandered in their travels from country to country, in some of 
which they stopped for several years, having prosecuted their journey from distant parts, none of the 
situations in which they had made a temporary abode contenting them, they arrived at the site of Mexico, 
which was at that time a complete swamp, overgrown with thick rushes, which they call ¢uwdi, and tall 
flags resembling a thicket. The entire extent of this site was occupied by a clear stream of water in 
the shape of a cross, free from weeds and rushes, which cross resembled that of Saint Andrew, as the 
painting shows. Nearly at the bounds and centre of this space and cross, the Mecitis found a large 
stone* or rock, on which was a high tunal, to which an eagle with rich plumage was accustomed to 
resort to devour its prey, so that the ground was strewed round about with the bones of birds, and many 
feathers of different colours. Having passed through and explored the whole site, and found it fertile 
and abundant in game, fish, and fowl, and such productions as are peculiar to a marshy soil, with which 
they might be enabled to support themselves, and to turn their industry to account in their dealings 
with the neighbouring people, and further induced by the security which the water afforded, which their 
neighbours could not cut off, and from other motives and causes, they determined to extend their travels 
no further ; and having so determined, they fortified themselves, substituting in the place of walls and 
bulwarks, the water and thick clumps of tulis and of flags. Having laid the foundation or commence- 

* Instead of honda, donde should have been printed in the corresponding Spanish passage, and a comma should have been inserted 
after peta; and for Candal, which is there supposed to be the proper name of the eagle, the word caudal should be substituted. 

4: INTERPRETATION OF THE 

ment of a settlement and population, they determined to bestow a name and appellation on the place, 
calling it Tenuchtitlan, because and on account of the tunal growing upon the stone *. 

The Mexican army had ten persons as chiefs, whose names were OcrLpan, Quapan, ACaciTLI, 
AHUEXOTL, TENUCH, TECINEUH, XOMIMITL, XocoyoL, X1uucaQut, and ArorTort, (as likewise is 
demonstrated by the painting,) who having made choice of a site, elected as their head and king Tenucu, 
in order that he might rule over them, as a person eminently fitted for that office, who united in himself 
talents and abilities qualifying him for command. The other chiefs became in a manner his lieutenants, 
and filled the post of captains over the mixed multitude. Some years having passed away in a course of 
settlement, and the population of the city increasing, the capital received likewise the name of Mexico, 
being named and called after the Mexicans, and was distinguished by the appellation of the place and 
habitation of the Mexicans; and as the number of the people had somewhat increased, they began like a 
brave and warlike nation to direct their attention to conquests over their neighbours ; and accordingly 
they signalized their courage in arms, thereby reducing to a state of vassalage, and to the payment of 
tribute, two cities in the vicinity of Mexico, named Colhuacan and Tenayucan, (which is also proved 
by the painting,) which events occurred in the course of the reign of Tenucu, which lasted fifty-one 

years ; at the expiration of which period he died. 

* This account appears to be compounded of truth and fiction. It is probable that when the Mexicans selected, for the sake of 
security, a swampy island in the Mexican Lake as the site of the capital of their future empire, the first thing they proceeded 
to do, was to make drains, as well for the purpose of rendering the ground more firm for the sake of building, as to guard against the 
noxious exhalations which, continually arising from so marshy a soil, would have proved very destructive to the lives of the new 
colonists; and that the main drains were cut in the shape of the cross represented in the plate. We learn from the letters of Cortes, 
that the city of Mexico itself was entirely intersected with drains and canals, and that while some of the streets were wholly water, others 
were half earth and half water, a line of road for foot-passengers running parallel to the half which served as a passage for boats and canoes. 
The Spanish brigantines during the last days of the siege of Mexico, sailed into the city by the larger canals, and greatly contributed 
to its destruction. Peter Martyr compares it to Venice, and says in his fifth Decade, that he had seen a map of it which was done 
by the natives: ‘ After that we saw another great map, a little lesse, but not lesse allurmg to our mindes, which contained the city 
of Tenustitan itself, described by the same hand, of the inhabitants, with her temples, bridges, and lakes.” The cross of Saint Andrew 
was likewise a sacred symbol among the Indians. Gomara, describing the manners and customs of the inhabitants of Cumana, says: 
“¢ Entre los muchos idolos y figuras que adoran por dioses, tienen una aspa como la de Sant Andres, y un signo, como de escrivano, 
quadrado, cerrado y atravesado en cruz, de esquina a esquina, y muchos frailes y otros Espafioles dezian ser cruz, y que con el se defen- 
dian de las fantasmas de noche, y lo ponian a los nifios en nacitndo.” “ Amongst the many idols and figures which they worship as gods, 
they have a cross like that of Saint Andrew, and a sign, done as it were by a penman, square, enclosed, and with a cross diagonally 
passing through it, which many monks and other Spaniards have pronounced to be a cross, and with it they defend themselves from 
nightly spectres, and place it over children shortly after their birth.” In the edition of Peter Martyr’s work, published in Paris, by Hak- 
luyt, and dedicated to Sir Walter Raleigh, a wood engraving, as well as a description of the same kind of cross, occurs. The engraving 
exactly resembles the cross in which the Mexicans founded their city, and the description is similar to that given by Gomara, which 
in the English translation of the Decades is as follows. ‘‘ They knew them (the Chiribians, or Chiribichenses, which name differs 
from that of Chibirias, the mother of Bacab,) honour the crosse, although lying somewhat oblique, and in another place compassed 
about with lynes, they putt it upon such as are newe borne, supposing the divels flie from that instrument. If any fearefull apparition 
bee seene at any time by night, they set up the crosse, and say that the place is cleansed by that remedy; and bemg demanded 
whence they learned this, and the speeches which they understande not, they answere that those rites and customes came by tradition 
from the elders to the younger.” Gomara says, that in Yucatan a cross of copper, or of wood, was placed over the graves of the dead. 
“* Alli se hallaron cruzes de laton y palo sobre muertos. De donde arguyen algunos, que muchos Espafioles se fueron 4 esta tierra, 

quando la destrucion de Espafia hecha por los Moros, en tiempo del Rey Don Rodrigo. Mas no lo creo, pues no las ay en las islas.” 

La Istoria de las Indias, fo. xxvii. ‘‘ They found there crosses of copper and of wood over the dead. Whence some conclude that 
many Spaniards fled to that country at the period of the destruction of Spain by the Moors, in the time of the King Don Roderic : 
but I do not credit this, because there are no crosses in the islands.” Gomara mentions here the discovery of crosses in Yucatan, as 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 5 

The blue outlines in the margins of this history signify a year, and point out the number of years, 
and the length of the lives of the kings of Mexico. For the more perfect and clear understanding of 
the paintings and their mode of reckoning, and the names of the years, it must be observed that they 
reckoned by the points contained in each square, counting from the first point as far as thirteen points. 
Although different figures occupy the squares and enclosures, nevertheless the number of the points is 
the chief thing to be attended to; for as to the names which they assigned and allotted to their years, 
beginning from the first point and reckoning as far as thirteen points, they are not of much importance 
as considered in connection with each square and enclosure. For the better understanding of what has 
been said, we here separately insert the signs and proof of the names, together with their interpretations, 
for the information of the reader. Wherever in the order and succession of the squares and enclosures 
reckoned as years, a square occurs with a branch and stem resembling a flower accompanying it, it 
signifies an unfortunate and calamitous year; which the Mexicans believed and feared, affirming that 
their ancestors from time immemorial had admonished them, that such years as succeeded each other 
after every interval of fifty-two years, would be dangerous, unlucky, and calamitous, on account of the 
universal deluge having taken place in such a year, and likewise darkness caused by an eclipse of the 

sun, and earthquakes generally every where*. They accordingly performed many sacrifices and cere- 

a fact of which there could be no doubt, and which had engaged the attention of well-informed Spaniards; but Herrera, who pro- 
nounces so severe a censure on the Indian monarchy of Torquemada, and declares Sahagun to be a writer of no authority, and is 
further determined that no crosses should be found in America, disbelieves Gomara on the grounds of Yucatan not possessing mines ; 
although, unfortunately for his own credit as an historian, M. Dupaix discovered a copper medal in the city of Ciudad Real, which is 
on the frontiers of Tabasco, and the peninsula of Yucatan ; a representation of which will be found in the eighth plate of the third part 
of his Monuments of New Spain, No. 12. In another part of America, the Spaniards were disappointed by finding that a golden cross, 
in search of which they had proceeded nine hundred miles to the north of Mexico, as far as Quivira, was merely a jewel of copper. 
Gomara thus relates the motives and the result of the expedition : “ Desde alli fue Don Gargilopez de Cardenas con su compafiia de 
cavallos a la mar, y Francisco Vazquez con los demas, a Tiguex, que esta ribera de un gran rio. Alli tuvieron nueva de Axa y Quivira. 
Donde decian que estava un rey, dicho por nombre Tatarrax, barbudo, cano, y rico, que cefiia un bracamarte, que rezava en horas, 
que adorava uha cruz de oro, y una ymagen de muger sefiora del cielo.” ‘Don Garcilopez de Cardenas went from thence with his 
troop of horse to the sea, and Francisco Vazquez with those who remained behind, to Tiguex, which is on the banks of a great river : 
there they received intelligence of Axa and Quivira, where they said there was a king of the name of Tatarrax, bearded, gray-headed, 
and rich, who was girded with a bracamarte, who prayed at regular hours, who adored a cross of gold, and the image of a woman 
who was queen of heaven.”—After recounting the many hardships which they suffered in the journey, he proceeds to add: ‘ Huvo 
hartas lagrimas, flaqueza, y votos. Llegaron en fin a Quivira, y hallaron al Tatarrax, que buscavan, hombre ya cano, desnudo, y 
con una joya de cobre al cuello, que era toda su riqueza. Vista por los Espafioles la burla de tan famosa riqueza, se volvieron a 
Tiguex, sin ver cruz ni rastro de Christiandad, e de alli a Mexico en fin de Marco del afio de quarenta y dos.” ‘ Tears, fainting, and 
vows were abundant. They arrived at last at Quivira, and found Tatarrax, whom they sought, a naked, gray-headed old man, with a 
copper jewel hanging at his neck, which was his only wealth. The Spaniards, perceiving the joke of these so much boasted riches, 
returned to Tiguex without seeing cross or trace of Christianity, and from thence to Mexico, towards the end of March of the year 
forty-two.” In further corroboration of the accounts given by Peter Martyr and Gomara of crosses discovered in America, the testi- 
mony of Garcia may be adduced, who, having been himself many years in Peru, is not likely to have been deceived respecting the 
one in Cuzco: ‘‘ En Yucatan se hallaron muchas cruces, i en el Cuzco una mui notable.”—Origen de los Indios, pag. 243. 

* Christians might have feared the return of every period of fifty-two years, as being nearly the anniversary of the age which Christ 
had attained when he was crucified, and of the great eclipse which sacred history records, and which (since profane history is silent 
respecting it,) it is very remarkable how the Mexicans should have become acquainted with. Boturini says that this eclipse was 
noted down in the historical paintings of the Tultecas, as having happened in the sign of Seven Rabbits: ‘En el (afio) de Siete Conejos 
nos acuerda el grande eclypse, que acontecid en la muerte de Christo, nuestro Sefior.”—Idea de una Nueva Tistoria General de la 
America Septentrional, page 6. The sign of Seven Rabbits may allude to the year, and the sign of Nahui Ollin, (or Four Earths 
quakes,) may have been the day in which this famous eclipse occurred. 

(c) 

6 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

monies to their gods on such years, devoting themselves to the celebration of religious rites, and abstained 
from the commission of any sin until the proper day and hour of such a year had arrived; on which day 
all generally extinguished their lights and fires till the day had passed by, which being over, they lit 
new fire, which was brought from a mountain and kindled by a priest *. 

0000} |o0000} JopQ000} jooo0000 

eS ie 

* Torquemada, after describing in the thirty-third chapter of the tenth book of his Indian Monarchy the curious manner in which 
the priest kindled the fire with the two little pieces of wood, called Tletlaxoni, in the wound. itself in the breast of the prisoner, con- 
cludes by remarking, ‘‘ Asi como en el pueblo de Israel celebraban el afio del Jubileo, que era el de cinquenta, en el qual se redimian las 
possessiones y heredades, y se libertaban los cautivos, y la tenian por la major de sus fiestas, como lo dice el Tostado ; asi estos 
Indios tenian esta por la major, porque en ella pensaban que redimian vida para mas tiempo, aunque se engafaban, pues dios es el que 
lo da, y lo quita; y no sabemos, como dice Christo, el que el Padre celestial tiene determinado, por estar reservado a su solo poder ; 
pero como ciegos estos hombres creian estas locuras, con todas las demas que en estos libros van escritas, y otras sin cuenta que 
callo.” ‘As the Israelites celebrated the year of Jubilee, which was the fiftieth, in which they redeemed possessions and inheritances, 
and freed captives, and which they considered the greatest of their festivals, as Tostado observes; so the Indians reckoned this (the 
festival of Teoxihuitl, or the year of God,) as their greatest: for they thought when it arrived, that their lives were redeemed for a 
longer space of time ; although they deceived themselves, since it is God who bestows and takes away life ; and we are ignorant, as 
Christ declares, of what may have been determined by the Heavenly Father, since he has reserved that to himself; but these men, 
being blind, believed in these absurdities, with all the rest which are mentioned in these books, with innumerable others, respecting 
which I am silent.” It would appear from some expressions of Boturini, that a redemption of certain descriptions of property took 
place in the year of Two Canes, or of the Mexican Jubilee ; whilst other kinds, such as garments and vessels of earthenware, were 
wholly destroyed. The Mexicans expected also the end of the world at the expiration of each of these short cycles, and were, in 
fact, in continual expectation of that event ; resembling in this anticipation some of the early Christians and disciples, who misin- 
terpreting the texts of Scripture, and the words of Christ, believed that that event was momentarily at hand. The expression of ‘in 
these latter days,” occurring in Scripture, deceived some of the more ancient fathers, who did not believe that the course of the world 
had still to continue, at least for a period of time, as long as from the age of Noah to the birth of Christ, who having informed his 
disciples that his second coming would be like that of a thief in the night, induced thereby some of them to suppose that John, the 
favourite disciple, would tarry till he came; perhaps they might have even thought that the day of judgment would speedily follow 
the crucifixion, It may be observed, in passing, that in the fifty-second year after the death of Christ, a pretended Messiah, to whom 
the credulity of his countrymen, in consequence of some successes which he obtained over the Romans, had. given the title of “ Bar 
Chocoba,” (the Son of the Star,) arose, who proved afterwards no blessing to the House of Israel. In later times Mahomet appeared 
in that character, and appealed to his astonishing victories as a proof of his divine mission; but the Jews rejecting him, are condemned 
in the Koran for their disbelief. It is to be regretted that the early Spanish historians should have professed great reserve in treating 
of some superstitious notions and traditions of the Mexicans. 

Gomara, speaking of a king named Topilcin, whom they believed to have been changed into Venus, or the morning star, evidently 
suppresses much curious information which he could have given, as he himself admits ; “ Al luzero que tienen por la mejor estrella, 
matavan un esclavo del rei el dia que primero se les demostrava, y descubren lo en Otono, y veenle dozientos y sesenta dias. 
Atribuyen le los hados, y assi agueran por unos signos que pintan para cada dia de aquellos dozientos y sesenta. Creen que Topilcin 
su rei primero se convertio en aquella estrella. Otras cosas y poesias razonan sobre este planeta. Mas porque para la istoria bastan las 
dichas, no las cuento.” “ They sacrificed to Venus, which they considered the most excellent of the stars, a royal slave on the day in 
which this star first appeared to them, when they perceived it in the autumn. It continued visible for two hundred and sixty days. 
They believed that it was influential over destinies, and accordingly they practised divination by signs, which they painted and allotted 
to these two hundred and sixty days. They imagine that Topilcin, their first king, was changed into this star. They indulge in other 
speculations and fancies about this planet; but since history may be content with what is already written, I do not mention them.” 
It would even appear from the accounts given by Peter Martyr and Gomara, (for both these authors record the viva voce evidence 
given by friar Thomas Ortizius before the council of the Indies), that that friar, speaking in the name of Pedro de Cordova and of the 
Dominicans and Franciscans, and recommending the slavery of the Indians, insinuates that he omits some charges which might have 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 7 

Ce Tuchtli, Ome*, Acatl, Yey Tecpatl, Nahui Cali, Macuili Tuchtli, Chiquincen j- Acatl, Chicome 
Tecpatl, Chicnahui Cali, Matlactli Tuchtli, X oce Acatl, X omome Tecpatl, X omey Cali, X onahui 
Tuchtli; One Rabbit, Two Canes, Three Flints, Four Houses, Five Rabbits, Six Canes, Seven Flints, 
Eight Houses, Nine Rabbits, Ten Canes, Eleven Flints, Twelve Houses, Thirteen Rabbits. 

The names which they assign to the years, which are signified by each square, are written above them 
in red ink, and the interpretation of these names are written below each square. Where an X is marked 
in red ink, which means ten, they reckon matlactli. 

PLATE It. 

1. Acacitli. 2. Quapa. 3. Ocelopa. 4. Aquexotl. 5. Tecineuh. 6. Tenuch. 7. Xomimitl. 
8. Xocoyol. 9. Xiuhcaq. 10. Atototl 11. Colhuacan. 12. Tenayucan. 13. Tenochtitlan. 

PLATE II. 

1. Acamapich. 2. By this shield and arrows are signified weapons of war. 3. Quauhnahuac. 
4, Acamapich. 5. Mizquic. 6. Cuitlhuac. 7. Xochimilco. 

The four cities represented and named in this plate, are those which AcamMaricu conquered by 
force of arms during the time that he was king of Mexico. 

The four heads painted and inserted in the above plate denote those who were taken prisoners in the 
wars with the four cities, whom they beheaded. 

been brought against them ; but what charge but one seems wanting to the long catalogue of accusation ?—that of Judaism. And even 
if the Indians had been discovered to be all Jews, they could not have been more hardly dealt with by the Spaniards : for Gomara says, 
“ Fray Garcia de Loaysa dio grandissimo credito a fray Thomas Hortiz y a los otros frayles de su orden. Por lo qual el Emperador 
con acuerdo del consejo de Indias, declaro que fuessen esclavos estando en Madrid el afio de veniticinco.” This condemnation 
applied to the Indians of the continent of America generally ; for the Caribean islanders had been condemned to slavery twenty years 
before. It would not be just towards the two religious orders, or at the least to the Dominicans, not to add that they afterwards 
disapproved of the slavery of the Indians, and condemned it from the pulpits. Las Casas’s persuasion that the Indians were 
descended from the Jews, is elsewhere mentioned ; but as the words “ Loquela tua manifestum te facit” were discovered with some 
other reasons tending towards the same conclusion by Torquemada in some private papers containing the will of Las Casas, at the 
same time that great weight must be attached to so solemnly recorded an opinion, it cannot be said that that learned prelate was 
guilty of any indiscretion in promulgating it: but the contrary is proved, by the proviso which he made respecting the publication of 
his History,—that it should not be printed till fifty years after his death ; and then only if it appeared good to the superior of his 
order, and for the benefit of religion ; but that in the intermediate time no layman or young ecclesiastic was to be permitted to read 
it. This work has never been published ; and Don Martin Fernandez de Navarrete says, that when it was referred some years ago 
to the Academy of History at Madrid, to take their decision respecting its publication, they did not think it convenient. 

* Come occurs in the Spanish text; a dash of the pen having been mistaken for the letter C. 

+ Torquemada designates the number six, Chiquacen; and Chicuey, eight, being here omitted, and Chicnahui, nine, substituted 
for it, the remaining names properly belong to the numbers immediately preceding each of those to which they are assigned. 

{ These references are to the plates in the first volume, where the persons and cities numbered are represented by their proper 
symbols. 

3 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

In 1870 AcamMapicuT Li succeeded to the said kingdom and government ; and in the course of his 
reign he gained and conquered by force of arms the cities contained and named in the paintings, which 
were Quauhnahuac, Mizquic, Cuitlahuac and Xochimilco, which became tributary to him, acknowledging 
themselves as vassals. AcamMapicuTti during his entire reign was disposed to keep many wives, the 
daughters of all the principal Mexican lords, by whom he had many sons, who were the founders of the 
future greatness of many families of Caciques, and chieftains of martial reputation; by whose means the 
capital of Mexico received great augmentation and increase of power, as is successively shown in the 
course of this History by the paintings, with their explanations. 

The two figures, with the title and name of AcamapicuTLi accompanying them, are in reality the 
same; for the first figure points out the beginning of his reign, and his accession to the said dignity ; and 
the second denotes the year after he had succeeded to the said dignity, when he undertook the conquest 
and subjugation of the said four cities*. ‘The said reign lasted twenty-one years ; at the expiration of 
which period the said Acamaricuttt died, and departed this present life, whose decease occurred in 
the year 1396. 

PLATE II. 

1. Tottitnan. 2. Quauutitian. 3. Chalco. 4. Husrciryuvrrz. 5. This representation of a 
shield and arrows signifies the conquest of the cities painted and named in the margin of the plate. 
6. Tulancinco. 7. Xaltocan. 8. Otumpa. 9. The capital city of Tezcuco. 10. Acolma. The 
number of years xX1. 

In 1396 Huicityuuitt, the son of Acamaricu, succeeded to the said government, who in the 
course of his reign conquered and gained by force of arms eight cities, which are those contained in 
the preceding paintings, the names of which said cities are therein specified, which became tributary to 
the state of Mexico, acknowledging themselves as vassals. The said Hurcinynvitt was of a warlike 
disposition, and inclined to keep many wives, by whom he had many sons, who increased the resources 
of the Mexican State. The reign and life of the said Hurcrryuvitt lasted twenty-one years; at the 
expiration of which period he died, and departed this present life, according to the computation of the 

figures contained within the blue compartments. 

PLATE IV. 

1. Tequixquiac. 2. Cuimazeuruca. 3. This painting of a shield and arrows signifies wars. 
A, Chalco. 5. Cutmazneupuca dead. 6. These heads signify five Mexicans who were put to death 

* The first figure probably denotes that Acamapichtli, before he was elected king, possessed the title of Cihuacohuatl, or supreme 
governor of the Mexicans ; when Mexico afterwards became a monarchy, this office was retained, and the person who occupied it 
filled a post like that of Grand Vizier in the East. Torquemada says, that by the Mexican laws it was equally treasonable to con- 
spire against the life of the King or of the Cihuacohuatl. The symbol over the head of the first figure of Acamapichtli exactly 
corresponds with the signification of this Mexican appellation. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 9 

by the Chalchese. 7 A Canoe. 7. A Canoe. 7. A Canoe. 7. A Canoe. 8. This figure personifies 
the people of the city of Chalco, who rebelled against the Mexicans, and injured them by breaking 
four of their canoes, which is symbolically signified by the stone grasped in its hands; and five 

persons are further represented, whom they killed in the said rebellion. 9. X years. 

In 1417, by the decease and death of Huicitryuvirt, Cuimatruruca succeeded to the said 
government. The said Curmatpuruca was the son of the said Huiciiyuuiti; and in the course of 
his said reign, he conquered by force of arms the city of 'Tequixquiac, and Chalco, which is a large 
city ; which acknowledging themselves as vassals, paid tribute to the state of Mexico, as is demonstrated 
in the preceding paintings: the said cities in this manner remaining subject to him, in the course 
of a few years the said city of Chalco, being powerful, rebelled against the Mexicans, from which 
rebellion there resulted loss to the Mexicans, five persons being killed, and four canoes destroyed, as is 
signified in the preceding paintings, with their explanations. The course of the life and reign of the 
said CuimaxLruruca lasted ten years; at the end of which period he died, according to the compu- 
tation of the blue compartments painted in the margin. Cuimaxpupruca also had in his life many 

wives and sons, for that was considered a point of state. 

PLATE V. 

1. Azcapuzala. 2. Coyuacan. 3. Teocalhueyan. 4. Yzcoaci. 5. 'This shield and arrows signify 
the instruments of war by which the cities contained and named under their proper symbols in these 
plates were conquered. 6. Quaguacan. 7. Tlacopan. 8. Atlacinhuayan. 9. Mixcoac. 10. Quauximal. 
11. Quauhtitlan. 12. Tecpan. 13. Acolhuacan. The number of years x111I. 

PLATE VI. 

1. Mizquic. 2. Cuitlahuac. 3. Xodjimilco. 4. Chalco. 5. QuaunTiatoa dies in Tlatilulco. 
6. Tlatilulco. 7. Huizizilapa. 8. Quauhnahuac. 9. Cuezalan. 10. Zaqualpa. 11. Yaztepec. 
12. Xiuhtepec. 13. Yoalan. 14. Tepequacinla. 

In 1427, by the decease and death of the said Curmatpuruca, Yzcoact, the son of AcaMaAPIn, 
who had been king of Mexico, succeeded to the government, who during his said reign gained and 
conquered by force of arms twenty-four cities, which are those represented in the preceding plates ; 
which cities he subjected in a single invasion under the dominion of Mexico. As the said Yzcoaci 
was brave and valiant in arms, and in many respects a man of sound judgment and resolution, 
he subjugated the said cities, which became tributary to him, acknowledging themselves his vassals. 
The said Yzcoaci had many wives, by whom he had seven sons and daughters. He continued in 
possession of the said government thirteen years, at the expiration of which period he died, and 
departed this present life. 

(D) 

10 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

PLATE VII. 

1. Atonat, Coayxtlahuacan. 2. Mamalhuaztepec. 3. Tenanco. 4. Hurnurmoreccuma. 
5. Weapons of War. 6.'Teteuhtepec. 7. Chiconquiauhco. 8. Xiuhtepec. 9. Totolapa. 10. Chalco. 
11. Quauhnahuac. 12. Atlatlauhca. 13. Huaxtepec. 

PLATE VIII. 

1. Yauhtepec. 2. Tepuztlan. 3. Tepatzinco. 4. Yacapichtlan. 5. Yoaltepec. 6. Tlachco. 
7. Tlalcozauhtitla. 8. Tepecuacinla. 9. Quiyauhteopan. 10. Chontalcoatlan. 11. Hueypuchtla. 
12. Atotonilco. 13. Axocopan. 14. Tulan. 15. Xilotepec. 16. Yzcuincuitlapilco. 17. Atoto- 
milco. 18. Tlapacoyom. 19. Chapolycxitla. 20. Tlatlauhquitepec. 21. Cuetlaxtlan. 22. Quauh- 
tochco. 

In 1440, by the decease and death of Yzcoaci, HuEnurmoteccuma, the son of HuiciLyuvitt, 
who was king of Mexico, succeeded to the said government; and during his reign he conquered 
and gained by force of arms thirty-three cities, as they are represented in the preceding plates, 
and painted in a circle round the figure of the said Huruuvremorseccuma; and having subjected 
them to the state of Mexico, they paid him tribute, acknowledging themselves his vassals. HuEnuE- 
MOTECCUMA Was a very grave and generous prince, who applied himself to the practice of virtue. He 
was endowed with excellent abilities and judgment, and an enemy to corrupt morals; he introduced, of 
his own free will, order and laws into the state, and his subjects placed their entire confidence in him. 
He imposed severe punishments, which he commanded to be executed without any mitigation, on those 
who violated the laws ; he was not however cruel, but on the contrary, kind, anxious for the public 
good, and the father of his people. He was not intemperately addicted to women ; he had two sons. 
He was exceedingly temperate in drinking; so that never in the course of his life was he seen ina 
state of intoxication, whilst the native Indians are in general extremely inclined to drunkenness; on 
the contrary, he commanded that those who so transgressed should be punished ; and from his gene- 
rosity, and the good example which he displayed in his life, he was feared and respected by his subjects 
during the whole course of his reign, which lasted twenty-nine years, at the expiration of which period 
he died, and departed this present life. 

PLATE IX. 

1. Tlatilula. 2. Moaquiuurx, the lord of Tlatilula. 3. Atlapula. 4. Xalatlan. 5. Axayacact. 
6. Weapons of war. 7. Tlacotepec. 8. Metepec. 9. Capuluac. 10. Ocoyacac. 11. Quauh- 
panoayan. 12. Xochiachan. 13. Teotenanco. 14. Caliymaya. 15. Cinacantepec. The number 
of years XII. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 11 

PLATE X. 

1. Tulucan. 2. Xiquipilco. 3. Tenanzinco. 4. Tepeyaca. 5. Tlaximaloyan. 6. Oztoma. 
7. Xocotitlan. 8. Ocuilan. 9. Oztoticpac. 10. Matlatlan. 11. Cuezcomatlyyacac. 12. Tecalco. 
13. Cuetlaxtlam. 14. Puxcauhtlam. 15. Ahuilizapan. 16. Tlaolan. 17. Mixtlan. 18. Cueca- 
loztoc. 19. Tetzapotitlan. 20. Miquiyetlan. 21. Tamuoc. 22. Tanpatel. 23. Tuchpan. 24. Te- 
nexticpac. 25. Quauhtlan. 

In 1469, by the decease and death of Hunnvemoreccuma, Axayacact succeeded to the govern- 
ment, who was the son of Tzcocomocrtt, and the grandson of Yzcoatzi1, who had been king of 
Mexico; and whilst the said Axayacacti was king, he conquered and gained by force of arms thirty- 
seven cities, according to their successive names and representations, in which number is included 
the city of Tlatilula, which he reduced under his dominion by force of arms; an event of great 
importance. The lord of Tlatilula at that time was Moquiuvtx, a powerful personage, possessed of 
great abilities, who being naturally of a haughty disposition, afforded to the king of Mexico a pretext 
and occasion for wars and dissensions, although they had formerly been friends; whence ensued 
great battles and engagements between them, in which the said Moaqutuurx of Tlatilula died, pre- 
cipitating himself from the top of a high temple: for seeing himself worsted in a combat, and 
returning from a defeat, he went into a temple to save himself from being taken prisoner, when a 
priest who was in the temple upbraiding him, and reproaching him for so doing aloud, he precipitated 
himself to the ground in the manner which has been mentioned ; on which occasion the Mexicans 
proved victorious, and the city of Tlatilula from that time until the conquest of Mexico by the 
Spaniards, was subject to the king of Mexico, paying him tribute, and acknowledging vassalage. 

AXavyAcaTzi was very valiant and brave in war, and was intemperately addicted to women; whence 
the number of his wives and sons was considerable. He was proud and impetuous, which caused him 
to be extremely feared by all his subjects. He maintained and approved as good, the laws and ordi- 
nances which his ancestor HusHurmoteccuma had enacted, as has been declared in his history, 

and his reign lasted twelve years, at the expiration of which period he died, and departed this 
present life. 

PLATE XI. 

1. Tonaliymoquecayom. 2. Toxico. 3. Ecatepec. 4. Cilom. 5. Tecaxic. 6. Tuluca. 7. T1g¢o- 
gicaTzi. 8. This shield and arrows signify the instruments with which the cities contained in the 
margin of this plate were conquered. 9. Yamanitlam. 10. Tlapan. 11. Atezcahuacan. 12. Ma- 
catlam. 13. Xochiyetla. 14. Tamapacha. 15. Ecatlyguapecha. 16. Miquetlam. 

In 1482, by the decease and death of Axavacacr, Trcoctcarzi, the son of the said Axavacact, 
succeeded to the said government, who in the course of his reign conquered and gained by force of 
arms fourteen cities, accordingly as they are successively painted and named. 

12 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

The said Tr¢ocicarzt was also extremely brave and warlike; and before he succeeded to the said 
government, he achieved in war, in his own person, signal deeds of valour, whence he obtained the 
dignity of TracarEcatt, which was esteemed a title of great honour and state, and was the point from 
which, when the throne became vacant, a successor was immediately elevated to the regal dignity, which 
career of titles and honours his predecessors, his brothers hereafter named, and father and erandfather, 
pursuing, became at length kings of Mexico. 

The said Trgo¢rcarzt had likewise, as a mark of authority and state attaching to the said dignity, 
many wives, and sons born of them. He was a man of a grave character, and severe in exercising 
command, and in causing himself to be feared and respected by his subjects; he was also disposed 
and inclined to good and virtuous actions, and zealous for the interests of the state. He caused to be 
observed and approved as good, the laws and statutes which his predecessors had augmented and kept 
from the time of Hurnurmorrccuma, and was vigilant in punishing and chastising the crimes 
and misdemeanors of his subjects, whereby the state of Mexico was well governed and administered 
during his life-time. The course of his reign lasted five years, at the end of which he died, and 
departed this present life. 

PLATE XII. 

1. 'Tziccoac. 2. Tappan. 3. Molanco. 4. Amaxtlan. 5. Capotlan. 6. Xaltepec. 7. Chiapan. 
8. Tototepec. 9. Anuricogin. 10. Weapons of war. 11. Xochtlan. 12. Xolochiuhyom. 
13. Cozcaquauhtenanco. 14. Cocohuipilecan. 15. Coyuca. 16. Acatepec. 17. Huexolotlan. 
18. Acapulco. 19. Xiuhhuacan. 20. Apancalecan. 21. Tecpatepec. 22. Tepechiapa. 23. Xico- 
chimalco. 24. Xiuhtec¢acatlan. 

PLATE XIII. 

1. Tecuantepec. 2. Coyolapan. 3. Yztactlealocan. 4. Teocuitlatla*. 5. Huehuetlan. 
6. Quauhxayacatitla*. ‘7. Yzhuatlan. 8. Comitlan. 9. Nantzintlan. 10. Huipilan. 11. Cahualan. 
12. Yztatlan. 13. Huiztlan. 14. Xolotlan. 15. Quauhnacaztlan. 16. Macatlan. 17. Ayauh- 
tochcintlatla. 18. Quauhtlan. 19. Cuecalcintlapila. 20. Mapachtepec. 21. Quauhpilola. 22. Tla- 
cotepec. 23. Mizquitlan. 

In 1486, by the decease and death of T1co¢icarzi1, Auvicgocgin the brother of his predecessor 
Trcocrcarzi succeeded to the said government; who in the course of his reign conquered and gained 
by force of arms forty-five cities, accordingly as they are successively painted and named. The said 
Auvrgo¢gin resembled in valour and martial prowess his brother and predecessor 'T1go¢icarzr, 
whence he obtained the title of Tuacatscatt, which signifies great captain, which said title was the 

next step to the throne. 

* Many of the Mexican names of places terminated in an, and not as they are generally written in a; the final letter being 

frequently expressed by a cross above the letter a in ancient MSS., and this has not always been here attended to. 

ee 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 13 

The said Anvurcocin was also naturally of a good disposition, and inclined to the practice of every 
virtue: the state was accordingly during his whole life and reign well governed and administered. 
He observed, and caused to be observed, the laws and statutes which his ancestors had maintained and 
kept from the time of Huzuvnmotsccuma; and since the Mexican monarchy had received great 
accessions, and possessed the larger part of New Spain subject to it, acknowledging vassalage; the 
said state, from the many and costly tributes which they paid to it, arrived at great splendour: and like 
a powerful and generous prince, he indulged his subjects with magnificent entertainments, and was of a 
sweet and benignant disposition; whence his vassals and chiefs loved him extremely, and entertained 
feelings of great reverence towards him. He likewise had many wives and sons, as a thing annexed to 
the said dignity, and a point of great state. He was of a gay temper, whence his subjects continually 
diverted him during his life-time with all kinds of festivals, and vocal and instrumental music by day 
as well as by night; so that in his palace the voices of singers and musicians, and the sounds of many 
musical instruments, never ceased. The course of his life* lasted eighteen years; at the expiration of 
which period he died, and departed this present life, 

PLATE XIV. 

1. Achiotlan. 2. Cocolan. 3. Nochiztlan. 4. Tecutepec. 5. Culan. 6. Tlaniztlan. 7. Huilo- 
tepec. 8. Morrccuma. 9. Weapons of war. 10. Ycpatepec. 11. Yztactlalocan. 12. Chihihual- 
tatacala. 13. Tecaxic. 14. Tlachinoltic. 15. Xoconochco. 16. Cinacantlan. 17. Huiztlan. 
18. Piaztlan. 19. The decease and death of Morrec¢guma. Pacification and conquest of New Spain. 

Number of years xvii. 

PLATE XV. 

1. Molanco. 2 Caquantepec. 3. Pipiyoltepec. 4. Hueyapan. 5. Tecpatlan. 6. Amatlan. 
7. Caltepec. 8. Pantepec. 9. Teoacinco. 10. Tecocauhtla. 11. Teochiapan. 12. Cacatepec. 
18. Tlachquiyauhco. 14. Malinaltepec. 15. Quimichtepec. 16. Yzcuintepec. 17. Cencontepec. 
18. Quetzaltepec. 19. Cuezcomayxtlahuacan. 20. Huexolotlan. 

PLATE XVI. 

1. Xalapan. 2. Xaltianquizco. 3. Yoloxpuecuila. 4. Atepec. 5. Mictlan. 6. Yatitlan. 
7. Tliltepec. 8. Comaltepec. 

* “ Life” is obviously a mistake for “reign.” But the text of the original has in this, as in every other passage, been hterally 
adhered to in the translation, 

(zB) 

14 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

PLATE XVII. 

1. Citlaltepec. 2. Quauhtochco. 3. Mixcoatu-Tiacatectui, a Governor*. 4. Tzonpanco. 
5. Xaltocan. 6. Trhacarsecti1, a Governor. 7. Txiacocurrcotir, a Governor. 8. Huaca. 
9. Yateyocan. 10. Acalhuacan. 11. Coatitlan. 12. Huixachtitlan. 13. Tuacatncorrr, a Governor. 
14. Tuacocutrcrii, a Governor. 15. Cogolan. 16. Poctepec. 17. Coatlayauhcan 18. Acol- 
nahuac. 19. Puputlan. 20. Yztacalco. 21. Chalcoatenco. 

PLATE XVIII. 

1. TnacocuTecryi, a Governor. 2. Tracatecati, a Governor. 3. Oztoma. 4. TLACATECTLI, 
a Governor. 5. TnacocutTectii, a Governor. 6. Atzacan. 7. TLACOCHTECTLI, a Governor, 
8. Atlan. 9. OmEquurnzcacoacaTt, a Governor. 10. Txinancaneur, a Governor. 11. Xoco- 
nochco. 12. Tecapotitlan. 

In 1502, on the death of Anurgogrn, Morzc¢guma succeeded to the said government ; who at his 
accession found the state of Mexico already advanced to great majesty and authority ; and having 
been himself promoted to the said dignity on account of his great gravity and severity of character, 
he augmented exceedingly the state and dominions of Mexico, in a much greater degree than any of 
his predecessors. 

Moreccuma was the son of Axayacacrn, who was king of Mexico; and before he succeeded to 
the said government, he acquired a reputation for valour and military enterprise, whence he obtained 
the title of Tuacarzctit, and so succeeded to the said government, as has been already declared; and 
becoming possessed of the said sovereign rule, he increased as much as possible the Mexican empire, 
ruling over all the cities of New Spain, which gave and paid him great and costly tributes. He 
was extremely feared by all his subjects, and likewise by his chiefs and nobles, so that none when 
they transacted business with him, ventured, on account of the great fear and reverence in which they 
held him, to look him in the face, but kept their eyes cast down to the earth, and their heads bent and 
inclined to the ground, with many other extreme forms of respect, observances and ceremonies, with 
which they did him homage, on account of the great majesty which he displayed before them, of which 
a description is here omitted, to avoid prolixity. 

After Morrgcuma had succeeded to the said government, he conquered forty-four cities, (accordingly 
as they are represented and named in the paintings that follow,) and subjected them beneath his rule 

* It does not appear that the cities represented in the other plates had special governors deputed from Mexico to govern them 
as viceroys. The extent of the Mexican empire was twelve hundred miles, from one extremity to the other; and it is likely that 
the government of the frontier provinces would only have been confided to persons in whom the sovereign could place the greatest 
dependence ; and therefore that the office of viceroy in these places would be one of higher dignity and confidence. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 15 

and empire ; which, as an acknowledgment of vassalage, paid him during the whole course of his life 

great and rich tributes (as may be seen in the paintings with their explanations which follow) 
Moreccuma was by nature wise, an astrologer * and philosopher, and skilled and generally versed 

in all the arts, both in those of a military, as well as others of a civil nature, and from his extreme 

* Scripture frequently mentions the wise men and astrologers whom the kings of Babylon consulted in doubtful emergencies, and 
sent for to interpret dreams of ominous import: and it is particularly recorded of Joseph and Daniel, who were Jews, that their 
interpretation of dreams surpassed those of the wise men of Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar. It is singular that dreams and visions, 
the usual way in which the Jews received divine inspirations, should have formed no small portion of the superstitions of the 
Mexicans ; amongst whom diviners and the art of divination were, according to Torquemada, held in great esteem. The custom of 
a monarch surrounding himself with astrologers to deliberate upon the arduous affairs of his kingdom, is so entirely oriental, and 
conformable to the prejudices of the nations bordering on Palestine, whose manners it should be recollected the Jews never failed to 
imitate,—that we must feel some surprise at finding that Montezuma and Nezahualpilli, the king of Tezcuco should have placed such 
faith in astrology and divination, and some difficulty in conjecturing whence they derived it. The passage in the Interpretation of 
the Collection of Mendoza to which this note refers, expressly states that Montezuma was skilled in astrology, to which proficiency 
the complimentary speech addressed to him by Nezahualpilli on his accession to the throne, (in which, according to Torquemada, he 
congratulated the Mexican nation on the election of a king, whose deep knowledge of heavenly things ensured to his subjects his 
comprehension of those of an earthly nature,) would seem to allude; that Nezahualpilli was himself attached to astrological inquiries, 
is recorded in the following very curious passage of the sixty-fourth chapter of the second book of the Indian Monarchy, “ Dicen 
que fue grande astrologo, y que se preciaba mucho de entender los movimientos de los astros celestes ; y con esta inclinacion que 4 
estas cosas tenia, hacia inquisicion por todas las partes de sus reinos, de todos los que sabian algo de esto, y los traia 4 su corte, y 
communicaba con ellos todo lo que sabia; y de noche se subia 4 las agoteas de su palacio, y desde alll consideraba las estrellas, 
y arguia con todos lo que de ellas dificultaban. Al menos, yo sé decir, aver visto un lugar en sus casas, encima de las acoteas, de 
quatro paredes, no mas altas que una vara, ni mas ancho el lugar que lo que puede occupar un hombre acostado, y en cada esquina 
tenia un hoyo 6 agujero, donde se ponia una hasta en las quales colgaban un cielo. Y preguntando yo, que de qué servia aquel 
quadro? me respondid un nieto suio, que me iba mostrando la casa, que era del Sefior Nezahualpilli, para quando de noche iba con 
sus astrologos 4 considerar los cielos y sus estrellas ; de donde inferi ser verdad esto que de el se dice ; y pienso que el estar levan- 
tadas las paredes una vara de el suelo, y tener puesto cielo de algodon 6 seda, pendiente de las varas, debia de ser para mejor tantear 
el curso celeste; como el otro filosofo, que metido en una cuba estuvo treinta y dos afios mirando con puntualidad el curso de una 
estrella.” “ They say that he was a great astrologer, and prided himself much on his knowledge of the motions of the celestial 
bodies; and being attached to this study, that he caused inquiries to be made throughout the entire of his dominions, for all such 
persons as were at all conversant with it, whom he brought to his court, and imparted to them whatever he knew; and ascending by 
night on the terraced roof of his palace, he thence considered the stars, and disputed with them all on difficult questions connected 
with them. I at least can affirm that I have seen a place on the outside of the roof of the palace, inclosed within four walls only a 
yard in height, and just of sufficient breadth for a man to lie down in; in each angle of which was a hole or perforation, in which 
was placed a lance, upon which hung a sphere; and on my inquiring the use of this square space, a grandson of his, who was 
showing me the palace, replied that it was for King Nezahualpilli, when he went by night attended by his astrologers to contemplate 
the heavens and the stars; whence I inferred that what is recorded of him is true; and I think that the reason of the walls being 
elevated one yard’ above the terrace, and a sphere of cotton or silk being hung from the poles, was for the sake of measuring more 
exactly the celestial motions; like the philosopher who, seated in the hollow of a cask, spent thirty-two years in watching with pre- 
cision the course of a single star.” It can hardly be doubted that the Mexicans were acquainted with many scientifical instruments 
of strange invention as compared with our own: whether the telescope may not have been of the number is uncertain ; but 
the thirteenth plate of M. Dupaix’ Monuments, which represents a man holding something of a similar nature to his eye, affords 
reason for supposing that they knew how to improve the powers of vision. Astronomy has in all ages been a favourite study with 
mankind: the Greeks cultivated it from their love of philosophy ; the Jews were star-gazers because the Chaldeans were astrologers ; 
and the early Christians, whom Saint Paul inspired with a distaste for the arts and sciences of Greece, might still have retained some 
predilection for it, from associating it with the discovery of the new star by the wise men of the East, who were reputed to have been 
famous astronomers. The proficiency which the Mexicans had attained in this science cannot with certainty be known. Like the 
Jews and primitive Christians, they entertained a superstitious dread of eclipses ; and from some of their paintings it may be inferred 

that they believed in a firmament, or orecaua, which divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were 
above the firmament. 

16 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

gravity and state, the monarchy under his sway began to verge towards empire : his subjects accord- 
ingly were impressed with feelings of great awe and veneration towards him on account of his power ; 
‘since, compared with him, none of his predecessors had attained to a fourth part of his state and 
majesty. 

He was zealous in causing the laws and-statutes of his predecessors, from the time of Hunuvurmo- 
reccuma to his own time, to be strictly obeyed and fulfilled; and being endowed with so much 
wisdom, he by the excellence of his own understanding, enacted and framed other laws and ordinances, 
such as it appeared to him were wanting to the completion of the former, without repealing any ; all 
which he did for the advantage and good government of his state and subjects. 

He was inclined to keep many wives, the daughters of princes his vassals and allies, by whom he 
had many sons: his reason for keeping so many wives was chiefly to show his great majesty and 
authority, for they considered it a matter of state; of whom, those who were the daughters of prin- 
cipal lords and grandees he espoused as his lawful wives, according to their rites and ceremonies, 
who resided within his palaces and the houses which he usually inhabited ; and the sons whom he had 
by them were more highly considered on account of their legitimacy, than those whom he had by the 
other women. 

The order which was observed with respect to these women would be a long history to detail; and 
since the present History is brief, it is here omitted. The quantity, value, and number of the tributes 
which his subjects paid to him, will be seen and understood presently, according to the signification 
of the paintings representing their several kinds and qualities. He was very exact in the tribute which 
they paid him, that it should be collected in full, according to the amount of taxation which he im- 
posed; and he kept for this purpose his calpixques and revenue-ofticers, stationed in all the cities of 
his vassals, as a sort of governors, to rule over, direct and administer their affairs. Being so much 
feared, none dared to transgress or exceed his will and pleasure, which was accordingly entirely fulfilled 
and obeyed; for he was inexorable in punishing and chastising rebels. 

In the sixteenth year of the reign of Morr¢¢uma, the Mexicans received advice of certain Spaniards, 
the discoverers of New Spain, that the object of the arrival and expedition of the Spaniards was to 
gain and conquer the country, which event would happen at the expiration of twelve months. ‘The 
Mexicans accordingly reckoned the time, and found it to be true; for at the end of twelve months the 
expedition and arrival of the Spaniards in the port of New Spain occurred ; in which came Don 
Frrpinanp Cortes, Marquis of the Valley, at the end of the said twelve months ; which event took 
place in the seventeenth year of the reign of the said Morr¢cuma, and in the eighteenth year of the said 
reign Morrccuma terminated his career, in which year he died, and departed this present life. 

Morerccuma when he succeeded to the said government was about thirty-five years of age, a little 
more or less, so that at the time of his death his age was fifty-three. 

In the year immediately following the death of Morrccuma, the conquest and pacification of the 
capital of Mexico, and the other cities in its vicinity, by the Marquis or tux Vanuzy and his 

companions took place; and thus New Spain was gained and reduced.to submission. 

THE SECOND PART. 

THE cities contained, represented, and named, in this and the foregoing plate, were governed 
by caciques and lords of Mexico, placed therein by the king of Mexico, as well for the protection 
and good government of the citizens, as that they should take the entire charge of collecting, and 
causing to be collected, the revenues and tributes belonging to the crown of Mexico, and likewise 
for the security of the citizens, that they should not rebel. 

The nature and the quality of the tribute which the inhabitants of Tlatilulco, which is now called 
Santiago, paid to the state of Mexico, is represented and declared in the following plate ; the brief 
abstract of which said tribute here follows *. 

They were obliged, in discharge of tribute, always to keep in repair the mezquita named Huiz- 
nahuac. 

Likewise to furnish forty large baskets, each containing half a fanega +, of chocolate ground with 
the flour of maize, which they called cacahuapinol: each basket was required to have sixteen hun- 
dred nuts of chocolate. 

Also forty other baskets of chianpinolit. 

Also eight hundred loads of large mantles. 

Also eighty pieces of arms of rich feathers, of the devices and colours represented. 

All of which, with the exception of the said arms and shields, they paid in tribute every eighty days ; 
but the said arms and shields they paid only once in the entire year. 

The said tribute began in the time of QuavurraToa and Moquiruv1x§, who were lords of Tla- 
tilulco. 

The kings of Mexico who first compelled the inhabitants of Tlatilulco to pay tribute in acknow- 
ledgement of vassalage, were Yzcoact and AXAYACACI. 

* This tribute roll was published by Cardinal Lorenzana in Mexico in the year 1770, together with an edition of the Letters of 
Cortes, from some ancient Mexican paintings which once belonged to Boturini. The symbols of the tributary cities are engraved in 
the most incorrect manner, and. their explanation is full of errors. 

+ Clavigero observes in a note, that a fanega was a Spanish measure for dry goods, containing about a hundred Spanish pounds, 
or one’ hundred and thirty Roman pounds. © It is possible that the present Spanish fanega may differ from that in use in the 
beginning of the sixteenth century. 

{ Torquemada says that chian was a seed, of a cooling quality and an agreeable flavour: ‘es cierta semilla de calidad fria, aunque 
sabrosa.” 

§ The proper name Mogquihuix has probably some reference to the symbol worn as a memorial on the nose by the Mexicans, 
which may have been instituted by Huemoque their ancient leader. 

Gay) 

18 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

PLATE XIX. 

1. The Mezquita named Huiznahuac. 2. xx Chests of ground chocolate. 3. xx Chests of 
ground chocolate. 4. xx Chests of pinol. 5. xx Chests of pinol. 6. 400 loads of large mantles. 
7. 400 loads of large mantles. 8. xl pieces of armour of this device. 9. xl pieces of armour of this 
device. 10. 11. 12. 13. These four figures, resembling flowers, signify eighty days, each flower 
standing for twenty days, at which stated intervals the inhabitants of Tlatilulco paid taxes to the 
kings of Mexico, of the articles represented and declared in this plate. 14. xl shields of this device. 
15. xl shields of this device. 16. Tenuctitlan. 17. Yzcoagr. 18. Axayacaci. 19. Quavun- 
TLaTos. 20. Moquinurx. 21. Tlatilulco. 

The cities which are represented in the two following plates, summed up here, are eighteen cities, 
according to their several names, over which a governor was appointed by the kings of Mexico, who 
was called a Petlacalcatl, although each city had a calpixque stationed in it, who was a kind of 
steward, whose duty it was to collect the rents and tributes which the said lords paid to the state 
of Mexico; and all the said stewards submitted their accounts to the said Petlacalcatl, as their 
governor. The different articles of tribute which the said cities paid are the following. 

2400 loads of large mantles of twisted cloth. 

800 loads of small mantles, of rich wearing apparel, of the colours which are represented. 

400 loads of maxtlac, which served as trowsers. 

400 loads of huipiles and naguas, all which they paid as tribute every six months. 

They further presented 5 pieces of armour of rich feathers, and as many more shields, of the 
colours and devices which are represented. 

They likewise gave 60 pieces of armour of common feathers, and the same number of shields, of 
the colours and devices which are represented. 

They sent moreover a chest* of beans, and another chest of chian, with another chest of maize, 
and another of quautli, which is seed of bledos; which tribute, comprehending the said arms, and 

shields, and chests of beans, and of other seeds, the said cities paid and presented once in the year. 

PLATE XX. 

1. A governor named a Petlacalcatl. 2. Xaxahpan. 3. Yopico. 4. Tepetlacalco. 5. Teco- 
loapan. 6. Tepechpan. 7. Tequemecuan. 8. Huicilopuchco. 9. Colhuacinco. 10. Cocotlan. 
11. Tepepulan. 12. Olac. 13. Acapan. 14. Four hundred loads of maxtles, worked in this man- 
ner, which served as trowsers. 15. Four hundred loads of huipiles and naguas worked in this 
manner. 16. Four hundred loads of large mantles. 17. Four hundred loads of large mantles. 

* These chests were named by the Spaniards, troves. Torquemada says that they were extremely large, nearly of the height of 
two men, and plastered in the inside with mortar, and that they were woven out of osiers. 

aN a 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 19 

18. Four hundred loads of large mantles. 19. Four hundred loads of small mantles worked in 
this manner. 20. Four hundred loads of small mantles worked in this manner. 21. Four hundred 
loads of large mantles. 22. Four hundred loads of large mantles. 23. Four hundred loads of 
large mantles. 24. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device, which was presented once 
in the year. 25. A shield of this device, of rich feathers. 26. A piece of armour of rich feathers 
of this device, which was presented once in the year. 27. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 
28. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device, which was presented once in the year. 29. A 
shield of rich feathers of this device. 30. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device, which 

was presented once in the year. 31. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 

PLATE XXI. 

1. Cuitlahuac. 2.Tezcacoac. 3. Mizquic. 4. Auchpanco. 5. 'Tzapotitlan. 6. Xico. 7. Toyac. 
8. Tecalco. 9. Tlacgoxiuhco. 10. Nextitlan. 11. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device, 
which was presented twice in the year. 12. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 13. xx pieces 
of armour of this device, which were presented once in the year, composed of rich feathers. 14. xx 
shields of feathers of this device. 15. xx pieces of armour of this device, which were presented 
once in the year. 16. xx shields of feathers. 17. xx pieces of armour of common feathers with 
this blue device, which were presented once in the year. 18. xx shields of feathers of this device. 
19. Chests of beans and of chian, one full of the former and the other of the latter. 20. A chest of 

maize and another of quauhtli, which is seed of bledos. 

The cities which are represented and named in the two following plates, summed up here, are 
twenty-six cities; in which the kings of Mexico, from the period of their first conquest, kept cal- 
pixques stationed in each of them; and a governor resided in the principal city, who ruled over 
all for the maintenance of peace and justice, and in order to cause the: due payment of tribute and 
to prevent rebellion. The tributes which all these cities hereafter named, paid collectively, are the 
following. 

2000 loads of large mantles. 

Likewise 1200 loads of rich canahuac, which are small vests which lords and caciques wore, of the 
colours which are represented. 

Likewise 400 loads of maxtlatl, which are a kind of trowsers. 

Likewise 400 loads of quipiles and naguas. All which they paid and presented twice in the year. 

They further gave as tribute three pieces of armour ornamented with common feathers, and the 
same number of shields of the colours and devices which are represented; all which they paid at the 
expiration of the year. 

As also twenty pieces of armour ornamented with common feathers, and as many shields of the 
devices and colours which are successively represented, which they paid once in the year. 

Likewise four large chests of timber, one full of beans, another of chian, another of maize, and 
another of quautli, which is seed of bledos. Each chest contained four or five thousand fanegas, 
which they paid in tribute once in each year. 

20 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

PLATE XXII. 

1. Acolhuacan Acolmecatl, Calpixqui. 2. Huicilan. 3. Totolginco. 4. Tlachyahualco. 
5. Tepechupa. 6. Aztaquemeca. 7. Teacalco. 8. Tonanytla. 9. Cenpoalan. 10. Tepetlaoztoc. 
11. Ahuatepec. 12. Ticatepec. 13. Contlam. 14. Yxquemecan. 15. Matixco. 16. Temazcalapa. 
17. Loads of small mantles of this colour and work. 18. Loads of small mantles of this colour. 
19. Loads of small mantles of this work. 20. Loads of white mantles. 21. Loads of white mantles. 
22. Loads of quipiles and naguas of this work. 23. Loads of maxtlac, which are a kind of trowsers. 
24. Loads of large mantles. 25. Loads of large mantles. 26. Loads of large mantles. 27. A 
piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 28. A shield of rich feathers. 29. A piece of 
armour of rich feathers of this device. 30. A shield of rich feathers. 31. A piece of armour of 
rich feathers of this device. 32. A shield of rich feathers. 33. Twenty pieces of armour of common 
feathers of this device. 34. A shield of feathers. 

PLATE XXIII. 

1. Twenty pieces of armour of common feathers of this device. 2. Twenty shields of common 
feathers. 3. Twenty pieces of armour of common feathers of this device. 4. Twenty shields of 
common feathers of this device. 5. Twenty pieces of armour of common feathers of this device. 
6. Twenty shields of commen feathers. 7. Twenty pieces of armour of common blue feathers of this 
device. 8. Twenty shields of common feathers of this device. 9. A chest of beans and chian. 
10. Two chests, one of maize and the other of quauhtli. 11. Ticayuca. 12. Tepetlapa. 13. Ca- 
liahualco. 14. Tecocuca. 15. Tlaquilpa. 16. Quauhgmecan. 17. Epacuyuca. 18. Ameyalco. 
19. Ecatepec. 20. Quauhyocan. 

The cities which are represented and named in the two following plates here enumerated are 
sixteen cities, which paid as tribute to the kings of Mexico the articles which are painted and de- 
clared in the said two plates: the kings of Mexico kept calpixques stationed in each of them, and 
a governor placed over all the calpixques, who was a principal person of Mexico (the calpixques 
being likewise Mexicans) for their good government and the better administration of their affairs, 
which was arranged and provided in this manner by the said kings, as well for to guard against 
rebellion, as for the administration of justice and the hearing of civil causes. The said tributes which 
the said lords paid, accordingly as they are signified by the said paintings, summed up here, are as 
follows. 

First, they paid 1200 loads of large mantles of twisted cloth. 

Likewise 200 loads of small white mantles, wearing apparel. 

Likewise 1200 loads of small mantles richly worked, wearing apparel for lords and caciques. 

Likewise 400 loads of maxtlatl, which are a kind of trowsers worn amongst them. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 21 

Likewise 400 loads of quipiles and naguas, wearing apparel for women, all which they presented 
twice in each year; each tribute being paid every six months. 

They further gave eight pieces of armour, and four shields, ornamented with rich feathers of different 
colours according to their representations, which they paid as tribute once in the year. 

As also four large chests of timber full of maize, beans, chian, and quautli, which is seed of bledos ; 
each chest contained 5000 fanegas, which they gave as tribute once in each year. 

Likewise 8000 reams * of paper of the country, which they paid twice a year, which amounted each 
year to 16,000 sheets of paper. 

And likewise 2000 Xicaras at each payment of tribute, which they made twice in the year. 

PLATE XXIV. 

1. Quauhnahuac. 2. Teocalcinco. 3. Chimalco. 4. Huicilapa. 5. Actlyzpac. 6. Xochitepec. 
7. Miacatl. 8. Molotla. 9. Coatlan. 10. Xiuhtepec. 11. Xoxontla. 12. Amacoztitla. 13. Yaztla. 
14, Ocpayucan. 15. Yztepec. 16. Atlicholoayan. 17. Loads of small mantles of this colour. 
18. Loads of small mantles of this colour. 19. Loads of small mantles of this colour. 20. Loads 
of small white mantles. 21. Loads of small white mantles. 22. Loads of maxtle or trowsers. 
23. Loads of quipiles and naguas. 24. Loads of large mantles. 25. Loads of large mantles. 
26. Loads of large mantles. 27. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 28. A shield 
of rich feathers. 29. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 30. A shield of rich feathers. 
31. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 32. A shield of rich feathers. 33. A piece of 
armour of rich feathers of this device. 34. A shield of rich feathers. 

PLATE XXV. 

1. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 2. A shield of rich feathers. 3. A piece of ar- 
mour of rich feathers of this device. 4. A shield of rich feathers. 5. A piece of armour of rich feathers. 
6. A shield of rich feathers. 7. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 8. A shield of rich 
feathers. 9. Two chests, one of maize, the other of quauhtli, which is seed of bledos. 10. Two 
chests, one of beans, the other of chian. 11. Eight thousand sheets of paper of the country. 12. Four 
hundred Xicaras worked in this manner. 13. Four hundred Xicaras. 14. Four hundred Xicaras. 
15. Four hundred Xicaras. 16. Four hundred Xicaras. 

The cities which are represented and named in the two following plates, and here enumerated, are 
twenty-six cities, which paid tribute to the kings of Mexico of the things represented and declared in 
the said two plates; in which, as in the case of the preceding cities, a governor and Mexican Cal- 

pixques resided, placed there by the hand of the said kings of Mexico. 

* The ream and the sheet are here considered as the same quantity of paper; perhaps from the Mexican ream consisting of a 
single sheet of paper, which folded up into many squares or pages. 

(G) 

22 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

The tributes which they paid are those which follow, taken from the said paintings, and here 
summed up. 

First, they paid 400 loads of maxtlatl, which are trowsers. 

Also 400 loads of naguas and huipiles, wearing apparel for women. 

Also 2400 loads of large mantles of twisted cloth. 

Also 800 small rich mantles, wearing apparel for lords and chiefs of Mexico, of the colours 
which are represented. 

Also 2000 varnished xicaras, of the colours which are represented. 

Also 8000 reams of paper of the country; all which they presented at each payment of tribute, 
which was every six months. 

They further likewise gave 40 pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with 
rich and dyed feathers, and others of a more common sort, of different colours, according to their 
_ representations. 

As also four large chests of timber like those already mentioned, full of maize, beans, chian, and 
quautli; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XXVI. 

1. Huaxtepec. 2. Xochimilcacinco. 3. Quauhtlan. 4. Ahuehuepan. 5. Anenequilco. 6. Olin- 
tepec. 7. Quahuitleyxco. 8. Companco. 9. Huicilan. 10. Tlaltigapan. 11. Coacalco. 12. Yza- 
matitlan. 13. Tepoztla. 14. Yauhtepec. 15. Yacapichtla. 16. Tlayacapa. 17. Xaloztoc. 
18. Tecpaginco. 19. Ayoxochapa. 20. Tlajacac. 21. Tehuizco. 22. Loads of maxtlatl. 23. Loads 
of huipiles and naguas. 24. Loads of large mantles. 25. Loads of large mantles. 26. Loads of 
large mantles. 27. Loads of small mantles worked in this manner. 28. Loads of small mantles 
worked in this manner. 29. Loads of large mantles. 30. Loads of large mantles. 31. Loads of 
large mantles. 32. xx pieces of armour of common feathers of this device. 33. xx shields of 
common feathers. 34. xx pieces of armour of common feathers. 35. xx shields of common feathers. 
36. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 37. A shield of rich feathers. 38. A piece of 
armour of rich feathers. 39. A shield of rich feathers. 

PLATE XXVII. 

1. A piece of armour of rich feathers. 2. A shield of rich feathers. 3. A piece of armour of rich 
feathers of this device. 4. A shield of rich feathers. 5. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this 
device. 6. A shield of rich feathers. 7. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 8. A 
shield of rich feathers. 9. Two chests of maize and of seeds of bledos. 10. Two chests of beans 
and chian. 11. Xicaras. 12. Xicaras. 13. Xicaras. 14. Xicaras. 15. Xicaras. 16. Eight 
thousand reams of paper of the country. 17. Nepopoalco. 18. Atlatlauca. 19. Totolapa. 
20. Amilcinco. 21. Atlhuelic. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 23 

The cities which are represented and named in the plate which follows, and here enumerated, are 
seven cities, which were tributary to the kings of Mexico, in the same manner as those already men- 
tioned in the preceding section; and the articles of tribute which they paid are the following : 

First, 400 loads of small mantles richly worked, besides 800 loads of such as have been designated 
mantillas, of the colours which are represented. 

Likewise 4000 petates, which are mats, and 4000 chairbacks, with their seats, composed of enea 
and of other grasses, which they paid every six months. 

Further, Two pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with rich feathers, of 
the devices and colours which are represented. 

Likewise, Sixty pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with common feathers. 

Also, Four large chests of timber of the size and measure of those already mentioned, full of maize, 

beans, chian and quautli, which they paid as tribute once in the year. 

PLATE XXVIII. 

1. Quauhtitlan. 2. Tehuiloyoca. 3. Alhuexoyocan. 4. Xalapan. 5. Tepoxaco. 6. Cuezco- 
mahuacan. 7. Xilocginco. 8. Loads of small mantles worked in this manner. 9. Loads of small 
mantles worked in this manner. 10. Loads of small white mantles. 11. A piece of armour of rich 
feathers. 12. A shield of rich feathers. 13. A piece of armour of rich feathers. 14. A shield of 
rich feathers. 15. xx pieces of armour of common feathers. 16. xx pieces of armour of common 
feathers. 17. xx pieces of armour of common feathers. 18. xx shields of common feathers. 
19. xx shields of common feathers. 20. xx shields of common feathers. 21. Two chests of maize 
and quautli. 22. Two chests of beans and chian. 23. Four thousand chairbacks of enea. 24. Four 

thousand mats. 25. Each of these ears of corn signifies 400 mats. 

The cities represented and named in the following plate, and here enumerated, are ten cities, which 
were tributary to the kings of Mexico in the same manner as those already mentioned in the preceding 
sections ; and the articles which they paid are the following : 

First, 800 loads of small rich mantles, worked as represented and specified. 

Likewise, 400 loads of small white mantles with black and white fringes. 

Likewise, 800 loads of small white mantles. 

Likewise, 400 loads of naguas and quipiles. 

Likewise, 400 large jars of thick honey of the aloe; all which they paid every six months. — 

They further presented Two pieces of armour, ornamented with rich feathers, and the same number 
of shields of rich feathers, of the devices which are represented and declared. 

As also, 40 pieces of armour, ornamented with common feathers, and as many shields, of the devices 
which are represented. 

And likewise, Four large chests of timber of the size of those already mentioned in the preceding 
section; one of maize, another of beans, another of chian, and another of quautli, which is seed of 

bledos : all which they paid once in the year. 

Q4, INTERPRETATION OF THE 

PLATE XXIX. 

1. Axopan. 2. Atenco. 3. Tetepanco. 4. Xochichivca.. 5. Temohuazan. 6. Tezcatepec. 
7. Mizquiyahuala. 8. Yzmiguilpa. 9. Tlaahuililpa. 11. Loads of small mantles worked in this 
manner. 12. Loads of small mantles worked in this manner. 13. Loads of small white mantles. 
14. Loads of small white mantles. 15. Loads of small mantles worked in this manner. 16. Loads 
of huipiles and naguas. 17. A piece of armour of feathers of this device. 18. A shield of rich fea- 
thers. 19. xx pieces of armour of common scarlet feathers. 20. xx shields of common feathers. 
21. A piece of armour of rich feathers. 22. A shield of rich feathers. 23. xx pieces of armour of 
common blue feathers. 24. xx shields of common feathers. 25. Two chests of maize and quautli. 
20. 'Two chests of beans and chian. 27. Four hundred pitchers of thick honey of the aloe. 

The number of cities contained, represented, and named in the following plate, which were tributary 
to the kings of Mexico, in the same manner as those already mentioned in the preceding sections, 
the number of these cities here summed up, is seven ; and the articles of tribute which they paid are 
the following : 

First, 400 loads of small mantles richly worked, which were wearing apparel for lords and caciques. 

Also, 400 loads of small white mantles with black and white fringes. 

Also, 800 loads of large mantles of twisted cloth. 

Also, 400 loads of lime: all which they paid every six months. 

They further presented Two pieces of armour ornamented with rich feathers, and two shields, accord- 
ing to the devices which are represented and declared. 

Likewise, Sixty pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with common feathers, 
according to the devices which are represented and declared. 

Likewise, Four large chests of timber of the size of those already mentioned; one full of maize, 

another of beans, another of chian, and another of quautli; all which they paid once in the year. 

‘ PLATE XXX. 

1. Atotonilco. 2. Guapalcalco. 3. Quecalmaca. 4. Acocolco. 5. Tehuehuec. 6. Otlazpa. 
7. Xalac. 8. Loads of small rich mantles worked in this manner. 9. Loads of small mantles 
worked in this manner. 10. Loads of large mantles. 11. Loads of large mantles. 12. A piece 
of armour of rich feathers of this device. 13. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 14. A piece 
of armour of feathers of this device. 15. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 16. Twenty pieces 
of armour of common feathers of this device. 17. Twenty pieces of armour of common feathers of 
this device. 18. Twenty pieces of armour of feathers of this device. 19. Twenty shields of common 
feathers of this device. 20. Twenty shields of common feathers of this device. 21. Twenty shields 
of common feathers of this device. 22. Two chests of maize and chian. 23. Two chests of beans and 
of quautli. 24. Four hundred loads of lime. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 95 

The number of cities of the following plate is nine, according to their names and representations. 

First, they paid 400 loads of small mantles richly worked, wearing apparel for lords and caciques 
of Mexico. 

Likewise 400 loads of small white mantles with black and white fringes. 

Likewise 800 loads of small white mantles of eneguen. 

Likewise 400 jars of thick honey of the aloe; all which they paid every six months. 

They further presented two pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with 
rich feathers, of the colours and devices which are represented and declared. 

Also four large chests of timber of the size of those already mentioned ; one full of maize, another 

of beans, another of chian, and another of quautli; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XXXI. 

1. Huepuchtla. 2. Xalac. 3. Tequixquiac. 4. 'Tetlapanaloya. 5. Xicalhuacan. 6. Xomezocan. 
7. Acayocan. 8. Tezcatepetonco. 9. Atocpan. 10. Loads of small rich mantles worked in this 
manner. 11. Loads of small mantles of eneguen. 12. Loads of small mantles of eneguen. 
13. Loads of small mantles of eneguen. 14. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 15. A 
piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 16. 'wenty pieces of armour of common yellow 
feathers of this device. 17. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 18. A shield of rich feathers 
of this device. 19. Twenty shields of common feathers of this device. 20. Twenty pieces of 
armour of common feathers of this device. 21. Twenty shields of common feathers of this device. 
22. Twenty pieces of armour of common feathers of this device. 23. Twenty shields of common 
feathers of this device. 24. Two chests, one of maize and the other of quautli, which is seed of 
bledos. 25. Two chests, one of beans and the other of chian. 26. Four hundred large jars of 
thick honey of the aloe. 

The number of the cities represented and named in the following plate. 

They paid 800 loads of small rich mantles, wearing apparel for the lords of Mexico, according to 
their names and representations as contained in the said plate. 

Likewise 1600 loads of small white mantles of eneguen ; all which they paid to the kings of Mexico 
every six months. 

Further also, four pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with rich feathers, 
of the colours and devices which are represented and declared. 

Likewise four large chests of timber such as those already mentioned, full of maize and beans, 

chian and quautli; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XXXII. 

1. Atotonilco. 2. Caxochitla. 3. Quachquegaloya. 4. Hueyapan. 5. Itzihuiuquilucan. 6. Tu- 
lancingo. 7. Four hundred loads of small rich mantles worked in this manner. 8. Loads of small: 

(H) 

26 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

rich mantles worked in this manner. 9. Loads of small mantles of eneguen. 10. Loads of small 
mantles of eneguen. 11. Loads of small mantles of eneguen. 12. Loads of small mantles of eneguen. 
13. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 14. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 
15. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 16. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 
17. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 18. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 
19. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 20. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 
21. Two chests, one of maize and the other of chian. 22. Two chests, one of beans and the other of 
quautli, which is seed of bledos. 

The number of cities represented and named in the following plate is seven. 

First, they paid 400 loads of very rich naguas and quipiles, which are wearing apparel for women. 

Likewise 400 loads of rich mantles, wearing apparel for lords. 

Likewise 400 loads of worked naguas. 

Likewise 800 loads of rich mantles. 

Likewise 400 loads of mantles striped with scarlet in the middle; all which they paid every six 
months. 

They also presented a live eagle, or two or three, or more, accordingly as they could procure them. 

And further, two pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with rich feathers, 
of the devices and colours which are represented. 

As also four large chests of timber, full of maize, beans, chian, and quautli; all which they paid once 

in the year. 

PLATE XXXIII. 

1. Xilotepec. 2. Tlachco. 3. Tzanayalquilpa. 4. Michmaloyan. 5. Tepetitlan. 6. Acaxochitla. 
7. Tecocauhtla. 8. Loads of very rich naguas and quipiles. 9. Loads of rich mantles worked in this 
manner. 10. Loads of naguas worked in this manner. 11. Loads of rich mantles worked in this 
manner. 12. Loads of rich mantles worked in this manner. 13. A live eagle, which they presented 
at every payment of tribute, as sometimes three, sometimes four, and occasionally a greater or lesser 
number. 14. Loads of mantles worked in this manner. 15. Loads of small rich mantles worked in 
this manner. 16. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 17. A shield of rich feathers 
of this device. 18. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 19. A shield of rich feathers 

of this device. 20. Two chests of maize and chian. 21. Two chests of beans and quautli. 

The number of cities which are represented and named in the following plate is thirteen. 

First, they paid 800 loads of small rich mantles worked in the manner represented. 

Also 800 loads of small mantles of eneguen, which they presented every six months. 

Likewise a piece of armour, and a shield, ornamented with rich feathers. 

Likewise 40 pieces of armour, and an equal number of shields, ornamented with common feathers, 
which pieces of armour they paid once in the year. 

Likewise four large chests of timber, of the size of the preceding, full of maize, beans, chian, and 

quautli, which they also paid once in the year. 

Se 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. Q7 

And also 1200 loads of wood, which they gave once in eighty days. 
As likewise 1200 large beams of timber, which they paid once in eighty days. 
And further, 1400 planks, which they paid once in eighty days. 

PLATE XXXIV. 

1. Quahuacan. 2. Tecpan. 3. Chapolmoloya. 4. Tlalatlaoco. 5. Acaxochic. 6. Ameyalco. 
7. Ocotepec. 8. Yuohuizquilocan. 9. Coatepec. 10. Loads of small mantles. 11. Loads of 
small mantles. 12. Loads of small mantles. 13. Loads of small mantles. 14. A piece of armour 
of rich feathers of this device. 15. Twenty pieces of armour of common feathers of this device. 
16. xx pieces of common armour of this device. 17. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 
18. xx shields of common feathers of this device. 19. xx shields of common feathers of this device. 
20. 'T'wo chests, one of maize and the other of chian. 21. T'wo chests, one of beans and the other 
of quautli. 22. Four hundred large beams. 23. Four hundred large beams. 24, Four hundred 
large beams. 25. Four hundred large planks of wood. 26. Large planks of wood. 27. Four 
hundred large planks of wood. 28. Four hundred boards of wood. 29. Four hundred boards of 
wood. 30. Four hundred boards of wood. 31. Four hundred loads of wood. 32. Four hundred 
loads of wood. 33. Four hundred loads of wood. 34. Quauhpanoaya. 35. Tallacha. 36. Chi- 
chicquautla. 37. Huitzcilapa. 

The number of cities represented and named in the following plate is twelve. 

First, they paid 400 loads of small mantles of white cotton, with fringes of yellow, scarlet, and olive. 

Likewise 400 loads of small mantles of eneguen, worked and striped with scarlet, white, and black. 

Likewise 1200 loads of small white mantles of eneguen, which they gave as tribute every six months. 

They further presented two pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with 
rich feathers, of the devices and colours which are represented. . 

Also twenty pieces of armour, and an equal number of shields, ornamented with common feathers, 
of the devices and colours which are represented. 

As also six large chests of timber, like those already mentioned, full of beans, maize, chian, and 
quautli; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XXXV. 

1. Tuluca. 2. Calixtlahuacan. 3. Xicaltepec. 4. Tepetlhuacan. 5 

5. Mitepec. 6. Capulteo- 
pan. 7. Metepec. 8. Cacalomaca. 9. Caliymayan. 10. Teotenanco. 11. Tepemaxalco. 

12. Coquitzinco. 13. Four hundred loads of small cotton mantles worked in this manner. 14. Loads 
of small mantles of eneguen worked in this manner. 15. Loads of small white mantles of eneguen. 

16. Loads of small white mantles of eneguen. 17. Loads of small white mantles of eneguen. 18. A 

piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 19. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 

23 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

20. Twenty pieces of armour of common feathers of this device. 21. A shield of rich feathers of 
this device. 22. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 23. Twenty shields of common feathers 
of this device. 24. 'wo chests, one of maize and the other of chian. 25. Two chests of maize, 
beans, and quautli. 26. Two chests, one of maize and the other of chian. 27. Two chests, one of 

beans and the other of chian. 

The number of cities represented and named in the following plate is six. 

First, they paid 800 loads of small rich mantles of eneguen, worked as represented. 

Likewise 400 loads of small rich cotton mantles, worked as represented. 

Likewise 2000 loaves of very white salt, refined in the shape of the mould, for the consumption 
only of the lords of Mexico; all which they paid every six months. 

Further, a piece of armour, and a shield, ornamented with rich feathers, of the colour and device 
which are represented. 

As also twenty pieces of armour, and an equal number of shields, ornamented with common 
feathers, of the colour and device which are represented. 

Likewise four large chests of timber, of the size of the preceding ; one full of maize, and the others 

of beans, chian, and quautli; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XXXVI. 

1; Ocuilan. 2. Loads of small rich mantles of eneguen, worked in this manner. 3. Loads of 
small mantles. 4. Loads of small rich mantles of eneguen. 5. Loads of small white mantles of 

eneguen. 6. Tenantzinco. 7. Tequaloyan. 8. Tonathiuco. 9. Coatepec. 10. Cincozca. 

11. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 12. A shield of rich feathers. 13. xx pieces 
of armour of common feathers of this device. 14. xx shields of common feathers. 15. Two chests, 
one of maize and the other of quautli. 16. Two chests, one of beans and the other of chian. 
17. Four hundred loaves of salt of this shape. 18. Four hundred loaves of salt of this shape. 
19. Four hundred loaves of salt of this shape. 20. Four hundred loaves of salt of this shape. 
21. Four hundred loaves of salt of this shape. These loaves of salt were very white and fine, and 

were only for the consumption of the lords of Mexico. 

The number of cities represented and named in the following plate is three. 

First, they paid 1200 loads of large mantles of soft eneguen. 

Likewise 400 loads of small mantles of worked eneguen; all which they gave every six months. 
They further paid once in the year eight large chests of timber, of the size of those already men- 

tioned ; two full of maize, two of beans, two of chian, and two of quautli. 

a a 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 29 

PLATE XXXVII. 

1. Malinalco. 2. Loads of large mantles of soft eneguen. 3. Loads of mantles of soft eneguen. 
4. Loads of mantles of soft eneguen which they call yzccotilmatli. 5. Conpahnuacan. 6. Two 
chests, one of maize and the other of quautli. 7. 'Two chests, one of beans and the other of chian. 
8. Xocotytlan. 9. Loads of small mantles of eneguen worked in this manner. 10. Two chests, 
one of maize and the other of quautli. 11. Two chests, one of beans and the other of chian. 

The number of cities named and contained in the following plate is ten, situated in a warm 
climate. 

First, they paid 400 loads of small rich cotton mantles, worked as represented. 

Likewise 400 loads of naguas and quipiles. , 

Likewise 1200 loads of small mantles of soft eneguen, which they paid every six months. 

They further gave 200 small pitchers of bees’ honey. 

Also 1200 Xicaras varnished of a yellow colour. 

Also 400 small baskets of white copal for incense. 

Also 8000 lumps of unrefined copal wrapped up in leaves of the palm-tree; all which they paid 
once in the period of eighty days. 

They further presented two pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with 
rich feathers of the colour and devices which are represented. 

As also two large chests of timber of the size of those already mentioned, the one full of maize 

and the other of chian ; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XXXVIII. 

1. Tlachco. 2. Acamilyxtlahuaca.. 3. Chontalcoatlan. 4. Tectipa. 5. Nochtepec. 6. Teot- 
liztacan. 7. Tlamacazapa. 8. Tepexahnualco. 9. T'zicapuzalco. 10. Tetenanco. 11. Loads of 
small rich cotton mantles worked in this manner. 12. Loads of naguas and quipiles. 13. Loads 
of mantles of soft eneguen, large vests. 14. Loads of mantles of soft eneguen, large vests. 
15. Loads of mantles of soft eneguen, large vests. 16. A piece of armour of feathers of this device. 
17. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 18. A piece of armour of feathers of this device. 
19. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 20. Two chests, one of maize and the other of chian. 
PNG SS YU IR | IS sna) WHI Som, WD, 5Ox, Os SG Wn OO SE DOD oe, 0, SOc 8 
each single pitcher is reckoned at twenty pitchers of bees’ honey, according to the numerical sign 
over each pitcher. 31. Four hundred small baskets of white refined copal. 32. Four hundred 
_Xicaras. 33. Four hundred Xicaras. 34. Four hundred Xicaras. 35. Bight thousand a of 
unrefined copal wrapped up in leaves of the palm-tree. 

The cities situated in a warm climate, which are represented and named in the following plate, 
are fourteen in number. 

(2) 

30 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

First, they paid 400 loads of quilted mantles. 

Likewise 400 loads of mantles striped with black and white. 

Likewise 400 loads of rich mantles. 

Likewise 400 loads of naguas and quipiles. 

Likewise 400 loads of small white mantles. 

Likewise 1600 loads of large mantles ; all which they gave every six months. 

They further paid 100 axes of copper. 

Also 1200 xicaras of yellow varnish. 

Also 200 small pitchers of bees’ honey. 

Also 400 small baskets of white copal for incense; all which they gave once in eighty days. 

Also 8000 lumps of unrefined copal, which was likewise used for incense, and was paid once in 
eighty days. 

They further presented two pieces of armour with their shields, ornamented with rich feathers, 
with the devices which are represented. 

As also 20 pieces of armour, together with their shields, ornamented with common feathers. 

Likewise five strings of rich stones called chalchihuitl. 

And likewise four large chests of timber of the size of those before mentioned, full of maize, 
beans, chian, and quautli; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XXXIX. 

1. Tepecuacuilco. 2. Chilapan. 3. Ohuapa. 4. Huitzoco. 5. Tlachmalacac. 6. Yoalan. 
7. Cocolan. 8. Atenanco. 9. Chilacachapa. 10. Teloloapan. 11. Loads of quilted mantles 
worked in this manner. 12. Loads of mantles worked in this manner. 13. Loads of rich mantles 
worked in this manner. 14. Loads of naguas and quipiles. 15. Loads of small white mantles. 
16. Loads of large mantles. 17. Loads of large mantles. 18. Loads of large mantles. 19. Loads 
of large mantles. 20. One hundred axes of copper. 21. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this 
device. 22. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 23. xx pieces of armour of common 
feathers of this device. 24. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 25. A shield of rich feathers 
of this device. 26. xx shields of common feathers. 27. 28.29. Xicaras. 30. Two chests, one of 
maize and the other of chian. 31. Two chests, one of beans and the other of quautli. 32. 33. 34. 
35. 36. Five strings of beads of rich stones which they call chalchihuitl. 37. Small baskets of 
white copal. 38. Eight thousand lumps of unrefined copal. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 477. 
48. Two hundred pitchers of bees’ honey. 49. Oztoma. 50. Ychcateopa. 51. Alahuiztla. 
52. Cuegalan. 

The number of cities of warm provinces which are represented and named in the plate following. 
First, they paid 1600 loads of large mantles striped with orange. 

Likewise 2400 loads of large mantles of twisted cloth. 

Likewise 80 loads of red chocolate. 

, 
. 
. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 31 

Likewise 400 bundles of cotton. 
As also 800 sea shells of the deepest red, resembling porcelain shells ; all which they paid every 
six months. 

PLATE XL. 

1. Cihnatlan. 2. Colima. 3. Pomotlan. 4. Nochcoc. 5. Yztapan. 6. Petlatlan. 7. Xihua- 
can. 8. Apancalecan. 9. Cocohuipileca. 10. Coyucac. 11. Qacatulan. 12. Xolochiuhyan. 
13. Loads of large mantles worked in this manner. 14. Loads of large mantles worked in 
this manner. 15. Loads of large mantles worked in this manner. 16. Loads of large mantles 
worked in this manner. 17. Large white mantles. 18. Loads of large white mantles. 19. Loads 
of large white mantles. 20. Loads of large white mantles. 21. Loads of large white mantles. 
22. Loads of large white mantles. 23. Ixxx loads of red chocolate. 24. Four hundred bundles of 
cotton. 25. Four hundred sea shells, resembling scarlet porcelain shells. 26. Four hundred sea 
shells resembling scarlet porcelain shells. 

The number of cities of warm provinces, which are represented and named in the plate following. 

First, they paid 400 loads of naguas and quipiles. 

Likewise 800 loads of large mantles. 

Likewise 800 Xicaras, which they name tecomates, out of which they drink chocolate ; all which 
they paid every six months. 

They further presented two pieces of armour, with their shields ornamented with rich feathers, 
of the device and colours which are represented. 

Likewise twenty Xicaras of gold in dust; each xicara contained two double handfuls. 

Also ten plates of gold, of the breadth of four fingers, and three quarters of a yard long, and as 
thick as parchment; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XLI. 

1, Tlapa. 2. Xocotla. 3. Ychcateopa. 4. Amaxac. 5. Ahuacatla. 6. Acocozpa. 7. Yoalan. 
8. Ocoapan. 9. Huitzannola. 10. Acuitlapa. 11. Malinaltepec. 12. Totomixtlahuacan. 
13. Tetenanco. 14. Chipetlan. 15. Loads of naguas and quipiles. 16. Loads of small mantles 
worked in this manner. 17. Loads of large mantles. 17. Loads of large mantles. 18. A piece 
of armour of rich feathers of this device. 18. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 19. A piece 
of armour of rich feathers of this device. 19. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 20. Ten 
plates of gold of the breadth of four fingers, as thick as parchment, and measuring three quarters of 
a yard in length. 21. Twenty Xicaras of gold dust, each xicara contained two double handfuls. 
22. Hight hundred Xicaras, which they name tecomates, cups out of which they drink chocolate. 

32 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

The inhabitants of the city which is named and specified in the following plate, the name of which 
is Tlacogauhtitlan, a city of a warm province, paid the following tribute; that is to say, the city of 
Tlacogauhtitlan, together with the other seven cities contained in the first section. 

400 loads of large mantles. 

100 small pitchers of bees’ honey. 

20 pans of tecocahuitl, which is a yellow varnish with which they anoint themselves; all which 
they paid every six months. . 

Also, a piece of armour with a shield ornamented with rich feathers, which they presented once 

in the year. 

PLATE XLIT. 

1. A piece of armour of feathers of this device. 2. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 
3. Loads of large mantles. 4. Twenty pans of tecocahuitl, which is a yellow varnish with which 
they anoint themselves. 5. One hundred small pitchers of bees’ honey. 6. Tlacogautitla. 7. Toli- 
mani. 8. Quauhtecomacinco. 9. Ychcatlan. 10. Tepoztitla. 11. Ahuacicinco. 12. Mitzinco. 
13. Gacatla. 

The cities represented and named in the second section of the following plate paid the following 
tribute. 

400 loads of large mantles. 

Likewise 40 large bells of copper. 

Likewise 80 copper axes. 

Likewise 100 small pitchers of bees’ honey ; which they paid every six months. 

As also a piece of armour with a shield of rich feathers. 

And likewise a little vessel of small turquoise stones ; all which they presented once in the year. 

The cities of warm provinces which are represented and named in the second section are six in 

number. 

14. A piece of armour of feathers of this device. 15. A shield of this device. 16. Loads of large 
mantles. 17. A little vessel of small turquoise stones. 18. One hundred small pitchers of bees’ 
honey. 19. xl large bells of brass or copper. 20. Ixxx axes of copper. 21. Quiyauhteopan. 
22. Olinalan. 23. Quauhtecolmatl. 24. Qualac. 25. Ychcatl. 26. Xala. 

The cities which are represented and named in the third section of the following plate are six in 
number ; cities situated in warm provinces, which paid the following tribute. 

400 loads of large mantles. 

Likewise 100 small pitchers of bees’ honey ; which they paid every six months. 

They further presented a piece of armour, with a shield ornamented with rich feathers of the 

device and colours which are represented. 

| 
5 
| 
i 
| 
{ 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 33 

Likewise 40 small tiles of gold, of the size of an oyster, and of the thickness of the finger. 
Likewise 10 middling-sized masks of rich blue stones, like turquoises ; all which they paid once 

in the year. 

27. A piece of armour of feathers of this device. 28. A shield of this device. 29. One hundred 
jars of bees’ honey. 30. Loads of large mantles. 31. 32. Tiles of gold, of the size of an oyster, and 
as thick as the finger. 33. Ten masks of rich blue stones. 34. A large bag of the said blue 
stones. 35. Yoaltepec. 36. Ehnacalco. 37. Tzilacaapan. 38. Platanala. 39. Yxicaya. 
40. Ychcaatoyac. 

The number of cities represented and named in the following plate. 

First, they presented 800 loads of large mantles, which they paid every six months. 

They further gave two pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with rich 
feathers, of the colours which are represented. 

As also four large chests of timber, of the size of those before-mentioned, full of maize, beans, 
chian, and quautli. 

Likewise four other large chests of timber, of the same size, full of the same contents. 

Likewise four more chests of timber, full of maize ; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XLII. 

1. Chalco. 2. Tepuztlan. 3. Tecmilco. 4. Xocoyoltepec. 5. Malinaltepec. 6. Quauxu- 
mulco. 7%. Loads of large mantles. 8. Loads of large mantles. 9. A piece of armour of rich 
feathers of this device. 10. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 11. A piece of armour of rich 
feathers of this device. 12. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 13. Four chests of maize, 
beans, chian, and quautli. 14. Four chests of maize, beans, chian, and quautli. 15. Two chests 
of maize. 16. 'T'wo chests of maize. 

The number of cities of hot provinces which are represented and named in the following plate. 
The articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

There were in each of these cities Mexican calpixques ; and the same order, rule, and government 
were preserved in them as in the other cities and provinces which have been already mentioned. 
For the sake of brevity, therefore, the names of the cities, and the tributes which they paid, will 
henceforward only be enumerated. With respect to their government by calpixques, it will be 
understood that the cities hereafter named preserved the same order and government. 

Those contained in the following plate are twenty-two. 

First, they paid 4000 loads of lime. | 

Likewise 4000 loads of thick cane stalks, which they name otlatle. 

Likewise 800 deer skins. : 

(kK) 

34 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

Likewise 8000 loads of acayetl*, which are perfumes which the Indians use in the mouth. 

Likewise 200 cacaxtles, which are equipments which the Indians make use of for carrying 
burthens on their backs, like packsaddles. 

All which they paid once in every period of eighty days. 

As also four large chests of timber, of the size and measure of those before mentioned, two full 

of maize, and the other two of beans; which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XLIV. 

1. Tepeacac. 2. Quechulac. 3. 'Tecamachalco. 4. Acatzinco. 5. 'Tecalco. 6. Yccochinanco. 
7. Quauhtinchan. 8. Chictlan. 9. Quatlatlauh. 10. Tepexic. 11. Ytzucan. 12. Quauhque- 
cholan. 13. Teonochtitla. 14. Teopantlan. 15. Huehuetla. 16. Atezcahuacan. 17. Oztotla- 
pechco. 18. Chiltepintla. 19. Nacochtlan. 20. Epatlan. 21. Coatzinco. 22. Tetenanco. 
23. Tlaxcaltecatl. 24. Chululteca}. 25. Huexotzincatl. 26. A staff or rod which they used as 

* Torquemada says that Acayetl were canes filled with perfumes to smoke: ‘ unos cafiutos embutidos de cosas de olor para 
tomar humo.” 

‘+ From a comparison of the symbols of the cities of Chululteca (otherwise called Chollula or Churula) and Atlicholoayan, 
which latter symbol occurs in the twenty-fourth plate of the Collection of Mendoza, under the number 16, it would appear that a 
deer’s foot was in some manner connected with the signification of both these proper names; and if, further, the apparent con- 
nection between the names of the city of Chollula and the star Sitlal Choloha, or Venus, and the signification of the former and 
that of the sign Ce Mazatl, or One Stag, (under which the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis has written “ cielo,” as he 
likewise has written “cielo” under the sien Ce Acatl, or One Cane, which was dedicated to Quecalcoatle, and for that reason attri- 
buted to Heaven ; as was also, we may suppose, Ce Mazatl, because both signs belonged to Quecalcoatle,) be considered, it might 
seem proper to assign some other derivation to the name of Chollula, and to reject as unfounded the analogy elsewhere noticed 
between that name (frequently written Churula) and Jerusalem, This is not, however, at all necessary ; for the Tultecas, in 
adapting the foreign name of Jerusalem to the Mexican dialect, which was soon to become their mother tongue, would gladly 
have availed themselves of a word in that language, which, resembling it in sound, bore also a signification which they might 
convert into an. allusion to their Messiah; since a double analogy would thus present itself: and whilst the sound of Churula 
recalled Jerusalem to their recollection, its signification would refer to that passage in the Song of Solomon which the Jews always 
interpreted of him; ‘ The voice of my beloved! Behold he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills. My 
beloved is like a roe or a young hart.” A deer or a fawn is certainly as apt a symbol of innocence as a lamb ; and the phrase of 
‘« exalting the horn” would be more suitable to the former than to the latter. It deserves likewise to be remarked, that the Indians 
of Florida offered up annually to their deity the image of a stag, or the stuffed skin of one, which they elevated in the air upon a 
high pole. From the name of Tonatzuli, which they gave to certain birds which they kept to sing the praises of the sun, it may 
be inferred that the appellation of that luminary in the language of Florida resembled the Mexican term, Tonatiuh ; that these 
Indians sacrificed to this or to some other principal deity, their first-born male infants, (differing in this custom from the less civi- 
lised Northern tribes, who carefully nourished their male children, in the hopes that at a future time they would be serviceable in 
war, (is a fact which authors of veracity have not scrupled to assert ; which if true, even of some small Indian tribe, extreme fana- 
ticism and credulity can only account for. In reference to the above-mentioned symbol of the city of Cholula (the deer’s foot), it 
may be observed, that the same symbol occurs in one of the original Mexican paintings preserved in the Bodleian library, sur- 
mounting a globe, which is fastened to a crown worn by some Aztec deity, who poises in one hand a lance, and holds in the other 
a shield, whose figure is associated with the sign of thirteen eagles. The plate likewise, in the Collection of Mendoza, in which 
this symbol is contained, may correct a mistake of Clavigero; as it demonstrates by the heads of three chiefs of Tlaxcalla, 
Chulula, and Huexotzinco, that those states, and the cities dependent upon them, were tributary to Montezuma, although the 
tribute which they paid was of little value. The symbols of the other Mexican cities are interesting, since they are all accom- 
panied with their proper names; and the interpretation of the hieroglyphics, which Boturini pronounces in the following sentence 
to be an almost hopeless task, (“ solo este trabajo de interpretar los nombres de las figuras apura toda la atencion de un 

historiador,”) can now cause neither embarrassment nor confusion. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 35 

a sword, with knives inlaid along the sides. 27. Four thousand loads of lime. 28. Hight hundred 
deer skins. 29. Four thousand loads of thick cane stalks, which they name otlatle. 30. Eight thou- 
sand loads of canes of which they made arrows. 31. Two chests of maize. 32. A chest of beans. 
33. Eight thousand loads of acayetl, which are perfumes which they use in the mouth. 34. Two 
hundred cacaxtles. 

The cities of hot and temperate provinces which are represented and named in the following plate 
are eleven in number; and the tributes which they paid are the following. 

First, 400 loads of quilted mantles richly worked. 

Likewise 400 loads of mantles striped with scarlet and white. 

Likewise 400 loads of mantles striped with black and white. 

Likewise 400 loads of maxtlatl, which served as trowsers. 

Likewise 400 loads of quipiles and naguas; all which they paid to the kings of Mexico every six 
months. 

They further presented two pieces of armour, and the same number of shields, ornamented with 
rich feathers of the colours and devices which are represented. 

Also two strings of beads of chalchihuitl, rich stones. 

Likewise 800 handfuls of long green rich feathers, which they call quecali. 

Likewise a piece of work of rich feathers named tlalpiloni, which served as a royal ensign, of the 
shape which is represented. 

Likewise 40 bags of grain, which they call grain of cochineal. 

And 20 xicaras of gold in dust, of the finest quality; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XLV, 

1. Coayxtlahuacan. 2. Texopan. 3.Tamacolapan. 4. Yanantitlan. 5. Tepuzculula. 6. No- 
chiztlan. 7. Xaltepec. 8. Tamacolan. 9. Mictlan. 10. Coaxomulco. 11. Cuicatlan. 12. Loads 
of rich quilted mantles worked in this manner. 13. Loads of mantles worked in this manner. 
14, Loads of mantles worked in this manner. 15. Loads of maxtlac. 16. Loads of naguas and 
quipiles. 17. A piece of armour of feathers of this device. 18. A shield of feathers of this 
device. 19. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 20. A shield of rich feathers of this 
device. 21.22. Two strings of beads of chalchihuitl, rich stones. 23. 24. Eight hundred handfuls 
of long green rich feathers, which they call quetzale. 25.26. Forty bags of grain, which they name 
cochineal. 27. Twenty xicaras of fine gold dust. 28. A tlalpiloni of rich feathers of this shape, 
which served as a royal ensign. 

The number of cities of hot and temperate provinces which are represented and named in the 
following plate is eleven; and the tribute which they paid is as follows. 

First, they gave 400 loads of quilted mantles richly worked. 

Likewise 800 loads of large mantles ; which they paid every six months to the kings of Mexico. 

36 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

' They further presented four large chests of timber of the size of the preceding, two full of maize, 
one of beans, and the other of chian. 
Also twenty tiles of fine gold, of the size of a middling salver, and of the thickness of the thumb. 
_ Likewise twenty bags of grain of cochineal ; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XLVI. 

1. Coplapan. 2. Etlan. 3. Quauxilotitlan. 4. Guaxaca. 5. Camotlan. 6. Teocuitlatlan. 
7. Quatzontepec. 8. Octlan. 9. Teticpa. 10. Tlalcuechahuaya. 11. Macuilxochic. 12. Loads 
of rich quilted mantles worked in this manner. 13. Loads of large mantles. 14. Loads of large 
mantles. 15. Two chests of maize. 16. 'l'wo chests of beans and chian. 17. Twenty tiles of fine 
gold, as large as a middling-sized salver, and as thick as the thumb. 18. Twenty bags of grain of 

cochineal. 

The number of cities of hot provinces which are represented in the following plate is three. The 
articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, they paid 400 loads of large mantles, which they gave every six months. 

They further presented a piece of armour, and a shield, ornamented with rich feathers, of the 
colours which are represented. 

Likewise twenty xicaras full of fine gold dust. 

Likewise five bags of grain of cochineal. 

Likewise 400 handfuls of rich green feathers, which they call quetzalli; all which they paid once in 

the year. 

PLATE XLVII. 

1. Loads of large mantles. 2. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 3. 'Tlachquiauco. 
4. Twenty xicaras of fine gold in dust. 5. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 6. Achioatlan. 
7. Capotlan. 8. Five bags of grain of cochineal. 9. Four hundred handfuls of quetzali, rich feathers. 

The cities of hot and temperate provinces which are represented and named in the following plate 
are twenty-two in number; and the articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are 
the following. 

First, they gave 1600 loads of rich mantles, wearing apparel for lords and caciques. 

Likewise 800 loads of mantles striped with scarlet and white. 

Likewise 400 loads of naguas and quipiles; all which they paid every six months. 

They further presented a piece of armour, and a shield, ornamented with rich feathers, with the 
device of a bird, and of the colours which are represented. 

Likewise a shield of gold. 

Likewise a device for armour resembling a wing, of rich yellow feathers. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. oy 

‘Likewise a band of gold for the head, of the breadth of the hand, and as thick as parchment. 
Likewise two strings of beads, and a collar of gold. 

Likewise a diadem of gold, of the shape which is represented. 

Likewise three large pieces of chalchiuitl, rich stones. 

Likewise three strings of entirely round beads of chalchiuitl, rich stones. 

Likewise four strings of beads of chalchiuitl, rich stones. 

Likewise twenty lip-jewels of clear amber, ornamented with gold. 

Likewise twenty other lip-jewels of crystal with blue enamel, and ornamented with gold. 
Likewise eighty handfuls of rich green feathers, which they call quecali. 

Likewise four pieces of green feathers, like handfuls, ornamented with rich yellow feathers. 
Likewise 8000 small handfuls of rich feathers of the colour of the turquoise. 

Likewise 8000 small handfuls of rich scarlet feathers. 

Likewise 8000 small handfuls of rich green feathers. 

Likewise 100 jars or pitchers of fine liquid amber. 

Likewise 200 loads of chocolate. 

Likewise 16000 round lumps, resembling balls, of oli, which is the gum of a tree; which balls 

being struck on the ground, rebound very high; all which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE XLVIII. 

i. Tochtepec. 2. Xayaco. 3. Otlatitlan. 4. Cocamaloapa. 5. Mixtlan. 6. Michapan. 
7. Ayotzintepec. 8. Michatlan. 9. Teotlitlan. 10. Xicaltepec. 11. Oxitlan. 12. Tzinacanoztoc. 
13. ‘Tototepec. 14. Chinantlan. 15. Ayocintepec. 16. Cuezcomatitla. 17. Puctlan. 18. Te- 
teutlan. 19. Loads of rich mantles worked in this manner. 20. Loads of rich mantles worked in 
thismanner. 21. Loads of rich mantles worked in thismanner. 22. Loads of rich mantles worked 
in this manner. 23. Loads worked in this manner. 24. A piece of armour of rich feathers with this 
device of a bird. 25. A shield of rich feathers. 26. A golden shield of this shape. 27. Loads of 
mantles worked in this manner. 28. Loads of naguas and quipiles. 29. A device from the down 
of rich feathers. 30. A diadem of gold of this shape. 31. A golden band for the head, of the 
breadth of the hand, and as thick as parchment. 32. A string of golden beads. 33. A string of 
golden beads. 34. 35. 36. 37. Four strings of chalchihuitl. 38.39. 40. Three pieces of chalchihuitl, 
rich stones. 41.42. 43. Three strings of chalchihuitl, rich stones. 44. Twenty jewels for the lips, 
of clear amber, with their ends set in gold. 45. Twenty jewels for the lips, of crystal of a blue 
shade, set in gold. 46. Eighty handfuls of rich feathers. 47. 48. Sixteen thousand balls of olli. 
49. Tlacotlal. 50. 51. 52. 53. Four pieces of rich feathers resembling handfuls in their composition, 
of this shape. 54. One hundred pots or jars of liquid amber. 55. Two hundred loads of cho- 
colate. 56. Toztlan. 57. Hight thousand small handfuls of blue feathers. 58. Eight thousand 
small handfuls of rich scarlet feathers. 59. Hight thousand small handfuls of rich green feathers. 
60. Yautlan. 61. Yxmatlatlan. 

(1) 

38 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

The cities of hot provinces, which are represented and named in the following plate, are seven in 
number. ‘The articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, they gave two long strings of chalchihuitl, rich stones. 

Likewise 1400 handfuls of rich blue, scarlet, green, and turquoise coloured feathers, which are 
represented in six handfuls. | 

Likewise 80 whole skins of birds of rich plumage, of the colour of the turquoise, with violet breasts, 
of the colours which are represented. 

Likewise 80 more whole skins of birds. 

Likewise 800 handfuls of rich yellow feathers. 

Likewise 800 handfuls of long green feathers which they call quecali. 

Likewise two lip-jewels of transparent amber ornamented with gold. 

Likewise 200 loads of chocolate. 

Likewise 40 tiger skins. 

Likewise 800 rich tecomates out of which they drink chocolate. 

And likewise two large pieces of clear amber, of the size of a brick; all which they paid every six 
months. 

PLATE XUIX. 

1. Xoconochco. 2. Ayotlan. 3. Coyoacan. 4. Mapachtepec. 5. Macatlan. 6. Huiztlan. 
7. Acapetlatlan. 8. Huehuetlan. 9. Ochpaniztli*. 10. 11. Two strings of chalchihuitl. 12. Tla- 
caxipehualiztl*. 13. Handfuls of rich blue feathers. 14. Handfuls of rich green feathers. 15. Hand- 
fuls of rich scarlet feathers. 16. Handfuls of rich blue feathers of the colour of turquoise. 
17. Handfuls of rich scarlet feathers. 18. Handfuls of rich green feathers. 19. Eighty skins of 
birds of this colour. 20. Handfuls of rich yellow feathers. 21. Handfuls of rich green feathers. 
22. A lip-jewel of transparent amber, set in gold. 23. Eighty skins of birds of this colour. 
24. Handfuls of rich yellow feathers. 25. Handfuls of rich green feathers. 26. A lip-jewel of 
transparent amber, set in gold. 27. One hundred loads of chocolate. 28. Twenty tiger skins. 
29. One hundred loads of chocolate. 30. Twenty skins. 31. Four hundred tecomates of this shape, 
out of which they drink chocolate. 32. Four hundred tecomates of this shape. 33.34. Two pieces 
of clear amber, each of the size of a brick. 

The cities of hot and temperate provinces, which are represented and named in the following plate, 
are seven in number. The articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, they gave 400 loads of large mantles; which they paid every six months 

Likewise 20 loads of chocolate. 

Also 1600 bundles of cotton ; all which they paid once in the year. 

* The symbols of two Mexican months seem to have been inserted here accidentally amongst those of the tributary cities. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 39 

PLATE L. 

1. Quauhtochco. 2. Teucoltzapotla. 3. Tototlan. 4. Tuchconco. 5. Ahuilizapan. 6. Quaut- 
hetelco. 7. Ytzteyocan. 8. Loads of large mantles. 9. Twenty loads of chocolate. 10. 11. 12. 
13. One thousand six hundred bundles of cotton. 

The cities of hot provinces contained, represented, and named in the following plate, are six in 
number. The articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, 400 loads of quipiles and naguas, which are wearing apparel for women. 

Likewise 400 loads of quilted mantles. 

Likewise 400 loads of small mantles, with white and black fringes. 

Likewise 400 loads of mantles, each mantle of six yards, with one half striped with black and 
white. 

Likewise 400 loads of large white mantles, each mantle of six yards. 

Likewise 160 loads of rich and curiously worked mantles, wearing apparel for lords and caciques. 

Likewise 1200 loads of striped mantles, containing more white than black; all which they paid 
every six months. 

They further presented two rich pieces of armour, with their shields ornamented with rich feathers, 
according to their representations. 

Also a string of chalchihuitl, rich stones. 

Also 400 handfuls of long rich green feathers, which they call quecali. 

Likewise 20 lip-jewels of crystal with blue enamel, set in gold. 

Likewise 20 lip-jewels of transparent amber, ornamented with gold. 

Likewise 200 loads of chocolate. 

And further a quecaltlalpiloni of rich feathers, which served as a royal ensign ; all which they paid 
once in the year. 

PLATE LI. 

1. Cuetlaxtlan. 2. Mictlanquauhtla. 3. Tlapanicytlan. 4. Oxichan. 5. Acozpa. 6. Teocio- 
can. 7. Loads of naguas and quipiles worked in this manner. 8. Loads of mantles worked in this 
manner, half scarlet. 9. Loads of small mantles worked in this manner. 10. Loads of mantles 
worked in this manner. 11. Loads of large mantles. 12. Eighty loads of rich mantles worked 
in this manner. 13. Highty loads of rich mantles worked in this manner. 14. Loads of mantles 
worked in this manner. 15. Loads of mantles worked in this manner. 16. Loads of mantles 
worked in this manner. 17. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 18. A shield of 
rich feathers of this device. 19. A piece of armour of rich feathers. 20. A shield of rich feathers. 
21. A string of chalchihuitl, which are stones. 22. Two hundred loads of chocolate. 23. Four 
hundred handfuls of green feathers. 24. Twenty lip-jewels of crystal of a blue shade, set in gold. 

40 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

25. Twenty lip-jewels of transparent amber, set in gold. 26. A quecaltlalpiloni of rich feathers, 
which served as a royal ensign. 

The cities contained, represented, and named in the following plate, are seven in number; and 
the articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, they gave 400 loads of mantles, striped with brown and white. : 

Likewise 800 loads of large white mantles; which they paid every six months. 

They further presented once in the year two pieces of armour with their shields, ornamented 
with rich feathers, of the kind which is represented. 

PLATE LIl. 
1. Tlapacoyan. 2. Xiloxochitlan. 3. Xochiquauhtitlan. 4. Tuchtlan. 5. Coapan. 6. Azta- 

opan. 7. Acagacatla. 8. Loads of mantles worked in this manner. 9. Loads of large white mantles. 
10. Loads of large white mantles. 11. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 12. A 
piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 13. A shield of feathers of this device. 14. A shield 
of feathers of this device. 

The number of cities represented and named in the following plate. The articles of tribute which 
they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 
First, they gave 1600 loads of mantles, striped with brown and white. 

Likewise 8000 loaves or lumps of liquid amber for incense, which they call xochiococtl ; all which | 

they paid every six months. 
They further presented two pieces of armour with their shields, ornamented with rich feathers, 
of the kind which are represented ; which they paid once in the year. 

PLATE LIII. 

1. Tlatlauhquitepec. 2. Atenco. 3. Teciutlan. 4. Ayutuchco. 5. Yayauquitlalpa. 6. Xo- 
noctla. 7. Teotlalpan. 8. Ytztepec. 9.Yxcoyamec*. 10. Yaunahuac. 11. Caltepec. 12. Four 

* This symbol represents a beast with an eye situated in the middle of its body, to which the first syllable yx of the proper 

name Yxcoyamec, (which often in compound words signifies an eye, as in Yxnextli, the name which the Mexicans gave to Eve on . 

account of her perpetual sorrow for having plucked the forbidden fruit,) alludes. The idea of beasts with eyes in various parts of 
their body often occurs in the Old Testament ; and Ezekiel describes, in the eighteenth verse of the first chapter of his prophecies, 
wheels full of eyes ; and Zechariah mentions, in the ninth verse of the third chapter of his book, a stone with seven eyes. Hyes are 
also frequently represented in Mexican paintings in places and on objects where their occurrence is quite unusual. A beast with 
five eyes upon its back is painted in the tenth page of the lesser Vatican MS.; anda stone with the exact number of seven eyes 
seems to be represented in the Mexican painting which is preserved in the Imperial library at Vienna. It cannot be denied that 
a passage in the twelfth chapter of the Revelations, which has perplexed all commentators on Scripture, ‘‘ And there appeared 
a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun,” receives considerable elucidation from some of the figures contained 

in the Mexican paintings, since this extraordinary costume is one in which they are not unfrequently attired. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. AA 

hundred loads of striped mantles. 13. Four hundred loads of mantles, striped with black and white. 
14, Four hundred loads of striped mantles. 15. Four hundred loads of striped mantles. 16. A 
piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 17. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 
18. A shield of feathers of this device. 19. A shield of feathers of this device. 20. Eight thousand 

loaves of xochiococotle, which is liquid amber. 

The cities of hot provinces, which are represented and named in the following plate, are seven 
in number. The articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, 400 loads of mantles, latticed as it were with black and white. 

Likewise 400 loads of rich mantles, worked with scarlet and white, wearing apparel for lords. 

Likewise 400 loads of maxtlatl, which served as trowsers, otherwise named small-clothes. 

Likewise 800 loads of large white mantles, each mantle of six yards. 

Likewise 800 loads of striped mantles, each measuring twelve yards, orange-coloured and white. 

Likewise 400 loads of large white mantles, each mantle of twelve yards. 

Likewise 400 loads of mantles, striped with green, yellow, and scarlet. 

Likewise 400 loads of naguas and quipiles. 

Likewise 240 loads of rich worked mantles, of scarlet, white, and black, wearing apparel for lords ; 
all which dresses they paid every six months. 

They further presented two pieces of armour with their shields, ornamented with rich feathers, 
of the kind which is represented. 

Also 800 loads of dry axi. 

Likewise 20 bags of small white feathers, with which they ornamented mantles. 

Likewise two strings of chalchihuitl, rich stones. 

Likewise two strings of beads of rich stones, resembling turquoises. 

Likewise two pieces like salvers, ornamented or set with rich turquoise stones; all which they paid 
once in the year. 

PLATE LIV. 

1. Tuchpa. 2. Tlatigapa. 3. Cihnanteopa. 4. Papantla. 5. Ogelotepec. 6. Miahuaapa. 
7. Mictlan. 8. Four hundred loads of mantles worked in this manner. 9. Four hundred loads of 
rich mantles worked in this manner. 10. Four hundred loads of maxtlatl, which are a sort of 
trowsers. 11. Four hundred loads of large white mantles. 12. Four hundred loads of large white 
mantles. 13. Four hundred loads of mantles worked in this manner. 14. Four hundred loads 
of mantles worked in this manner. 15. Loads of mantles. 16. Loads of mantles worked in this 
manner. 17. Loads of quipiles and naguas. 18. 19. 20. Two hundred and forty loads of rich 
mantles. 21. 22. Eight hundred loads of dried axi. 23. A piece of armour of rich feathers. of 
this device. 24. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this device. 25. Twenty bags of small 
feathers. 26. 27. ‘Two strings of chalchihuitl, beads of rich stones. 28. A string of turquoise 

(™) 

AQ INTERPRETATION OF THE 

stones. 29. 30. Two salvers of small turquoise stones. 31. A shield of rich feathers. 32. A 
shield of rich feathers of this device. 

The cities represented in the following plate are two, and the articles of tribute which they paid to 
the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, they gave 800 loads of rich mantles, worked in scarlet and white, with fringes of green, 
yellow, scarlet, and blue. 

Likewise 400 loads of maxtlatl. 

Likewise 400 loads more of maxtlatl. 

Likewise 400 loads of large white mantles, each measuring six yards; all which they paid every 
six months. 

They further presented each year 1200 bundles of cotton 

PLATE LV. 

1. Atlan. 2. Four hundred loads of rich mantles worked in this manner. 3. Four hundred 
loads of maxtlatl, which are a kind of trowsers. 4. Four hundred loads of rich mantles worked in 
this manner. 5. Four hundred loads of maxtlatl, which are a kind of trowsers. 6. Four hundred 
loads of large white mantles. 7. Tecapatitlan. 8. 9. 10. One thousand two hundred bundles of 

cotton. 

The tributes which the city of Oxitipan, which is represented and named in the following plate, 
paid to the kings of Mexico, are the following. 

First, 2000 loads of large mantles, each mantle of three yards. 

Likewise 800 loads of large mantles, striped with yellow, blue, scarlet and green, each mantle 
measuring six yards; all which apparel was presented every six months. 

They further gave 400 loads of dry axi. 

And likewise a live eagle, and occasionally two or three, accordingly as they could catch or 

procure them ; all which they paid and presented once in the year. 

PLATE LVI. 

1. Four hundred loads of large mantles. 2%. Four hundred loads of large mantles. 3. Four 
hundred loads of large mantles. 4. Four hundred loads of large mantles. 5. Oxitipan. 6. Four 
hundred loads of striped mantles of this colour. 7. Four hundred loads of striped mantles of this 
colour. 8. Loads of large mantles. 9. Four hundred loads of dry axi. 10. A live eagle, which 
they presented at every payment of tribute; and occasionally two or three, accordingly as they could 

procure them. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 43 

The cities which are represented and named in the following plate are five in number. The 
articles of tribute which they paid to the kings of Mexico are the following. 

First, 400 loads of white mantles, with fringes of scarlet, blue, green, and yellow. 

Likewise 400 loads of maxtlatl, which are a kind of trowsers. 

Likewise 800 loads of large white mantles, each mantle of six yards. 

Likewise 400 loads of naguas and quipiles, which are wearing apparel for women ; all which 
apparel they paid every six months. 

They further presented two pieces of armour, with their shields, ornamented with rich feathers, 
of the kind which is represented. 

Also 800 bundles of cotton ; all which they paid once in the year. 

Also 400 loads of dry axi. 

PLATE LVII. 

1. Ctzicoac. 2. Molanco. 3. Cozcatecutlan. 4. Ychcatlan. 5. Xocoyocan. 6. Four 
hundred loads of mantles worked in this manner. 7. Four hundred loads of maxtlatl, which are a 
kind of trowsers. 8. Four hundred loads of large white mantles. 9. Four hundred loads of large 
white mantles. 10. Four hundred loads of naguas and quipiles. 11. A piece of armour of feathers 
of this device. 12. A shield of rich feathers. 13. A piece of armour of rich feathers of this 
device. 14. A shield of rich feathers of this device. 15. Four hundred loads of dry axi. 16. 17. 
Eight hundred bundles of cotton *. 

* It may appear surprising that no mention should occur in this long tribute roll, of silver, pearls, emeralds, and rubies ;. all 
which are enumerated by Spanish historians in the list of the first presents which Montezuma sent to Cortes ; of which two wheels, 
the one of gold and the other of silver, representing the sun and the moon, formed the most valuable part. The precious green 
stones, named Chalchiutles, so often noticed as an article of tribute, were not emeralds, or a stone of much intrinsic value; but 
Clavigero and various Spanish writers mention the large emerald which was discovered by a missionary in the province of 
Mixteca, which was called the Heart of the People, and on which was carved a bird in the centre of a ring formed out of a 
serpent; who, notwithstanding the immense price which he was offered for it, ground it in the presence of the Indians into 
powder. The green colour of the stone, its name, and the symbols engraved upon it, lead to the supposition that it was an 
ornament belonging to some image of Quecalcoatle, who was worshiped under the three names of Quecalcoatle, which signifies 
a serpent ; Huitzilopuchtli, which means an aquatic bird; and Votan, which is a heart in the Tzendal or Gapotecan language. 
The following are the Mexican names of various precious stones, which the Tultecas were very skilful in cutting and polishing 
with emery, three or four kinds of which are described by Sahagun :—the Quetzaliztli was the emerald, the literal signification of 
which name is the precious stone; the Teuxiuitl was the turquoise; the Tlapalteuxihuitl is supposed to have been the ruby; and 
the Xiuhmatlaliztli, the sapphire; the Epiollotli was the pearl ; amber was called according to the shades of its colour by three 
different names, Apoconalli, Tzalapoconalli, and Iztacapoconalli ; the Eztetl was the blood-stone; the Teuilotl was the crystal ; and 
the Teutetl was a dark stone resembling jet. Sahagun describes, in the first section of the twenty-ninth chapter of his tenth book, 
the manner in which the Tultecas discovered precious stones, whether they lay hid in the earth or within other stones, by watching 
at sun-rise certain exhalations which rose from the surface of the ground: “They possessed such knowledge respecting precious 
stones, that although they were within some other large stone and buried in the earth, they found them by their native ingenuity 
and philosophy. They discovered them im places where they were likely to exist in this manner: They got up early in the 
morning and proceeded up some rising piece of ground, turning their faces towards the rising sun; and as they walked along they 
looked carefully around them to perceive where and in what situation beneath the ground a precious stone was likely to be: they 

44, INTERPRETATION OF THE 

examined more attentively moist and damp spots; and when the sun had completely risen, but more especially when it was begin- 
ning to rise, a fine and subtile vapour collected and rose in the air; and there they discovered the precious stone under the earth 
and within some other stone, by seeing the ascent of that vapour. They were the discoverers of the mine of precious stones which 
the Mexicans name Xiuitl, which are turquoises, which according to ancient tradition is in a large hill near the city of Teputzotlan, 
which bears the name of Xiuhtzoni.” It may be interesting to compare this passage of Sahagun with what Diodorus Siculus 
says in his second book, of the growth of ‘gems in Arabia, and of their modification into different colours and various degrees of 
transparency by the rays and heat of the sun; since the ancient philosophers seem, like the Tultecas, to have believed that the 
sun drew a vapour (ex@vouc) from precious stones. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 45 

THE THIRD PART. 

THE description of what was customary with the native Mexicans at the birth of a male or female 
infant; the rite and ceremony of naming the children, and of afterwards dedicating and offering 
them at their temples, or to the military profession, according to the signification of the figures which 
follow on the other side of the leaf, which are accompanied with brief explanations in addition to 
the description given in this page of all the said figures, which is as follows. 

As soon as the mother was delivered of the infant, they put it into a cradle, as is represented ; and 
when it was four days old, the midwife took the infant in her arms naked, and carried it into the 
court of the mother’s house, in which court were strewed reeds, or rushes, which they call Tule, upon 
which was placed a small vessel of water, in which the said midwife bathed the said infant; and after 

she had bathed it, three boys * being seated near the said rushes, eating roasted maize mixed with 

* Baron de Humboldt, citing M. de Palin’s work on the study of hieroglyphics, remarks, in reference to this passage in the 
Interpretation of the Collection of Mendoza, that the Mexican custom of naming children in the presence of three other children, 
who were parties to the ceremony, was somewhat analogous to the Jewish rite of baptizing proselytes before three witnesses : 

“ Cette cérémonie se fait devant trois enfans (que désignent des enfans en général) ils nomment le nouveau-né, et célébrent 
sa naissance en mangeant du mais. Dans V’inscription de Rosette, un décret ordonne la méme chose, et par une pareille repré- 
sentation ; les trois célébrans y étant réunis aux trois fleurs pour former le caractére de la célébration du jour de naissance, que 
l’on représente aussi par le lever du soleil. Tous les détails de ce tableau ou de cette table de loi Mexicaine rapellent le baptéme 
des proselytes du judaisme, en présence de trois temoins, et les audidpoua des Grecs, ot V’enfant le cinquitme jour de sa 
naissance étoit voué aux dieux et obtenoit un nom, aprés des cérémonies expiatoires.” The remaining rites, of baptising the 
children and of afterwards presenting them with an offering at the temple, seem to be a confusion of Christian ceremonies with 
Jewish customs and traditions ; which however distant the period or intricate the manner in which it was effected,—and whether 
by Jews alone in hatred to Christianity, and in profanation of its sacraments and most hallowed reminiscences, and partly out of 
superstition, (as the Mahometans are said sometimes to adore the cross,) or by Jews and Christians both colonizing America,— 
the longer we meditate on the religious rites of the Mexicans and the Peruvians, the more we are inclined to believe did actually 
take place. 

The custom of offering their children at the temple was peculiar to the Jews; and no other nation ever imitated them in this, 
except the Mexicans. Another custom analogous to this, or at least founded on an analogous belief, —viz. that their God who 
brought them out of Egypt had a right to their bodies for sacrifice on his altar, as well as for service in his temple,—was the 
redemption of the first-born, which consisted in every Jewish parent being obliged to give the priests or Levites a certain sum 
of money, in lieu of his eldest son for sacrifice ; for according to the fifteenth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Exodus, “all that 
opened the matrix amongst beasts,” being males, were to be sacrificed to the Lord ; but the first-born of men were to be redeemed. 
The firstling of an ass was likewise to be redeemed with a lamb ; or if unredeemed, to have its neck broken. This command of 
Moses should be considered in reference to the custom of sacrificing children which existed in Mexico and Peru: for if the 
Indians borrowed the custom of offering their children at the temple from the Jews, vague traditions of the time when the Lord, 
to punish Pharaoh whose heart he had hardened, smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, “ from the first-born of Pharaoh 

(Nn) 

46 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

boiled beans, which kind of food they named Yacuwe, which provision or paste they set before the 
said boys, in order that they might eat it. After the said bathing or washing, the said midwife desired 

that sat on his throne, unto the first-born of the captive that was in the dungeon! ;* and an indistinct recollection of the sacrifices 
which were ordained to commemorate that event, and of the devotion of the first-born of men as well as of animals, miserably 
confused with notions of propitiation and atonement, might have suggested to their fanaticism the idea of sacrificing their own 
children, who were no less innocent than those of the Egyptians. 

In the Holy Land such sacrifices were very common amongst the Jews; and the name of Tophet, and of the Valley of the Son 
of Hinnom, which was close to the gates of Jerusalem, is still odious on account of the human sacrifices, especially those of 
children, which the Scripture records as having there taken place. 

Ifwe may be allowed to venture an opinion on an obscure matter of history, the extreme rigour with which the Jews after 
having been long fostered in Spain were treated by the Spanish government and the Inquisition, towards the end of the fifteenth 
and the beginning of the sixteenth century, was not less owing to a spirit of intolerance on their part, than to the discovery of 
great enormities perpetrated by the more ignorant and fanatical class of Jews resident in Spain at the celebration of the festival 
of the sacrifice of their paschal lamb. The severity of the edicts issued against them at that time is really surprising ; and for 
many years afterwards a kind of undefined horror of Jews and Judaism prevailed in Spain, which Sir Edwin Sandys, an old English 
writer, probably attributing it to a wrong cause, thus notices: “‘ There is in Spain a sort of people of the Marrany, as they term 
them, who are baptized Jews and Moors, and many of them in secret withal circumcised Christians. All which, although 
conforming themselves in some sort of outward show unto the Christian religion, yet are thought in heart to be utterly averse 
from it, and to retain an inward desire to return to that superstition from which their ancestors by rigour and terror were driven ; 
and the Jews will say in Italy, that there come divers Spaniards to them to be circumcised there, and so away to Constantinople 
to plant in the East.” , 

It may be interesting to learn from the Narrative of Mr. Walsh, chaplain to Lord Strangford, (the late British ambassador to 
the Porte,) what is the present situation at Constantinople of the descendants of those Jews who were expelled from Spain three 
centuries ago; who it is singular should be accused of the same crimes by the Turks as were formerly often unjustly laid to their 
charge by Christians. Mr. Walsh’s account is somewhat long ; but we shall here give it without any abbreviation :—‘“‘ Our direct 
road was to cross the harbour, and pass through Constantinople, and out at the Selyvria gate ; but as we took horses from Pera, 
we were compelled to go a round of several miles, and cross the Kyat-khana Sou, at the head of the harbour. Our way lay 
through the suburb in which the Jews reside ; and perhaps you would wish to know, en passant, something of the remnant of that 
extraordinary people settled at Constantinople, who have lately distinguished themselves in the Greek insurrection by their 
inveterate hostility to the Greeks. You would naturally suppose, as I did, that these people came to Constantinople from some 
part of the East, and brought with them their Oriental language ; but this is not the case. After the extinction of the Waldenses, 
in the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, the rage of the Inquisition was turned against the Jews of Spain; and having inflicted on 
them various persecutions and sufferings, an edict was at length issued for expelling them altogether from that country ; and 
they set out, to the amount of eight hundred thousand persons, from this land of Egypt,—not spoiling their enemies, but spoiled of 
all they possessed themselves. As the same prejudices existed against them in every Christian country at the time, they could 
find no asylum in the West; so they set their faces to the East, and returned to the place from whence they originally came. 
They were kindly received in different parts of the Ottoman Empire, and the Turks afforded them that protection which 
Christians had denied them. They settled at Salonichi, Smyrna, Rodosto, and other large towns, where they at this day form an 
important part of the population. At Salonichi they have no less than thirty synagogues. But the principal division of them 

came to Constantinople, and were assigned a large district, called Hassa Kui, to inhabit, where they form a community of fifty 

1A very remarkable representation of the ten plagues which God sent on Egypt, in order to punish Pharaoh’s hardness of 
heart, occurs in the eleventh and twelfth pages of the Borgian MS. Moses is there painted holding up im his left hand his rod 
which became a serpent, and with a furious gesture calling down plagues on the Egyptians. These plagues were frogs, locusts, 
lice, flies, &c., all which seem to be represented in the pages referred to; but the last and most dreadful were the thick darkness 
which overspread Egypt for three days, and the death of the first-born of all the Egyptians ; the former of which is represented 
by the figure of an eclipse of the sun, and the latter by Mictlanteotle, (or the god of the dead,) descending in the form of a skeleton 
or a cadaverous body, from the rod of Moses. The curious symbol of one serpent swallowing up another, occurs likewise in the 
nineteenth page of the same MS. It is not extraordinary that the Mexicans, who were acquainted with one portion of Exodus, 
-—that relating to the migration of the children of Israel from Egypt,—should also have not been ignorant of another. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. AT 

the said boys to pronounce the name aloud*, bestowing a new name on the infant which had been 
thus bathed; and the name which they gave it was that which the midwife wished. When they first 
carried out the infant to bathe it,—if it was a boy they carried him holding his symbol in his hand, 
which symbol was the instrument which the father of the infant employed, either in the military pro- 

* Naming children was so important a ceremony amongst the Jews, that if the infant died before it was eight days old, when 
the rite of circumcision was performed, a name was given to it at the place of burial; that, as the Rabbis say, it might have a 
name amongst Israel, and be remembered at the resurrection. 

According likewise to Jewish usages, boys were to be present at the rite of circumcision, one of whom was to hold a torch with 

twelve lights, in remembrance of the twelve tribes of Israel. 

thousand persons. The Turks call the different people who reside under them by names indicative of the estimation in which 
they hold them; the Greeks, Yeshir, (or slaves,) as they were considered to have forfeited their life at the taking of Constantinople, 
and hold it ever since on sufferance ;—the Armenians, Rayas, (or subjects,) as they were never a conquered people, but merged 
insensibly into the population of the empire: but the Jews they call Mousaphir, (or visitors,) because they sought an asylum amongst 
them. They treat them therefore as visitors, with kindness and hospitality. I give you this as the original and accurate distinc- 
tion; though all the subjects of Turkey, who are not Turks, are loosely called Rayas. As a further motive for good-will they mu- 
tually approach to an assimilation, much more nearly than any of the rest, in their religious opimions and observances. Their 
strict theism, their practice of circumcision, their abhorrence of swine’s flesh, their language read from right to left; are all coin- 
cidences which, to a certain degree, give them an identity of feeling which does not take place with the others. 

“The Jews, therefore, are a favoured people, and held by the Turks in a degree of consideration which is very different from that 
which they receive in any Christian country at the present day. In many towns im Germany which I have visited, they are 
prohibited by law from passing a night within the walls; and the law is strictly enforced, unless evaded by the payment of an 
exorbitant tax: in others they are obliged to submit to degrading conditions and suspicious precautions, which are as frivolous 
as they are humiliating. They cannot travel from town to town, or exercise particular trades, without paying an extraordinary 
toll or tax, which is not exacted from other people. Even in England there is a strong line of demarcation still drawn, and they 
are still considered foreigners; and in London they cannot be members of corporations, cannot open a shop, cannot practise 
particular callings, without paying to the corporation exorbitant fines, which are demanded from nobody else. The prejudice 
which led to cruelty and persecution is softened with the growing liberality of the age; but it still exists under a milder form, 
and is a wall of separation between them and the Christian community. In Turkey it forms no such barrier: the Jews freely 
exercise the most lucrative callings; they are generally the brokers who transact business for merchants, and the sarafs, or 
bankers, with whom the Turks deposit their property. They enter, particularly the women, into the harams with merchandize, 
and so are agents of intrigue, and acquire extraordinary influence in Turkish houses. 

“On a hill behind the quarter of Hassa Kui, where they reside, they have a large cemetery, ornamented with marble tombs, 
some of them extremely well sculptured in high relief; and the houses of the opulent are furnished and fitted up in a style of 
Oriental magnificence. The lower orders, however, are marked by that peculiarity which distinguishes them in. every other 
country ; squalor and raggedness in their persons, filth and nastiness in their houses, their morals very lax, and ready to 
engage in any base business which the less vile would have a repugnance to. They are distinguished, like all classes in Turkey, 
by a particular dress: they wear a turban like a Turkish gentleman, but lower; and instead of being encircled with a rich 
shawl, it is generally bound with a mean cross-barred handkerchief; and their slippers, the colour of which is particularly 
prescribed to all Turkish subjects, are blue. The front of their houses is lead-colour. They are inflexibly attached to their 
own religion, though many of them have apparently conformed to Mahomedanism ;—such as have done so, still practise, in their 
own way, the rites common to both people. 

“The Turk cireumcises his child at the age of five or six, and makes it a gay public ceremony. The Jewish proselyte always 
performs it on the eighth day, and in private. Their Rabbins also visit them secretly, and keep up all their former observances. 
Should a Jew be made a convert to Christianity, he becomes the immediate object of the most relentless persecution of his own 
people ; so that his life is not safe. 

““A very respectable man of that persuasion applied to me to be received into Christian communion, and in due time I baptized 
him in the chapel of the British embassy: but he earnestly requested that I should keep it a profound secret; and the day after 
the ceremony he left Constantinople for Poland. Indeed their repugnance to Christians, particularly to the Greeks, displays 
itself on all occasions. When the venerable Patriarch was hanged by the Turks, the Jews volunteered their services to cast his 
body into the sea: some fellows of the lowest description were brought from Hassa Kui for the purpose, and they dragged his 

48 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

fession, or in his trade, whether it was that of a goldsmith, jeweller, or any other; and the said cere- 
mony having been gone through, the midwife delivered the infant to his mother. But if the infant was 
a girl, the symbol with which they carried her to be bathed was, a spinning wheel and distaff, with 
a small basket and a handful of brooms, which were the things which would afford her occupation 
when she arrived at a proper age. 

corpse, by the cord by which he was hanged, through the streets with gratuitous insult. This circumstance, with others of a 
similar nature, so increased the former antipathy of the Greeks, that they revenged themselves on every Jew that fell in their 
way, at the commencement of the insurrection, with the most dreadful retaliation. The mutual prejudice is so strong, that it 
gives rise, as you may suppose, to a number of accusations; and they charge each other with the most atrocious practices. 
The Jews, you will recollect, in the early ages of Christianity denounced the Christians as eaters of their own children,—an 
accusation sanctioned by the impure and secret practices of some of the Gnostic sects. The Christians of Spain formerly stated 
that the Jews crucified adults on Good Friday, in mockery of our Saviour: and at Constantinople at the present day, they are 
charged with purloining children, and sacrificing them as paschal lambs at their passover. 

““T was one day at Galata, a suburb of Pera, where a great commotion was just excited. The child of a Greek merchant had 
disappeared, and no one could give any account of it; it was a beautiful boy, and it was imagined it had been taken by a Turk 
for a slave. After some time, however, the body was found in the Bosphorus ; its lees and arms were bound, and certain wounds 
in its side indicated that it had been put to death in some extraordinary manner, and for some extraordinary purpose: suspicion 
immediately fell upon the Jews ; and as it was just after their paschal feast, suspicion, people said, was confirmed to a certainty. 
Nothing could be discovered to give a clue to the perpetrators ; but the story was universally talked of, and generally believed all 
over Pera. The prejudice has also been greatly increased by a book written by a Jewish Rabbi converted to Christianity, which 
is a great curiosity. It is entitled, ‘A Confutation of the Religion of the Jews,’ by Neophytus, a Greek monk, formerly a 
Jewish Rabbi. The original work was in the Moldavian language, and was printed in the year 1803; but it is said that the 
Jews, at that time, gave a large sum of money to the Hospodar, and the book was suppressed and destroyed. A copy, however, 
escaped, which was translated into modern Greek, and printed at Yasi in 1818, of which I had a copy at Constantinople. The 
first chapter is entitled, Muornpwoe kexpuppevor voy de aroxexaduupevor, ‘The concealed Mysteries now made public.’ The subject 
is ‘the blood which the Jews take from Christians, and the purpose to which they apply it.’ After detailing a number of the 
most extraordinary particulars, he concludes in the following words: ‘When I was thirteen years old my father revealed to me 
the mystery of the blood, and cursed me by all the elements of heaven and earth, if ever I should divulge the secret, even 1o my 
brethren; and when I was married, and should even have ten sons, I should not discover it to all, but only to one, who should 
be the most prudent and learned, and at the same time firm and unmoved in faith; but to a female I should never disclose it. 
May the earth, said he, never receive thee, if thou revealest these secrets !’ 

“So said my father ; but I, since I have taken as my father the Lord Jesus Christ, will proclaim the truth in every place; and 
as the wise Sirac says, ‘even unto death strive for the truth.’ Much of these and similar representations are to be attributed to 
prejudice, and great deductions are to be made from them: but certainly the Jews of Constantinople are a fierce and fanatic race; 
persecution and suffermg have not taught them moderation, and they pursue, even to death, any apostate from their own doc- 
trines. They have a language and character peculiar to themselves; the first is Spanish, debased by Hebrew and foreign words 
into a lingua franca; and the second, in which it is written, is rabbinical, disguised by an alteration of some of the letters. I 
annex a passage of their creed, taken from one of their books, as a specimen of both.” The specimen is contained in the Appendix 
to Mr. Walsh’s ‘ Narrative,’ of which we shall here only insert a single verse, to show how entirely Spanish, with the exception of a 
few words, although written in Hebrew characters, the language of the Jews residing in Constantinople, and probably in many 
of the other cities of Turkey, continues at the present day to be: “Yo creyo con emouna cumplida, que el Criador, bendicho su 
nombre, pertenece a el azer tefila; y no es otro.” ‘I believe with a perfect faith, that to the Creator, blessed be his name, prayer 
ought to be made, and there is none beside him.” 

In Turkey it is evident that the Jews are held in much greater consideration than Christians, and in all other Mahometan 
countries ; it is probably for the reasons which Mr. Walsh enumerates. In Hindostan, (as any one who reads the Abbé Dubois’ 
well written work on Christian Missions in that part of the globe must feel convinced,) the Jews would be considered by the 
Brahmin as belonging to the most degraded race of Pariahs, and Christians as occupying a place next to them; because the Old 
Testament describes the blood of goats and of bulls as a grateful offering to Jehovah. Beyond the Ganges in Thibet, m many of 
the islands of the Indian Archipelago, and in the populous kingdoms bordering on China, where the votaries of Budha are very 
numerous, a sect so opposed to their religious prejudices would scarcely be tolerated; and the laws of Moses would seem to the 
gymnosophists on the banks of the Burampooter, what those of Draco appear to the philosophers on those of the Thames. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 4Q 

They offered the umbilical cord of the male infant, together with the shield and arrows, the symbols 
with which they had carried him to be bathed, in that spot and place where war was likely to happen 
with their enemies, where they buried them in the earth; and they did the same with that of the 
female infant, which they in the same way buried beneath the Metate or stone on which they 
ground meal. 

After the above-mentioned ceremonies, when the period of twenty days had expired, the parents 
of the infant went with the infant to the temple or Mezquita* which they called Calmecac, and in 

* Mezquita and Alfaqui are words which in Arabic signify @ temple and a priest. The Saracen dynasties which so long ruled 
over Spain made the Spaniards familiar with the meaning of them. In nothing did the civil policy of the Mexicans more closely 
resemble that of the Jews than in their dedicating their children at the temple, and afterwards sending them there to be instructed 
by the master, or, as we might say, the superior Rabbi, in the doctrines of their religion and their moral and ceremonial laws. 
Christ himself is said, when only eight years old, to have gone to the temple at Jerusalem, and disputed with the Rabbis, listening 
to them and asking them questions: whence it may be inferred (as they could not have known that he was the Son of God, 
since general publicity was not given to that circumstance till many years afterwards), that it was customary for the priests and 
Rabbis to teach children who came to the temple, by discoursing to them of matters of Jewish faith and doctrine. And that it was 
also a custom for children perpetually to serve in the temple we know from the history of Samuel, who waited on Eli the high 
priest ; of whom it is said, in the eighteenth verse of the second chapter of the First Book of Samuel, ‘‘ But Samuel ministered 
before the Lord, being a child, girded with a linen ephod.” Torquemada says, that the ceremony of dedicating their children to 
the military profession was likewise a religious one; and that their names were registered at the temple by the priests, that when 
they attained a fit age they might be compelled to go on military service. Amongst the Jews all wars, not excepting their civil 
wars, bore a religious character (for even in civil war right must exist on one side) ; and in the twentieth chapter of Deuteronomy 
directions are given to the priests to accompany and exhort the soldiers to battle. The interpreter of the Collection of Mendoza 
says that priests likewise followed the Mexican armies, not only for the purpose of joining the combatants, but also to perform 
certain religious ceremonies, in which some analogy is discovered between the customs of the two nations. So frequently is 
Jehovah named in Scripture the God of war, and likened to a warrior going forth to battle, as in the following verse, “The Lord 
is a man of war, The Lord is his name,”—that it is evident that the Jews believed that such epithets of praise did not profane the 
Majesty of Heaven, and that it was magnifying God to ascribe to him courage and invincibility in conflicts with arms of flesh and a 
mortal foe. Since likewise the expression “ The Lord went up,” as applied to the marching of the Jewish armies, repeatedly 
occurs, and the presence of Jehovah in the camp of Israel is so often proclaimed,—it is not surprising that they should have consi- 
dered their wars as sacred, and have called them the “ wars of the Lord;” or that they should have attached religious ideas to the 
profession of arms. But whether the names of the soldiers were enrolled by the Levites, as they were by the priests amongst the 
Mexicans, is uncertain. A striking example is afforded in the twentieth chapter of the Book of Judges of the religious spirit 
which animated the Jews even in their wars with each other. This remarkable chapter contains the account of the extermination 
of nearly the whole tribe of Benjamin by the other tribes, and of the singular cause which led to that result ; as well as of the 
solemn and religious preparation for a war that deluged Israel with blood, and seemed to lend a sanction to a precedent by which 
Romulus might have justified the violence which he offered to the Sabine women. The very commencement of it reminds us of 
the formal summons to Cusco which the Ingas sent to their subjects when about to undertake any of their religious wars : “Then 
all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the 
land of Gilead, unto the Lord in Mizpeh. And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in 
the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew the sword.” That the Ingas waged wars for the 
express purpose of compelling other nations to lay aside what they deemed to be idolatry, and to embrace the knowledge of the 
true God, we have the authority of Acosta and of other eminent historians for asserting. And the following passage from the 
eighteenth chapter of the sixth book of the Natural and Moral History of the Indies, will show that they were at no loss for 
specious reasons with which to defend their injustice: ‘‘Ceterum cur, et quo pretextu, terras eas dominatui suo subegerint, 
breviter quoque percenseamus. Ad populum autem profitebantur, quod post diluvium, de quo Indis universis constabat, a solis 
Ingis genus humanum de novo propagatum et multiplicatum esset. Ejus enim generis septem heroas ex specu Pacaritambo 
erupisse, et quo diximus modo, novos populos ac gentes proseminasse. Unde fas sit, ac equum, ut Ingis, ceu satoribus suis ac 
progenitoribus, omnes in universum populi parerent ac obsequerentur. Sed et hoc gloriabantur, quod solt ex omnibus veram et 
puram Dei colendi ac honorandi notitiam haberent. Unde etiam in Cusco, veluti terra quadam sancta, ultra 400 delubra nume- 

rabantur, et finitima omnia passim sacrorum arcanis plena videbantur. Et sicut forti manu in occupandis et subigendis regnis 

(0) 

50 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

the presence of their Alfaquis presented the infant with its offering of mantles and maxtles, together 

with some provision ; and after the infant had been brought up by its parents, as soon as it arrived 

pergebant, ita m condendis quoque templis, ac divinis cultibus instituendis, nihilo segmiores erant. Quos deos venerabantur ex 
his primarius Viracocha Pachayachachic, id est, mundi creator, erat. Ab hoc secundus sol colebatur, credebaturque tum solem, 
tum Guacas, virtutem et vigorem suum a creatore infusam suscipere, apud quem etiam pro hominibus mediatores et advocati 
intercedant.” ‘‘ But let us now proceed briefly to state the plea and pretext by which they (the Ingas) subdued those countries 
under their yoke. They professed to the people that after the deluge, with which event the Indians were universally acquainted, 
the human species was again propagated and multiplied by the Ingas alone; for that seven heroes of their race came forth from 
the cave of Pacaritambo and procreated, in the manner which has been mentioned, new nations and people; whence it was fit and 
just that all mankind should obey and submit to the Ingas as their ancestors and progenitors. They made this likewise a boast, 
that they alone of all men possessed the true and pure knowledge of the worship and honour due to God: and hence in Cusco, 
as in some holy land, the temples exceeded the number of four hundred, and the neighbouring territory was every where full of 
religious mysteries. In the same manner also as they were strenuous in seizing on, and conquering kingdoms, so they were not 
less sedulous in founding temples and in instituting religious rites. Of the gods whom they worshiped, the principal was Viracocha 
Pachayachachic, that is to say, the creator of the world. Next to him came the sun; and they believed that both the sun and 
the Guacas derived the virtue and vigour infused into them from the creator, before whom they interceded as mediators and advo- 
cates for men.” Gomara says that the Mexicans likewise made religion a pretext for their early wars: ‘‘ Dieron guerra 4 sus 
vezinos, vencieron muchas batallas. Tuvieron esto, que & los que se les davan, ponian ciertos tributos 6 parias; y 4 los que les 
resistian, robavan, y servian se dellos, y de sus hijos y mugeres, por esclavos. Comencaron por via de religion, afiadieron le luego 
las armas y fuerca, y despues codicia; y assi se quedaron sefiores de todo, y pusieron la silla de su ymperio en Mexico.”—La 
Conquista de Mewico, fo. exx. The Peruvians had the singular custom of putting the images of the gods of the conquered pro- 
vinces into a large net or latticed frame, and of preserving them as a trophy in honour of Viracocha. And we may observe, 
in passing, that Ezekiel twice introduces God as threatening to spread his net over his enemies, in which light he regarded the 
disobedient Jews: ‘“‘ My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare: and I will bring him to Babylon to the 
land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there. And I will scatter toward every wind all that are about 
him to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw out the sword after them.” chap. xii. This prophecy related to the captivity 
of the Jews and of their king Zedekiah, whose eyes were put out before he was carried to Babylon. The expression likewise of 
“scattering towards every wind,” which occurs in several places of Scripture, brings to our recollection that passage in the 
twenty-ninth chapter of Acosta’s History of America, wherein, treating of the Mexican jubilee which was celebrated every fifty- 
second year in honour of Tetzcatlipoca, he says, that the Mexicans, in the midst of the sincerest manifestation of their penitence 
for their past sins, (the recollection of which was awakened by the sound of the trumpets which the priests blew towards the four 
quarters of the world,) humbly deprecated injuries from either darkness or the winds. In the seventeenth chapter of his prophecies, 
Ezekiel again makes use of almost the same language: “ And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, 
and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me. And all his 
fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds ; and ye shall know 
that I the Lord have spoken it.” Job also employs a like metaphor: ‘ Know now that God hath overthrown me, and hath com- 
passed me with his net: Behold, I ery out of wrong, but I am not heard; I cry aloud, but there is no judgment. He hath fenced 
up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set darkness in my paths.” That the Jews did, like the Peruvians, acknowledge in a 
manner the gods of other nations, although they digbelieved in their divinity, cannot be denied ; since it is evident from the follow- 
ing remarkable verse in the twenty-second chapter of Exodus: ‘Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.” 
And it says in the twenty-seventh verse of the twenty-sixth chapter of the First Book of Chronicles; ‘“ Out of the spotls won in 
battles did they dedicate to maintain the house of the Lord:” which usage was precisely that of the Mexicans. It has been 
before remarked, that the Mexicans in many of their customs resembled the Peruvians, and that their religion was probably 
derived from a common source, Viracocha being the same deity as Tetzcatlipoca and Huitzilopuchtli, although worshiped under 
a different name. The proper name Viracocha, signifies the foam or froth of the sea; and Pachayachachic, the creator of the 
universe. And since the epithet of Tlavizcalpantecutli was bestowed on Tetzcatlipoca on account of the creation of light, and the 
Mexicans believed that he in the beginning had made the division of the waters ;—so that of Viracocha might have been given to 
Pachayachachic by the Peruvians for some analogous reason. To say that this name has some resemblance in meaning to the 
_ Greek word A@pooirn is merely pointing out a similarity where there can be no possible allusion. “The belief which the Mexicans 
and Peruvians entertained of their origin is likewise an argument in favour of their common descent. The former of these nations 

pretended that their ancestors had proceeded from seven caves; and the latter, that they were descended from seven heroes, who 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 51 

at the proper age, they delivered him to the superior Alfaqui of the said Mezquita, that he might be 
there instructed, in order that he might afterwards become an Alfaqui: but if the parents of the 

came out of the same cave. M. de Humboldt has observed, that if we knew exactly in what part of the globe the ancient king- 
doms of Tulan, Tlapallan, Huetlapallan, Amaquemacam, Aztlan, and Chicomoztoc were situated, we might be able to form an 
opinion of who the ancestors of the Mexicans were, and from what country they passed over to America. An attentive examina-~ 
tion of the meaning of these proper names, and the mutual comparison of one with another, may at least assist us in forming some 
conjecture. But it must first be observed, that the opinion of Herrera, (who is the authority to which a kind of general submission 
is yielded on all questions relating to America), viz. that that continent was only colonized from its western side,—is improbable in 
the extreme; for, omitting physical reasons and other causes for supposing that the contrary would rather have been the case; such 
as the great current of the sea which runs from the African towards the American shores; the relative magnitude of the Atlantic 
and the Pacific oceans; and the consequent nearer proximity of America to Europe; and the much greater naval enterprise 
which has in all ages distinguished Europeans, and the Asiatics bordering on the coasts of the Mediteranean Sea from other 
Asiatics: and likewise the curious fact mentioned by Sahagun, that the Mexicans recorded in numerous historical paintings an 
early colonization of America from the East; as also that Torquemada says that when Quecalcoatle set out on. his return to 
his former kingdom of Tlapallan, he proceeded to the province of Coagacoalco, (which was situated on the gulf of Mexico,) and 
there embarked in a boat or raft formed out of serpents’ skins! (and such a boat seems to be represented in the forty-third 
page of the painting preserved in the Royal Library of Dresden)—Herrera cannot be considered a candid author, or one who 
declared all that he knew or believed respecting the ancient colonization of America; nor can it be expected that much weight 
should be attached to his theory ;—that America was peopled from Asia by colonists passing over the Isthmus of California, and 
that the Mexicans came from thence; since modern geographical science contradicts the supposed facilities of such a passage. We 
shall therefore, (divesting ourselves of all ancient prejudices, which Lord Bacon rightly considers the idols to which human reason 
readily bows, and to be most detrimental to the advance of knowledge,) proceed to the consideration of the meaning of the above- 
mentioned proper names, and, comparing them with each other, endeavour to discover whether they may not all have a common 
reference, and lead us to that portion of the Old continent to which ancient traditions and the mythological recollections of Peru 
and Mexico equally point. Tulan signifies the country of reeds, Tlapallan the red sea, Huetlapallan the old red sea, Amaque- 
mecam the country of the veil of paper, Aztlan the country of the flamingo, and Chicomoztoc the seven caves. In the absence of 
all positive knowledge of facts, to employ conjecture is not only admissible, but becomes absolutely necessary, if research after 
truth is not altogether to be abandoned. We may therefore be permitted to express an opinion, for reasons which shall be alledged, 
that Egypt is the country to which all these proper names refer; and that the colony which arrived in early ages in America from 
the East, were Jews from Alexandria; in which emporium of the commerce of the world they had been established from the 
period of its foundation by Alexander the Great, and enjoyed equal rites of citizenship with the other citizens, possessed a con- 
tentious synagogue ; and, probably as a means of increasing their wealth, addicted themselves to those mercantile pursuits which 
caused its haven to be crowded with the ships of every country. 

The Scripture testifies that in the reign of Solomon the Jews embarked extensively in mercantile speculations ; and the frequent 
mention which it makes of the gold of Ophir and of silver, common in Jerusalem as the stones in the days of that king, might have 
induced their descendants, settled at Alexandria, to try whether they could not likewise discover the “navigation to the Isles.” ® 
That the Jews would not have allowed their ignorance of the art of navigation to remain long an obstacle to the gain which they might 
acquire from it, itis unnecessary to attempt to prove ; and that in later ages there were good cosmographers amongst them, the testi- 
mony of Doctor Robertson is sufficient to show: who says, that when Columbus laid before John the Second, king of Portugal, the 
plan of his proposed discovery of the New World, “‘ The king listened to him in the most gracious manner, and referred the con- 
sideration of his plan to Diego Ortiz bishop of Ceuta, and two Jewish physicians, eminent cosmographers, whom he was accus- 

' Boats were in very early ages formed out of skins, as the following passage in the old Life of Saint Patrick, elsewhere 
referred to, proves ; who is said to have prescribed to Maccuil as an act of penance, that, embarking in a boat of a single skin, 
without rudder or oars and with his feet chained, in order that the waves might carry him to some chance island of the ocean, 
he should forsake his native soil: ‘‘ Conliga pedes tuos conpede ferreo, et projice clavem ejus in mari, et mitte te in navem unius 
pellis, absque gubernaculo et absque remo, et quocumque te duxerit ventus, et mare, esto paratus, et terram in quamcunque 
deferat te divina providentia, inhabita, et exerce tibi divina mandata.” The Mexicans feigned that Quecalcoatle embarked in a 
boat formed out of a serpent’s skin, intending thus to give an air of novelty to fiction. 

2 They would probably have sailed to the West in search of them, because the Hebrew name for the isles bears the 
signification of the West also. 

52 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

infant resolved that when he attained a fit age he should go and serve in the military profession, they 

immediately offered him to the master, making a promise of him, which master of the young men 

tomed to consult in matters of this kind. As in Genoa ignorance had opposed and disappointed Columbus,—in Lisbon he had to 
combat with prejudice, an enemy no less formidable. The persons according to whose decision his scheme was to be adopted or 
rejected had been the chief directors of the Portuguese navigations, and had advised to search for a passage to India by steering a 
course directly opposite to that which Columbus recommended, as shorter and more certain. They could not, therefore, approve of 
his proposal, without submitting to the double mortification of condemning their own theory and of acknowledging his superior 
sagacity. After teasimg him with captious questions, and starting innumerable objections with a view of betraying him into such a 
particular explanation of his system as might draw from him a full discovery of its nature, they deferred passing a final judgment with 
respect to it. In the mean time they conspired to rob him of the honour and advantages which he expected from the success of his 
scheme, advising the king to dispatch a vessel secretly, in order to attempt the proposed discovery by following exactly the course 
which Columbus seemed to point out. John, forgetting on this occasion the sentiments becoming a monarch, meanly adopted 
this perfidious counsel. But the pilot chosen to execute Columbus’s plan had neither the genius nor the fortitude of its author ;— 
contrary winds arose, no sight of approaching land appeared, his courage failed, and he returned to Lisbon, execrating the project 
as equally extravagant and dangerous.” —History of America. book 2. It is certainly singular that the proposal of Columbus 
should have been referred by the king of Portugal to a bishop and to two Jews, and that he should have experienced from them 
the treatment described. If the Jews had had any suspicion that their countrymen had already established themselves in America, 
or that the great and unknown region which Benjamin of Tudela had described as under the dominion of the Jews, lay in the direc- 
tion of the intended navigation, other objections besides those hinted at by Doctor Robertson might have actuated their conduct. 
The above passage has, however, been only cited to show that the Jews have not been in all ages ignorant of cosmography ; and it 
is not impossible, amidst the uncertainty which prevails respecting by whom, where, and when the mariners’ compass was invented, 
that they might have introduced it from the East, where it had been long known and used, to the knowledge of Europeans, who, 
as it might be expected, would not have been at much pains to record the obligation. The reasons for supposing that the 
proper names of places abovementioned all refer to Egypt, are the following, which are chiefly derived from the local qualities of 
its soil,—Tulan, (the country of rushes,) is a name which would well suit a country extending along the banks of a great river 
covered with flags; Tlapallan and Huetlapallan, (the country of the red sea, or of the old red sea,) would be an appellation equally 
applicable to Egypt; Amequemecan, (the kingdom of the veil of paper,) might refer to the reeds producing the papyrus, 
since the land of Egypt is said in Scripture to be hidden in her reeds, on account of their great abundance, and the lowness of the 
soil. Aztlan, (the country of the flamingo,) is a name which recalls to our recollection the ibis, a bird of the flamingo species, 
which was very common in Egypt, and greatly revered by the Egyptians; Aztlan, likewise, is said to have been an island, and 
that part of Lower Egypt named the Delta, in which Alexandria is situated, is in fact an island formed by the arms of the Nile ; 
and the pyramid, the memory of which the Mexicans preserved as existing in Aztlan, might have been nothing more than a 
tradition of the Egyptian pyramids. Chicomoztoc, (the country of the seven caves, or of the seven dragons’ mouths, or of the 
seven gulfs,)—for oztoc may be interpreted a cave, a dragon’s mouth, and a gulf,—might also have signified Lower Egypt, and 
the seven branches of the Nile, from which colonies, either at the same or different times embarking, might have proceeded to 
America. It deserves likewise to be observed that Quecalcoatle and Totec are said by the interpreter of the Vatican Codex to 
have collected together the innocent people of Tulan, and such other persons as were inclined to follow them, and to have jour- 
neyed on till they arrived at a high mountain, which not being able to pass, they bored a hole through it, and so passed. | 
This passage is represented in the fourteenth page of the MS. referred to, where a number of persons are painted creeping 
from between two mountains vertically placed over each other, with the further peculiarity of being jomed together at the 
summits, whilst their bases are separate and opposed to each other, which might indicate a passage between two mountains 
the summits of which were contiguous, but the bases nevertheless separate,—such as are those on either side of the Straits of 
Gibraltar. Votan also is said in the Memoir inserted by Doctor Cabrera in his short treatise on the Population of America, to 
have visited the old continent, and to have gone by the road which his brethren the Culebras had bored, which would seem to refer 
to the former journey of Quecalcoatle to America. The curious expression likewise of Votan’s having determined on quitting America 
to visit Europe, “‘ to travel until he arrived at the root of heaven, in order to discover his relations, the Culebras,” which follows 
shortly afterwards in the above-mentioned Memoir, might possibly contain some allusion to Mount Atlas, which, situated in Libya, 
was sometimes personified under the figure of a man supporting the heavens on his shoulders, on account of its great height. The 
Mexicans had likewise a notion of high mountains reaching up to heaven, as the proper name Citlaltepec, (or the mountain 
of the stars) indicates. The houses of the thirteen Culebras, which Votan is said to have passed by, or to have left behind him 
on the journey, were, perhaps, the Madeira Islands, in which ancient Hebrew inscriptions are stated to have been found ; although 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 53 

and boys was named Teachcauh, or Telpuchtlato ; which offering they accompanied with a present 
of provisions and other things for its celebration: and when the infant attained a fit age, they delivered 

him up to the said master *. 

* The title of Master, which was given by the Mexicans to those who instructed their sons in the principles of their religion 
and in their moral duties, corresponds well with the Hebrew word Rabbi, which is translated Master in the English version of the 
New Testament ; by which name Christ was called by his disciples, on account of his being a teacher. 

Spizelius denies the fact. That in very early ages the tide of Jewish migration flowed from East to West, may be inferred from 
the great numbers of Jews who settled in Spain, and from the monument mentioned by Procopius in the second book of his 
History of the Vandal War, as having been discovered in the city of Tangiers, which bore the following inscription in the Pheni- 
cian language :— 

‘Nos sumus qui predonem Jesum filium nave fugientes in tutum receptisumus.” ‘‘ We are those who, flying in a ship from 
the robber Jesus the Son, have arrived at a place of safety.” It is impossible to understand this inscription as referring to the 
Canaanites in the days of Joshua, although Procopius and Calmet both so explain it; since they interpret “ Jesum filium nave,” as 
« Jesus or Joshua the son of Nun”; making nave or nave the Phenician of the proper name Nun!. Whoever the interpreter of the 
Phenician inscription was, he might easily have been mistaken as to the meaning of the word naue; since it might either have 
been an original Phenician name for a ship, which had become obsolete, or of which the translator was ignorant; or it might have 
been adopted into that language at some period or other from the Greek: or, finally, it might have been a Latin word inserted in 
the Phenician inscription ; as the Jews of Constantinople at the present day introduce into their confession of faith in the Spanish 
language, occasionally an Arabic word, which they write like the rest in Hebrew letters. Since likewise it is allowed that the 
Greeks and Romans learned ship-building and the art of navigation from the Phenicians and the Carthaginians, there is some 
reason for supposing that the Phenician name for a ship would resemble the Greek term vave, and the Latin navis. The appella- 
tion of Culebras (or serpents) corresponding in signification with the Mexican name Coatl or Cohuatl, which Votan bestows on his 
brethren of both continents, might also have been a term either applied by the Jews to themselves, or given to them by Christians, 
or of patronymic derivation. Since “ wise as a serpent ” was a Hebrew proverb, the Jews might, in some critical posture of their 
affairs, —such as would have been the discovery by them of the West Indian Islands or of the continent of America, when the exercise 
of prudence and circumspection would have appeared very necessary to keep the secret from Christians,—have assumed this epithet 
asa kind of motto of caution; or having fled from the wrath of Christians and settled in the New World, they might, out of 
hatred to Christianity, have adopted a name which was first given to them by Christ, and which the early Christians, following his 
example, might likewise have applied to them as a term of reproach; indicating, by so doing, their intention of becoming, should 
it be ever in their power, that in deed to Christianity, which they before were only in name: and certainly, in considering the 
nature of many of the Mexican and Peruvian religious rites, an intended profanation of Christian mysteries seems almost manifest. 
The last argument for supposing that serpents or snakes may have been an appellation by which the Hebrew race were oceasion- 
ally distinguished,—as the Macedonians were sometimes called Muppudovec (or ants), from puppn€; and the Athenians, or Ionic 
Greeks, Avroy Bovec or aborigines ; and those of Dorian descent inhabiting a portion of the Peloponesus, 2rapror, or sown men, in 
allusion to their fabulous origin,—is, that Christ calls the Pharisees “a generation of vipers ;” whether from their wickedness, their 
prudence, or their lineage, is not absolutely certain, although probability inclines to the first and second reasons. If lineage or terri- 
torial occupation was insinuated in this address, it might be in consequence of the similarity of the proper names Hevei and 
Hebrei, (the first of which, according to Calmet, signifies in the Phenician language, snakes,) and from the Jews having possessed 
themselves by force of the land of the Hivites, or Hevei. With respect to the latter name, the Rabbis say that the reason the 
Hivites were so called, was because they were accustomed to live in subterraneous caves, like snakes, being the early inhabitants 
of the land of Canaan; something therefore corresponding in sense to the Greek phrase avroy#wv is admitted to be found in the 
proper name Hevei. But conquest always gives the victors a right to assume the titles of the vanquished; and as Argos was 
called Pelasgian long after the real Pelasgians had ceased to exist; so if there was any thing honorary as indicating great antiquity 
in the term Hevei, the Jews from their long residence in the land of Canaan would have had a right to assume it. 

The strongest argument, however, and one which we perceive how unwilling the Spanish historians of the sixteenth century 
were to press to a conclusion, by which to prove that America was colonized from its European side, is the confession of Monte- 

zuma and his nobles, one and all, to Cortes,—that their ancestors had come from the same part of the globe as the Spaniards, 

€ 

“1 Joshua is named Jesus the son of Nave in the forty-sixth chapter of Ecclesiasticus. 

(ae) 

INTERPRETATION OF THE 

Or 
SS 

PLATE LVIII. 

1. The woman lately delivered. 2. These four roses signify four days, at the completion of which 
period the midwife carried forth the new-born infant to be bathed. 3. The cradle with the infant. 
4. The midwife. 5. The symbols. 6.7. 8. The three boys who named the new-born infant. 
9. The rushes, with the small vessel of water. 10. The brooms, distaff, spinning-wheel, and basket. 
11. The father of the infant. 12. The superior Alfaqui. 13. The infant in the cradle, whose parents 

situated towards the rising sun: ‘‘ Y todos, en especial el dicho Muteczuma, me respondieron, que ya me habian dicho que ellos 
no eran naturales de esta tierra ; y que habia muchos tiempos que sus predecesores habian venido 4 ella; y que bien creian que 
podrian estar errados en algo de aquello que tenian, por haber tanto tiempo que salieron de su naturaleza ; y que yo como mas 
" nueyamente venido, sabria mejor las cosas que debian tener y creer que no ellos.” Which Montezuma also acknowledges in the 
following passage of his speech to his subjects: “‘ Tambien creo que de vuestros antecesores terneis memoria, como nosotros no 
somos naturales de esta tierra ; € que vinieron 4 ella de otra muy lejos, y los trajo un sefor que en ella los dejo, cuyos vasallos 
todos eran; el qual bolvié dende 4 mucho tiempo, y hallé que nuestros abuelos estaban ya poblados, y assentados en esta tierra, 
y casados con las mugeres de esta tierra, y tenian mucha multiplicacion de hijos, por manera que no quisieron bolverse con el, ni 
menos lo quisieron recebir por sefior de la tierra; y el se bolvid, y dejo dicho que tornaria, 6 embiaria con tal poder que los 
pudiesse costrefir y atraher 4 su servicio, e bien sabeis que siempre lo hemos esperado, y segun las cosas que el capitan nos ha 
dicho de aquel rey y sefior que le embi6 aca, y segun la parte de do él dice que viene, tengo por cierto, y assi lo debeis vosotros 
tener, que aqueste es el sefior que esperabamos.” These extracts are from the letters of Cortes to the Emperor Charles the Fifth ; 
and the passages printed in italics, (where Montezuma affirms that he and his subjects might have erred in matters of faith, from 
having been aliens for such a length of time from the country of their ancestors, and that they had intermarried with the women 
of the land,) seem more particularly worthy of attention. The lord to whom he alludes as having conducted the Mexicans to their 
new settlements, ‘ whose vassals all were,” was Quecalcoatle. But his second coming, after the lapse of a long period of time, to 
the American continent, is an enigmatical piece of history which it is not probable will speedily be explained. It is singular, 
however, that he should have left a prophecy that he would come again on the sign of One Cane; and that Cortes, who chanced to 
arrive in Mexico in the year of that sign, and who perceived how much to his own advantage he might turn the popular super- 
stition and this current belief, should have pretended that he himself was their expected Messiah. The arrival of Cortes in 
Mexico in the year of One Cane, is represented in page 136 of the larger Vatican MS., from which painting it would appear 
that a slaughter of some of the Mexican priests, as well as a destruction of their idols, had taken place. And since the following 
account of Peter Martyr tends to the elucidation of what is there represented, and likewise corroborates, on the authority of others, 
what Cortes had stated on his own, to the Emperor, we shall here insert it: ‘‘ Whatsoever images were in the halls, Cortes 
commanded them to be presently overthrown and broken, and to be thrown down the steps of the high stairs in pieces. One marble 
colosse he left standing, because it was too huge, and could not easily be taken away ; wherewith Muteczuma being present, was 
much troubled, and all the nobility of the court, who complained, saying, O unhappy and miserable men that we are! the gods 
being angry with us, will take away the fruits which we eat, and so we shall perish through famine : and, as at other times it hath 
befallen us, the gods being displeased, all kinds of diseases shalt suddenly come upon us; and we shall not be freed from our enemies 
if we be assailed by war, nor be sufficiently secured from the tumult of the people, who, if they understand this, will furiously arise 
in arms. Whereto Cortes maketh answer: Behold! saith he, what is more wicked and abominable? and: what more foolish ? 
Do you think those to be gods, which are formed and fashioned by the hands of your tributaries? Is the service of your men 
more worthy than the men themselves? Is that thmg, O Muteczuma! which your workmen, and, peradventure, a filthy slave, 
fashioneth with his hands, more worthy than your Majesty ?. What blindness is this in you, or what mad cruelty, that ye slaughter 
so many human bodies every year for these insensible images’ sake ? What do these perceive, which neither see nor hear ?—Him, 
Him I say, who created heaven and earth, Him ye are to worship. This is He, from whom all good things proceed ; to whom 
these your sacrifices are most offensive. Besides, it is decreed and established, by a law from our king, whom ye confess to 
derive his descent from him who brought your ancestors unto these countries, that whosoever smiteth male or female with the 
sword, shall die the death.— When Cortes had declared these things by interpreters, Muteczuma, with a pale countenance and 
trembling heart, replied ; Hearken, O Cortes! The ceremonies of sacrifices left us by traditions from our ancestors, those we observe 

and have hitherto exercised: but seeing you say we have so much erred, and that it is displeasing to our king, we are greatly 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 55 

are offering it at the Mezquita. 14. The mother of the infant. 15. The master of the boys and of 

the young men. 

The explanation of the plate which follows, and of the figures contained in it, which treats of the 
time, and manner, in which the native Indians instructed their children how they ought to live, 
according to the signification of the figures successively represented in the plate; which comprises 

the four sections which follow. ; 
The first section shows how parents corrected their children of three years old, by giving them 
good advice*, and the quantity of food which they allowed them at each meal was half a roll. 

delighted to hear it, so we may persuade the people thereunto. These rites and ceremonies, peradventure, our ancestors who 
were left here found them to be observed by the inhabitants of those times; so that we have followed the customs of our fathers- 
in-law and of our wives. Neither are you to wonder that we fell into these errors, if they be errors. Give us a law, and we will 
endeavour to embrace it with all our power.—Cortes, hearing this, repeated, that there was one God, three in persons and one in 
essence, who created the heaven and the earth, and the sun and the moon, with all the ornament of the stars which move about 
the earth for the use of men; and hence it cometh, that it is odious unto him to kill men, who formed the slave, and all others 
having the face of men, of the same matter whereof he made me, thee, and them. He was born amongst us of a woman who was a 
virgin, and suffered for the salvation of mankind, which by the leamed men who are to come shall hereafter more largely be declared 
both to you, and the rest. The standard of that God and ensign of victory, is the image or representation of this cross; for it 
behoveth the general both to have the cross, and also the image of the virgin his mother carrying the infant in her bosom.—And 
as he was speaking thus, Cortes, of a lawyer being made a divine, showed the cross and the image of the virgin to be adored.” 
The sentences printed in italics in the complaint of the Mexican nobles, in the speech of Cortes to Montezuma, and in that 
monarch’s reply, deserve to be noticed, because there is something Jewish in the tone of sentiment and feeling displayed by the 
Mexicans; and a fit answer to Jews seems to be given by Cortes, where he says, ‘Is the service of your men more worthy than 
the men themselves?” or in other words, Were men made for rites, or rites for men? which question of Cortes seems to refer to 
Christ’s answer to the Jews, “ The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath.” The fears of tumults of the people, 
famine, pestilence, and warlike invasions, were exactly the same as those entertained by the Jews if they failed in the performance 
of any of their ritual observances, as the following denunciations contained in the twenty-eighth chapter of Deuteronomy clearly 
show: “ The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land whither thou goest to 
possess it. The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme 
burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew: and they shall pursue thee until thou perish.” It is not a little 
singular also, (as establishing that to be a fact which few persons would feel inclined to suspect,) that the Mexicans and the Jews 
should have believed that similar divine judgments, (even when those judgments were of a very peculiar nature,) would follow the 
commission of similar crimes. The fifth chapter of Numbers records the extraordinary effects produced by a guilty woman, whose 
husband was jealous of her, drinking the bitter water in the trial of jealousy. And Torquemada says, that nearly the same kind of 
threat was held out by the Mexican priests, to induce the nuns to dread the vengeance of Huitzilopuchthi, if they violated their 
vows of chastity, although he makes no mention of the bitter water. Since, however, the same temporal punishments, such as 
stoning to death and crucifying, were resorted to both by the Jews and the Mexicans, it is not surprising that they should have 
threatened offenders with similar divine judements.—It may be proper before concluding this note, to correct a wrong impression 
which the passage quoted above from Acosta’s History of the Indies may possibly convey; since it might thence appear that that 
learned writer affirms that the Indians were universally acquainted with the deluge as understood to mean that of Noah; whereas 
he elsewhere says that he alludes to the later deluge of Deucalion, although the former calculated to have happened about four 
thousand years ago, appears extremely near, without recurring to any other, or even admitting such to be probable. 

* The Mexicans, in instilling into the minds of their children in their earliest years the tenets of their false religion, seem to 
have proceeded upon the principle of “Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.” 
They displayed a perfect knowledge of human nature in so doing; since long habit divests the most absurd doctrines of all appear- 
ance of strangeness and novelty. Reason inquires about that which is new, but is reconciled to that which is old; and our passions 
enlist us on the side of the pleasing recollections of our early years,—the prejudices of childhood often retain possession of the 
heart of the sage. Ifit is important to the welfare of a people that the administration of their finances should be placed in wise 

hands, and that some account should be rendered to them of the expenditure of the taxes which they pay,—how much more 

56 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

PLATE LIX. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. Three years of age. 2. The father of the boy. 3. The boy. 4. The half of aroll*. 5. The 
mother of the girl. 6. The half of a roll. 7. The girl of three years of age. 

important to them, as determining the future glory of their country and its prosperity, is the education of their children! And if a 
magnanimous king would permit an attached people to dictate to him the terms of a great national charter,—ought not the first 
article to be, that public instruction should be confided to no particular class of men, but to censors chosen from the people, and 
only accountable to them for the proper discharge of the duties devolving upon them ? 

If History has rightly been pronounced to be Philosophy teaching by éxamples,—how striking a lesson that of the Mexicans 
affords us of the evil consequences resulting from early education, when the principles and doctrines instilled into the mind are 
false and bad ! 

The Mexicans were by nature not more cruel than other men; their hearts were equally susceptible of attachment and of pity : 
they were ingenious in arts, and acute in intellect. But nurtured up in religious prejudices, they shed the last drop of their blood 
in defence of a faith in the rites of which they were cruel; in the ceremonies, mere machines ; and in believing its tenets, below 
. the level of brute instinct. 

* In every thing relating to the treatment of their children, even in their mode of punishing them, the Mexicans resembled 
the Jews. As sterility was reckoned by the Jewish women a great misfortune, and they made vows at the temple to obtain 
children;.so the Mexican women considered it a great reproach to be without them, and they offered up prayers to Huitzilopuchtli 
that he might vouchsafe to remove that cause of complaint. Torquemada has also observed, that in the festivals consequent on 
the birth of children, the Mexican customs were like those of the Jews. These festivals (omitting further mention of baptismal 
ceremonies and the rite of circumcision, both which it may be presumed on the authority of very eminent writers were in use 
amongst the Mexicans) took place on naming the infant, and afterwards on its being weaned or removed from the breast; and were 
celebrated by invitations of guests to an entertainment. From the account given in the first chapter of St. Luke, we know that 
many persons were present at the naming of John the Baptist. And Torquemada, in treating in the twenty-fourth chapter of the 
thirteenth book of his Indian Monarchy, of the antiquity of the custom amongst the Jews of keeping the day on which an infant 
was weaned as a festival,—in reference to the same custom prevailing amongst the Mexicans, says; “That this was an ancient 
custom is manifest and notorious; and the Holy Scripture affords us the strongest and clearest proof of this fact, since Moses 
says in Genesis, of the Patriarch Abraham, that when the day for his son Isaac bemg weaned arrived, he made a very great enter- 
tainment. From whence it is reasonable to infer, that, being a man of such distinction and power, the guests who were invited were 
likewise numerous: for if this had not been the case, the Holy Scripture would not have said that he made a great entertainment. 
The reason of this entertainment, according to the Jews, as stated by Lira, was: that as Sarah was barren and childless, and an old 
woman of ninety, Abraham’s neighbours would not believe that his wife Sarah had given birth to that son; but that having taken 
it from some other woman, she had adopted it, and pretended that it was her own; and that to remove that doubt and convince 
them of the fact, he sent them a formal invitation ; and not only placed before them refreshment, but likewise caused his wife, who 
had been lately delivered of a son, to suckle at her breast the children who chanced at that time to be sucking other mothers; 
and that God on this occasion gave her great abundance of milk.” Torquemada further observes, in commendation of the 
Mexican women, that, like the wives of the Jewish patriarchs, they made it a point to nurse their own children, not trusting that 
task to others. The education of children commenced amongst the Mexicans, as with the Jews, at an exceedingly early age; and 
the first thmg which they taught them, was to honour the gods: on which custom Torquemada remarking, says, “Tambien quiero 
que se vea, como el demonio ordené en su vano pueblo Indiano; que lo primero que el padre dijese 4 sus hijos, fuese, que amasen 
y reverenciasen 4 sus dioses.” “I likewise wish it to be noticed that the devil commanded amongst his vain Indian people; that 
the first thing a father bid his children do, should be, to love and honour their gods.” Of the excellent nature, however, of the moral 
precepts which the Mexican parents inculcated on the minds of their children, the same author is a witness ; where, adducing the 
authority of the Book of Ecclesiasticus in favour of the early education of children, and quoting the twenty-third verse of the 
seventh chapter, ‘‘ Hast thou children? instruct them and bow down their neck from their youth ; ”»—he says that the Indians strictly 
fulfilled that doctrine. “‘ Aquesta doctrina tenemos maravillosamente probada en los Indios de esta Nueva Espafia, los quales no 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 57 

The second section represents the parents employed in the same way, in instructing their children 
when they attained four years of age, when they began to exercise them by bidding them to do a few 
slight things. The quantity of food which they gave them at each meal was a roll. 

solo cuidaban de criar 4 sus hijos, con el sustento y manjar corporal, con que fortificaban los cuerpos, y crecian en edad y afios, 
pero con admirable doctrina moral, para hacerlos racionales y politicos; y que viviesen la vida de hombres que tenian, como los 
que constaban de anima capaz de orden, y de ragon. Y por ser esta doctrina de estas gentes, de mucho acuerdo y consejo, no 
dejaré, aunque parezca prolijo, de referir sus platicas y amonestaciones, que como por ellas parecera, ni la lei natural, ni la de 
gracia, ni la policia humana pide mas en ragon de buenas costumbres, dej ado & parte el verdadero conocimiento de dios.” ‘‘ This 
doctrine we find wonderfully approved amongst the Indians of this territory of New Spain, who not only took care to nourish 
their children with food and bodily aliments for the sake of strengthening their bodies, and that they might grow as they advanced 
in age and years, but also with admirable moral doctrines, in order to render them rational and proper members of a civil commu- 
nity; and that they might live the life of men which had been allotted to them, as befitted those who possessed minds capable of 
reason and order. Since the doctrines of these Indians are characterized with much prudence and counsel, I will not omit 
(although I may incur the charge of prolixity) to record their conversations and exhortations to their children ; since from them it 
will be apparent that neither natural law, nor that of grace, nor human policy could demand more, as far as morality is concerned, 
laying aside the knowledge of the true God.” Torquemada inserts many of these exhortations at considerable length in the 
thirteenth book of his Indian Monarchy ; and it deserves to be remarked, that not only are the same moral maxims inculcated as 
were held in the greatest estimation by the Jews, but that the language and allusions employed are frequently quite scriptural. 
The Mexican mother who addresses a discourse to her daughter about to be married, telling her that the time has arrived when 
she must forsake her father, and her mother, and her father’s house, and devote herself wholly to her husband, might seem to 
have borrowed this advice from the twenty-fourth verse of the second chapter of Genesis: and in the great criminality which the 
Mexicans attached to lying, evil-speaking, slander, and drunkenness, vices, which, from generally recoiling on the individuals 
themselves who indulge in them, other nations have been contented to visit with trifling penal enactments, as well as from the 
extraordinary respect which they paid to oaths, on account of the direct appeal which they made to Huitzilopuchtli, and the fear 
of his vengeance, and the rigour with which they treated false witnesses, they more closely resembled the Jews than any 
nation we have ever heard or read of. Since some doubt may be entertained, as the Mexicans were unacquainted with the art of 
writing, how Torquemada was enabled to write down word for word the exhortations which the ancient Mexicans gave orally to 
their children; it may be proper to observe, that they were delivered in a set form, were in universal use, without variation in their 
style and language, and were learned by heart by those to whom they were addressed. That learned writer himself gives the 
following account of these exhortations in the thirty-sixth chapter of the thirteenth book of his Indian Monarchy. “ Estas 
exortaciones las tradujo de lengua Mexicana en Castellana el venerable Padre Frai Andrés de Olmos, fraile menor de la orden de 
mi glorioso Padre San Francisco, tantas veces en esta Historia referido en los principios de la conversion de estas gentes; el qual 
trabajo en esta vifia y nueva plantacion del Santo Evangelio con grandisimo cuidado, padeciendo en la fundacion de esta nueva 
iglesia grandes y crecidos trabajos ; las quales platicas (en lengua Mexicana) tengo en mi poder: y oso afirmar, que ni el dicho 
Padre Frai Andrés de Olmos, ni el Sefior Obispo de Chiapa, Don Frai Bartholomé de las Casas, que las huvo de ¢l, ni yo que las 
tengo, y he procurado entenderlas, y saber mui de raiz sus metaforas, no las hemos sabido romancear con la dulcura, y suavidad, 
que en su lengua estos naturales las usaban.” ‘‘ These exhortations were translated from the Mexican language into Spanish 
by the venerable Father Andrew de Olmos, a minor brother of the order of my glorious Father Saint Francis, who is so often 
mentioned by me in this History, when treating of the commencement of the conversion of these nations ; who laboured in this 
vineyard and new plantation of the Holy Gospel with the greatest diligence, undergoing great and numerous hardships in laying 
the foundation of this new church ; which exhortations (in the Mexican language) I have in my possession ; and J can venture to 
affirm, that neither the said Father Andrew de Olmos, nor the Lord Bishop of Chiapa, Don Bartholomew de las Casas, who obtained 
them from him, nor I who now own them, and have bestowed pains upon understanding them, and thoroughly comprehending 
their metaphors, have known how to translate them with the same softness and sweetness as the natives uttered them in 
their own language.” In the same manner as Jewish parents were accustomed to take their children to the synagogues or public 
places of worship, so we are informed by Torquemada, in the thirtieth chapter of the thirteenth book of the Indian Monarchy, 
that Mexican parents took theirs to the temple, on stated days at appointed hours. ‘‘Imponianlos 4 que sirviesen 4 los dioses, 
Ilevabanlos consigo & los templos en los dias y horas sefialadas, para que se aficionasen 4 lo mismo para quando viviesen de por 
si, y fuesen padres de familias.” ‘‘ They impressed upon them the necessity of serving the gods, carrying their children with 
them to the temples on appointed days and hours, in order that they might acquire a liking for the same practice when they lived 
separate from them, and became fathers of families.” The restraint likewise which Mexican parents exercised over their children, 

(@) 

58 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

SECOND SECTION. 

8. The father of the boy. 9. The boy of four years of age. 10. Aroll. 11. The mother of the 
girl. 12. Aroll. 13. The girl of four years of age. 

The third section shows how the parents employed and exercised their sons of five years of age 
in tasks of bodily strength; for example, in carrying loads of wood of slight weight, and in sending 
them with light bundles 1o the Tianquez or market-place: and the girls of this age received lessons 
how they ought to hold the distaff and the spinning-wheel. Their allowance of food was a roll. 

THIRD SECTION. 

14, The father of the boys. 15. Two boys of five years of age. 16. Aroll. 17. Aroll. 18. The 
mother of the girl. 19. A roll. 20. The girl of five years of age. 

The fourth section shows how parents exercised and employed their sons of six years old in 
personal services, that they might be of some assistance to their parents: as also in the Tianquez or 

market-places, in picking up from the ground the grains of maize which lay scattered about, and the 

especially their daughters, Torquemada judges to have been very agreeable to the precepts contained in the Book of Eccle- 
siasticus, and consequently to have perfectly accorded with Jewish customs: and the severity with which King Nezahualpilli 
treated his son and daughter, by causing them to be put to death, for disobedience to his orders, and the regulations of the palace, 
—notwithstanding the extreme affection which the same writer would persuade us that monarch bore to them, and his general 
benevolence of character, aiming in this instance only at the public good, by himself setting the example of the obedience due 
from subjects to the laws, and from children to their parents,—might also be defended by recurring to the Mosaic Law, which in 
some cases gave a father the power of life and death over his children; which notwithstanding, the Jews by their traditions and the 
quibble of saying “ Corban,” or “ It is a gift,” in reference to their own obedience to their parents, succeeded in rendering of none 
effect. But if by the laws of the Pentateuch any father might, on the plea of stubbornness and undutiful conduct, assume a power 
over his son’s life,—when in the person of a father the rights of a sovereign also centered, how much more justifiable would the 
assumption of such a power appear; although of the Hebrew law itself, which empowered parents so to act, it might confidently 
be said, that because of the hardness of their hearts it was permitted them; for certainly, of all the nations who ever inhabited the 
globe, whose annals have recorded their own crimes, the Jews were by far the most hard-hearted and barbarous. The law 
referred to is the following, which is contained in the twenty-first chapter of Deuteronomy: ‘If a man have a stubborn and 
rebellious son which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that when they have chastened him will 
not hearken unto them; then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his city, and 
unto the gate of his place. And they shall say unto the Elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey 
our voice ; he is a glutton and a drunkard. And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones that he die: so shalt thou put 
evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.” It is evident, let commentators interpret this law as they please, 
(for they frequently ascribe ambiguity to the Laws of Moses, as if that would not bea great imperfection in laws of human enactment, 
and hence assume a great latitude of interpretation,) that Jewish parents were authorized to appear before the Elders, both as the 
accusers and witnesses on their own behalf against their sons. But it is extraordinary that, possessing so much power by divine 
right at the beginning, either by exercising it too often, or by not exercising it at all, the law itself should, in later ages, have 
become obsolete; which would not, however, be a reason against its possible revival by the posterity of the Jews in another part 
of the globe at some succeeding period. It may further be remarked, that the above-mentioned Hebrew law affords some indi- 
cations that the primitive Jews did occasionally punish drunkenness with death, in which they would have resembled the 

Mexicans. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 59 

beans and other trifling things which those who resorted to the market had dropped ;—this was the 
occupation of the boys. The girls were set to spin, and employed in other useful tasks, that they might 
hereafter, through the said tasks and works, sedulously shun idleness, in order to avoid the bad habits 
which idleness is accustomed to cause. The allowance of food which was given to the boys at each 

meal, was a roll and a half. 

FOURTH SECTION. 

21. The father of the two boys. 22. 'T'wo boys of six years old. 23. Aroll andahalf. 24. The 
mother of the girl. 25. A roll andahalf. 26. The girl of six years old. 

The explanation of the figures contained in the following plate, which treats of the time and manner 
in which the native Mexicans instructed and corrected their sons; that they might learn to avoid all 
kinds of sloth, and to keep themselves constantly exercised in profitable things, according to the 
signification of the figures successively represented in the plate, which is divided into four sections, 
which four sections are explained in their proper order and are as follow. 

The first section, wherein is shown how fathers employed their sons of seven years old in- giving 
them nets to fish with; and mothers occupied their daughters in spinning, and in giving them 
good advice; in order that they might always be diligent, and employ their time in something to 
avoid all sloth. The allowance of food which they gave to their sons at each meal was a roll and a 
half. 

PLATE LX. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. The seven blue points signify seven years. 2. The father of the boys contained in this division of 
the plate. 3. Arollanda half. 4. The boy of seven years old, whose father is instructing him how 
to fish with the net which he holds in his hands. 5. The mother of the girls contained in this division 
of the plate. 6. A roll anda half. 7. The girl of seven years of age, whom her mother is teaching 
how to spin. 

The second section, wherein is declared how fathers chastised their sons of eight years of age, 
intimidating and threatening them with thorns of the aloe, that in case of negligence and disobedience 
to their parents, they should be punished with the said thorns; the boys accordingly weep for fear, 
as is represented and signified by the figures contained in this section. The quantity of food which 
they allowed them, consisted of a roll and a half. 

SECOND SECTION. 

8. These eight points signify eight years. 9. The father of the boys contained in this division 
of the plate. 10. A roll anda half. 11. The boy of eight years of age, whose father threatens him 

60 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

in case of ill-behaviour to inflict public punishment upon him with thorns. 12. Thorns of the 
aloe. 13. The mother of the girls contained in this division of the plate. 14. The girl of eight 

years of age, whose mother threatens her with thorns of the aloe in case of ill-behaviour. 
15. Thorns of the aloe. 

The third section, wherein is declared how fathers punished, with the said thorns of the aloe, 
their sons of nine years of age, when they were incorrigible and rebellious towards their parents, 
by running the said thorns into their shoulders and bodies. They corrected their daughters by 

pricking their hands with thorns, as is represented in the third section. The allowance of food 
which they gave them was a roll and a half. 

Mal EIR ID) S15, CIELO IN, 

17. These nine points signify nine years. 18. A roll and a half. 19. The father of the boys 
contained in this division of the plate. 20. A boy of nine years old being found to be incorrigible, 
his father runs thorns of the aloe into his body. 21. The mother of the girls contained in this division 
of the plate. 22. A roll anda half. 23. The girl of nine years old, whose mother corrects her for 
her negligence, by pricking her hands with thorns. 

The fourth section shows how fathers chastised their sons of ten years of age when they were 
refractory, by inflicting blows upon them with a stick*, and threatening them with other punishments, 
as is represented by the figure contained in this section. ‘The quantity and allowance of food which 
they gave them was a roll and a half. 

FOURTH SECTION. 

24. These ten points signify ten years. 25. A roll and a half. 26. The father of the boys con- 
tained in this division of the plate. 27. The boy of ten years of age, whose father is correcting him 

* Beating with a stick was a very common punishment amongst the Jews. It is surprising how often the words vapulet and 
non vapulet occur in Maimonides’s decisions on questions arising out of the Mosaic law. It is said in the explanation of a 
preceding section, that a Mexican parent sometimes chastised his son by making him lie down in a wet place and keeping him for 
a long time in that situation: this was also a Jewish punishment ; as was shaving off the hair, which is mentioned in Scripture, 
where piercing the body with thorns seems likewise to be alluded to!. In a little work entitled A View of the Jewish Religion, to 
which we shall again refer, it is stated that Jewish parents sometimes corrected their rebellious children by holding their faces 
over some disagreeable smoking substance, which is a singular coincidence with the Mexican mode of punishing their children 
with the smoke of axi. From the following passage, taken from the ninetieth page of the same work, it will be seen that the Jews 
commenced the education of their children at almost as early a period as the Mexicans, and that they used paintings as a means of 
instruction: ‘ At the fifth year they (the children) begin to learn letters and paintings, for most who are of sufficient estates 
maintain in their families a Rabbin or Master for the education of their children; and when the boy is first able to read, he 

is taught to translate the Pentateuch into his country tongue.” 

‘A crown of thorns was placed by the Jews upon the head of Christ. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 61 

with a stick. 28. The mother of the girl contained in this division of the plate. 29. A roll and a 

half. 30. The girl of ten years of age, whose mother is correcting her with a stick. 

The explanation of what is represented in the first section of the following plate-—When a boy or 
a girl of eleven years of age disregarded verbal reproof, their parents obliged them to inhale smoke 
of axi through their nostrils, which was a cruel and severe punishment, that they might be sorry for 
their conduct, and not turn out worthless and abandoned, but on the contrary employ their time in 
profitable things. They gave boys of such an age bread, which consisted of rolls, only by allowance, 

that they might learn not to be gormandizers or gluttons. 

PLATE LXI. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. The eleven blue points signify eleven years. 2. A roll and a half. 3. The father of the boys 
contained in this division of the plate. 4. The boy of eleven years of age, whose father is punishing 
him by obliging him to inhale through the nostrils the smoke of dried axi. 5. The smoke or vapour 
of axi. 6. The mother of the girls contained in this division of the plate. 7. The girl of eleven 
years of age whose mother is punishing her by making her breathe smoke of axi. 8. A roll and a 
half. 9. The smoke of axi. 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section.— When a boy or girl of twelve years 
of age would not submit to the reproof or advice of their parents, the father took the boy and 
tied his hands and feet, and laid him naked on the ground in some damp and wet place, in which 
situation he kept him for a whole day, in order that by this punishment he might amend and fear 
his displeasure. And the mother obliged the girl of the said age to work by night before break of 
day, employing her in sweeping the house and the street, and continually occupying her in personal 

tasks. They gave them food likewise by allowance. 

SECOND SECTION. 

10. Twelve years. 11. A roll and a half. 12. The father of the boys contained in this division of 
the plate. 13. The boy of twelve years of age stretched upon the wet ground, with his hands and 
feet tied, for a whole day. 14. This painting signifies the night. 15. The mother of the girls 
contained in this division of the plate. 16. A roll and ahalf. 17. The girl of twelve years of age, 

who is employed by night in sweeping. 

The explanation of what is represented in the third section of the following plate.—Boys and girls 
of thirteen years of age were occupied by their parents: the boys in fetching wood from the 
mountains, and in bringing reed-grass and other litter in canoes for the use of the house; and the 
girls in grinding meal and making bread, and preparing other articles of food for their parents. 

They gave the boys for their allowance of food two rolls each at each meal. © 

(Rk) 

62 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

THIRD SECTION. 

18. The father of the boys contained in this division of the plate. 19. Thirteen years. 20. Two 
rolls. 21. The boy of thirteen years of age, who brings a load of reed-grass. 921. A canoe with 
bundles of canes. 22. The mother of the girls contained in this division of the plate. 23. The girl 
of thirteen years of age, who makes cakes and prepares articles of food. 24. Twocakes. 25: A 
bowl. 26. The comali. 27. 28. A pot for boiling provisions in and two cakes. 

The explanation of what is represented in the fourth section of the following plate-—Their parents 
employed and occupied a boy or girl of fourteen years of age, the boy in going in a canoe to 
fish in the lakes, and the girl in the task of weaving a piece of cloth. Their allowance of food 

was two rolls. 

FOURTH SECTION. 

29. Fourteen years. 30. Two rolls. 31. The father of the boys contained in this division of the 
plate. 32. The boy of fourteen years of age, who goes out fishing with his canoe. 33. The mother 
of the girls contained in this division of the plate. 34. Two rolls. 35. The girl of fourteen years of 
age, who is occupied in weaving. 36. 'The web and occupation of weaving. 

The explanation of what is represented in the following plate-——The figures contained in the 
first section signify that the father who had sons nearly grown up, carried them to the two houses 
represented in the plate; either to the house of the master, who taught and instructed the young 
men; or to the Mezquita, accordingly as the lad was himself inclined ; and committed him to the care 
of the superior Alfaqui, or to the master of the boys, to be educated,—which lads it was fit should 

have attained the age of fifteen. 

PLATE LXII. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. A youth of fifteen years of age, whose father delivers him up to the superior Alfaqui, that he 
might receive him as an Alfaqui. 2. The Tlamazqui, who is the superior Alfaqui. 3. The Mezquita 
named calmecac. 4. The father of these two youths. 5. A young man of sixteen, whose father 
delivers him up to the master, that he might teach and instruct him. 6. The Teachcauh or master. 
7. The seminary where they educated and taught the young men, which was called cuincacali. 

8. Fifteen years. 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section of the following plate.—This painting 
signifies the laws and usages which they followed and observed in the marriages, which they lawfully 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 63 

contracted*. ‘The ceremony consisted in the female negotiator, who arranged the nuptials, carrying 
on her back, on the first night of the wedding, the betrothed woman, accompanied by four women 
with blazing torches of resinous fir, who attended to light her on the way: and having arrived at 
the house of the man to whom she was engaged, the parents of the betrothed man went out to 

* Herrera gives the following description, in the seventeenth chapter of the second book of his third Decade, of the 
Mexican marriage ceremony, which, he says, was performed by the hands of a priest: ‘“‘Casabanse por manos de sus 
sacerdotes, poniendose los novios juntos delante del sacerdote, que los tomaba por las manos, 1 preguntaba si querian casarse ; 
ien diciendo que si, les ataban la punta de la manta del novio, i del velo que la novia llevaba sobre la cabeca, i atados 
iban 4 casa de la desposada, i andaban siete bueltas al rededor de un fogon, con que quedaba hecho el matrimonio. ran los 
Mesicanos mui zelosos de la virginidad de las esposas, afrentabanse de lo contrario, i honraban @ la que hallaban tal, i la 
daban grandes dadivas, i 4 sus padres,i hacian banquetes i fiestas. Ponian por memoria quanto traia la novia, porque si 
se bolvian & descasar como lo usaban, se hiciese particion de los bienes, Wevandose el hombre las hijas, ila muger los hijos, con 
facultad de bolverse & casar con otro, pero una vez descasados, no se avian de bolver & juntar so pena de muerte.” “ They 
were married by the hands of their priests, the betrothed couple standing side by side before the priest, who took them by the hand, 
and inquired whether they wished to be joined together in matrimony ; when on their replying in the affirmative he tied the corner 
of the mantle of the man to the veil which the woman wore on her head ; and they proceeded, tied in this manner, to the house of 
the bride, and walked seven times round a blazing hearth, which completed the nuptial ceremony.”—This painting reminds us of 
the marriage-feast in Canaan of Galilee, when Christ, having commanded his disciples to draw more wine from the pitcher, (which 
appears to have been placed in the middle of the room, as is here represented, with a cup beside it out of which to help the guests,) 
and being informed that the pitcher was empty, he changed the water into wine. What the ancient Hebrew marriage ceremony 
consisted in is not precisely known, although tying together the apparel of the parties would not obscurely have signified that 
those whom God had joined, man was not to put asunder; an admonition which the Mosaic law relating to divorces rendered 
of none effect. That to carry torches was customary at Jewish weddings, is evident from the parable of the five wise and the five 
foolish Virgins. And from the following verse of the forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah, it might be inferred that the daughters of Jeru- 
salem were occasionally carried in hammocks either on the shoulders of men or women: “ Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I 
will lift wp mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people; and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy 
daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.” Wine, it has already been observed, was drunk by the Jews at their marriage 
entertainments ; although it may be guessed, from the evil consequences of drunkenness recorded in the Pentateuch, that Moses 
would have been little inclined to indulge the children of Israel in the free use of it. Mahomet, who (assisted by a Nestorian 
monk) borrowed largely from the Pentateuch when compiling the Koran, at the same time that he enjomed the practice of cireum- 
cision to the Mussulmen, forbad them wine. In Mexico, although the grape was not cultivated, wine was obtained from the 
maguey, or American aloe; and the interpreter of the Vatican Codex says, that the man who taught the Mexicans “how to change 
the insipid juice which distilled from an incision cut in the shape of a basin in the trunk of the aloe into pulque‘or wine, was 
afterwards deified by them, and worshipped under the name of Patecatle, and probably under that of Ometochtl. It is singular 
that wine, which was generally forbidden to the Mexicans, should have been allowed them at marriage-feasts ; and that drunken- 
ness, which the laws punished with death in the case of the young and middle-aged, should have been permitted to the old. Like 
the Jews, they perhaps considered wine the milk of old age; and their legislators might have had respect to this adage. In Tezcuco 
the laws against drunkenness were even more rigidly enforced than in Mexico: and it is related of the celebrated Nezahualcoyotl, 
(Nezahualpilli’s predecessor on the throne,) that being once closely pursued by his enemies and nearly taken prisoner by them, he 
took refuge in the house of a certain widow, by whom he was hospitably received ; when discovering by mere chance that she had 
a plantation of aloes from which she distilled pulque, which she privately sold,—both the one and the other being expressly for- 
bidden by law,—he caused her, notwithstanding his obligation to her, to be put to death, that nota tittle of the law might be 
broken. This extreme rigour in fulfilling to the letter a harsh penal law, reminds us of a like severity exercised by Moses on the 
man who gathered sticks upon the sabbath day, which he himself thus describes in the fifteenth chapter of Numbers: ‘‘ And while 
the children of Israel-were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day. And they that found 
him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the congregation. And they put him in ward, because it 
was not declared what should be done to him. And the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death: all. the 
congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp. And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned 
him with stones, and he died; as the Lord commanded Moses.” One striking analogy remains still to be pointed out between the 

Mexican and Jewish customs, in reference to the age at which marriage was contracted by one or both parties. Since “‘ Increase 

64 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

receive her in the court of the house, and conducted her to an apartment where the man to whom 
she was engaged expected her; and seating the betrothed couple on a mat on which were placed 
seats, near a hearth of fire, they took them and tied them to each other by their clothes, and offered 
incense of copal to their gods. Two old men and two women afterwards delivered a separate discourse 
to the newly married couple, and set food before them, which they presently ate; and after their 
repast was over, the two old men and women gave good advice to the married pair, telling them 
how they ought to conduct themselves and to live *, and by what means they might best preserve the 
state and obligations which they had taken upon them, in order that they might pass their lives in 
tranquillity. 

SECOND SECTION. 

9. The apartment. 10. The old man. 11. The hearth of fire. 12. The wife. 13. Copal. 14. The 
husband. 15. The old woman. 16. The old man. 17. Food. 18. Amat. 19. Food. 20. An 
old woman. 21. A pitcher of pulque. 22. A cup. 23. 24. These women light the bride on her way 
with torches, when on the first night of the wedding they accompany her to leave her at the house of 
the bridegroom. 25. The female negotiator, the bride. 26.27. These women light the bride and 
bridegroom on the first night of their wedding. 

The explanation of what is contained in the first section of the following plate.—Since each of the 

and multiply ” was held by the Jews to be a most sacred injunction, and the posterity of Abraham were to become as the stars, and 
the sand of the sea in number, marriages amongst them became at a certain age almost compulsory, except in the case of those 
who devoted themselves to the study of the law. This age Selden fixes at twenty. And from the following passage of the fourth 
chapter of Peter Martyr’s fifth Decade, the Mexicans would appear closely to have imitated the example of the Jews: and the 
same may be said of the Peruvians. This passage is also interesting from the mention which it makes of the churches or temples, 
parishes, and particular images, like those of patron saimts, which existed in Mexico in the time of Montezuma; and the description 
which it gives of the greater temple: “ First, therefore, Muteczuma accompanying him (Cortes), he visiteth the churches, where, 
as with us in every tribe called a parish the churches are all assigned to their particular saint, so in every street with them their 
temples are dedicated to their peculiar idols. But your Holiness shall hear what things are reported of their greatest temple and 
chiefest idols. He saith, it is a famous and renowned square temple, on every side thereof there is an huge gate, whereupon those 
four admirable paved ways, which are instead of a bridge from the continent, directly answer. The largeness of that temple in 
situation is matchable with a town of five hundred houses ; it is fortified with high stone walls, very well and cunningly made, and 
compassed about with many towers, built after the manner of a strong castle of many towers. He saith, four of them are greater 
than the rest, and much more spacious, because in them are halls and chambers appointed for the priests and prelates. To the chief 
dwellings the priests ascended by fifty marble steps. These are the houses of the priests, who, as I said, take charge of the 
sacrifices. There the sons of the chief men of the city are shut up at seven years old, and never put out their heads or come 
forth thence until they become marriageable and are brought forth to be contracted in marriage: all that time they never cut 
their hair.” From the last sentence we may infer that their parents consecrated them at the temple as Nazarites to Huitzilo- 
puchtli,—the martial and tutelary god of the Mexicans, who was represented under the figure of a man seated upon an azure globe, 
scattering forth arrows from his right hand,—to whom, or to Tetzcatlipoca, Herrera must allude in the following passage of the 
fifteenth chapter of the second book of his third Decade: ‘‘ Con todo eso confesaban los Mexicanos aun supremo Dios, Senor 2 
Hacedor de todo, i este era el principal que veneraban, mirando al cielo, llamandole Criador del cielo i tierra, 1 admirable, a otros 
nombres de gran excelencia.” “‘ The Mexicans, notwithstanding, confessed a supreme God, the Lord, and framer of the universe ; 
and he was the principal object whom they adored, looking up to heaven and calling him the Creator of heaven and earth, and the 
wonderful, with other epithets of great excellence.” 
* “ Attend to the counsel of the aged ” seems to have been a Hebrew proverb. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 65 

figures representing the novice Alfaquis are accompanied with explanations signifying in what their 
fathers and superiors employed them, it will be unnecessary to repeat these explanations, further than 
by saying that as soon as they commenced being Alfaquis, personal services for the Mezquitas 
were immediately allotted to them, in order that when they became superior Alfaquis they might at 
a future time know how to employ the novices in the same routine of tasks as they had themselves 
been engaged in. 

PLATE LXIII. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. A Tlamacazq*, or novice Alfaqui, whose task it is to sweep. 2. A novice Alfaqui, who brings 
branches from the mountain for the purpose of strewing the mezquita. 3. A novice Alfaqui, who 
returns loaded with thorns of the aloe for the mezquita, in order to offer a sacrifice with them of his 
own blood to the devil. 4. A novice Alfaqui, who brings a load of green canes for the mezquita, for 
the purpose of making fences and to scatter on the pavement. 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section of the following plate; in which 
section likewise, under each of the figures, are declared the employments and occupation which were 
allotted to the young men, in order that they might afterwards know how, when they attained a proper 
age and station, to command other young men like themselves, that they might not turn out idle and 
abandoned persons, but always apply themselves to virtuous things. 

SECOND SECTION. 

5. A young man who carries a large log of timber for the purpose of keeping light burning in the 
mezquita. 6. A servant who carries wood for the abundant supply of light in the mezquitat. 7. A 

servant carrying the said wood. 8. A young man with a load of boughs for the purpose of strewing 
the mezquita. 

* The signification of Tlamacazq is, properly, a doer of penance; but it seems to have been a general appellation by which the 
Mexican priests were distinguished, on account of the austerities which they practised. It has already been observed, that they were 
required, like the Levites, to perform frequent ablutions; to which custom the name TVamacazapan, signifying the priest in the water, or 
the priest’s bath, compounded of the words tlamacazq a priest, atl water, and pan, a particle of local reference, alludes. This name 
was that of a Mexican city, the symbol of which, representing a man up to his neck in water, occurs in the thirty-eighth Plate of the 
Collection of Mendoza, under the number 7. The Jews were likewise accustomed to strew the temple with branches of trees, and to 
keep the courts and pavement of it swept perfectly clean; and women seem sometimes to have occupied themselves in this manner out of 
a deep sense of devotion to Jehovah, and in performance of particular vows. ‘Torquemada, confounding as it would appear the miraculous 
birth of Quecalcoatle, or of Huitzilopuchtli, and the pregnancy of Chimalman with some other history perhaps connected with the birth of 
Totec, says, that a devout woman of the city of Tulan, of the name of Coatlycue, from whom many nations were born, being employed 
according to custom in sweeping the shrines and holy places of the sacred mountain Coatepec, beheld a ball of feathers falling through 
the air, which catching in her hands and putting into her bosom she became pregnant; and that her own family, consisting of many sons 
and a daughter, (her husband 2s not mentioned,) resolved, suspecting that she had been guilty of adultery, to put her to death ; but that, 
suddenly giving birth to Huitzilopuchtli, he vindicated the honour of his mother and defended her from the violence of her sons, whom, 
notwithstanding their near relationship, he to a man destroyed. This curious account is detailed at greater length in the twenty-first 
chapter of the sixth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy. 

+ The interpreter of the paintings contained in the larger Vatican MS. says, that light was obliged to be always kept burning in the 
Mexican temples, and instancing this and other traits of resemblance between the Mexicans and Jews, he shortly afterwards adds, “ From 

(8) 

66 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

The explanation of what is represented in the third section of the following plate; in which section 
likewise, under each of the figures, are declared the punishments and chastisements which the superior 

all these circumstances the fact is plain and probable, that this nation descends from the Jews; since all the ceremonies of this chapter are, 
as it were, according to the text of Leviticus,—such as that the people should not touch the holy things; and again, as in Exodus,—that 
light should be always in the temple’, and incense, and the trumpets, and the sacred vestments.” How strict was the injunction against 
the Jewish laity being allowed to touch the holy things, and what dreadful vengeance they might expect in case of disobedience to this 
command, may be inferred from the following account of David’s bringing up the ark from Kirjath-jearim, which is contained in the 
thirteenth chapter of the First Book of Chronicles; wherein it is said that Uzza, notwithstanding the apparently religious necessity for the 
act, was struck dead by God for putting forth his hand to prevent the ark from falling on the ground ; at which David feared, recollecting 
perhaps the time when he and the young men who were with him had eaten of the shew-bread, which it was only lawful for the priests 
to eat, as recorded in the sixth verse of the twenty-first chapter of the first book of Samuel: “ And when they came unto the threshing-floor 
of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzza, and he 
smote him, because he put his hand to the ark : and there he died beforeGod. And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a 
breach upon Uzza: wherefore that place is called Perez-uzza to this day. And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring 
the ark of God home to me?” In reference to the proper name Perez-uzza, which signifies the breach of Uzza, it may be observed that 
the Hebrew names of places are generally, like the Mexican, significative. ‘The use of the trumpets in the Mexican temples was for the 
priests to blow in honour of the Deity, and likewise to summon the people to religious worship; and to sound them in a shrill tone on certain 
festivals of penance and mortification, thereby to excite in the hearts of the people a keener recollection and sense of sorrow for their sins. 
Itisa singular thing that Jews, Christians, and Mahometans, (the three sects which divide the Western portion of the globe,) should not 
only differ from each other in employing different modes of summoning the people to their religious duties, but that each, attaching in 
former ages superstitious notions to their own practice, should have entertained the utmost aversion and contempt for those of the other 
sects. Horns, bells, and the human voice, were the means which they severally resorted to; and even still, Mahometans can hardly 
conceive a greater profanation of a mosque, than that of ringing a bellin it. When the time for evening prayer arrives, the Imam, in 
countries inhabited by the believers in the Koran, ascends to the top of a minaret, and calls the people to their devotions by ejaculating 
in a loud and clear voice, “‘ There is no God but God ;” an appeal significative of their belief in the unity of the divine essence. Lord 
Byron has remarked, that there is something very solemn and impressive in this short address, disturbing the stillness of the evening, and 
arresting the attention of the mind, absorbed in a very different train of meditation. ‘The early Christians entertained a very extraordinary 
reverence for bells; and a curious notion of their virtue and efficacy in driving away evil spirits, their general belief in which cannot be 
better proved than by the fact, that those who entered on the spiritual office succeeded from the inferior degree of exorcists to that of 
deacons and priests; and boys were even eligible to the former, since it mentions in an old Life of Saint Patrick, lately published by 
Sir William Betham, that when that saint first visited Ireland, he had some boys in his train, who were exorcists?. Excommunication 
was likewise anciently performed by bell, book, and candle; and bells, candles, altars, and holy vests, were always the concomitants of 
foreign conversions’. If, therefore, some weight has been attached to the argument that Christians and civilized Europeans could never 
have passed over to America, at a period anterior to the arrival of the Spaniards, because the Indians were unacquainted with the use 
of candles either of wax or tallow, and milk and cheese formed no portion of their diet,—some weight must also be allowed to an argument 
favouring the contrary conclusion, founded on the knowledge which the Mexicans and other Indian nations possessed of the use of bells 
and the art of making them, since bells which were cast by the ancient Mexicans have even lately been dug up in Mexico; and Peter 
Martyr makes express mention, in the tenth chapter of his Seventh Decade, of bells being employed by the Indians of Dabaiba, (who 
inhabited a country situated at some distance from the province of Darien,) in the religious service of their temples, and to call the people 
to prayers. “ But it is not unfit to be heard after what manner they are called and summoned to their religious and sacred rites, or 
what instruments they use. One day the cursed thirst of gold provoking thereunto, the Spaniards having levied a strong power of armed 
men, went to pass through the banks of that river, Dabaiba, Here they light upon a king, whom they overthrew, and had from him - 
about fourteen thousand pensa of gold, brought into divers forms very fairly wrought, among which they found three golden trumpets 

1 From the following verse, with which Nehemiah closes his book of prophecies, it is evident that the Jewish priests or Levites 
considered it an important and meritorious task to provide a due supply of fuel for the temple: «And for the wood-offering at times 
appointed, and for the first fruits, remember me, OQ my God, for good.” 

2 « Venit vero Patricius cum Gallis ad insolas Mac Euchor, et insola orientali que dicitur Insola Patricii; et secum fuit multitudo 
episcoporum sanctorum, et presbyterorum, et diaconorum, ac exorcistarum, hostiariorum, lectorumque, nec non filiorum quos ordinavit.” 
Liber Ardmache—Vita S. Patricti, p. xix. ~ “ Exiit (Patricius) ad campum Lif, et posuit ibi ecclesiam, et ordinavit Auxilium puerum 
Patricii exorcistam, et Eserninum et Mactadeum in cellola Cuilin.” p. xxxv.—Irish Antiquarian Researches : Appendix. 

3 « Portavit Patricius per Sininn secum L clocos, L patinos, L calices, altaria, libros legis, evangelii libros, et reliquit illos in locis 

noyis.”—Vita S. Patricii, p. xvii. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 67 

Alfaquis inflicted on those who were subject to them, correcting them either because they were 

negligent and inattentive to their duties, or on account of some excesses which they had committed, 
in the manner represented in the plate. 

and as many golden bells; one of the bells weighed six hundred pensa, the other were lesser. Being demanded for what service they 
used the trumpets and bells, they answered, as they say, that they were wont to use the harmony and‘ concert of trumpets to stir them up 
to mirth upon their festival-days and times to sport, and that they used the noise and ringing of bells to call the people to the ceremonies 
of their religion. The clappers of the bells seemed to be made after our manner, but so white and clear that at the first sight, save that 
they were too long, our men would have thought that they had been made of pearls, or of the mother-of-pearl; in the end they 
understood they were made of the bones of fishes. ‘They say the ears of the hearers are delighted with a sweet and pleasant sound, 
although the ringing of gold useth to be dull. ‘The tongues or clappers moved touch the lips or brims of the bells as we see in ours.” 
The question naturally occurs,—what was the religion of these Indians? 

Peter Martyr says in a preceding paragraph, «‘ Being demanded to what God they pour forth their prayers, the Spaniards who were 
present report they answered, that they prayed to him who created the heavens, the sun, and the moon, and all invisible things, from 
whom all good things proceed: and they say that Dabaibe, the general God of those countries, was the mother of that creator.” That 
they believed in the immortality of the soul and a future state of rewards and punishments, is expressly stated in the following passage: 
—<TIt is very necessary and expedient for their priests to beware of all luxury and carnal pleasure. If any, contrary to his vow and 
purpose of chastity, shall be found to be polluted, he shall either be stoned to death or burned; for they suppose chastity pleaseth that 
God the creator. "Whiat time they fast and give themselves to prayer, having washed and rubbed their faces, when at other times they 
walked always painted, they now lifted their hands and eyes to heaven, and abstain not only from harlots and other venereous actions, 
but also from their own wives. ‘They are such simple men, that they know not how to call the soul, nor understand the power thereof : 
whereupon they often talk among themselves with admiration of what that invisible and not intelligible essence might be, whereby the 
members of men and brute beasts should be moved. I know not what secret thing they say should live after the corporal life. That (I 
know not what) they believe, that after this peregrination, if it lived without spot, and reserved that mass committed unto it without 
injury done to any, it should go to a certain eternal felicity: contrary, if it shall suffer the same to be corrupted with any filthy lust, 
violent rapine, or raging fury, they say it shall find a thousand tortures in rough and unpleasant places under the centre: and speaking 
these things, lifting up their hands, they show the heavens, and after that, casting the right hand down, they point to the womb of the 
earth.” The doubt might reasonably occur to our minds, whether these Indians might not have been Christians, though not acknowledged 
to be such by the Spaniards, if Peter Martyr did not inform us in another sentence, that, like Jephthah, they offered up human victims 
as burnt-offerings to Dabaiba. “There is an idol called Dabaibe as the river is; the chapel of this image is about forty leagues distant 
from Darien, whereunto the kings at certain times of the year send slaves.to be sacrificed from very far-removed countries ; and they also 
adore the place with exceeding great concourse of people. They kill the slaves before their god, and then burn them, supposing that 
flaming odour to be acceptable to their idol, as the light of a taper or the fume of frankincense is to our saints.” Peter Martyr states in 
the eighth chapter of his Fourth Decade, that the Indians of Coluacana, a large territory of New Spain, who also sacrificed slaves, “cir- 
cumcised them twenty days before they offered them to their idols.” Why, we may inquire, should they have thought that circumcision 
was more agreeable than uncircumcision to the Deity? ‘With respect to the arguments already mentioned as having been used by some 
eminent writers, who contend that America could never have been colonized by Europeans because the Indians were destitute of the 
knowledge of some articles which are reckoned by the former amongst the chief necessaries of life,—such as candles for light, and milk 
and cheese for nourishment,—it may be observed, that these reasons are really destitute of foundation. Leaving out of the question the 
consideration of whether the Jews might not feel scrupulous about manufacturing candles from the fat of animals, the total want of all 
the larger domestic species of quadrupeds in Mexico would have been a sufficient reason for the Mexicans contenting themselves with 
torches; which, perhaps, much more nearly resembled the candles used in other parts of the globe than is generally supposed, as Peter 
Martyr says they were made of the pith of the pine. The Mexicans, for the same reason, could not have either milk or cheese; nor is 
it positively known whether the Peruvians, who might have obtained both from the lama, used them: but in Sibola, a large territory to 
the north of Mexico, where the buffalo was domesticated by the Indians, milk was their common diet: and Gomara, describing the 
manners of the Chicorani, says that they inade cheese out of deer’s milk :—“ Ay muchos ciervos que crian en casa, y andan al pasto en 
el campo con pastores, y bueiven la noche al corral; desu leche hazen queso.” “They domesticate many deer, which shepherds drive to 
pasture in the plains, and which are shut up by night in pens; from their milk they make cheese.”— La Istoria de las Indias, fol. xxii. 
Since light was such an essential thing in the Mexican temples, and the Jews attached so much importance to the candlestick in which 
it was burnt in their own temple, ascribing a mystery to each of its branches, it may be interesting to inquire whether the Mexicans 
resembled the Jews in having a candlestick as a sacred utensil in their temple. The author of The Ceremonies and Religious Customs 
of All Nations informs us in the following passage, that they had: «On the two sides of the rail or ballister, at that part where the 
staircase ended, two marble statues supported, in an attitude that very well expressed their labour, two very odd-fashioned candlesticks. 
At some distance from hence was a stone of a green colour, five feet in height, sharp-bottomed. Here the unhappy wretch who was to 

N 

68 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

THIRD SECTION. 

9. A superior Alfaqui, who is chastising a novice Alfaqui for being neglectful of his duty. 10. A 
novice Alfaqui. 11. A superior Alfaqui. 12. A novice Alfaqui. 13. A superior Alfaqui, who is 
chastising a novice Alfaqui by piercing him with thorns of the aloe as incorrigible. 14. This house 
signifies, that if the novice Alfaqui went to his own house to sleep for three successive days, they 

inflicted on him the punishment which is declared and represented. 

The explanation of what is represented in the fourth section of the following plate ; in which section 
likewise, under each of the figures, is declared how soldiers of valour trained to the military profession 
young men who had attained a fit age, accordingly as their fathers had intrusted them to their care, 
and the youths were led by their own inclinations. ‘Their fathers in this manner placed them with 
persons who were skilled in the arts and occupations to which their own inclinations disposed them. 

PO WIR Wet § i9 CWI O WN, 

15. The Teguigua, who is a man of valour in war. 16. The young man. 17. The father of the 
young man, who confides his son to the soldier of valour, that he may train him to the military 
profession and carry him along with him to the wars. 18. The young man, the pupil of the soldier 
of valour, who goes with him to the wars, carrying his baggage on his back, together with his own 

arms. 19. The Teguigua, a soldier of valour, who goes ready armed to the wars. 
The explanation of what is represented in the first section of the following plate ; in which section, 

be sacrificed was laid on his back, when they ripped up his stomach and tore out his heart. Above this stone, and opposite to the stair- 
case, was a large strong chapel, the roof of which was of a rare and precious wood, under which their idol Vitzlipuztli was seated on a 
very high altar with curtains round it.” The character of this deity is thus described in a preceding section :—“Itis plain, from what 
has been just now related of Vitzlipuztli’s power, that the Mexicans acknowledged a supreme being under that name, notwithstanding 
what the Spaniards affirmed of their having no word to express the Deity; so that they were obliged to make use of the word dios to 
denote that being whom we call God. Be that as it will, the Mexicans worshipped Vitzlipuztli as the sovereign lord of all things, and 
creator of heaven and earth, and added the epithet ineffable to that supreme deity. But notwithstanding the great idea they had formed 
to themselves of this first cause, they yet could not persuade themselves that it was possible for it to govern the world without the imme- 
diate assistance of a numberless multitude of genii. The author of the Conquest of Mewico tells us, “that they were so silly as to 
believe that there were not any gods at that time in the other parts of heaven, till such time as mankind grew more and more miserable 
in proportion as they grew more numerous. They looked upon their gods as so many propitious genii, who were ever multiplying as 
mortals stood in need of their assistance.” It would be an omission not to observe, before taking leave of the present subject, that the 
Indians, besides torches, used the fat of tortoises for light; and if they were not acquainted with wax lights when the Spaniards first 
visited them, it is more probable that they had forgotten, than that they never possessed, the invention. At the same time it must be 
recollected that the Spaniards intentionally consigned the arts, history, religion, and ancient monuments of America to oblivion, and that 
they denied the Mexicans and Peruvians the knowledge of many arts which had arrived at even a flourishing state of perfection amongst 
them. Many writers have contended that the single fact of iron not having been known or used by the Indians, affords proof sufficient 
that no intercourse could have taken place in early ages between the old and the new continents; but these writers assume that to be a 
fact, which is by no means proved. M. Dupaix observes, that this metal of all others is most likely to decomposition; and that he 
would not venture to affirm, because he could discover no iron instruments of the ancient Mexicans, that they did not employ them in 
their works of architecture ; and Garcia declares, that in Paraguay, iron money, resembling in shape the shell of a tortoise, was used ; 

which animal is represented on some of the oldest Greek coins—those of Thebes. 

| 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 69 

under each of the figures, are declared the employments and occupations of the superior Alfaquis ; 
some went by night to the mountain to offer sacrifice to their gods, others played on musical instru- 
ments, others counted the hours by the stars of the sky, and others exercised themselves in other 

services of their mezquitas*. 

PLATE LXIV. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. Anovice Alfaqui. 2. A superior Alfaqui, who goes with a blazing light by night to a mountain 
to perform penance, and carries in his hand a bag of copal for incense to offer a sacrifice to the devil, 
and on his back henbane in a vase for the same sacrifice, as likewise boughs for the purpose of 
strewing the place of sacrifice; and behind him is a novice Alfaqui, with other things. 3. This 
painting with eyes} signifies the night. 4. A superior Alfaqui, who is playing on the teponaztli, which 
is a musical instrument, which is his occupation during the night. 5. This painting with eyes 
signifies the night. 6. A superior Alfaqui, who watches by night the stars and the sky, in order to 
see what the hour is, which is the task and duty allotted to him. 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section of the following plate; in which 
section, under each of the figures, is declared its signification, explanatory of the punishments which 
they inflicted on the young men, as represented by the figures, which were executed according to the 

laws and ordinances of the kings of Mexico. 

* It is almost superfluous to remark, that the tribe of Levi amongst the Jews constituted the sacerdotal order, and that the priests, in 
contradistinction to the other Levites, were the immediate descendants of Aaron, who discharged the higher functions of the priesthood. 
Their occupations were very various: some ministered at the altar and presided at sacrifices; some were musicians; and some, perhaps, 
counted the hours of the night by the stars, since the first watch, and the second watch, are expressions which occur in the New Testa- 
ment; and the night appears to have been divided by the Jews into four watches of three hours each, beginning at sunset and ending at 
sunrise. David ordained that the priests and Levites should serve in courses or in rotation in certain appointed numbers ; and the 
Mexican priests are said not to have fasted all together, but to have fasted in rotation, until the entire number of the priests had fasted ; in 
which may be traced some shadow of the forms prescribed by the Jewish ritual. Amongst the Mexicans, likewise, the high priesthood, 
or the office of Topilcin, (that is to say of the great high-priest who presided over public sacrifices,) was hereditary in a certain family, as 
we learn from the eighteenth chapter of Numbers that the Jewish high priesthood was hereditary in that of Aaron: “ And the Lord 
said unto Aaron, Thou, and thy sons, and thy father’s house with thee, shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons 
with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.” And hence it followed that the seed of Aaron, by prescription, sacrificed and 
made atonement for the sins of the people and of the Levites. The priests of Huitzilopuchtli, like the Levites, succeeded also to 
their office by belonging to a certain tribe, as Herrera remarks in the following passage of the fifteenth chapter of the second book of his 
Third Decade: “ Los sacerdotes de Vitzlipuztli sucedian por linages de ciertos barrios diputados para esto.” “ The priests of Viztlipuztl 
were entitled to succeed to their office by being born of families resident in certain suburbs of the city specially marked out for the 
purpose.” Herrera thus describes the duties and the dignity of the office of Topilcin: ‘“ Esta dignidad de ser sacrificador era suprema, 
i tenida en mucho, i que se heredaba como majorazgo, i el que abria el pecho al sacrificado, era reverenciado como supremo sacerdote ; 
el nombre de su dignidad era Papa, i Topilgin ; su ropa era una cortina colorada como dalmatica con flocuduras por orla, &c.” (Historia 
de las Indias Occidentales, dec. III. lib. 11. cap. 16.) “ The dignity of officiating as sacrificer was supreme, and held in great estimation, 
and hereditary in the manner of a feudal title; and he who opened the breast of the victim was reverenced as the high priest, and 
his title was Papa, and Topil¢in ; his dress was a scarlet vest resembling a robe with open sleeves, to which were fastened fringes as a 
border.” . 

+ Eyes in Mexican paintings are painted exactly in this manner. 

(ny) 

70 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

SECOND SECTION. 

7. A young man who proceeds on a military expedition, carrying a load of provisions and weapons 
of war. 8. The Telpuchtlato. 9. A woman. 10. A young man. 11. The Telpuchtlato. The 
officers deputed to watch over the conduct of the young men, are here signified, who, when any 
young man had criminal connexion with any woman, chastised the young man by inflicting blows 
upon him with half-burnt and fiery logs of wood, and separated the parties from further intercourse, 
as is represented by the figures contained in this division of the plate. 

The explanation of what is represented in the third section of the following plate ; in which section, 

under each of the figures, is declared its signification, which it is therefore unnecessary here to repeat. 

THIRD SECTION. 

12. A superior Alfaqui, whose duty it is to sweep the mezquita, or to cause it to be swept. 13. A 
superior Alfaqui. 14. A woman. 15. A novice Alfaqui. 16. A superior Alfaqui. These figures 
of Alfaquis signify, that if any novice Alfaqui was neglectful of his duties, and had criminal intercourse 
with any woman, the superior Alfaquis chastised him by running thorns of pine, made into stakes, 
into his whole body. 

The explanation of what is represented in the fourth section ; in which, under each of the figures, 
are declared the particular kinds of punishments which the officers named Telpuchtlato inflicted on 
the young men who turned out abandoned and vicious, as prescribed by their laws; and whatsoever 
else is contained and noticed in this section. 

FOURTH SECTION. 

17. The Telpuchtlato. 18. A young man. 19. The Teachcauh, an officer. These figures signify 
that if a young man turned out abandoned, the two officers chastised him by shaving off his hair *, 
and by singeing his head with fire. 20. A young man who is occupied in his canoe in bringing’ green 
sods for the service of the mezquita. 21. The Mezquita. 

‘The explanation of the first section of the following plate; in which section, under each of the 
figures, are declared the various occupations of the Alfaquis, and therefore the repetition of that 

which is there explained is here omitted. 

* Shaving the head was a Hebrew as well as a Mexican punishment. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 71 

PLATE LXV. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. A novice Alfaqui, a young man who is occupied in his canoe in fetching stones for the repair of 
the mezquita. 2. The Mezquita. 3. A novice Alfaqui, who goes with a superior Alfaqui to the 
wars, carrying his baggage. 4. A superior Alfaqui, who enters the field to animate and inspire the 
troops with courage, and to perform other ceremonies in the camp. 

The explanation of the second section ; in which section, under each of the figures, is declared how, 
according to their devices and insignia, (which were according to their achievements in war,) the 
soldiers advanced, step by step, to higher command; and the promotion and steps by which they 
attained the title of soldiers of valour, are signified by the number of persons whom they had made 
prisoners in war, as is successively represented by their arms, insignia, and apparel. The first step. 

SECOND SECTION. 

5. An officer who follows the Tecutli as a lictor. 6. The Tecutli, who was as it were a constable 
and justice under the kings of Mexico. This young man is occupied in repairing the gate of the 
mezquita. 7. The Mezquita, named Cihnateocali *, 8. The road, or street, with its gate of wood. 

9. A young man who if he took any prisoners was presented with a square mantle bearing a device 
of flowers, as a sign of valour. 10. A prisoner. 

The explanation of the third section; which relates to the second step of rank which Mexicans of 
valour attained, as signified by the devices and the insignia which the kings of Mexico bestowed upon 
them as arms, and by the colour of the dresses which they gave to them, to reward them for having 

taken a certain number of prisoners, as the figures declare, with their titles and explanations. 

* Cihnateocalli was the proper name of a Mexican temple, in which may be recognised, as forming a part of the compound name, 
the word Cihna, which corresponds exactly in sound with Sina, the appellation of the mountain from which God delivered the laws 
and tables of stone to Moses, the initial letter ¢ having a line under it, and therefore being pronounced in Spanish like s or z This 
name is different from that of Cihuateocalli, the signification of which would be the temple of the woman; since its accompanying 
symbol is not a female head, but two rows as if of arrow-headed characters engraved upon a single table of stone. Similar rows of 
characters occur in the sixty-fifth and seventy-third pages of the larger Vatican MS., and in the third page of the first part of the Coder 
Telleriano- Remensis : but in each of these paintings a line seems to divide the square in which they are enclosed, into two equal parts. 
The expression, arrow-headed characters and table of stone is applied here rather improperly to the above-mentioned symbols, in order 
to point out the possibility of the enclosed square representing a table of stone, and of the lines which it contains alluding to alphabetical 
or hieroglyphical writing. All that can with certainty be inferred, is, that this symbol, as applied to one of their temples, and to two 
of the mythological personages of their calendar, was sacred amongst the Mexicans; and that placed by the side of a particular 
temple, the name of which was Cinah, it constituted the phonetic hieroglyphic, like the thorn painted near the mezquita Huiznahuac, 
in the first plate of the second part of the Collection of Mendoza. It is a certain fact, that many Hebrew words are scattered through 
the American idioms. A respectable writer-says, that the inhabitants of Florida made use, in their religious songs, of the exclamation 
Hosanna, and their priests were named Jouanas. It cannot however be denied, that words in different languages often bear a 
resemblance to each other, as purely accidental as that which exists between El and Allah, Jehovah and Jove, and Japhet and J apetus. 

72 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

THIRD SECTION. 

11. This brave man has been presented with the device of arms which he wears, and with a square 
orange-coloured mantle with a scarlet fringe besides, as a sign of valour on account of his having 
taken two of the enemy prisoners. 12. A prisoner. 13. These insignia of a richly worked mantle, 
which this brave man wears, are as a sign that he has taken three prisoners in war. 14. A prisoner. 
15. The device of arms which this brave man wears, and this square mantle with two stripes of black 
and yellow and a fringe, signify that he has taken four of the enemy prisoners in war. 16. A 

prisoner. 

The explanation of the fourth section, which treats of the third step which Mexicans of valour 
attained, as is represented by the devices which the kings of Mexico bestowed upon them as arms, 
as a reward for their deserts and the number of prisoners whom they had captured in war; and 
accordingly they were promoted step by step, advancing always in rank, and taking precedence of 

those above mentioned, by higher titles and superior military command. 

FOURTH SECTION. 

17. This brave man bears his proper device of arms, and is distinguished by the title of Otonti, 
from his valour, and on account of his having taken five or six of the enemy prisoners in war; who 
is the same as the other who is represented above, who began by taking a single prisoner from the 
enemy, and so successively proceeded step by step to the attainment of his present dignity. 18. A 
prisoner. 19. This brave man, whose title is that of Quachic, and device of arms such as he wears, 
bears proof that he has captured five prisoners in war, besides having taken many other prisoners 
from the enemy in other wars. 20. A prisoner. 21. This brave man, whose title is Tlacatecatl, and 
device the robe which he wears, with his braided hair, and the insignia of a rich plume, declares by 
his presence that he has obtained the title of a valiant and distinguished person, by merit surpassing 

that of the others who are represented behind him. 

The explanation of the first section of the following plate; in which section, under each of the 
figures, are declared their respective significations ; for the superior Alfaquis likewise engaged in 
the profession of arms, and according to their proficiency in war, and the acts of valour which they 
had performed and the captives which they had taken, the kings of Mexico conferred in the same 
manner also upon them, dignities, honours, badges, and devices of valour, as is demonstrated 

by the arms with which they are represented in the plate. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. ~ 73 

PLATE LXVI. 

FIRST SECTION. 

1. An Alfaqui who has captured a single enemy in war. 2. The same Alfaqui as the one above 
mentioned, who has been presented with the device of arms which he wears, on account of his 
having taken two prisoners in war. 3. A prisoner. The same Alfaqui as the one above mentioned, 
who has been presented, as a reward for his valour on account of his having taken three prisoners 
in war, with the device and arms which he wears. A prisoner. 

The explanation of the second section, in which section, under each of the figures in the empty 
spaces between them, are declared their respective significations ; wherein are represented the same 
Alfaquis as those contained in the first section preceding this; who on account of the acts of valour 
by which they have signalized themselves in wars with the enemy, and the prisoners which they have 
taken, have merited higher titles, which the kings of Mexico have conferred upon them, together 
with the arms and the badges which they wear, as a sign of the rank and station to which they 
have been promoted by their deserts. 

SECOND SECTION. 

4. The same Alfaqui as those above mentioned, who, as a sign of valour, on account of his 
having captured four of the enemy, has been presented with the device of arms which he wears. A 
prisoner. 5. The same Alfaqui as those already represented, who has received the device of arms 
and the other insignia which he wears, as a sign of valour, on account of his having taken five of 
the enemy prisoners in war. A prisoner. 6. The same Alfaqui as those already represented, on 
whom the king of Mexico has bestowed the devices and the arms which he wears, as a sign of 

his bravery and courage in having taken six of the enemy prisoners in war. 

The explanation of the figures which are contained in the third section, in which section, under 
each of the figures, are declared the titles which they gained and acquired in the exercise of arms, 
by which they rose to higher rank, the kings of Mexico creating them captains and generals of 
their forces; whilst those of the one company served as officers of dispatch to execute the orders 
of the kings of Mexico, whether they related to the affairs of their own kingdom or to those of the 
other vassal states, who promptly obeyed, without in any manner deviating from the commands which 
they had received. 

THIRD SECTION. 

7. Quauhnochtli, an officer of dispatch. 8. Tlilancalqui*, an officer of dispatch. 9. Atenpanecatl, 
an officer of dispatch. 10. Ezguaguacatl, an officer of dispatch. The four personages contained 

* The signification of Thilancalqui is the house of darkness, which brings to mind the “ casa lobrega,” or temple of darkness, 
which Votan is said to have built in the short space of a breath; which seems to allude to what Christ says of destroying and 

(u) 

74 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

in this division of the plate served as officers and executors of the will and pleasure of the kings of 
Mexico. 11. Tlacochealcatl 12. Tezcacoacatl. 13. Ticocyahuacatl. 14. Tocinltecatl. The 
four personages contained in this division of the plate are men of distinguished courage in war, and 
captains of the Mexican forces, and persons who filled the post of generals of the Mexican armies. 

The explanation of the figures which are contained in the first section of the following plate, which 
represents a Cacique, (the governor of a city,) round whose neck, on account of his rebellion against 
the state of Mexico, the officers of dispatch above mentioned have placed a halter, by which he has 
been condemned to die by the king of Mexico, as a punishment for his rebellion, and his wife and 
children to be made captives, and brought prisoners to the court of Mexico*; in pursuance of which 

condemnation the officers are executing the punishments to which they had been sentenced, as 
the figures indicate. 

PLATE LXVII. 

FIRST SECTION. 

1. Huiznatl, an officer and executioner resembling a lictor. 2. An executioner. 3. The Cacique. 

4, An executioner. 5. The captive wife of the Cacique with a collar round her throat. 6. The 
captive son of the Cacique confined in a collar. 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section. The person who is seated and 
entitled a Cacique, signifies that he has been condemned, on account of his rebellion against the 
Mexican state, to utter ruin and destruction, together with the subjects of his city. The executioners 
accordingly present themselves before him by command of the Mexican government, informing 
him of the said condemnation; as a sign of which they mark him with the insignia which the 
executioners are putting on his head, and place in his hands a shield, in order thate h may not 
pretend ignorance of his ruin and destruction. The figures which are pierced through with mortal 
wounds, signify that they were Mexican merchants engaged in traffic, who came to the country and 
the city of the said Cacique ; and that the vassals of the Cacique, without the permission of their lord, 
attacked them on the road, killing them and robbing them of the merchandise which they carried, 
which furnished occasion for the said ruin and destruction of the whole city. 

rebuilding the temple in three days; whose real meaning was mistaken by the Jews, as is evident from their reply : ‘‘ Forty-and-six 
years hath this temple been building,” &e. The House of Darkness may appear a very inappropriate name for either a Mexican or 
a Jewish temple, since light was obliged to be kept perpetually burning in each of them ; but it is necessary to recollect, that in 
both there was a separate place inclosed within curtains; and that the ark of the covenant, which was an inclosed box in which 
the Jews declared that Jehovah was mysteriously present, was dark within; to which Solomon refers in the twelfth verse of the 
eighth chapter of the First Book of Kings: ‘‘ Then spake Solomon, The Lord said that he would dwell in the thick darkness. 1 
have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever.” It is singular that the Mexicans should 
sometimes have applied the epithet of divine to darkness, as in the expression teotliltan. 

* Leading away into captivity was a punishment which the Jews inflicted on their enemies, as well as one which they 
experienced from them ; it implied irredeemable slavery. 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. WS 

SECOND SECTION. 

7. A vassal of the Cacique. 8. Loads of merchandise. 9. A merchant. 10. A merchant. 11. A 

vassal of the Cacique. 12. An executioner. 18. An executioner. 14. The Cacique. 

The explanation of what is represented in the third section. The four officers of dispatch and 
ambassadors of the Mexican government signify, that after having denounced war against the 
Cacique, contained in the second section preceding this, as has been mentioned,—at the time that 
the said officers of dispatch were returning to Mexico, certain vassals of the said Cacique followed 
them on the road to ill-treat them, shooting arrows at them as a sign of war and rupture between 

them, and of the consequences which would ensue, and to widen the causes of hostility. 

THIRD SECTION. 
15. An officer of dispatch and ambassador from the state of Mexico. 16. An officer of dispatch 
and ambassador from the state of Mexico. 17. A vassal of the Cacique. 18. A vassal of the 
Cacique. 19. An ambassador and officer of dispatch from the state of Mexico. 20. An ambassador 
and officer of dispatch from the state of Mexico. 21. A vassal of the Cacique. They shoot arrows 

at the ambassadors to widen the causes of hostility. 

The description and explanation of what is represented in the first section of the following plate. 
The Tequihua signify an armed band of men dispatched by the state of Mexico to the city of the 
Cacique, in order that they might go and pass through it secretly by night without being perceived 
by the foe, that their enemies might be apprised and informed of where they should commence the 
battle, and make a successful assault without much resistance on the part of the foe. The 
Tequihua accordingly go and walk round about the city, houses, mezquita, and tianguez, at a time 
when the citizens are asleep and still, to discover where with least trouble and resistance it might be 

in their power to make the attack*. 

* The military tactics and articles of war of the Mexicans nearly resembled those of the Jews. Both nations were in the habit 
of sending spies to report the strength and condition of the cities which they intended to attack; they both treated their enemies 
when vanquished with extraordinary cruelty ;—the Mexicans sacrificing them in their temples, and the Jews on the field of battle. 
It was equally a custom with them after the return of the spies, formally to declare war against the foe; since Moses ordained 
that the devoted cities of the land of Canaan should be apprised, (like the Cacique of the city that rebelled against Mexico,) of their 
impending destruction; although peace was not to be proclaimed to them on terms of submission, as in the case of other cities, 
who by accepting it became tributary to the Jews. The following were the rules of Jewish warfare as laid down by Moses in 
the twentieth chapter of Deuteronomy : “‘ When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. 
And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein 
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee. And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, 
then thou shalt besiege it: And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with 
the edge of the sword. But the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shalt 
thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the Lord thy God hath given thee. Thus shalt thou 
do unto all the cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations. But of the cities of these people, 
which the Lord thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth: But thou shalt utterly 

76 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

PLATE LXVIII. 

RS SEC a OUN: 

1. A Tequihua. 2. A Tequihua. 3. A Tequihua. 4. A house. 5. The Mezquita. 6. A 
Tequihua.. 7. A house. 8. The Tianguez, or market-place. 9. A Tequihua. 10. A Tequihua. 
11. A house. 12. A house. 13. A Tequihua. 14. A Tequihua. 15. A house. 

destroy them ; namely, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, as the Lord 
thy God hath commanded thee: That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their gods ; 
so should ye sin against the Lord your God.” It is stated a little further on, that insults offered to Mexican ambassadors and 
merchants were a cause that sometimes induced Mexico to move her arms against other states; and we are indebted to Torque- 
mada for observing, that the Mexicans entertained notions very similar to those of the Jews, of the respect due to the persons of 
ambassadors; and for citing as a parallel case to one which he mentions, the example of David who sent ambassadors to Hanun 
the king of the Ammonites, to condole with him on the death of his father Nahash, who being accused of being spies, were con~ 
tumeliously treated by that king, and sent back to David with their beards shorn, who was so provoked that he immediately 
declared war against the Ammonites ; and having taken the city of Rabbah, put the inhabitants to the torture to revenge himself 
of the insult offered to him by Hanun, as is recorded in the third verse of the twentieth chapter of the First Book of Chronicles : 
‘‘And he brought out the people that were in it” (Rabbah) ; “‘and cut them with saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes: 
even so dealt David with all the cities of the children of Ammon: and David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.” It is to 
be presumed that the reason David tortured the Ammonites was to revenge himself of the insult offered to his ambassadors ; since, 
though simply putting them to death might have been only obedience to the law, the Jews were not commanded first to torture 
their prisoners. ' 

It is probable that the Mexicans, in their mode of attack and defence, in their warlike weapons and accoutrements, in their 
ambushes and in their fortification of towns and cities, closely resembled the Jews. We might perhaps also note the practice of 
transmitting state dispatches from one part of the kingdom to the other by means of couriers, who both in Mexico and Peru 
were a class of persons exercised in running, and maintained for the service of the state: and the frequent mention in Scripture of 
persons of this description induces the supposition that public officers of this kind existed amongst the Jews. In the eighteenth 
chapter of the Second Book of Samuel they seem to be spoken of in more places than one: ‘‘ Then said Ahimaaz the son of 
Zadok, Let me now run and bear the king tidings, how that the Lord hath avenged him of his enemies. And Joab said unto him, 
Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day ; but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because 
the king’s son is dead. Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen. And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, 
and ran. Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And 
Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready? But howsoever, said he, let me run. And 
he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and over-ran Cushi. And David sat between the two gates : 
and the watchman went up to the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, a man running 
alone. And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came 
apace, and drew near. And the watchman saw another man running; and the watchman called unto the porter, and said, 
Behold, another man running alone. And the king said, He also bringeth tidings. And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running 
of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and cometh with good 
tidings.” Ezekiel says, in the fourth chapter of his prophecies, that God had commanded him to pourtray Jerusalem upon a tile, 
and to lay siege to it, and to cast. a mount against it. This mode of raising earthen mounds, so as to overtop the walls of a city 
and to enable the enemy to shoot arrows into it, seems to have been practised by the Mexicans. The Jews often made use of the 
stratagem of laying in ambush, and of digging pits into which their adversaries or their horses might fall: and Cortes says that the 
Tlascalans employed both these devices against the Spaniards. Mutual challenges and defiances frequently took place between 
the Jewish leaders and those of the enemy; and the same thing usually happened when the Mexican armies took the field,—the 
contending parties pausing in the mean time to behold the result of these single combats. The Tlascalans are said to have drawn 
an omen of the fortune of the approaching battle by previously firing an arrow: and the following story, of Joash king of Israel 
auguring the issue of an engagement with the army of the Syrians from shooting and smiting arrows on the ground, is found in 

EE SS 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. Vi 

This section signifies the city of the Cacique, before mentioned, against whom war had been 
denounced on account of his rebellion against the state of Mexico. The figures of the Tequihua 
signify those who were sent by the said state to the city, to pass through it secretly by night, and to 
destroy the foe without much trouble in the hour of battle, and to make their enemies masters of the 
city and its territory. 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section. The Mexican who is seated with a 
shield and arrows behind him, signifies that the Mexicans were resolved to destroy by war a certain 
city which had rebelled against the state of Mexico. The three vassals of the Cacique represented 
in the plate, who likewise are seated opposite to the Mexican, signify that all the subjects of the 

the thirteenth chapter of the Second Book of Kings. ‘‘ Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And Joash the 
king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face, and said, O my father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen 
thereof! And Elisha said unto him, Take bow and arrows: and he took unto him bow and arrows: and he said to the king of Israel, 
Put thine hand upon the bow: and he put his hand upon it: and Elisha put his hands upon the king’s hands. And he said, Open the 
window eastward : and he opened it. Then Elisha said, Shoot: and he shot. And he said, The arrow of the Lord’s deliverance, and 
the arrow of deliverance from Syria : for thou shalt smite the Syrians in Aphek till thou have consumed them. And he said, Take the 
arrows: and he took them. And he said unto the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground: and he smote thrice, and stayed. And 
the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou shouldest have smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Syria till thou 
hadst consumed it : whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice.”” The Mexicans when they lost their sacred standard became so 
terrified at the omen,—as was the case at the famous battle of Otumba which decided the fate of the Mexican empire,—that the 
army invariably disbanded itself, and the soldiers retreated in confusion from ever so inferior a force. The Jews in the same manner 
were dismayed at seeing the ark fall into the hands of the enemy, which if the Philistines had twice taken, twice would the 
children of Israel have fled. In modern times, armies being less superstitious, these kinds of divine panics are unknown. It 
would be wrong to suppose, from the example above mentioned, that valour and not discipline was only prized in the Mexican 
armies, nor is it probable that the forces of Montezuma were inferior in this latter respect to those of other Indian states. In Peru, 
on the contrary, military discipline was held in great esteem by the Ingas: and Rosales says that the Indians of Chili, especially 
the Araucas, highly valued it. In Xalixco likewise it was carefully infused into the troops; and Gomara observes in the following 
passage, that the chiefs of that province held in their hands during the time of an engagement a baton, in order to maintain it. 
“ Sus armas son como en Mexico; empero no traen los sefiores y capitanes arma ninguna en la guerra, sino unos bastones, con 
que sacuden al que no pelea, 6 se desmanda, 6 no guarda orden.”” “‘ Their arms resemble those of the Mexicans; but their chiefs 
and generals only carry batons, with which they remove from the ranks those who do not fight, or who disobey orders, or who do not 
preserve discipline.” ‘The Mexican mode of fortification seems chiefly to have consisted in their teocallis or temples, which were also, 
like the temple of Jerusalem, arsenals; and in the thick walls which surrounded their cities, protected on the outside with a fosse 
with ramparts above. The streets likewise, from the houses being flat-terraced and covered with battlements, were capable of defence, 
and Cortes complains of the annoyance which his soldiers experienced from the Mexicans, who fought from the tops of their houses 
and threw missiles from behind the battlements. It is certainly singular that this curious mode of turreting the roofs of the houses 
should have existed in Mexico, as it was in strict conformity with the Mosaic law: ‘* When thou buildest a new house, then thou 
shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence.” And perusing a 
few verses lower down the same twenty-second chapter of Deuteronomy, we come to another precept, which we find from the 
indubitable testimony of their own paintings that the Mexicans followed more scrupulously than the Jews of the middle ages, who 
were laughed or persecuted out of some of their prejudices by Christians: “ Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters 
of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.” It is not of any signification whether all the Mexican dresses were ornamented 
with fringes, provided proof may be found in the Mexican paintings that this custom if not universal was general, and sacred and 
ritual, if not profane and vulgar. From the phrase “ the four quarters of thy vesture,” which could not apply to the girdle or 
maxtle, which the Jews wore round their loins, it may be inferred that the square vest or mantle which covered their body is 
understood ; and that was precisely the part of their dress to which the Mevicans fastened Fringes. Further arguments may appear 
unnecessary to establish the fact, that in military matters, as well as in their civil institutions, the Mexicans resembled the Jews: 
but another analogy may still be pointed out in reference to its beg customary with the kings of both nations to entrust to a subject 
the supreme command of the army, since the title of Tlacatecatl in the Mexican army, seems to have been equivalent to that which 
Joab and Abner possessed, under Saul and David, in the army of the Jews. 

(x) 

78 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

Cacique, being terrified at the war and destruction in which the Mexicans wished to involve them, 
they have come to Mexico to treat of peace, submitting themselves as vassals to the Mexicans, and 
promising to pay them tribute and to acknowledge their dominion ; on which conditions they are 
admitted to amity, and received as vassals, that which had previously been determined to their 
prejudice having been laid aside. The four valiant men represented and intitled with their lances in 
their hands, ready and equipped for war, wearing their devices and arms, signify the generals of the 
Mexican armies. 

SECOND SECTION. 

15. 16. 17. These are the vassals of the Cacique. 18. The Mexican. 19. A shield and arrows. 
20. A brave officer entitled Tlacatecatl. 21. A brave officer entitled Tlacochcalcatl. 22. A brave 
officer entitled Huitznahuatl. 23. A brave officer entitled 'Ticocyahuacatl. 

The explanation of what is represented in the first section of the following plate ; which signifies 
that he who is seated with a woman spinning behind him, is the newly married husband of the 
woman, who by reason of his having taken upon himself the marriage state, having before been a 
messenger of the number of the others who are painted before him, who are five, who are named 
Telpuchtli, who are likewise messengers, the married man discourses to them of the reasons which 
induced him to relinquish his office and duties of a messenger, as well for the sake of his private 
ease, as because he wished to rest from service; and further, to gain their good will and to cause 
them to grant his request, he invites them to a banquet plentifully supplied with meat and drink, 
besides making them a present of a handful of perfumes and some copper axes and two mantles, 
according to the signification of the representations of these articles; and with this ceremony the 
married man remained free, and vacated the said office. 

PLATE LXIX. 

FIRST SECTION. 

1. A Telpuchtli, who isa young man who is sent on missions: they are five. 2. Mantles. 3. A 
handful of perfumes. 4. An axe of copper. 5. The married Telpuchtli. 6. Tamales. 7. A 
dressed fowl. 8. A xicara containing chocolate to drink. 9. The wife of the married Tel- 
puchtli. 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section. He who is seated and his title declared 
is the king of Mexico; before whom some of the messengers named Telpuchtli, who are represented 
in the preceding plate, having rendered a satisfactory account of their past services, and taken’ on 
themselves the marriage state,—the said king promotes them from messengers, which they had before 
been, to higher rank and titles, by creating them Tequihua, which is what the three figures entitled 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. . 79 

Tequihua with their lances and fans signify, conferring upon them the privilege of being his ambas- 
sadors and comptrollers in war, which they esteemed an honourable office. 

SECOND SECTION. 

10. The king of Mexico. 11. A Tequihua. 12. A Tequihua. 13. A Tequihua. 

The explanation of what is represented in the third section. The magistrates and judges placed 
by the hand of the king of Mexico, to try both civil and criminal causes, are here signified: accord- 
ingly the figures of men and women represented in front of them, are those who demand justice, who 
are suitors ; and the four figures intitled Tectli, who are behind the judges, are young men of rank, 
who were assessors to the judges when they heard causes, that they might exercise themselves in 
affairs of judicature, for the purpose of afterwards succeeding to the office of judges. 

An appeal lay from these judges before the council-hall of Morzccuma, as will presently be 

shown *. 

* The Jewish Sanhedrim was a council composed of seventy-one persons; which Whiston, in a note to his Translation of Josephus, 
thus takes occasion to describe: “It is here worth our while to remark, that none could be put to death in Judea but by the appro- 
bation of the Jewish Sanhedrim, there being an excellent provision in the law of Moses, that even in criminal causes, and particularly 
where life was concerned, an appeal should lie from the lesser councils of seven in the other cities to the supreme council of seventy-one 
at Jerusalem, as I have formerly observed in my Horeb Covenant Revived, (page 100.) and this is exactly according to our Saviour’s 
words, when he says, “ It could not be that a prophet should perish out of Jerusalem.” Although the words of Christ seem rather 
to allude to the verse immediately following, in the thirteenth chapter of Saint Luke, wherein, addressing Jerusalem, he says, “ O 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee :”’—still all will assent to what Whiston says of 
the constitution and prerogatives of the supreme court of judicature among the Jews, called the Sanhedrim. But itis not a little sur- 
prising, that the Teotlatolli, or Tribunal of God, in Tezcuco, should have nearly resembled the Jewish Sanhedrim, both in the number of 
the judges of which it was composed, in the high authority which it possessed, and in the appeals which lay to it from the inferior courts; 
as also in the jurisdiction which it seems exclusively to have exercised in all criminal causes affecting the life of the accused. The fol- 
lowing account of the Teotlatolli is extracted from the twenty-second section of the Idea of a New General History of North America. 
« The court was at first established in Tenayuca, and afterwards transferred to Tetzcuco, where in the pagan times a famous university 
for all kinds of literature and science flourished, to which the lords of the country sent their sons, that they might learn the Nahuatl lan- 
guage in all its purity, together with poetry, moral philosophy, profane theology, astronomy, medicine, and history; besides those 
courteous addresses which it was proper to employ when sent on embassies, or in transacting business at court or with the nobility, 
(which have been printed in the Indian idiom, and which I possess in my museum:) and being not only the residence of monarchs as 
illustrious and wise as were Netzahualcoyotl, who composed sixty hymns in praise of the Creator of the universe, whose dwelling 
he affirmed was above the nine heavens, (mentioned in section 14. n. 3.) and Netzahualpiltzintli his son, who was a celebrated poet, 
historian, and astronomer ; but also the place in which the great council of eighty judges assembled, (as 1 have stated in‘section 15. n. 3.) 
where was the criminal court, which they named Teotlatolli, or the Tribunal of God, (of which I have spoken in section 14. n. 7.) at 
which tribunal criminal indictments represented in painting, together with the law which the accused parties had violated, were laid 
before the Emperor, on which the monarch pronounced sentence by drawing with an arrow the line of death over the figure of the cul- 
prit.” Boturini says,in section 15.n. 3, that the above-mentioned tribunal was also called Nepohualtlatolli, which signifies The tribunal 
of eighty days, because all appeals were obliged to be determined within that time. Eighty, it may be remarked, was a favourite num- 
ber among the Mexicans; which was probably owing either to its being the decuple of eight, a number to which they were as partial 
as the Jews; or because it was equal to twice forty, to which latter number they were also attached, and usually dedicated so many days 
to fasting, although a fast likewise of eighty days was no uncommon thing amongst them. It need scarcely be observed, that Moses 
fasted the first time forty days in the Mount, which was undoubtedly by way of penaice (for all fasting is penance). And itis stated in the 
thirty-fourth section of A View of the Jewish Religion, by A. R., printed in London in the year 1656,—That the Jews for certain 
offences “must fast forty days, and twice every day endure the malkus, or thirty-nine stripes on the back.” The Mexican fast of eighty 
days also resembled that of Moses; since we learn from the ninth and eighteenth verses of the ninth chapter of Deuteronomy, that Moses 
fasted eighty days in all: “ When I was gone up into the mount, to receive the tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which 
the Lord made with you, then [ abode in the mount forty days and forty nights; I neither did eat bread nor drink water.” He then 

80 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

THIRD SECTION. 

14, Tectli. 15. Tectli Myxcoatlaylotlac, the chief justice. 16. These six figures, three male and 
three female, are suitors who demand justice from the judges. 17. Tectli. 18. Ezguaguacatl, a 
judge. 19. Tectli. 20. Acatliyacapanecatl, a judge. 21. 'Tectli. 22. Tequixquiuahuacatl, a judge. 

The explanation of what is represented in the following plate; the plan of the halls of council be- 
longing to the king of Mexico, and of his palace with its courts, and the steps by which they entered, 
and the throne and seat of Morrccuma*. In the empty spaces of the figures representing them, are 

proceeds to say, that having received the tables from God, and flung them on the ground and broke them when he found that the Jews 
had taken advantage of his absence to prevail on Aaron to make them the golden calf; he fasted forty days more, to induce God to pardon 
their sins: “ And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes. And [I fell down before 
the Lord, as at the first, forty days and forty nights: 1 did neither eat bread nor drink water, because of all your sins which ye sinned, in 
doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. (For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure wherewith the 
Lord was wroth against you to destroy you.) But the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also. And the Lord was very angry with 
Aaron to have destroyed him : and I prayed for Aaron also the same time.” It is no wonder, since the fasting of Moses was so effica- 
cious, that the Jews should ever afterwards have considered it very meritorious to fast a length of time. And itis highly probable that the 
fasts of excessive duration, which ‘Torquemada says in the thirty-first chapter of the tenth book of his Indian Monarchy that the Tlasca- 
lans celebrated to their god Camaxtle, who he supposes was Quecalcoatle,—but who, it is more probable, was Huitzilopuchili, (if indeed 
the two latter deities were not one and the same,) derived their origin from Jewish superstition. Describing these fasts, to which he 
gives the common appellation of festivals, although macerations of the body by bleeding and fasting were what they entirely consisted 
in, he writes; “ Esta fiesta se hacia en el principio de Margo; y aunque se le hacia fiesta cada afio, era la major de quatro en quatro 
ahos, gue era su grande Pasqua. Este dia de su celebracion se llamaba Teowihuitl, que quiere decir Azo de Dios.” «This festival 
was celebrated in the beginning of March; and although it took place every year, it was kept with greater solemnity every fourth year, 
which was their great Passover. The day of its celebration was named Teoxihuitl, which signifies the Year of God.” Tt would appear 
from the following passage of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, that the fourth year was esteemed also by the Jews at a very early 
period of their history as holy : “ And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye 
shall count the fruat thereof as uncircumczsed: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you; it shall not be eaten of. But in the 
fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy, to praise the Lord withal. And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it 
may yield unto you the increase thereof: I am the Lord your God.” It is a remarkable fact, which admits of no doubt, (because the 
proof of it is found in the Mexican paintings,) that the Mexicans evinced a predilection for exactly the same numbers as the Jews; and 
hence eight, four, twelve, and seven, perpetually recur in those paintings, distinguished by as many units or points: and in Mexico, the 
number of the supreme judges, as the best informed authors assert, was strictly limited to twelve. 

* Peter Martyr gives the following description of Montezuma and his court, in the fourth chapter of his fifth decade: “ Let us there- 
fore say somewhat of the palaces of the nobility and other rich men, and of their excellent buildings. Cortes saith, that he never saw 
any palace in Spain, either of kings or any other prince, which the meanest of seventy stone or marble houses doth not match ; who saith 
that they are all built by the curious art of the architect, with pavements of divers sorts, and pillars of jasper stone or white transparent 
marble round about the courts, and large galleries under the solars. He addeth further, that whatsoever is reported concerning these 
things ought to be credited, saying, it is no wonder, because Muteczuma hath many large kingdoms, in the which a great multitude of 
noblemen govern many countries, as under the Emperor’s crown many dukes, earls, and marquises, and nobles of other titles are sha- 
dowed ; all these at certain times of the year, by an ancient custom, frequent the court of Muteczuma; nor may they do otherwise. It 
is a thing whereto they are much inclined, that every one should strive in his desires to excel his companions in the building of sumptuous 
houses. 1 might compare the manner of the Pope’s cardinals in the city of Rome to their magnificence, but much otherwise; for the 
cardinals in their buildings have respect only to themselves, not regarding succession: but these people, being obedient to Muteczuma, 
provide for posterity long to come; for they send their own children to be brought up with Muteczuma, especially such as descend from 
nobility ; whereof there is so great a multitude, that every day as soon as light appeareth, you may see more than five hundred such young 
noblemen walking in the halls and open solars of Muteczuma, with whose familiars, pages, and followers, three great courts and streets 
before the gates of the palace are filled at that time to the hour of dinner; all these are filled with Muteczuma’s provision. He saith, the 
cellars are never shut all day long, and that any man may demand drink of the butlers ; yet no man seeth the king before he come forth to 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 81 

written the names and the explanations of each particular thing; and accordingly that which has 
already been explained is not repeated in this description, further than that those who in the way of 

dinner or supper out of the privy chambers into the great hall, whose equal in greatness, Cortes saith, he knows not any. When he is set, three 
hundred young men, apparelled after the Palatine manner, come unto him; and every one of them brings several dishes of divers dainty 
meats, with chafing-dishes under them, that the meats freeze not in the winter time: but they come not near the table, for it is compassed 
about with a rail;—one only standeth within the rail, who taketh the several dishes from their hands, and setteth them before the prince 
being ready to dine. Muteczuma giveth, with his own hand, of the dishes to six ancient men of great authority, standing at his right 
hand, who, after the ancient manner, while he dineth stand all barefooted. The pavements are covered with mats. If it so happen that 
he call any, he that is called goeth unto him, bowing down his body with his face to the earth, and lifteth not up his head at all before he 
be gone far from him, creeping backward; for he may not return turning his back toward him. No man useth directly to look upon the 
king; his familiars and friends, and also the princes, casting down their eyes, and turning their face to the left or right hand, hearken 
what the king answers: and thereupon they blamed Cortes, because he suffered the Spaniards which he called unto him, to behold him 
with a direct countenance; who answered, that it was not the manner with us; nor that our king so highly esteemed his mortality, 
although he were the greatest, that he would be adored with so great reverence. Thisanswer pleasedthem. Besides, when Muteczuma 
is present, in what state soever he appear among so great a multitude, there is so wonderful a silence, that none would think any of them 
drew any breath at all, Every dinner and every supper he washeth his hands on both sides, and wipeth them with very white linen, and 
the towel he once useth he never taketh in hands again; all instruments must never be touched more. The like doth he concerning his 
apparel. Arising from his bed, he is clothed after one manner as he cometh forth to be seen; and returning back to his chamber after 
he hath dined, he changeth his garments; and when he cometh forth again to supper, he taketh another; and returning back again, the 
fourth, which he weareth until he go to bed. But concerning three garments which he changeth every day, many of them that returned 
have reported. the same unto me with their own mouth: but howsoever it be, all agree in the changing of garments, that being once 
taken into the wardrobe, they are there piled up on heaps, and not likely to see the face of Muteczuma any more. But what manner of 
garments they be, we will elsewhere declare ; for they are very light. ‘These things being observed, it will not be wondered at that we 
made mention before concerning so many garments presented; for accounting the years, and the days of the years especially, wherein 
Muteczuma hath enjoyed peace, and how often he changeth his garments every day, all admiration will cease. But the readers will 
demand why he heapeth up so great a pile of garments,—and that justly.” Peter Martyr proceeds to say, that Montezuma occasionally 
made presents of these garments to his friends and distinguished soldiers: and it deserves to be remarked, that frequent changes of 
raiment, and presents of apparel as a mark of honour from the hand of the king, are noticed in more places than one in Scripture. When 
Montezuma therefore, on his first interview with Cortes, took from his own neck a chain, and desired that it should be placed on that 
of the Spanish general, he treated him in a manner which the Jews would have considered very honourable; as is evident from the two 
following passages out of Genesis and the Book of Esther, which describe the marks of royal favour shown to Joseph and Mordecai by 
' Pharaoh and Ahasuerus: “ And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in vestures of 
fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck.” —“ Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the apparel, and the horse, as 
thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that sitteth at the king’s gate: let nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken.” The 
eating meat at the king’s table, and receiving dishes of provision sent from him, was also looked upon by the Jews as a great distinction. 
It is therefore recorded in the twenty-fifth chapter of the Second Book of Kings, that Jehoiachin king of Judah, when in captivity, was 
treated graciously by Evilmerodach king of Babylon, who “ spake kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that 
were with him in Babylon, and changed his prison garments; and he did eat bread continually before him all the days of his life”? And 
Uriah is said, in the eighth verse of the eleventh chapter of the Second Book of Samuel, to have had a mess of meat sent him from the 
king: although David, in conferring this apparent mark of favour on him, was guilty of the basest duplicity. “ And David said to Uriah, 
Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king’s house; and there followed him a mess of meat fromthe 
king.’ From what is said above of the six ancient men of great authority who partook of the dishes to which Montezuma helped them, 
it is plain that this was considered a mark of the highest royal favour in Mexico: and as Cortes has taken care to mention that 
Montezuma frequently sent him and some of his superior officers dishes from his own table, it is evident that the customs of the Jews 
prevailed to a great extent at the Mexican court. Nor should the ablution or washing of the hands, which this monarch is said publicly 
to have performed, pass altogether unnoticed; or the ceremonious manner in which his subjects approached him, bowing their heads, and 
worshipping, as Scripture expresses it, and averting their eyes from those of their sovereign, and casting them down on the ground; to which 
may be added, taking off their sandals. The right hand of Montezuma, it should also be observed, was the place of honour: and that it 
was so amongst the Jews may be inferred from the expression in the Psalms; “ On his right hand did stand the queen.” Hence it is more 
probable that Huitzilopuchtli, or Quecalcoatle, was seated on the right hand of Tezcatlipoca, than on the left as Boturini affirms, in the 
following curious passage of his Idea of a New General History of America: “ Llamése esta deidad, assi en el primero, como en este 
segundo tiempo, Huitzilopochtli, porque debieron las gentes mayores creer que estaba sentada 4 la mano siniestra de Tezcatlipoca, de la 
misma suerte que la fingieron estar 4 la de Tetzauhteotl, en esta segunda edad; en que de su nombre proprio Huitziton, y de 

Ga) 

32 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

appeal from the judges appeared at the one council hall, as a party aggrieved, obtained redress, if 
their causes were just: but this not being the case, the decision and the sentence of the judges were 

mapoche que es la mano siniestra compusieron el nombre de Huitzilopochtli. Alude esta fabula 4 la de la transformacion de Eneas, 
quien por sus hechos heroicos 4 ruegos de Venus su madre, despues de haverle purificado y lavado en el rio Numicio, assimismo 
ungido con balsamos y licores divinos, fue recebido de Jupiter en el colegio de los demas dioses.” “ ‘This divinity was called, as well in 
the first as in the second age, Huitzilopochtli, from their ancestors’ believing that he was seated onthe left hand of Tezcatlipoca, as they 
now believe, in this second age, that he is on that of Tetzauhteotl; so that, from his proper name Huitziton, and from mapoche, which 
is the left hand, they formed the compound name Huitzilopochtl. This fable alludes to that of the transfiguration of Eneas, who, as 
a reward for his heroic deeds, was at the entreaty of his mother Venus received by Jupiter into the society of the other gods, having 
been first purified and washed in the river Numicius, and anointed with balsam and divine liquids.” It is not unlikely that Boturini, 
having read in the memoirs of some of the early Spanish missionaries that the belief prevailed amongst the Mexicans that Huitzilo- 
puchtli was seated on one hand of Tezcatlipoca, or Tetzauhteotl; and being uncertain on which hand, paid more respect to a seeming 
etymology than to Mexican usages, and so confounded the right hand with the left. This opinion receives some confirmation from the 
derivation which he assigns to the word Huitzilopochtli, which he says is compounded of Huitziton, (the name of the leader who 
conducted the Mexicans from Aztlan, who was otherwise called Mezz, the former appellation having been given to him either on 
account of the bird which chirped from the bush, and invited the Mexicans to set out on their migration, having been the Huicilan, or 
from some other cause), and mapoche, the left hand. Ma certainly signifies, in the Mexican language, the hand, and poche may 
mean the left: but still Boturini seems to have written this word by mistake for opuchtl, which itself forms the latter part of this com- 
pound proper name, and which means, according to Torquemada, both water, and the left hand; and he may have sought to clear up 
tradition by the preference which he gave to its latter signification. That, however, Boturini assigned a somewhat forcible etymology to 
the word Huitzilopochtli, may be inferred from comparing his derivation with the symbol of the town of Huicilopucho, which Clavigero 
asserts to have been named after Huitzilopuchtli, as Mexico was. after Mexitli; and as we read in Scripture that Jehovahjireh, (the 
place where Abraham was about to offer up his son as a burnt-offering,) was, after Jehovah. 

The symbol of this city occurs in the 20th plate of the Collection of Mendoza, under the figure 8, which is represented by a bird fine 
over a piece of water, the bill of which, more than the brilliant plumage, assimilates it to the kingfisher, and might induce us to suppose 
that the ancient Mexicans bestowed the appellation of Huicilan on the kingfisher as well as on the humming-bird._ It deserves likewise to be 
noticed, that the Mexicans painted their principal deity Huitzilopuchtli, with a crest formed out of the head and straight bill of this bird. 
And since Torquemada and Sahagun both declare that Opuchtli was adored by the Mexicans as the god of fishermen, and the symbol of 
the city of Huicilopucho seems to allude to this occupation, a more simple and obvious interpretation of the proper name Huitzilopuchtli 
than that given by Boturini would appear to be, The god of fishermen crowned with the feathers of the kingfisher. And if Huicilan, 
the primary signification of which is a bird of green plumage, could also, like queézalli, which means simply green feathers (which the 
Mexicans, from the use they made of them in painting, prized in the highest degree), metaphorically signify preczous, then the meaning of 
this proper name would be, The precious god of fishermen. lt is certainly not a little singular, that one of the figures standing at the 
side of the mysterious cross in the temple of Palenque, should wear on its head a rich crest of feathers, on which are embroidered two fish ; 
while a bird, perched with one foot on a cross, holds another in his bill; and a fourth is represented in front ;—the whole constituting a 
very extraordinary head-dress. These reasons having been given for assigning a different derivation to the proper name Huitzilopuchtli, and 
for supposing that it was on the right hand, and not on the left, of Tezcatlipoca, that the deityso named was seated; we shall venture to 
attempt to account for so remarkable a Mexican tradition, by referring to the prophecy of David in the Psalms; “ The Lord said unto my 

Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool ;” and by supposing that the Jews who passed over to America 

appropriated this prophecy, like many others, to Quecalcoatle. But one solution offers itself for all the difficulties and mysteries which 

seem to be inseparable from the study of the ancient monuments, paintings, and mythology of the Mexicans : and that is, the presence of the 
Jews in the new world. Their bloody sacrifices, absurd traditions, and fictitious crimes and pollutions, appear to have traversed more 
than the half of that vast continent, and to have displaced the purer worship of the sun, and altars on which flowers were the only offering 
which the simple Indian dared to present to his Creator, and prayer the grateful incense. With respect to the appellation Mesi, or 
Mesitli (the other name by which Quecalcoatle was known amongst the Mexicans), it is very remarkable that it is precisely the same as 
the Hebrew word mwn, which signifies properly Lhe Anointed, andis peculiarly applied by Christians to Christ. At the same time, it is 
impossible not to recognize a great similarity between the two Hebrew names ro and mwp, which is much stronger in the Hebrew 
language, where the vowels are not written but supplied, than in other languages which, admitting a diversity of inflection in the 
pronunciation of words and a change ofintonation, and making use of vowels, have produced a considerable difference in these proper 
names. Reyerential reasons, as well as the alterations which are constantly found to occur in introducing names into one language which 
are foreign and peculiar to another,-may be assigned as the chief cause of the apparent difference between them. And this may. account for 
an opinion entertained by some of the Jewish rabbis, that the prophecy of Moses relating to the likeness which the future Messiah would 
bear to him, was the reason why that expected deliverer was called by a name resembling his, which came also to signify anomted, because 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 33 

confirmed. If it was a matter for the council in the first instance to take cognizance of, an appeal 

lay, on the plea of grievance, before Morrccuma, where the cause was concluded. The hall, which 

Moses was himself the spiritually-anointed prophet of God. Since the history of the Jews commences with their Egyptian bondage, and 
their middle state was bondage to the Babylonians, and their latter end bondage to the Romans,—it is not surprising that a people whose 
minds were so familiar with slavery should constantly have expected a deliverer like unto Moses, such as that great lawgiver had foretold 
in the fifteenth verse of the eighteenth chapter-of Deuteronomy should rise up in Israel: “ The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee 
a prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me’; unto him ye shall hearken:’ whose coming, succeeding prophets, 
testifying to the truth of the Mosaic traditions, did not fail to announce. We accordingly find that many pretended Messiahs did from 
time to time rise up among the Jews, who imposed upon their credulity, and made them believe that the ancient prophecies were verified 
in their persons; amongst which number was the famous Bar Chocoba, (i. e. the Son of the Star,) whom the rabbis themselves were not 
ashamed to acknowledge, nor hesitated, by so doing, to draw down upon their countrymen the severe vengeance of the Romans. But it 
is in America, and in the person of Quecalcoatle, that the Jews, as we shall elsewhere point out, have pretended to discover the full 
accomplishment of the ancient prophecies respecting the Messiah; although the only one which has been here noticed is that of David 
in the Psalms, “ The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool :” which it is 
evident, from the question which Christ puts, in the twenty-second chapter of Saint Matthew, to the Pharisees, was generally understood 
by the Jews to refer to the Messiah, and must therefore be considered a more famous prophecy than some others, which, equally relating 
to him,—such as that quoted in the twenty-third verse of the second chapter of Saint Matthew, “¢ He shall be called a Nazarene,”—were 
more obscure, and less heeded by the Jews; as the fact of their being careless of preserving the books of Scripture, in which they were 
contained, sufficiently proves; which we know from Saint Chrysostom was the case; who, confessing that the prophecy which Saint 
Matthew cites was no where to be found in Scripture, thus vindicates, in his Ninth Homily on Saint Matthew’s Gospel, that Evangelist 
from the charge of want of veracity in adducing proofs of Christ’s being the Messiah, as if out of Holy Writ; which in fact did not there 
exist : ¢ Many of the prophetical monuments have perished; for the Jews being careless, and not only careless but also impious, they 
have carelessly lost some of these monuments; others they have partly burned, partly torn in pieces.” It might further have been 
satisfactory to have learned from Saint Chrysostom why, since the Jews could have had no reason for impiously destroying prophecies 
relating to the Messiah till the coming of Christ, the Christians were not more careful to preserve these prophetical monuments. It 
might, however, be abundantly proved, that the early Fathers were as diligent én collecting traditions relating to Christ, as the primitive 
Christians were sadly negligent in recording the real events of his life: since, strange to say, for more than forty years was the only Son of 
God incarnate amongst men; and his remarkable actions are declared by Saint John, in the twenty-fifth and last verse of the last chapter 
of his Gospel, to have been so numerous, that if they had been severally recorded, the world would scarcely have been able to contain the 
books which would have been written. Yet the entire history of a life so important to mankind is comprised in a few pages, which a few 
hours would suffice to peruse: for, deducting from the New Testament, (whichis but a small book,) that part which relates only to the 
Apostles, containing a scanty enumeration of their acts, but no detailed accounts of their lives, some of their letters, and the Revelations 
of Saint John, which weré not at first allowed to be a canonical portion of Scripture,—there only remain the four Gospels which treat of 
the history of Christ; and deducting again from them, or from the three last, what is merely a repetition of what is said in the first, or the 
Gospel of Saint Matthew, the biography of Christ may truly be said to be reduced to a few pages. And the contrast is more surprising, 
when we consider how diffuse the early Christians, who lived after the first Fathers, have been in recording the most insignificant circum- 
stances relating to the births, lives, deaths, and parentage, of the saints. This striking difference we might be tempted to try to account 
for, by supposing (if the fact was not notorious that the age of Augustus was the age of letters, and that Judea in the time of Christ was 
tributary to Cesar,) that the four Evangelists were the only primitive Christians acquainted with the art of writing ; and that they had, for 
inscrutable reasons, thought proper to communicate no more than they have done of the history of Christ for the information of mankind. 
Having referred to the authority of Saint Chrysostom, it may be proper to observe, that that ancient author appears to have understood the 
force of Saint Matthew’s reasoning, in the following verse of his Gospel, and the distinction between a Nazarite and a Nazarene, much 
better than some modern commentators, who affirm that, “ And he came, and dwelt in a city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene’’—refers, as regards the alleged accomplishment of a prophecy, to the 
fifth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Judges, which more immediately relates to Samson: “ For, lo, thou shalt conceive and bear a son; 

and no razor shall come on his head, for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb ; and he shall begin to deliver Israel out 
of the hand of the Philistines.” That Samson, although not a Nazarene, was considered both by the Jews and Christians a type of the 

Messiah, is an undoubted fact. An angel was sent to his mother, to inform her that she should conceive and bear a son. It was predicted 
before he was born, that he should deliver Israel; he was consecrated from the womb to God; he became a judge of Israel; he was 

betrayed by the men of Judah to his enemies the Philistines: he was delivered up bound to them, notwithstanding his great strength. 

The Spirit of God came upon him, and he broke his bonds asunder ; and slew a thousand of the Philistines with the jaw-bone of an ass. 

1 Moses here likens himself to God. 

84. INTERPRETATION OF THE 

is named the council-hall of war, was that in which deliberations were held for providing officers and 
armies in time of war, according to arrangements made by Morzccuma himself; and in all the 

He was a second time betrayed by Delilah, his concubine, who received eleven hundred pieces of silver as the price of his blood, into 
the hands of the heathen rulers over his people, after having first dented thrice to her the truth of his great strength. His hair was cut off: 
to which Isaiah perhaps alludes, in the sixth verse of the fiftieth chapter of his prophecies: “1 gave my back to the smiters, and my 
cheeks to those that plucked off the hair.’ And the Spirit of God forsaking him and not renewing his strength within him, he remained 
in the power of the Philistines, who mocked him, and put out his eyes, and brought him to a large entertainment, at which all the lords 
of the Philistines were present, for the purpose of turning him into derision: when, invoking the name of God, and determining by his 
voluntary sacrifice to accomplish the deliverance of Israel, standing between two pillars, which he clasped, the one on his right hand, 
and the other on has left, he bowed with all his might to the ground: and the house in which the Philistine lords were feasting, fell upon 
them and crushed them all. And Samson died with the wicked; but his brethren obtained his body, and buried it in Eshtaol, the 
sepulchre of his father Manoah. It is not surprising, from all these striking coincidences in the life of Samson, that he should have been 
considered a type of Christ by Christians: but how far the analogies between some of the circumstances of his voluntary death and 
the crucifixion of Christ may have been traced in the first and second centuries, is uncertain; or whether the former might not have given 
occasion for mixing up legendary tales with the history of the latter ; since, that legendary tales began at an early period to be mixed up with 
the evangelical accounts, is a fact that cannot be denied, as they have even crept into the sacred text and been identified with it, as the 
following verse, inserted immediately after the forty-eighth verse of the twenty-seventh chapter of Saint Matthew, and occurring also in 
the Gospel of Saint Mark, in several of the most ancient MSS. of the New Testament extant, fully demonstrates: “ Alius autem, accept 
lancea, pupungit latus ejus; et exivit aqua et sanguis: Jesus autem iterum clamans voce magné, emisit spiritum.” “ But another having 
taken a lance, pierced his side, and there came forth water and blood: but Jesus again crying with a loud voice, expired.” Sir William 
Betham states in his Irish Antiquarian Researches, that this verse is found in two Irish MSS. of the most remote antiquity, (the Leabhar 
Dhimma, or Book of Dhimma ; and the Book of Armagh,) as also in other MSS. preserved in the College Library of Dublin. Describing 
the former MS. he says, in a subjoined note, “There is in this book a very extraordinary various reading, on which I think it necessary to 
enlarge. After the forty-eighth verse of the twenty-seventh chapter of Saint Matthew, the following is inserted: * Alius autem, capt 

*” He next proceeds: “* Jesus autem clamans,’ &c. This reading, which is to 

lancea, pupungit latus ejus, et exivit aqua et sanguis. 
be found in four Greek MSS. in the Aithiopian version of the New Testament, and in the works of Saint Chrysostom, does not occur in 
the Vulgates which Sabbatier has published, or in any of the four Italic texts of Blanchini. Its history is curious, as it is related by 
Wetstein. In the time of Pope Clement V. this additional verse was very generally received; but that pontiff—considering it to contain 
heretical doctrine, that our Saviour had been wounded before his death, as this text imports,—condemned it at the council of Vienna, holden 
in the year 1311. ‘The text rested, indeed, upon the slightest authority, existing only in four MSS., of the hundreds collated by Mill, 
Wetstein, and their predecessors. J find it in several of the most ancient Vulgate copies that were written in Ireland, and exist in the 
College Library, asin A. 1. 5., and A. 4.6. It is also in some others. Birch asserts, in his edition of the Gospels, that it is to be found 
in the Vatican MS.; one which is surpassed by none in antiquity, and by few in importance. But I doubt the fact: for, were it the 
case, it would not have escaped the knowledge and notice of Wetstein, who does not mention it.” ‘The same learned author, speaking 
afterwards of the Book of Armagh, and of the version of the Apostolic Epistles which it contains, says: “ The disputed seventh verse of 
the fifth chapter of the First Epistle of Saint John, respecting the heavenly witnesses, ‘ Mor there are Three that bear record in heaven, 
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost ; and these Three are One, is omitted in this version.” This fact, if the arguments of 
Porson required confirmation, which they do not, might be further adduced to confute those who, in the true spirit of inconsistency, will 
contend for the canonicity of this disputed verse of Saint John, at the same time that they deny that of the forty-ninth verse of the 
twenty-seventh chapter of Saint Matthew, which is found in some of the most ancient copies of the Scripture, and which must be either 
a true or a legendary account of one remarkable event that occurred at the crucifixion. Since it is quite unlikely that so important 
a doctrinal text as that of the above-mentioned Epistle of Saint John would ever have been left out if it had formed an original portion 
of Scripture, it is probable that the enemies of the Arians added it to that Epistle, but not that their friends expunged it from it; since 
the latter supposition involves the contradiction of maintaining that the weaker party were sufficiently powerful to mould the Scriptures 
according to their views, and that the more orthodox suffered them to do so; weaker and stronger being relative terms of comparison, 
this argument does not affect that by which others attempt to prove that the Arians altered the New Testament, as the Jews have been 
accused of corrupting the chronology of the Hebrew version of the Pentateuch, as far at least as they proceed on the assumption that 
the Arians were a most powerful sect; since it is only the conclusion at which they arrive that it is impossible to assent to. On the 
contrary, all who have read history must confess, that the fourth century has bequeathed an admirable lesson of toleration to all 
succeeding ages ; since scarcely three hundred years after the establishment of Christianity, the minds of men became divided on one of 
its most important doctrines, that of the Trinity. Bishops and Fathers of the church espoused opposite sides on this great question, 
and excommunicated each other; and, as at the commencement of the Reformation, frequently recanted old opinions: the councils of 
the Emperors wavered: and finally, the disorder in which the East was thrown, by these contending religious sects, favoured the 
progress of Mahomedanism; the rapid growth of which, in the succeeding centuries, Tillemont ascribes principally to this cause. 

aR Shs5 pties Oe 

aos 

wal ot eit ee ee ee 

Fo le 

eee 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 85 

affairs of state, order, regularity, and judgment prevailed, that the government might thereby be well 
administered. But before the reign of Morzccuma, so much order had not been introduced by his 
predecessors into the public affairs, as Mornccuma introduced after his accession to the throne: for 
being endowed with excellent parts and prudence, by his own free will he prescribed order and the 
rule of good government, which he commanded to be maintained and preserved under heavy 
penalties; and accordingly offenders suffered, without any mitigation of their sentence, the 
punishment which he had prescribed for their particular case of delinquency; which punishments 
were rigorous : and since they underwent no modification in their execution, his subjects were always 
on their guard, attentive to their duty; and they accordingly with fear applied themselves to 
profitable things, and to such as were in no wise prejudicial to the public liberty which they 

enjoyed. 

PLATE LXxX. 

1. The throne and state of Moreccuma, where he sat in council and in judgment. 2. Morrccuma. 
3. The house in which { the lords of Tenayuca, Chicenauhtla, and Colhuacan, who were friends and 
allies of Morreccuma, were entertained as guests. 4. The house in which the great lords of Tezinco 
and Tacuba, who were friends of Morrccuma, were entertained as guests. 5. The court of 
Morsccuma’s palace. 6.The court of Morrccuma’s palace. 7. The council-hall of war. 8. These 
lines gradually ascending lead to the court of Morrccuma’s palace, which is here represented. 
9. These four persons are, as it were, judges of Morrccuma’s council, and learned men. 10. Suitors 
who, in the way of appeal from the judges, appear and present themselves before the judges of 

Moreccuma’s council. 

The explanation of what is represented in the following plate.—The father and son, who are seated 
opposite to each other, signify that the father is giving good advice to his son, that he may not turn 
out ill; setting before him the example of those who attained complete virtue, who afterwards joined 
in dances with the lords and caciques, when they bestowed honourable offices upon them, employing 
them as their messengers, and were admitted by the musicians and singers to their feasts and wedding 
entertainments, on account of the favour which they enjoyed. 

This painting represents the place where they were accustomed to assemble, to consider and 
provide for the public works. The overseer, who is there seated, signifies that the two young men 
before him are weeping, because he has proposed and offered to employ them in manual labour ; 
and the overseer is occupied in giving them good advice, admonishing them to lay aside idleness 
and to forsake a vagabond life, which occasioned and caused them to become robbers, or players 
of the ball, or gamesters with patol *, which resemble dice ; the losses sustained in which games they 
recruited themselves for by stealing to satisfy and gratify such vices, which only led to bad 
consequences, as that which is signified by the figures, with their titles, declares. | 

* From casting lots being so often mentioned in Scripture, and games of chance not having been forbidden to the Jews in the 
Pentatéuch, it is probable that they were acquainted with the use of dice, and that the Mexican game of patol differed little from the 
ancient Hebrew usage of throwing lots. 

Cs) 

86 INTERPRETATION OF THE 

The trades* of a carpenter, jeweller, painter, goldsmith, and embroiderer in feathers, accordingly 
as they are represented and declared, signify that the masters of such arts taught these trades ‘to 
their sons from their earliest boyhood, in order that when grown up to be men they might attend 
to their trades and spend their time virtuously, counselling them that idleness as it is the root and 
mother of vices, as well as of evil-speaking and tale-bearing, whence followed drunkenness and 
robberies, and other dangerous vices, and setting before their imaginations many other grounds 
of alarm, that hence they might submit to be diligent in every thing. 

PLATE LXXI. 

1. A messenger. 2. The father who advises his son to apply himself to the practice of every 
virtue, and to avoid turning out ill. 3. The son. 4. A singer and a musician, who invite guests 
and entertain them with music. 5. A Coaguacal. 6. A young man. 7. A vagabond. 8. A player 
of ball. 9. The house where they assemble about the public works. 10. Texancalco. 11. The 
Petlacalcatle, or overseer. 12. A Coaguacal. 13. A young man. 14. A robber. 15. A gamester 
with patol. 16. A kind of dice. 17. A carpenter. 18. The son of the carpenter. 19. A jeweller. 
20. The son of the jeweller. 21. An evil-speaker and tale-bearer. 22. A painter. 23. The son 
of the painter. 24. A goldsmith. 25. The son of the goldsmith. 26. A master of the art of 
embroidering in feathers. 27. The son of the master of that art. 28. A drunken man. 29. A 
drunken woman. 30. From the vice of drunkenness ensues that of robbery. 

The explanation of what is represented in the first section of the following plate-—That which is 
there painted, declared, and described, signifies the punishments awarded by the laws and statutes 
of the kings of Mexico to those who committed such offences, which were put in force without any 

remedy, as appears by the painting. 

PLATE LXXII. 
FIRST SECTION. 

1. 2. These two figures signify, that young men who intoxicated themselves with wine, died for 
the same, according to their laws and ordinances. 3. If a young woman intoxicated herself, she was 
put to death by the laws of the kings of Mexico. 4. A robber was stoned to death by the laws of the 
kings of Mexico. 5. These two figures, lying side by side and covered with a garment, denote that 
whosoever had criminal intercourse with a married woman, was stoned to death according to the laws 

of the kings of Mexico+-. 

* A curious account of these different trades will be found in the Supplement. It is in Spanish, and taken from the Indian Monarchy 
of Torquemada. eae : 

+ Stoning to death and burning to death were both Mexican punishments; and that they were founded on religious prejudices, as 
well as sanctioned by legal usage, may be inferred not only from the latter sentence being executed chiefly on priests who disgraced the 

COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 37 

The explanation of what is represented in the second section: wherein it is shown that drunkenness 
was prohibited by the laws and statutes of the kings of Mexico, to men as well as to women who 
were under seventy years of age; persons of that age being permitted and allowed to indulge in it, 
provided such old persons had sons and grandsons, as is demonstrated by the figures ; and he who 
transgressed this law died for his offence, as is represented in the first section that precedes this. 

SECOND SECTION. 

An old man of seventy years of age was privileged, both in public and in private, to drink wine 
and to become drunk, on account of his great age, and of his having sons and grandsons, by reason 
of which age he was not forbidden to drink wine and to become intoxicated. The old wife of the 
old man represented above was, for the same reason, privileged and allowed to become intoxicated 
like her husband, since she had sons and grandsons: drunkenness was prohibited to none who 
had attained such an age. 

The reader must excuse the rude style of the interpretation of the paintings contained in this 
History, for the interpreter was pressed for time, and as a matter neither duly considered 
beforehand, nor on which all were agreed; it was interpreted in the manner of a suit at law*. 
Where, likewise, the names of superior Alfaqui and novice Alfaqui occur, it was the mistake of the 
interpreter to use such names, which are proper to the Moorish idiom. By the term superior 
Alfaqut is meant a superior priest, and by that of novice Alfaqut, a priest in his noviciate; and 
where the word Mezquita is written, temple should be understood. ‘Ten days before the departure 
of the fleet this History was given to the interpreter in order that he might interpret it; which 
negligence was owing to the Indians, who were long before they could come to an agreement: 
and as a task. executed in haste, much stress was not laid on the style most suitable to the 
interpretation of it, nor was there time to make a new copy, and to polish the expressions, and 
improve the order of the sentences: but although the interpretation is rude, all that is necessary to 
attend to is the substance of the explanations and the meaning of the figures, which is correctly 
declared, because the interpreter is well acquainted with the Mexican language. 

rules of their order, but likewise because the people acquiesced in such cruel judgments ; since public opinion, in judging of the degrees 
of crime and the proper measure of punishment, seldom errs, except when it views human actions through the distorted medium of false 
religious doctrines, and becomes the unconscious but powerful organ of injustice. 

* The interpreter of the Collection of Mendoza means to say that these Mexican paintings were, in the first instance, given to the 
native Mexicans, that they might consult together on their proper meaning, whose oral testimony he afterwards took down when they — 
had come to an agreement as to the right signification of the symbols representing the cities tributary to the crown of Mexico. And 
Sahagun says, that he assembled, in a similar manner, the Indians of Tezcuco and Mexico who were most conversant with the antiquities 
of their country, in order that they might explain to him the signification of their ancient paintings, as the best authority which he could 
follow in writing the History of New Spain. 

. if 
L 
‘ 
: Y 
s 6 oH 
: 
‘ 
: : 
1 ( re 
y ca € 
4 ; § 
‘ 
‘ 
: , 
‘ 
: 
: 
, bai 
‘ 
a y 
can 
: . + = m1 
g : 
3 : F 
; 
; 

INDEX 

TO 

THE FIRST PART 

OF 

THE COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 

Plate Figure 

OMT ACAN 6 9 o OXWIlG 6 oo) UO 

Acapulco. .... SC Eassecre zee | ats 

Acatepec .... . CHB yee usllG: 

VOTE o o 0 OF 0 XIV. XLVII. 1,6 
Aeollhwmena 5 oo 0 Woo co 0 0 0 13 

SINGIN 5 6 6 0 0 0 Ill. 10 
Acolnahuac .... XVII 18 

*Abuilizapan. ... X.. +: . 15 
Asmetilem® 5 6 6 0 © DXGV Pere Hove cae 6 

AMER © 6 0 0 0 XII. XLI. . 4, 4 
*Apancalecan ket, ene 32.0 
Atepec....-- IWiloo 0 0! 4 

*Atezcahuacan... XI. 11 
Atlacinhuayan. .. V...... 8 

*Atlatlaucha® ... VII..... 12 
ATEN 6 9 0 6 6 0.6 XVIII 8 
Atlapula ..... Ix. 3 

*Atotomilco . . Vill 12 
*Atotomilco . . Vill he 
INTRON > 6 0 6 0 9 SX@V ALTE 6 

*Axocopan...- - VII. XXIX. 13,1 
Ayauhtochintlatla . XIII. iE? 

Azcapuzala ....V.... 4. I 

*Cacatepec PREV Seeercue es 12 
Cacuantepec XV. XLIT.. 2,13 

Cahualantyeom nen. XIil. 11 

*Caliymaya . IX. 14 
*Caltepec ..... DV etis ton oct W 
*Capotlan ..... xaLIG 5 
Capuluac..... IX. 9 

Cencontepec®. .. XV..... NZ 

OIMAG® 2 9.00 6 6 DMs Pte 22 3 

* The country of paper. 
© The hill of the star. 

» The country of the red river. 
* The country of yellow garments. 

Plate Figure 
Callem o 65000 IV. 4 
Clraled oo 056 6 VI. 4 
C)ngle® o o6 6 6 6 Wills 9 6 10 
Chaleoatenco . .. XVII. . Ai 
Chapolycxitla4 5 oF NINO, 19 
Chrapanwryeaeme XGIIE 7 
Chiconquiauhco. . VII. 7 
Chihihualtatacala . XIV. 12 
(Cilow »9 5 56 0 0 XI. 4 
Cinacantepec . . . IX. 11055 
Cinacantlan XIV. 16 

3 XVI 3 2h. 1 
XVII. XXIV. 11,9 

Citlaltepec®. . . 
*Coatitlan . . 

Coatlayauchan .. XVII... . 17 
*Coayxtlahuacan. . VII... .. 1 
*Cogohuipilecan*. . XII... . . 14 
(Cosolkim 6 6% o 6 IWS 0 2 
COCO BINS o o 6-0 6 XVII 15 
“sCollnmaczin. 6 o 6 ells cos 6 6 11 
Cormelliyxs® 6 6 6 0 Wis 6 6 o 8 
EConmtilM o 5 oo 0 XII. XXII. 8,13 
Coyyollejoain’ 6 5 5 5 OINNIG 6 5c 2 
*Coyuacan. .... Ween Eh os 2 
Commen!” o gle. o XII 15 
Cozeaquauhtenanco XII..... 13 

*Cuecalcintlapila . XIII. XX XIX.19, 52 

@uecaloztcc! rn) Xen 18 
Cuetlaxtl ampere One n eae 138 
*Cuetlaxtlan .... VIII 21 
Cuezalanwamey es VI. 9 
Cuezcomatlyyacac. X...... Ia 
Cuezcomayxtlahuacan XV. ... 19 
ACMI o 5.5 0° 0 Ter ete ya aod 6 

Plate Figure 
Cummalntae 5 ooo Wl 5 6 5 6 2 
Gules oo 5056 PNOTIV 5 055 se 5 
*Ecatepec ... . . DOS, sprays 3 
Ecatlyguapecha . . XI. 15 

*Hontalcoatlan . 

. VIII. XX XIII. 10,3 

SHIEITEVER, 9 6 0 0 0 6 XVII. XLVI. 8, 4 
*Huaxtepec sea se as 13 
*Huehuetlan. . . . XIII. 5 
Huexolotlan. ... XII.. LZ 
Ailueyapany. aie EXO EI cm 4 
*Hueypuchtlan. . . VIII. 1] 
Huilotepec . XIV. Z 
Lampe, 4 6 5 5 0 XIII. 10 
Huixachtitlan . . . XVII 1 
SIENWWATEIN 5 5 5 6 6 XIII 13 
SANE 5 5 6 0 6 DIN pas a3 Sot Le 
*Huizizilapan. . . . VI.XXIV.. 7, 4 
ImioEI og 5 5 6 6 DXi ca: 17 
MERIT 5 o-5 6 XI. 183 
Macatlanueneeeye XIII 16 
*Malinaltepec . XO rst: 14 
Mamalhuaztepec . VII. 2 
*Mapachtepec ... XIII 20 
Niele’. 5 5 56 65 6 6 oc 10 
*Metepec ..-.. . IX. 8 
INCH 5 5 0 0 0 6 XVI. . 5 
OM Maqwsiienm 5 6 6 5 Ol IWUAY 16,7 
Miiqiiy.c tlaniae eee Xena een 20 
IMIDKOORO 6 56 6 6 a Vee eared 9 

© The hill of four hundred. 
& Place of the bell in the water. 

The leg of grasshopper. 
» The sandal of the wolf, 

i The place of the scarlet-feathered serpent. Mexican names terminating in oztoc are generally represented by the head of a serpent as their symbol. 

Chicomoztoc, from whence the nations of New Spain derive their origin, may allude to the ancient fable of men sprung from serpents’ teeth. 

k The place of a net. 

Note.—A star placed by the side of a name, signifies that the corresponding name is found in the second Index ;—a numeral added, refers to places which 
are apparently the same, with some change in the name and symbol by which they are distinguished. 

(Ba) 

90 1ONEIDH exe 
Plate Figure Plate Figure 
SIMON 5 6 5 0 0 c XE. peeing, 7 NOCEHIC 5 6 o 6 6 0 XIV. 13 
SIMGCACTNC 5 6 56 0 6 OU aa 5 Mtsoowawinles. o 66 IXWs 5 0 0 ¢ 10 
IMGYABIENKG. 56 5 6 0 a VAT oes 1 Rec pane ine Wo XONL 5 6 ID, & 
Mizquitlan . X11 OR Maoanianes 6 0 « MUL 66.6 21 
“IMIGIEINGD. 6 a o 0 c XESS ee 3 iecpatlanwaenene NEV eee rs 5 
MOEN ooo 0 6 OXGV., Saar W ecco 1 Tecuantepec XIII. 1 
ecutepece ae XIV. 4 
Nantzintlan. . . . XIII 9 INEHANCD 5 o o 9 « AVI, sie 3 
*Nochiztlan® XIV. INSTATAINED 5 o 6 6 ho 6 0 6 0 0 3 
Wemayu@am > 6.6 lls 5 5 5 0 12 
Ocovacachu-acnrn: Ix, 10 ANGNEDAHIEERE 9 4g co Oko 5 0 0 0 24 
Oem. 9 oo 5 0 ae omcrtenun 8 MNEORETNOD 5 8 0 0 6 WW 0 0 0 6 9 
OiewEN, oo 06 6 Iil. 8 Weocallmneyan o 6 6 Woo oo ¢ 3 
OVAOHND o 6 6 6 6 6 EXON arses ae 6 Weoolamayaam 5 so 0 Woo 6 5 3 iil 
OWI, 0 6 0 6 0 XVIII 3 | “Waoouilatia® oo 5 SG oo. 4 
OAOWE IAG oo oo whoo 0 0 6 6 9 Teotenanco.... IX. 13 
SNGTORUAING® 6 6 6 9 WIlllll, KOXWil, B, 18 
IPRINUEIEB o 9 0 6 0 DOVE aaa ees 8 Tepechiapa . POO aR eee nO 
Pianilams oo 6 © 6 XIV. : 18 | *Tepecuacinla . . VIII. XXXIX. 8, 1 
Ripiyoltepec™ aa eXGVen .) os 3 | *Tepequacinla ... VI. 14 
*Poctépée . . . XVI XLVIIE 16, 17 || *Tepeyaca.. . =~. XX, MW. 6 4 il 
IPuyowuery 5 66 6 6 XVII IQ) || s*Mepumaileyn 5 6 5 0 6 VIII. XXVI. 2,13 
IPupxeamlntilammn 5 . 3 > 6/0 oo ¢ lal |} Seqimbxomae > > o o IW. 6 4 6 6 1 
*Meteuhtepec. =. Vill XLVI 6) 8 
*@uecuacdnl = ee V- SX XV SOS NP enetzapouitian ss eye Xe Vicuee LO ssl 
Quauhnacaztlan. . XIII. loa MNevcucoe soe ee LS ee 9 
*@uaulmahuadcr ce LI we. 3 Tlachinoltic. . . . XIV 14 
Quauhnahuac. .. VI. 8 Macho. Joe VIII. 6 
Quauhnahuac. . . VII. 11 | *Tlachquiyaucho . . XV. 13 
*Quauhpanoayan. . IX. IL | Wevesyein 5) ad AEN cies te 7 
Quauhpilola. XII all Tlacotepec IDS 7 
*Quauhtitlan . AealUllesreneseceo 2 Tlacotepec XIII. 92 
Quauhtitlan . Vane Co aes 11 Tlalcozauhtitla . . VIII. 7 
Queminilem 6 6 5 0 80 0 0 0 0 25 Tlaniztlan. . .. ; XIV. 6 
*Quauhtlan XII 18 Meaolem ooo. 6 6 ENC er eseen eae 16 
*Quauhtocho. . . . VIII. 22 | *Tlapacoyom. .. . VIII 18 
Quauhtocho. .. . XVII 2 | *DMeypein ooo oo ¢ XI. 10 
Quauhxayacatitla . XIII. 6 Ways cho 5 0 © XG yee 2 
Quamsimmell 5.616 0 Woo o 65 6 1@ | “Mev, 2 oo 6 o Ix. 1 
Quetzaltepec . EXO OF Ae 18 CUM ctilil Ome) ee ees Vi. 6 
Quimichtepec . . . XVI Bava 15 *Tlatlauhquitepec . VIII 20 
*Quiyauhteopan . . VIII. 9 Messnmalloyan oo o Wks 0 0 0 0 6 5 
; Tliltepec4 es Ae ats Wie 7 
Tamapacha.... XI. 14 Tonaliymoquegayom XI. 1 
MEINE@L o oo 0 0 0 D, Cire ant Sle Al |) SSTNGKHOleBA 6 oo 0 0 Vel eee 9 
anpatel ee-mra Xoo 9 oo 6 22 | *Tototepec. . . . ; XII 8 
MSeal@ o od 9 0 6 ho ILIV o UBS & MOxICOMuRAe cite Dal Bont 2 
*Tecapotitlan . XVIII. LV. 12,7 | *Tsompanco .. . XVII. XXXVII. 4,5 
WOGERMC 0 a 665 0 6 DA ae & | stwelmonm — 5 oo o Ukc 0 0 0 oc 23 

a The country of the cochineal. 

> The country of bees. 

© The country of goldsmiths. 

© The place of wasps on the shield. 
i The white temple. 

f The azure-coloured mountain. 
k The white country of Tlaloc. 

& The country of Xolotle. 

4 The dark mountain. 
h The firmament. 

Plate Figure 

CoM Lati omer yes senses Vill 14 
ullemenmeo 2 6 oo Wl, ooo 0 6 
Malla@a, so 5 0 0 0 XI. 6 
Sollucane ae eeee Dots ee 1 
SVICOORG 5 5 0 0 0 SOM, ILWIEG 5 il, I 
feXtllajanies stan XVI.. 1 
Kole 9 o 9 6 6 IX. 4 
“DKOIGIVSE 5 ¢ 0 0 0 DNelieae 6 
Xaltianquizeo. . . XVI. 2) 
PMID 5 9 6 0 6 10, 6 7 
AMOCAN 9 5 5 5 0 XVII. 5 
Xicochimalceo © 6 OTN, 23 
*Xilotepec .. . . . VIII 15 
Xiquipilco pirate Names 2 
*Xiuhhuacan. XII. XL IQ. 7 
Xiuhteccacatlan. . XII 24 
*Xiuhtepecf .... VI. 1g 
Xiuhtepec 3 VEL are 8 
*Xochiacan . . .. IX. XXIX.. 12, 4 
OxOCMTICGO o 6 9 6 Ill, SOXWI 5 7,2 
XOocht antrum NGL ee eel 
Xochyyetla. .. . XI. 13 
“IOCONOEN 5 9 5 6 MWe 1S 
Xoconocho .... XVIII 1] 
+ *Xocotitlan XC neler eriar 7 
“OCMC 6 5 6 o Wi XOXWIL o By B 
*Xolochiuhyom GUA eres 12 
XOGloainS 5. 5 5 6 XIII. 14 
*Yacapichtlan ... VIII. : 4 
VWewmereM 5 ¢ o ¢ atl MUL, 5 ©, 4 
*Yauhtepec o o WINE I 
Ycepatepec 3* SOI Std ho ARO 
Wen! 5 5 5 0 6 Vi. 13 
*Voaltepee. . 2. . VIil. 5 
Yoloxpuecuila. . . XVI. 3 
Yzcuincuitlapilco . VII 16 
Yzcuintepec NOV Erte Nita 16 
Womens 5 o 3 6 XIII. 7a 
Yztacalco!*. . 2 » XVI 20 
Yztactlalocan®. . . XIV. iil 
Yztactlealocan . . XIII. 3 
SO AIEN. ~ 595 9 0 0 XML, Kile » 1B, S 
WHER > 65 0 0 0 NARS: 11 
Nizteyocan mm mr nt XVII 9 
Niztitlalive ete ora XVI. 6 
/fexe WAVE, 6 5 0 5 0 Wile 10 

IND 

TO 

THE SECOND PART 

OF 

EX 

THE COLLECTION OF MENDOZA. 

_ACAGACATLA .. . 

Acamilyxtlahuaca. X XXVIII. . 2 
“Acapan. 2... PRO het 13 
Acapetlatlan XLIX 7 
ACHING 5 5 6 0 c XLiv. 4 
WNcaxochicnes & 4 XXXIV 5 
AcExxoomiles 5 o 5 5 SOQOXING > 6 6 
ANCOTOCRID 0 6 0 0 6 XXXI. 7 
*Achioatlany ~ = . . XCLVIIT. XWVe 61 
AGED 5550 ¢ XOXOXe 4 
INGDEOAB, 6 5 0 6 6 XLI. 6 
WAVGOIA, 5 oo 6 6 XXII 1 
CORB, oo 6 0 0 0 LLL RE rts 5 
Acuitlapa mene XLI. 10 
ANGI» 5 6 0 0 XLI. 5 
AINTACIOINED > 6 6 6 SUH, It 
Ahuatepec XXII 11 
Ahuehuepan. .. . XXVI 4 
SANTRUABD 6 0 9 « Io oo 0 0 0 5 
Alahuiztla. .... DXOXOXGDXG eee) 
Alhuexoyocan. . . XXVIII... 3 
A\meCORmIa, 5 o 6 0 AOWoo 6 5 612 
CHUNTIBEBC 6 5 6 6 0 TES Go 8 4 
ANMEWAIGO 6 o 6 6 6 YOM s 55 | UB 
ANINEVENKEO 5 6 6 6 o XCXOXGIV nee 6 
ASIMILGINE® 5 5 5 6 0 XXVII 20 
Aneneemilco . . . XXVI 5 
*Apancalecan Bl Bae gama 8 
Atenanco..... XXXIX 8 
INGINED 59 6 0 6 ¢ XXIX 2 
ANIINEO § 6 0 0 6 0 LIIT.. 2 
*Atezcahuacan XLIV. 16 
PUAtlamo? ly. caer TEE teh aia I 
*Atlatlauca. .... XXVII 18 
INMMUANCG 5 6 56 6 XXVII Bil 
Atlicholoayan. . . XXIV. 16 
NOON 5 6 0 0 9 XXXII. 9 

* The country of water. 

Plate Figure 
“SUM OOIMIKED) 5 5 6 5 OOKS 5 6 0 1 
AM GOUOMTTIKED 6 9 o 0 2OXOKTIIG 3 6 iI 
AXWOVOBNED 6 6 3 ¢ SOM oo » 4 
WAGON 5 5 0 60 6 XXIX. VIII. 1,13 
Ayocmtepec. ... XLVIII... 15 
AYOUB 6 6 6 6 0 IMILIDKG'5 6 2 
Avotzintepee ... ) XLV ITN. 7 
Ayoxochapa. .. . XXVI 19 
ANAULACING) 5 6 6 6 6 LHI 4 
ANABNONEIN 6 5.0 0 0 ETDS 5 sae 5 6 
Aztaquemeca ? XXII 6 
Cacalomaca. ... XXXV... 8 
EXO RCMIG o 6 0 6 0 0 OLIN, Wg We, UB 
Cacatulaneienen Dy corns seas tl 
Caliahualco. . XXII 1G} 
Calixtlahuacan . . XXXV 3} 
*Caliymayan. ... XXXV 9 
“OMNES 6 oo 6 6 LUI. 11 
@amotlanweaee XLVI. 5 
“sCapoilem co. o 6 XLVII. 7 
Capulteopan XXXV. 6 
Caxochitla, .... XXXII 2 
Cenpoalan®. . XXII 9 
“XOMBA o oo 0 0 6 XLIUII. J 
Chapolmoloya . XXXIV 3 
Chichicquautla . . XXXIV 36 
Chictlants aaa XLIV. 8 
Chilacachapa .. . XXXIX 9 
Chilapanyemeaemn XXXIX 2 
Chiltepintla. . . . XLIV 18 
Chimalcoyees XXIV 3 
Clamernidein = 5 5 o UVINNG G5 le 
Chipailem® 5 5 55 Mbc ooo «1A 
*Chontalcoatlan . . XXXVIII... 3 
Claulbulliogs coo 5 SUUN5 5 5 6 | BA 
Cihvanteopan 2%). LEVic. 4° 3 

> The country of the veil of the feathers of the flamingo. 
* The symbol representing this city resembles the bust of Jupiter Ammon. 

* The country of Xipe. 

Plate Figure 
Cihvatlane ners DG ie eases 1 
Cheon, o 5 4 4 5 XXXVI 10 
Concnlle 5 oo 6 4 XXVI Il 
Coapantee anes IhIUT, 5 
(Coatepeci mem enn XXXIV 9 
Coatepec. .... XOXOXGVAles eee 9 
“OWRUEM. 5 o 5 oo XXIV. XVII. 9,11 
Coatzincores oye. NOTHING, ah ouese el 
Coaxomulco. .. . XLV. 10 
ACoayextlahuacam. ~ OXsIiVay se 1 
Cocamaloapa ... XLVIII.. . 4 
*Cocomuipilecay a... OX@lanepen as 9 
Cocolaneymesiane i XXXIX 7 
Coscilein . 4 6 2 o BXOXTS a Se 10 
“COMIN, 5 5 6 0 00 NOL Sepeee 2 
“Oolnwmmenmeo>s 6 o 5 kG oo oo 9 
*Conpahnuacan . XXXVII. XVII. 5, 4 
2 Conulammaenaeeene XXII. XIII. 13,8 
“ACOMNTBINGD 5 o 6 0 SOMW]oo 5c 8 
Coplapan...... XLVI I 
Coquizinco XXXV 12 
S@ovoucaneyeyn. as XLIX 3 
COWMEAC, o no Os 2 io eb ates 10 
Cozcatecutlan. . . LVII 3 
“AQMOCES 95 6 5 6 5 TWANG OIG siya 
*Cuecalan . . . XXXIX. XIII. 52, 19 
*Cuetlaxtlan . . . . LI. Sans 1 
Cuezcomahuacan . XXVIII... 6 
Cuezcomatitla. . . XLVIII... 16 
Cuicatlanwaes eee XLV. I 
ACmmMMEKS 5 5 6 6 &Ole 1 
AICMEIVGO 6 9 0 6 6 XXIII 20 
Ehnacalco XLII 36 
Epaguyuca . . XXIII 17 
IBOUIRINS 66 0 oo XLIV 20 
BUEN o 9 6 0-0 6 4 XLVI 2 

Guapalcalco. . . 
“(CHUEREVGD, 9 o 6 0 0 

*Huaxtepec 

*Huehuetla 

*Huehuetlan . . 
*Huepuchtla. .; . 
Huexotzincatl. . . 
*Hueyapan. ... . 
EWM 5 6 5 6 0 
IBlun@HMN 6 5 5 5 o 
HEMONAE 6 6 6 0 6 
Huicilopucho . . 
Huitzannola® . . 
Huitzcilapa . . 
TEIWMADED og 6 6 6 0 
“SUMIVATER 6 5 0 0 0 

Itzihuiuquilucan. . 
IMIBVOMUIEIR 6 6 0 6 o 

Macuilxochic . 

Miailinalcomaemene + 

Plate Figure 

o BOOKS 6 6 6 2 

XLVI. XVII. 4,8 

6 XO 6 6 1 
5S OMIIW 5 Soo | LG 

6 OXTLIDK 5 6 0 
EXOXOXG [aoe 
IUIIW 55 oo | BH 
XXXII... 

4 
XOXIMS 9 6 6 2 
XOMW log oo 9 
XOX, Wile by 2 
8 
9 

RELL ey Se 
66 COONWso o Be 
XXXIX.. . 4 

XMILIDKS oo 6 

XOXOXGIe 5 

AUIDK, 6. 5 

2) NGL VA mromrsy = lel 

XXXVII. . 1 

“MMMM TSS 6 3 9 wba 6 6 6 © Ih 
Malinaltepec ... XLII... . 5 
*Mapachtepec ... XLIX.... 4 
IMIEHEBKOO. 0 6 0 6 0 MOM, 5 oo 16 
WNIGESDE® 6 6 0 0 6 DXOXOXG\ ae 7 
iMilevemills 0 6 0 6 6 DXOXGIV 5 toe i] 
Mba oo o 6 NY, 6 6 6 o 6 
Michapan. .... XGTVALTIE ar 6 
Muchatlanky mmc SXGTAVATIT Ear 8 
Michmaloyan.. . XXXIII... 4 
“SMTCWRM 5 6 0 0 6 6 XGLVe 9 
Whe 5 6 oo 5 6 LIV. XI 7,16 
Mictlanquauhtla. . LI... ... 2 
iMitepec care <1. XXXV 5 
IMGRWATNE® 6 6 5 0 0 XLII. 1D 
IMIVACTIG 5 o 5. 6 0 0 XO oo 3 
Mizquiyahuala ROXIDS g 0 6 a 
SIMEDMIENN 6 6 0 0 6 0 OXI THU oo 5 
*Molanco LVII. ; 2 
WIOHE 5 6 6 6 6 6 XO 5 6 9 8 

Nacochtlan... 
Nepopoalco? . 
iINextitlanye) ime 
IN@ENGE 6 6 000 
*Nochiztlan 

@ Prickly leaf of the pine-apple. 
© The place of the vapour bath. 

SONI o6 55 1G 
oo AOKI 6 9 =A 

YOMS oo 0 LO 
DNase 4 

& PCIE, ares 6 

f Mexico. 

> The place of numbering. 

INDE xX. 

Plate Figure 
Nochtepec. . 2 = ~ XXXVIII. . 5 
Ogallawepee ooo o II. . os 6 5 
Ocoapan ..... SXGIATE y Mecales2s 8 
Ocotepec . . 5 XQVOKINYS o 7 
Oopeymeam o ooo SOMWoo oo » IA 
Ocitlam ooo 0 6-6 NELVASE one 8 
50 cull ane XOORWile oo 1 
Ohare DXOXOXG Ge 3 
OlaC Hae Jantar ie BXEXG rac), enemes SIND 
Olinalan ..... XUV Ce eo 
Ollnarepee? oo 0 6 MOKWlloo 6 « 6 
Oulton ¢ 5 oo o SILWIIL o « 3 
Oxsn@ngin 9 2 5 0 6 1 Dra ease 4 
Ovannypeim oo 0 6 6 Vali RRS 7 5 
Orotileim 5 5 0 0 6 6 SRILWIS g o Ih 
AOVARIN®, 5 9 9 0 0 6 XXXIX.: . 49 

Onigileyxeeln@® o o 5 OXILIMWo5 6 ¢ 7 

Payee 5 5 6 6 6 TVS ee 4 
Ret atlanta Xe ee, 6 
Meni, ¢ 6 5 o o MOLI 5 6 6 §=6BB 
Rorrnowkin 5 4g 6 6 o IXGI oes eek 3 

IP wCUBINS 5 6 o SLAM, WIL, 17/5 16 
Quachquegaloya. . XXXII... 3 
6 SOON. Wo I, G 
Quahuitleyxco. .. XXVI. .. 7 
Qwelae oo6 co 6 XC fee sO! 
Qwenedawn, 5 o o IIMs a 6 5 9 
Quatzontepec ... XLVI... . 7 
Quauhemecan 4 ie DRONGIU Sg 16 
XEXONVE FOR 

*Quauhpanoaya .. XXXIV... 34 
Quauhquechulan. . XLIV.... 
@uauhtecolmatl., ) XI 7) 23 

*Quahuacan . . 

*Quauhnahuac. . . 

= 
two 

Quauhtecomacinco XLII. ... 8 
@uaulthetelCommeuen ieee 6 
Qrawlnnmeneins > o AIUDYss 6 5 7/ 
*Quauhtitlan. . . . XXVIII.. 1 
“Qmew Me. o o o 6 YOOWIo o! oo 3 
HOTAUINIGTIN® 2 5 5 Wy 5 6000 I 
Quauhyocan XXIII 19 
Quauxilotitlan. .. XLVIJ.... 3 
Quauxumulco. . . XLII... . 6 
Quegalmaca. ... XXX... . 3 
@uechulac -) 4 4 ULV 2 
*Quiyauhteopan .. XLII... . 21 

8 The country of the pyramid. 

© The hill of earthquakes. 
» The country of divine darkness. 

XXVI. VIII. 

Plate Figure 

Tialllelna, 5 6 5 0 2 XXXIV 35 

Tamagolan XLV. 8 

Tamacolapan . . . XLV. 3 

Meacalcoy = eee XXII 7 

ECAIGO 6 5 6 oo 6 XO Woo o 8, 1B 
CAE 6 2 6 » 0 0 XLII Xo 0 Hp UB 
ecamach all corms NON epee 3 

legapeitlems oo o Ib. SWIM, 7, 12 
Meciutlanes we ee 110 eae er I 

Mecano 6 0 0 0 DRIGINIMS o's) 6 B 

Tecogauthla. ... XXXIII.. . 7 

MBOORTOR, co 0 6 ¢ XXIII. 14 

Tecoloapan Lee Sy PROG eae. 5 

*Tecpacinco - XXVI. VIL. 18, 3 
‘Tecpan ti Bette ne XOXOXGTV en 2 

ASEH, oo 6 0 6 6 OMOXOKWIUML 4 

Tehuehuec: .... XXX... 5 

Tehuiloyoca. . . . XXVIII... 2 

Nehuizcon emer PXOXGV see ea 

T@lellosjam 5 o oo RXONIDK . 5 6 10 

Nemerealapm© 5 o> XOSIMG 6 oo 1G 

Temohuazan tr: SXOXSDPXE nse 5 

oN NTMIATNEOS) 9 6 5 6 ROMROVIL g o 6 
Tenuchtitlan®. . . XIX. 16 

Teocalcinco. . . . XXIV 2 

Meociocanturw mea LEMS Rac ess 6 

*Teocuitlatlan . . . XLVI 6 
"Teonochtitla. <= = XcLIV: 13 
Teopantlané. .. . XLIV 14 

Teotenanco .. .. XXXV 10 

Teotlalpan oo JUIN 7 

Aeon! 5 5 5 5 OXILNVIUML, 5 9 

TNSOUIUAINEON cg 9g o BORMAVINNL 5 6 

*Tepeacac } 9 SHLIW> Xo 5 Il, & 
Tepechpan Bs BX MTEL atte 6 

Tepechupa’.... XXII... 5 

*Tepecuacuilco. . . XXXIX.VIII.1,8 
Tepemaxaleo ..: XXXV... II 

Tepepulan POONER Ga ny 11 

Tepetitlan. ... . XXXII... 6 

Tepetlacalco. ... XX..... 4 

Tepetlaoztoc XXII. 10 

Mepetlapary ma 4. XXIII 1B 

Tepetlhuiacan. . . XXXV... 4 

Tepexahnualco .. XXXVI. 8 

MWEETIC 5 oo 0 0 6 XLIV. 10 

Mepoxacomarmraen: XXVIII... 5 

Tepoztitla. ... - XLII 10 

*Tepoztla’. . . - - NB, 2B 

4 Place of the veil of eagles’ feathers. 

i On the point of the hill. 

Plate 

Tepuzeulula. ... XLV. ... 
CANE 6 6 6 oo WHlIGS oo 
Tequaloyan .... XXXVI... 
Tequemecuan. .. XX..... 
*Tequixguiac. ... XXXI : 
Tetenanco..... XXXVIII. . 
Tetenanco..... ELI ee 
Tetenanco..... DIN 5B a 
Metepancorm-m once. XXIX. 
WEWOM 0 0 9 6 6 6 NET AVAL ne ie: 
Tetlapanaloya. .. XXXI.... 
*Teteutlan. . .. XLVIII. VII. 
Meucolizapotlanweey Wer 4 
iNexopanterwrje. irene XLV. 
ANSACEOHOS 6 6 6 o XXI. 
Tezcatepec .... XXIX 
Tezcatepetonco . . XXXI 
Tigatepec. .... XXII 
Micayucayees sees XXII 
Tlaahuililpa. . . . XXIX 
‘Tlachmalacac .. . . XXXIX... 
SINAC 6°56 5.6 6 0 XXXII. . 
“MINE. 5 oo 10 6 XXXVIII. . 
*Tlachquiauco . . . XLVII. 
Tlachyahualeco. .. XXII... . 
Weycocmmmmia, 5 5 5 20M 3 6 5 
WMeaeolall 6 4 6 6s XLVIII.. . 
Tlagoxiucho. ... XXI. . 
Meare, 6 5 6 6 o XXIII. 
INBIOCAB 6 9.0 9 6 XXVI. ‘ 
WUalerdke 5 6 6 6 VOOM! 4 5 
Tlalcuechahuaya . XLVI... . 
Tlaltigapa Be. @.G\14 lat ase 
Tlamacazapa . . . XXXVIII.. 
MBO? oo 60 6 6 XLI. 
*Tlapacoyan . TANG os sears 
Alejormmoxnilera ¢ 6 5 Ibllbe 5 6 o o 
Mlaticapayeamene tes LIV. 
AMlauilulcommeeares XIX. 
*Tlatlauhquitepec -. LITT. 
Tlayacapa XXVI 
Tlaxcaltecatl . . . XLIV 

2 The red country. 
4 The hill of heaven. 

Figure 

18,6 
2 

Soe 
Dah We NYO OrF WH DAN DWN 

— oe SS) 
eS oy © & 

LNs) 
mS HS oO 1D eS eH 

wo = 
WwW 

INDEX. 

Xiloxochitlan . 

OATUIMMETIEGS 6 0 6 
*Xochichiuca. . 

*Xochimilcacinco. . 

Xochitepec .. . 
Xochiquahtitlan. . 

> The place of the sun. 

Plate Figure 

Tochtepec. .... XLVIII... 1 
Mobineym 5 5 5 oo BUM 4 6 6 v7] 
Tonanytla. .... SOK, oo 0 8 
Tonathiuco> o ROOWIE 6 6 8 
“Motolapaleemten iii ZOOVNIGNS 6 UY) 
Totolginco 5 2OKMS of 6 6 2 
Totomixtlahuacan. XLI.... 12 
*Tototepec. ... . XLVIII. . 13 
WOKE 6 5 6 6 6 | Caen odie Be 8 3 
NOVAS ov 06 09 XEN a 7 
Doztlany armen XLVIII 56 
Tuchconco . . Peete. 4 
*Tulangingo .... XXXII 6 
“MMIC, 9 0/0 0 6 6 XXXV... 1 
OOM 5 0 0.00 IDV AA weenie il 
Tzanayalguilpa . . XXXII... 3 
TWaaynoeNy 6 6 oo SOK, 6 00 5 
Tzicapuzalco . .. XXXVIII.. 9 
Mzilacaapanns srr eXciileg pee 37 
Tzinacanoztoc. . . XLVIII... 12 
2A 6 OM nb 9 2H 26 
BIC 5 og o-0 0 GO EXEXON ois 7 
Xtal ache ee eck XXXI. 2 
SDX@IRAIN 5 6 9 6 « XXVIII... 4 
OOO 0° 6 6 6 6 OVA BG eae WILY 
DBIMISS 6 6 9 6 0 DOW oo 7 
Xaxahpan Sc ONONGS ranges 2 
IXERVEXEO 6° oo 0 6 6 SQILAVINUL, 6. 6 2 
Xicalhuacan .. XXXII. : 5 
DMNCMNINGO 5 6 6 6 WMOXWe 6 6 3 
CMDS” 5 oo OXILWWIN. 5 yp ~~ 110) 
XG COME UES wey. r ONES “hein 6 
*Xihuacan. ... . Ibe AXIS o Wy IO 
GMOGINGD 6 6 6 0 6 SORWIN LG 9 9 7 
MODIS 6 go 0 OOM s 9 1 

10 

. XXIX. IX. 4, 12 

XXVI. I. < 2,7 

PEXOXSIIVin ae: 6 

© The country of Yxmatla. 

(28) 

*Xoconocho ... . 1 
XOGOHUIBD o 6-660 6 2 
. XXXVII. . 8 
5 
4 

Xocotytlan . . 
Xocoyocan . 

Plate 
DID. Gaamaus 
>. GBs eres 

Xocoyoltepec . . . XLII 

*Xolochiuhyan. .. XL... .. 12 
Xomezocan. ... XXXI. 6 
Xonoctlayeraemae LIT. 6 
KOEN, 5 6 6 0 6 XXIV 11 
*Yacapichtla . . XXVI. 15 
*Yanantitlan . . XLV. XI 4,9 
Waeodlem® 6 o 5.0/6 XLVIII... 60 
Yaonahuac .... LIII. 10 
*Yauhtepec 6 a 2OMWLio 14 

Yayauguitlalpa . . 
Yecochinanco. . . 

TUM, 6 oe 5 
2GUINVS & a 6 6 

Ychcaatoyac Be GD steeds eae 0) 
Ychcateopa. ... XXXIX... 50 
Ychcateopan Bo OGIIN [sea epeeae 3 
Wenemile Gs o's © IMS Gig BD 
Yeheatlan; 2.7... GUNG ss 9 
Nichcatlanteanee) e- ENT) oop o CS 
“ORIKIN 5 9 0 696 o XXXIX... 6 
“Woallin 5 9% 0 6 6 XLI.. 7 
*Yoaltepec 4 XLII 35 
MOMED' od 6 0 6 6 XxX. . 3 
Miiztepecsay re cnr LIII. 8 
Woimigyeeanm 6 0 6-0 Ib 6 6 5 0 ¢ 7 
WWAAIN 6 0 6 6 0 XLIV 11 
Yxcoyemec ... . LIII. 9 
WORICAYM. 6 0.6 6-0 XLII » 8 
Neamt’? 5 3 6 OMNIS 6 6) Olk 
Yxquemecan ... XXII... 14 
Yzamatillaf. . . . XXVI. 1D 
Viamignilpa: eat) XEXOX ee 8 
OW TAIY BINS G6 66 6 hs DT 5 Gy 
EMMIINIOS. 6 6 08 G XXIV. 15 
AUG Reso? aclec nce XXIV. 13 
Yuohuizquilocan . XXXIV... 8 

© The country of water. 

f The country of paper of the palm. 

INDEX 

TO 

THE NAMES OF PERSONS AND OFFICES. 

Plate 

AGACTTIIes el. seas 
ANeERTFEN ¢ oo oo dllbg 0 0 0 6 
Acatliyacapanecatl . LXIX.. 
INTE! 6 6 5676 0 6 fees ere 
ANTICO 5 6 0 4 4 tlle 09 0 0 
Atenpanecatl..... LXVI 
ANON G 5 6 6 0-6 6 WAS 6. od 0 
AMO 5 6 560.000 Ile Bie o 40-0 
LSGRENOL 9 0 000 IDXo g 0 0 6 

Axayacaci ..... XIX. 

Walmecaccsanneens 
Chimalpupuca ... IV. .... 
OnlmenrerccaliPs ooo IWXWo 6 6 6 

Cuincacali®?. .... TOI 60 6 
Ezguaguacatl. . . . LXVI 
Ezguaguacatl. ... LXIX... 

Huehuemoteccuma . VIJ..... 
Hiuigilyhuttl ie 2 ene) US Sei 
Huitznahuatl .... LXVIII.. . 
Himaralneae?> 6 o o IDK 5 6 6 
isha) 6 o 9 6 0 0 LWVlG 6 6 
Mixcoatl Tlacatectli XVII... . 
IMigepilnth, 5 5 a 0 6 IS 6056 

Moquihuix... . 

@ Temple. 
4 The house of darkness. 

aN Oo 

10 
18 

22 

—_ 

20 

Moteccuma 
Monaco, 9 6 6 6 IWOX> o ¢ 

Oedlypwm., 6 5000 I 
Ochpaniztli? . 
Omeqtih Tezcacoacatl XVIII. 

@Otontilem peau IDSWo 0 6 0 

iRetlacalcatlem- mmm ie xO Cure near 
Petlacalcatle . . . 

QURANG 6 50560 9 DKW 6 6 o 
QUAN 6 65000 Ho 9 0.06 0 
Quauhnoctli .... 
Qramlavkeiee, oc oo Wo 0006 
@uaubtlatoameeeen ee NGuns 

Weachcauliem-mememe ID, 9 6 0 
Weomenlng 6 5046 SN so traps 
PREC ELMS aats Uae ede IDXID So 6 6. 0 
MeCtlite wake hon ete: IIDKo0 00 
Tectli Myxcoatlaylotlac LXIX.. . 
Mecutlivnes feet en IDWo 6 018 
NESTE, 9 56 060 0 IWIN, 6 96 

Telpuchtlato .... LXIV.... 

Telpuchtli ..... TEXTDNG yee 

PANU CH ys rsya Fehon ollie velinee deugonte 

Teponaztli®. .... IDM 6 6 6 

> The name of a Mexican month. 
© Blue sandal. 

Mequihuay-y Senn 

Plate 
. LXVIII.. 

Tequixquinahuacatl . LXIX.. . 

Tezcacoacatl . ... 

hicogicatzinwe memes 

Ticocyahuacatl . . 
Ticocyahuacatl . . 
Tlacatecatl .... 

Tlacatecat] . . . . 
Tlacatecatl .... 

shlacatectliqnmemene 
Tlacatectli .. . 
Tlacaxipehualiztl > 

Tlacochealeatl ... 
Tlacochcalcatl . . . 
Tlacochtectli . .. 

Tlacochtectli . .. 

MMlamiaz quits ele 

Tlamacazqui .... 

o IW o 6 0 
o LOVIN 5 6 
0 IDs 6 6 0 

- LXVIIL. . 

o WII 6 o 

5 Willllbs 6 o 
oo UWI 5 6 6 

o HILIDKo 9 0 6 

LXVIIi. . 

IDWilo.o oo 

o AWN, o 6 © 
5 wWAlle o 5 6 

ITM, 60 6 
LXII.. .. 

Tlilancalqui? . . . . XVIII. 

Thlancalqui. . ... IDWlo co 6 
Tocinltecatl 9 Ib W1loo 9 0 
2elNeAG|!“o 6 0 0 0 0 Ib > © : 
OOH! 50 0000tb o5000 
Komik 6 9 5 0 0 Ib 90060 
YE@OOEL 5 00 000 Woo oo 

YGROORG 90 0 00.0 OIDKS 6 5 g 

© An instrument of music. 

Figure 
1 
22 

17 

SS ee 

THE EXPLANATION OF THE HIEROGLYPHICAL PAINTINGS 
OF THE CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS*. 

THE FIRST PART. 

PLATE I. 
1, TECUILVITONTL. 

THE lesser festival commenced on the... of June,....; it was the Festival of all the Lords, that 
is to say, of all the lords in their calendar. They said on the arrival of this festival, that the kids 
would not rule during the entire year; or if they did, that they would be applied to merchants. The 
lords gave food and drink on this festival to all the people: it was the lesser festival. 

2. VEYTECUILVITL. 

The principal festival commenced on the fourteenth of July ; the name signifies The Principal 
Festival of the Lord, resembling the preceding. This was the greatest festival of all that were 
celebrated in the entire year. The great festival was kept in this month, on which the Indians 
drove the Spanish Christians out of Mexico, when the great slaughter took place; and I am informed 
by many old men, that their indignation against the Christians was in consequence of many Christians 
mixing amongst them whilst they were engaged in dancing and celebrating the festival, who turned 
it into ridicule; and that the Indians on this account determined to massacre them all. This event 
took place in the year of Two Flints. This month was that of the general fast which they called 
Atamal+, which means bread and water. They neither ate salt during the period of this fast or 
any thing else but bread and watert. 

a.§ The greatest festival of all that were celebrated in the entire year. 

3. MICHAYLHUITLI. 

The Festival of All the Dead commenced on the third of August. They made offerings on this 

* The Codex Telleriano-Remensis is merely a copy by Peter de los Rios, a Dominican monk, of a Mexican calendar. An 
original Mexican calendar, painted on paper of the Agave, and very much resembling the Codex Telleriano-Remensis in the 

disposition of the signs of the days of the year round the figures of the principal Mexican idols, is preserved in the Library of the 
Chamber of Deputies at Paris. 

+ This name is compounded of ati water, and tamal bread. 

{ This reminds us of the Jewish feast of unleavened bread. 

§ a. refers to the symbol of the day on which the festival occurred. p 

|| The festivals of Michaylhuitl and Huemiccaylhuitl were probably in honour of Quetzalcoatle, whom Torquemada says the 

96 EXPLANATION OF THE 

festival to the dead, putting food and drink upon their sepulchres, which custom they continued for 
the space of four years ; for they believed that during this entire period their souls had not arrived 
at the place of repose, according to their notions; and they therefore buried them with all their 
apparel, vestments and shoes: for they believed that until souls had arrived at the destined place 
at the expiration of these four years, they had to encounter much hardship, cold, and toil, and that 
they had to pass through places full of snow and of thorns* ; and on this account, when any principal 
person died, they killed at the same time a slave, and buried him with the deceased, in order that he 
might serve him. The Mixtecas, Capotecas, and Mixes, performed the honours of the dead almost in 
the manner of the Spaniards, for they placed over them a tomb covered with black, and around it a 
quantity of food. Their manner of burying the dead was quite conformable to our custom, the feet 
of the deceased were turned towards the east-}. After the bodies had been buried, they removed the 
bones from the sepulchre, and put them into charnel-houses, which they had in the courts of the 
temples, made of mortar. This was the custom of the Mixtecan and Capotecan nations; since the 
Mexicans did not bury, but burned the bones of the deadt ; and this custom the Mexicans borrowed 
from the Otomitles or Chichimecas, who were the most ancient inhabitants of that country. a. A knife. 

4. HUEYMICCAYLHUITL. 

This festival began on the twenty-third of August. They celebrated again in this month the 

Mexicans believed to have disappeared or died, and whose image was placed in their temples reclining on a bier, and covered up 
with mantles to denote his absence. The cuchillo (or knife) placed before the two figures in the plate, is the sign of the flint 
proceeding from the cane. 

* The Jews believe in a short state of purgatory. 

+ M. Dupaix observes, that the Mexican temples, or Teocalli, were turned towards the east, or at least that their sides were 
adjusted to the four cardinal points of the compass, and that the sacellum or sanctuary above faced the east. It will also be 
seen from his plans, that the ancient subterraneous sepulchres in the province of Mixteca were made in the form of a cross. The 
sides of the Hebrew tabernacle were likewise turned to the cardinal points of the compass. 

{ The Jews sometimes burned the bones of the dead, as is evident from the tenth verse of the sixth chapter of the prophet 
Amos: “ And a man’s uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say 
unto him that is by the sides of the house, Is there yet any with thee? and he shall say, No. Then shall he say, Hold thy 
tongue; for we may not make mention of the name of the Lord. For, behold, the Lord commandeth, and he will smite the great 
house with breaches, and the little house with clefts.” It is singular that many of the temples in the Mexican paintings, 
especially in the MS. of Vienna, should be represented with breaches and clefts in the roofs or other parts of them. According 
to Torquemada and Gomara, it was an ancient usage to burn the bodies of the deceased kings of Michuacan (a powerful state 
bordering on Mexico) with great pomp; and the latter writer dedicates a long chapter to the description of the rites which 
accompanied that ceremony ; of which the title is, ““ De como queman para enterrar los reies de Michuacan’””—* How they burn at 
their funerals the bodies of the kings of Michuacan.” And the Scripture informs us, in the Second Book of Chronicles and in 
the thirty-fourth chapter of Jeremiah, ‘that the funeral rites of the Jewish kings were solemnized with great burnings ; whether of 
the body or of spices only is not clearly explained, since “burying” might apply to the ashes or the bones after they had been 
reduced to charcoal by the fire. At any rate the Jewish custom might easily, in process of time, have changed into a real 
burning of the body along with the odoriferous perfumes. The passages of Scripture alluded to are the following: “ But thou 
shalt die in peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings which were before thee, so shall they burn odours for 
thee; and they will lament thee, saying, Ah Lord! for I have pronounced the word, saith the Lord.” The king here addressed 
is Zedekiah king of Jerusalem, to whom the prophet Jeremiah thus speaks. Of Asa it is said: “ And they buried him in his 
own sepulchres, which he had made for himself in the city of David; and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odours 
and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries’ art; and they made a very great burning for him.” 

fate 

Sete 

ee Me igen Sar, 

ER 3 

4 
4] 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 97 

Festival of the Dead; and it was much greater than the former, since the name Hueymiccaylhuitl 
signifies the great festival of the dead*. 

During the three last days of this month the living all kept a fast to the dead, and went out into 
the plain to celebrate rejoicings. 

The Marquis Don Furpinanp Cortes terminated in this month the war which he carried on 
with Mexico, when he entirely conquered it. 

Each year, on the celebration of the Festival of the Dead, whilst the priests were engaged in 
performing sacrifices, the entire people, every individual in his own house, ascended on the terraces 
of the houses, and looking towards the north}, made earnest supplications to the dead, each of 
them to those of his own lineage, and ejaculating aloud, exclaimed, ‘“‘ Come quickly, since we expect 
you t.” . 

The slaves whom they killed along with the lords when they died, were for the purpose of assisting 
them in the hardships which they had to encounter in a future state. 

PLATE II. 

5. OCHPANIZTLI. 

Ochpaniztli commenced on the twelfth of September. They here celebrated the Festival of the 
Woman who sinned by eating of the fruit of the tree. The festival held on this occasion was 
properly named Otlacotleutli, our beginning ; or the festival of our Mother Tutzin§, or our end, or 
the termination of our lives. Ochpaniztli is interpreted purification ; and accordingly in this month 
all carefully swept their houses and the roads. They fasted on the first four days of this month, and 
during the entire of it they sacrificed to plants; and after adoring them they carried them to the 
temples. ‘This purification originated in the belief which they entertained, that by the performance 
of this ceremony every evil would depart from the city]. 

They kept many fasts; but the priests fasted during every month: not however all at the same 
time; but a general assembly of the priests having taken place, three or four of them made a vow to 
fast a certain number of days ; at the expiration of which the others in their proper order proceeded 
to make a similar vow to fast, until the entire number had been reckoned, and all had fasted on 

bread and water, in order that every evil might depart from the city ; and likewise because she 

* Huey signifies, in the Mexican language, old. 

+ They supposed Mictlan or hell to be situated towards the north. 

{ The following passage occurs in the thirty-sixth chapter of A View of the Jewish Religion, by A. R., printed in London in 
1656. . “That a Messias is promised to the Jews all agree, therefore in their prayers they beseech God that he may come quickly ; 
but who he is, or when he shall come, is much controverted.” 

§ Tutzin, otherwise written Totzin, was said to have been a different goddess from Tonantzin. The first name signifies our 
Mother, the other our Grandmother. Our beginning and our end were names equally applicable to the festival of Tutzin, since 
Eve was the cause of the beginning and of the termination of man’s existence. 

| The notion of evil departing from a city or people by the performance of some ceremony or rite is entirely Jewish. 

4] Suchiquecal. She was also designated Cihuacohuatl, which name certainly alludes to her temptation. It is singular that 
this woman should be represented in the forty-eighth page of the Vatican painting with two children who appear to have been. 
fighting, and one of them to have been killed, since in Mexican paintings closed eyes signify death. 

Baron de Humboldt supposes that the two vases at the bottom of the page, one of which is upset, might have been the cause of 

(2c) 

98 EXPLANATION OF THE 

introduced evil into the world. Suchiquecal was the first who sinned; she is here named Yzpa- 
palotle, the goddess of filth or of sin; and on this account they celebrated a festival to the fate 
which awaits man after death. In the course of these twenty days FErpinanp Corvzs arrived in 
the country. 

6. PACTONTLY. 

Pactontly, (or Humiliation,) commenced on the second of October. It was the festival of Tetz- 

catlipoca and the rest of his companions, Tehatletllachinath, which name signifies a conflagration 
of fire and water™. 

In this month the water usually freezes and ice appears, whence they say that the natives 
consider the festival of the glorious Saint Francis as highly ominous-, because it occurs in this 

the quarrel. A reversed vase might be symbolical of a refused offering, as an upright one of an offering accepted. The difference 
of colour in the children might mark inferiority or degradation in the descendants of one of them. Suchiquecal is represented in 
the eighty-seventh page of the Vatican painting, and in the MS. of Archbishop Laud, with two children at her knees, apparently 
in great mental affliction. This position of the children is very remarkable ; and it reminds us of a phrase often used in Scripture, 
of children being brought up at the knees of their parents ; Ephraim and Manasseh, the adopted children of Joseph, are thus said 
to have been brought up at his knees. 

* Abrasamiento de fuego y agua. 

+ Fear of the gods seems to have been the fundamental principle of the Mexican religion, which absorbed all other considera- 
tions of good or evil: thus virtues became vices, and vices virtues, according to the prescriptions of a barbarous ritual. It would 
appear that even after their conversion to Christianity, the Mexicans could not entirely divest themselves of their ancient 
prejudices; and it is probable that Saint Francis long continued rather an object of their fear than of their love. The same 
principle of fear induced the Mexicans to pourtray their divinities with terrible countenances, and to bestow the epithet of 
Tetzauhteotle, or the terrible god, on Tetzcatlipoca. It would almost appear that the angels of Raphael were copied from the 
busts of Apollo, Diana, or some of the other beautiful imaginary deities of Greece; but such were not the forms of the angels 
that appeared to the Jews, whose countenances are described in the Old Testament as terrible, even when executing a mission of 
grace. The wife of Manoah (informing her husband of the apparition of the angel, who declared to her, that although she had 
been barren, she should bear a child who should be a Nazarite unto God from the womb, and begin to deliver Israel,) says in the 
sixth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Judges; “ A man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of 
an angel of God, very terrible.” Ezekiel also describes, in the first chapter of his Book of Prophecies, the appearance of the 
four cherubim which he beheld on the banks of the river Chebar in Babylon, than which nothing could be more formidable :— 
the head of a lion, which of all wild beasts is the most ferocious ; that of a bull, which of all domestic quadrupeds is the most 
dangerous ; of a carnivorous eagle, and of a man,—all united in one,—formed the head of each cherub. It is singular that the 
inhabitants of the island of Haiti, whose supreme deity (to whom they assigned many attributes) was worshiped by them under 
the name of Jocanna, should have also adored a figure somewhat resembling the cherubim mentioned by. Ezekiel; which instead 
of four, had five heads united on the body of a man, terminating like the Hebrew cherubim with the feet of an animal: these 
heads were those of a tiger, a stag, an eagle, a serpent, and a dog. The presence of the Deity is also described in the nineteenth 
chapter of the Revelations as exceedingly terrible: ‘ And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon 
him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on 
his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew but he himself. And he was clothed with a vesture 
dipped in blood: and his name is called The Word of God. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white 
horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations; 
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he 
hath on his yesture and on his thigh a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And I saw an angel standing in the 
sun; and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together 
unto the supper of the great God; that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, 
and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.” A 
very remarkable painting oceurs in the third page of the Codex Borgianus, in which Quecalcoatle is represented in a sumptuous 

temple, seated on a throne; a sword proceeds out of his mouth, and an eagle is hastening to prey on the dead bodies under the 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 99 

month, since their fruits are at this season attacked by the frost. They accordingly paint this 
month dangerous like that of May, with the same symbols. They paint likewise these footsteps 
behind the month to signify that now the waters are left behind. Tetzcatlipoca* is he who 

throne: above is the symbol of the sun, which half conceals the body of a lamb, ora deer. Quecalcoatle is again represented 
in the same page in the act of sacrificing a demon, whom Death, painted beneath the sacrificial stone, seems waiting to devour. 
Many passages might be adduced from Scripture to prove that terror and martial prowess were attributes with which the Jews 
loved to invest the Deity: even still they cry with a loud voice at stated intervals in the synagogues, Magnus, magnus, magnus, 
est Deus exercituum ; which, whether it be translated, Great, great, great, is the god of war, or Great, great, great, is the god of 
armies, means the same thing, for hosts does not convey the signification of ‘ exercituum’. 

* It is singular that the Mexicans should have entertained the belief that their supreme deity Tetzcatlipoca, who punished them 
for their sins, and was the god to whom they professed penitence and besought forgiveness of them, nevertheless tempted them to 
sin. Various passages in Scripture might have induced the Jews to believe that God when provoked would lead them into tempta- 

> since the 

tion, notwithstanding the necessity of reconciling these passages with another, “‘ neither tempteth he any man ;’ 
mildest interpretation that can be put upon the often-repeated words “the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart,” is, that he tempted 
him to sin: for to suppose that by the expression “‘ hardened Pharaoh’s heart” is meant forced him to adopt a sinful course of 
conduct, would be to impute the sin of Pharaoh to God, which would be impious. Neither, on the other hand, can it be contended 
that the conduct of Pharaoh was not sinful, since by it he drew down the most dreadful judgments recorded in history upon all the 
Egyptians ; or that God had no share in causing it, since that would contradict the express words of Scripture. Some persons 
endeavour to draw a distinction between the pride, obstinacy, and presumption of a headstrong monarch and positive sin,—as much 
as arguing that God might fill the heart of man with the former, but could not cause the latter. But the thirty-fourth verse of the 
ninth chapter of Exodus, where sinning and hardening the heart are used as correlative terms, does not permit us to doubt that by 
‘the expression “ God hardened Pharaoh’s heart ” is meant, he tempted him to sin by refusing to let the Israelites depart out of 
Egypt, for which Pharaoh was accordingly punished. ‘‘ And when Pharaoh saw that the rain, and the hail, and the thunders 
were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.” Herodotus says that the Egyptians were most 
submissive subjects to their kings; and had it been otherwise, they certainly would never have suffered, from the heart of one of 
them having been hardened, ten such plagues as those recorded in the seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh chapters of 
Exodus, without rising into open rebellion. Another attempted solution of the difficulty which is found in reconciling God’s 
assurance to Moses, ‘‘ I will harden Pharaoh’s heart,” with the declaration of Saint James in the thirteenth verse of the first 
chapter of his General Epistle, “‘ Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with 
evil, neither tempteth he any man,”’—proceeds on the admission that God did tempt Pharaoh to sin, because he was an idolater, 
his enemy, and the oppressor of his chosen people; and that the words of Saint James are only applicable to true believers. But in 
what sense do those who thus attempt to reconcile the words of the Old Testament with those of the New, and Christian opinions 
with Jewish, understand the first verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of the Second Book of Samuel? ‘‘ And again the anger of 
the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.” The effect of 
David’s taking this census of the population was to displease God, and the consequences of it are described in the fifteenth verse 
of the same chapter of Samuel: “ So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed: and 
there died of the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba, seventy thousand men.” Every man on this occasion does not appear fo 
have borne only his own iniquity; but the Jews, like the Egyptians, suffered for the transgression of their king. Deception differs 
from temptation, or we might also remind them of the lying spirit which Jehovah is said on one occasion to have sent upon the 
Hebrew prophets. It was probably in consequence of its being a prevalent notion amongst the Jews, as amongst the Mexicans, 
that the Supreme Being did sometimes, when angry, tempt them to sin,—which the former might have inferred from the following 
passage of the eighth chapter of Isaiah: “ Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your 
dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary ; but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for 
a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be 
snared, and be taken.”—that Saint James made the above-mentioned declaration; which, if “‘dead” in the sentence “‘ Lead us not 
into temptation” be an error, as has been contended, which in the apostolic age crept into the Lord’s Prayer, which it must be 
presumed originated in some misconception which the early Christians entertained as to the meaning of the corresponding Hebrew 
term, might likewise have been intended to rectify that misconception. 
When it is considered what elevated notions the ancient philosophers entertained of the Supreme Being; and that the Stoics, on 
purpose to do away with the idea of evil either emanating from God, or attaching in any manner to his divine essence, only 

100 EXPLANATION OF THE 

appeared to that nation on the Mountain of the Mirror, as they say; and is he who tempted 
Quecalcoatle the penitent*. 

They paid Tetzcatlipoca great reverence, for they kept lights and fire burning in his honour in the 
temples. Whenever they worshiped him they addressed him, “ Lord, whose servants we are, grant 
us this.” ‘They accordingly called this festival The Lesser Festival, or that of Humiliation. In this 
month the inhabitants of Mataltzingo celebrated a festival to the god Suchiquecal +. 

a. Xiuatlatli. 6. A Quiver. c. A Serpent. d. Water and Flames. e. Footsteps. i. A Flint. 

7 VEYPACTLI. 

Veypactli commenced on the twenty-second of October. It was named the Festival of Humiliation, 
for each individual had his own advocate, whosoever he thought proper, and this advocate stood in 

admitted one kind of evil,—moral evil, of «which man himself was the sole cause; denying that what are usually called physical 
evils were really in their nature evil, because proceeding from his eternal decree, the words of Saint James seem rather to be 
addressed to the Jews than to the Gentiles. But how would the Greek sages, Solon, Plato, and Socrates, have been shocked at 
the Rabbinical doctrine that God can do no evil,—not because he is incapable of doing or commanding evil acts to be done, but 
because all actions, either done or commanded by him, lose the character of evil which otherwise might have belonged to them. 
The Rabbis would never have maintained this absurd and impious doctrine, if they had not misconstrued certain passages of 
Scripture, since the omnipotence of God can do all but evil; and evil, were it possible to be done by God, would not lose its 
character. 

It is probable that the first and third chapters of the prophet Hosea led them into error. It has been truly remarked, that the 
philosophy of the ancients was of a sublimer kind than the modern, because, not encompassed with Jewish prejudices, and turning 
more on mind than on matter. This was owing to the uncircumscribed range of reasoning on all philosophical questions in 
which they indulged. No fear of exciting the divine anger by the crime which the Jews invented of lese divine majestatis prevented 
them from discussing every question connected with their own mythology, the nature and the attributes of the Deity, the origin of 
good and evil, or any other moral problem; although in reference to that fictitious crime we may observe, that the wisest of 
the ancient philosophers judged it absurd to suppose that the Deity, though he might accept praise, could receive honour (rin) 
from mortals, or could, on the other hand, suffer disgrace or dishonour from them. 

* El penitente should, perhaps, be translated the doer of penance, instead of the penitent. The temptation of Quecalcoatle, 
the fast of forty days ordained by the Mexican ritual, the cup with which he was presented to drink, the reed which was his sign}, 
(which appears to have been a thistle in the province of Yucatan,) the morning star which he is designated, the tecpatl, or stone, 
which was laid on his altar, and called the teotecpatl, or divine stone, which was likewise an object of adoration;—all these 
circumstances connected, with many others relating to Quecalcoatle which are here omitted, are very curious and mysterious. 

+ Al dios Suchiquecal. 

' Parkhurst notices in his Greek and Hebrew lexicons, that the Jews were accustomed to give to criminals condemned to death 
a beverage with some infusion mixed with it, which lessened their sufferings by depriving them in some measure of the con- 
sciousness of pain. It is singular that the Mexicans should have had an analogous custom, as Sahagun remarks in the tenth 
chapter of the second book of his History, of scattering a powder named yiauhtli on the faces of those whom they were about to 
sacrifice, “‘ para que perdiesen el sentido, y no sintiesen tanto la muerte ;” “ that they might become deprived of sensation, 
and not suffer much pain in dying.” It is smgular also, that the person who presented a prisoner at the temple for sacrifice, 
should, at the moment the priest was about to perform the ceremony, have offered him wine to drink, which he was obliged to sip 
through a reed, as Sahagun states in the following passage of the twenty-first chapter of the same book: ‘‘ Estando todos sentados 
venia uno de los que tenia cabtivos para matar, y traia 4 su cabtivo de los cabellos hasta la piedra donde le habian de acuchillar, 
alli le daban & beber vino de la tierra } pulcre, y como el cabtivo recebia la xicara del pulcre, alzabala contra el Oriente, y contra 
el Septentrion, y contra el Occidente, y contra el Medio dia, como offreciendolo acta las quatro partes del mundo; y luego bebia, 

no con la xicara, sino con una cafa hueca chupando.” 

——————————— 

4 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 101 

the relation of a guardian angel to him. The festival itself was that of the advocates. This festival 
was the great festival of humiliation ; they celebrated in it the Festival of All the Gods, which corre- 
sponds in phraseology to that of All Saints. 

8. QUECHOLI, or THE SERPENT OF THE CLOUDS. 

Quecholi, or The Serpent of the Clouds *, commenced on the eleventh of November. It was the 
festival of the fall of Miquitlatecotli and of Zontemoqui, and the rest. They paint him} on this 
account with these instruments of war, since he introduced it into the world. ‘They celebrated in this 
month the festival of animals, and made ready their weapons of war, which is the reason why they 
represent it with these insignia. The first entrance of Don Ferpinanpb Corres, Marquis of the 
Valley, into Mexico occurred in this month. The proper signification of this name is the fall of the 
demons, who they say were stars; and even still there are stars in heaven called after their names {, 
which are the following: Yzacatecuytli§, Tlahvizcalpantecuytli, Ceyacatl |], Achitumetl, Xacupan- 
calqui, Mixauhnatl, Tezcatlipoca, and Contemoctli. These were their appellations as gods before 
they fell from heaven, but they are now named Tzitzimitli, which means something monstrous or 
dangerous. 

a. Xiuatlatly. 6. Arrows. c. A Bag of provisions for war. 

PLATE III. 

9, PANQUETZALITZLI. 

Panquetzalitzli commenced on the first of December, being another celebration of the festival 
of Tezcatlipoca, which they kept three times in the year . 

They do not here paint Tezcatlipoca with a foot formed of a serpent, since they say that this festival 
refers to a time previous to his sinning, whilst still in heaven ; and that hence happened the war in 
heaven, from whence sprung wars below. Panquetzalitzli may be interpreted “the lifting up of 
banners,” for every individual in this month placed upon his house a paper banner ; and the captains 

and soldiers sacrificed a certain number of those whom they had made prisoners in war, to whom 

* This Mexican month was called Quecholi, and Mixcoatle: the first of these names, according to Torquemada, signified a 
bird of blue and scarlet plumage, perhaps the flamingo ; the signification of Mixcoatle is the serpent of the clouds. 

+ “ Him ” refers to the figure contained in the plate. 

‘{ The devil is named Lucifer, and is compared in Scripture to a star falling from heaven. 

§ This proper name is compounded of Yzaca, the name of the star, and tecuytl, an honorary appellation which refers to the 
tecutli, or ornament of the head worn by the kings of Mexico and some of the priests and judges. 

|| Ceyacatl signifies one cane. 

q The Jews celebrated three times a year a solemn assembly to Jehovah, whose feet, in the figurative language of the East, 
they likened to fine brass. But it deserves to be remarked, that Nehushtan signifies a serpent as well as a lump of brass, and 
the brazen serpent to which the Jews offered incense in the days of Hezekiah was so named. Tezcatlipoca was the supreme deity 
of the Mexicans, but the interpreter confounds him here with Zontemoctli. 

(2D )) 

102 EXPLANATION OF THE 

they gave arms similar to their own, to defend themselves with, and in this manner fought with them 
until they killed them. The Mexicans celebrated in this month the festival of their first captain, 
whom they worshiped as a god, and named Vichilupuchitl*; and the province of Chalcho sacri- 
ficed to their captain 'Tezcatlipoca, who was so called. 

They celebrated in this month the Festival of the Loaf, which was in this manner. They made a 
large loaf of the seed of bledos, which they called tzoalli, and of honey +; and after having made it, 
they blessed it in their manner and broke it, and the high priest put it into a very clean vessel, and 
took a thorn of maguey, with which he with great reverence took up a morsel and put it into the 
mouths of every one of the Indians, as if in the manner of a communion. They also celebrated in 
this same month the festival which they called Xiutecutli, the Saviour of Fire. They celebrated it in 
this manner: Four priests took each of them a handful of ocotl §, and descended from the upper area 
of the temple, and with certain ceremonies which they performed, first towards the east, and then 
towards the north and towards the west, and lastly towards the south||, threw the ocotl into.a 
cauldron which they kept in the temples, where it burned; and this served them with light, as it 
never was extinguished either by night or day. a. A Banner. 

10. ATEMOZTLI. 

Atemoztli commenced on the twentieth of December. They celebrated in this month the festival 
of the descent of the waters of the deluge. They kept the festival for this reason: I mean on 
account of the earth’s having become visible, or on their finding themselves secure from the danger 

of the deluge. Atemoztli signifies the descent of the waters, as it rains surprisingly in this month. 

Wile ALOU CP by 

Tititl commenced on the tenth of January. They here kept the festival of Mixcoatle(, which 

* The month Panquetzalitzli was dedicated to Huitzilopuchtli or Quecalcoatle, to which latter name of the tutelary god of the 
Mexicans the name of the month refers. Huitzilopuchtli’s name was sometimes lengthened by the addition of other titles into 
Teoyaotlatohuehuitzilopuchtli. 

+ Torquemada says that the Totonacas, a numerous people of New Spain, consecrated every three years some dough, which 
they kneaded with the hearts of three sacrificed children, of which all the males above five-and-twenty, and the females above 
sixteen, were obliged to partake every six months. They called this dough Toyoliaytlaquatl, which name signifies Manjar de 
nuestra vida, Food of our life. —Monarquia Indiana, lib. vi. cap. 48. 

The Jews are said, in former ages at least, to have celebrated a kind of communion. But we will not revive the calumnies of 
centuries gone by. 

§ Ocotl was a kind of gum. 

|| The Jews on the feast of Tabernacles shake a bundle of boughs, “‘ thrice before their face eastward, thrice toward the south, 
thrice backward over their shoulders toward the west, thrice on their left side toward the north; lastly thrice upwards and 
downwards.”—A View of the Jewish Religion, page 306. 

{| The Mexican month Quecholli was also named Mixcoatle. Torquemada says that a bird of beautiful plumage called the 
Teoquechol was dedicated to the gods, but that the Indians after they became Christians changed its name into that of 
Tlauquechol. i 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 103 

means the Serpent of the Clouds. Women likewise, who followed the occupation of weaving and 
washing, celebrated a festival in this month to the goddess Ychpuihtl, which name signifies the. 

Virgin Goddess, who is the same as Suchiquecal*. 

12. YZCALLI. 

Yzcalli commenced on the thirtieth of January. It was the Festival of Fire, for at this season of the 
year the trees, becoming sensible of warmth, shoot forth. It was likewise the Festival of Pilquixtia, or 
of Human Nature, which was never destroyed in the various destructions of the world. This month 
Utzalli has the same signification as the living principle, or vital power; and accordingly on the 
arrival of this month, each mother took hold of her son by the head, and lifting him upwards, addressed 
him frequently with the words, Ytzcalli, Ytzcalli, as if saying to him, Hail, Hail. They paint this 
month only with a crown, as being the month of vegetation, or rather of returning thanks to Nature, 
which is the cause of this vegetation. The year here ended ; for they reckoned in it eighteen months, 
of twenty days each, as appears by these paintings ; and they named the five superfluous days dead 
days, for they neither celebrated any sacrifices or undertook any affairs of importance on these days. 
They kept every four years another fast of eight days in memory of the three destructions + which 
the world had undergone; and accordingly when this period arrived, they exclaimed four times, 
‘* Lord, how is it that the world having been so often destroyed, has never been destroyed {?” And 
they named it the Festival of Renovation; and further declared, that at the expiration of this fast 
and festival men imitated the frolicksome sports of children, wherefore to represent this festival 
they led children by the hands through the dance. 

a. A Crown. 6. A Tlacochitl with a Quiver. c. A Shield. 

13. THE FIVE DEAD DAYS. 

The five dead days, in which no sacrifices were performed, commenced on the nineteenth of 
February §. These were the days which were over and above the vicenary computation of the days 

* Chalchiuitlicue appears to have been the name by which the virgin Chimalman was designated in heaven. She was also 
called Suchiquecal, which seems to signify woman, in a general sense, or human nature without reference to sex; and Ychpuihtl, in 
reference to the Mexican belief that Quecalcoatle was born of a virgin. Huitzilopuchtli is also said to have been miraculously 
brought forth by a woman named Coatlycue, a native of the city of Tulan, who being a devout person and engaged in sweeping 
the altars of the gods, perceived a ball of feathers falling through the air, which having taken up and put into her girdle she 
became pregnant. 

++ The destruction of the province of Tulan, which constitutes an epoch in Mexican chronology, and is the fourth in order of the 
catastrophes which had befallen the world, is here omitted. 

{ That is to say, How has the human species been preserved ? 

§ This passage seems to explain in a very simple manner the system of the Mexican intercalation, and serves to illustrate the 
text of the Vatican MS. The Mexicans reckoned 365 days to their year; the last five of which had no sign or place appropriated 
to them in the calendar; since, if they had been admitted, the order of the signs would have been inverted, and the new year 
would not always have commenced with Ce Cipactli. These days, therefore, although included in the computation of the year, 
were rejected from the calendar, until at the expiration of four years an intercalation of twenty corresponding signs might be 

104 EXPLANATION OF THE 

of the year; and they always on the completion of the full period of three hundred and sixty-five 

days, left out these days, and proceeded to the commencement of the new year in the sign which 
entered *. | 

* The signature of Count Gazama is affixed to the end of this First Part, and y ansi gusto Ger’ de Spinosa to the end of 
the Second. It may here be observed that Spinosa is the name of many Jewish families in Portugal. 

effected without producing any confusion in it!. Tt would appear, however, that this intercalation did not actually take place till 
at the expiration of 52 years ; for it is impossible, except on this supposition, to understand the intercalation of years mentioned 
in the Vatican MS. as occurring at the expiration of every period of 52 years, when an entire year was intercalated : but admitting 
the postponement of an intercalation of a month every four years during a period of 52 years, such an intercalation would then 
become quite intelligible; since thirteen Mexican months, of 20 days each, exactly constitute a ritual year of the Mexicans, which 
contained 260 days, and was shorter than the civil year by 105 days; and this is the precise number of months of which the 
intercalation would have been postponed. Herrera has observed, in the following passage of his History of the Indies, that the 
people of Yucatan computed the duration of the year as exactly as the Mexicans: “ Y para acabar estas cosas de Yucatan, no se 

esconde, ni aparta tanto el sol de esta tierra, que jamas vengan las noches A ser majores que los dias, i quando majores vienen 4 
ser, suelen ser iguales, desde San Andres 4 Santa Lucia, que comiengan 4 crecer. Regianse de noche, para conocer la hora, por 
el Lucero, i las Cabrillas, i los Astilejos: de dia, por el medio dia: i desde el Norte 4 poniente tenian puestos 4 pedacos nombres, 
con los quales se entendian i regian. Tenian su afio perfecto, como el nuestro, de trecientos i sesenta i cinco dias, i de estos tenia 
el afio doce meses, cinco dias, i seis horas. A estos meses Ilaman U, que quiere decir luna, i la contaban desde que salia nueva. 
hasta que no parecia. Tambien contaban el afio de diez i ocho meses, & veinte dias cada mes, al uso de Mexico, i tenian sus 
veinte caracteres con que los nombraban, dexando de poner nombre a los cinco dias i seis horas que sobran de esta cuenta, 
porque los tenian por aciagos.—Historia de las Indias Occidentales, Dec. IV. lib. x. cap. iv. If the Mexicans were 
acquainted, like the inhabitants of Yucatan, with the excess of six hours in the duration of the natural year, their intercalation 
every four years might refer to the hours by which those years exceeded the period of 365 days, as the other intercalation which 
took place every 52 years might be explained by the days being taken into account which had been omitted in the previous calcu- 
lation: and in this manner the Mexican calendar would really have had two distinct intercalations, as stated by the interpreter 
of the Vatican MS. Torquemada, however, denies that the Mexicans were acquainted with these superfluous hours ?; and he 
firther says, relying upon the authority of Sahagun and his own knowledge of the Mexican mode of computing time, that the 
Mexican paintings called Tonalamatl by the Indians, and Calendars by the Spaniards, were in reality arts of divination, and 
improperly named calendars ; for that the Mexican year contained 365 days, whilst the series of signs employed in the Tona- 
lamatl amounted only to 260; the Mexican calendar used only four signs for the notation of days and years, and the Tonalamatl 
made use of twenty: and finally, that time was divided amongst the Mexicans into lesser periods, not of thirteen, the number 
found in the Tonalamatl, but of jive days. Inreference to the last argument, by which Torquemada endeavours to prove that 
the Mexican paintings to which the Spaniards had given the name of Calendars were not really such, but arts of divination; viz. 
that time was not divided by the Mexicans into lesser periods of thirteen parts ;—it is proper to observe, that a Mexican age (a 
period consisting of 52 years) was divided by the Mexicans into four equal portions of thirteen years; so that thirteen was a 
number used in the Mexican calendar: and if the days had been also so divided, this division would have only been analogous to 

* In the Coptic calendar, which was derived from the ancient Egyptian, an intercalation every four years was also admitted. 
If colonies had proceeded from Alexandria to America, it is likely that they would have carried with them the Egyptian mode of 
computing time, which was more correct than the old Roman reckoning. 

? Sahagun, in the following passage of the eighteenth chapter of the second book of his inedited History of New Spain, seems 
to differ from Torquemada ; since he says, without stating his doubt of a fact, which if it had been improbable in itself, or mere 
ignorant conjecture, he would certainly have done :—‘‘ that it was conjectured that when they (the Mexicans) bored holes in the~ 
ears of their male and female children, which custom was observed every four years, they intercalated six days of Nemontemi ; 
which is the same thing as the bissextile intercalation which we employ every four years.” ‘‘ Hay conjetura que quando aguge- 

raban las orejas 4 los nifios, y nifias, que era de quatro en quatro afios, hechaban seis dias de Nemontemi; y es lo mismo del 
bisiesto que nosotros hacemos de quatro en quatro afios.” 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 105 

that of the years. Neither was the computation of time and of the duration of the year (which reduced to writing or painting 
constitutes a calendar, and which depends on astronomy and the observation of the stars,) so distinct in the beginning, from 
astrology and the art of divination, as Sahagun seems to suppose. The Chaldeans, the ancestors of the Jews, contemplated the 
stars from the temple of Belus, and predicted by them the fortunes of men. Diodorus Siculus has preserved some curious opinions 
of the Chaldeans respecting the stars; and it is unlucky that the book in which he had recorded various true predictions which 
they had uttered to many famous kings and generals should have been lost. We may observe, that the number two thousand. 
seems to carry with it some strange fatality to religions, the most durable of all human institutions, (because founded on popular 
prejudices,) as lesser numbers have been deemed to be fatal to the more ephemeral works of man. For about two thousand years 
the fame of the Chaldeans resounded through Asia; for two thousand years the oracles were revered by the greatest heroes and 
sages of the earth; for two thousand years the Jewish religion flourished either in Egyptian bondage or in a remote corner of 
Palestine, scarcely even known to the other nations of the earth ; and perhaps for nearly fifteen’ hundred years the American 
altars, fragrant with incense and crimson with gore, failed only to draw down the indignation of Heaven, that by the continuance 
of their sacrilegious rites those might be punished who permitted impiety, absurdity, and cruelty, to cross the threshold of the 
Gods. Divination in Mexico was in as general use, and perverted to as mischievous purposes, as ever it was amongst the Jews, and 
popular delusion was equally amongst both nations its main spring. It cannot be doubted that the Tonalpouqui, or fortune-tellers 
of the Mexicans,—a class of men highly esteemed by them,—predicted with the assistance of the Tonalamatl, or book of destiny, 
the fortunes of children. But how, we may inquire, did the Mexicans become acquainted with that superstitious practice ? 
Torquemada, who does not allow that the Mexicans borrowed any of their analogous ceremonies and superstitious rites from the 
Jews, nevertheless in treating, in the thirty-seventh chapter of the tenth book of his Indian Monarchy, of their art of divination, 
expresses himself thus, ‘ Segun doctrina falsa de estos diabolicos Rabinos ;” by which he clearly shows the channel of his 
thoughts. Itis an undeniable fact that the Jews have in all ages been inclined to practise divination. Whilst other ancient nations 
became famous for their learning ; and the all-inquiring minds of the Grecian philosophers made philosophy rest on a solid basis, — 
this people, turning aside from the contemplation of nature, bestowed all their attention upon dreams, visions, omens, prophecies, 
and their absurd and false interpretations: and their minds reverting to the early period of their own history, and to the signs 
and wonders performed not only by Moses and by Aaron but by the magicians of Pharaoh,—it is no wonder that divination, 
necromancy, magic, and all kinds of superstition, should have engrossed so much of their attention: nor would it be surprising 
if in after-times so credulous a people should have persuaded themselves, or have been persuaded by their priests, that Jehovah 
was again present with them in an ark, animating them on to fresh victories, or that the American soil should have become the 
theatre of their new exploits, and of an imposition which was this time to make them masters of an hemisphere. On reading 
various books of the Old Testament, and especially that of Ezekiel, it is impossible to rise from their perusal and to meditate on 
these curious pages of Jewish history, without involuntarily asking one’s self the question, What kind of people were the Jews? 
What were these visions true and vain which were continually perturbing their imaginations ? and how shall we distinguish the true 
from the false, since they (who were so accustomed to them) were unable to doso; as the prophet Ezekiel declares in the twelfth 
chapter of his book. ‘“‘ And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the 
land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth? Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord God; I will 
make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use z¢ as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand, and 
the effect of every vision. For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.” 
This last line recalls to our recollection the Homeric verse, ‘‘ Back’ i6t ovA€ ovelpe Goag ém vnac Ayawwy,” where a false vision 
is sent to deceive Agamemnon; and appearing to him while slumbering in his tent, induces him to suppose that he had only 
to lead on his troops to the immediate conquest of Troy ; “‘ ®n yap oy aipnoew IIpiapou toAw quate Keww.” It is very 
remarkable that the Jews, who have been noted by one Roman satirist in that often quoted passage ‘‘ Credat Judeus Apelles, 
non ego” for their credulity, should have been stigmatized by another (Juvenal), in his second satire for carrying on the trade 
of professed fortune-tellers and diviners in his days in Rome. Beginning so early, they certainly had time to perfect the art 
and to become adepts in it many centuries before the fifteenth. But if we critically investigate the progress of this curious 
science amongst them, we shall find that the foundations of it were laid at a very early period of their history; since we read 
in the forty-fourth chapter of Genesis, of Joseph’s policy to stay his brethren in Egypt, and of his causing his divining cup and 
every man’s money to be put in his sack’s mouth, whence it might appear that they had stolen the money, and had the 
policy to take the cup also, in order that he might not divine who the thieves were. And to this apparent theft the messenger 
whom he sent after them alludes in the fifth verse of the same chapter; ‘‘Is not this it in which my Lord drinketh, and 
whereby indeed he divineth? Ye have done evil in so doing.” It is not a little singular that the Mexicans should have made 
use of a cup, in order that, by the mode of divination which Torquemada describes in the following passage of the forty-eighth 
chapter of the sixth book of his Indian Monarchy, they might discover stolen goods, and who the thief was, and where 

(28 ) 

106 EXPLANATION OF THE 

they were concealed; since it would argue some acquaintance with the history of Joseph. “Si perdian alguna cosa, 
hacian ciertas hechicherias con unos maices, y miraban en un lebrillo de agua, y dicen que alli veian al que lo tenia, la 
casa adonde estaba; y si era cosa viva, y alli les hacia entender, si era ya muerta, 6 viva.” “If they lose any thing they 
practise a certam mode of divination by means of stalks of maize, and look into an earthen pitcher full of water, and 
declare that they there see who has it, the house where it is; and if it was living property, that they there learn whether 
it is already dead or alive.” The Mexicans were not only extremely superstitious, but inclined to pay great respect to 
lucky or unlucky omens ; such as the screeching of the owl, the sneezing of a person in a company, the entrance of a rabbit 
or a hare into a house, (which animals were considered by the Jews as unclean); with many other idle notions too numerous 
to mention, but which show that they partook largely of vulgar European prejudices. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 107 

THE SECOND PART. 

PLATE I.* 
TONACACIQUA. 

ToNACACIQUA, otherwise Chicomecouatl, was she who caused famine : they named her Seven 
Serpents +. 

God, Lord, Creator, Governor of the Universe, Tloque, Nauaque, Tlalticpaque, Teotlale-Matlava 
Tepeva:—all these epithets they bestowed on their god Tonacatecotle, who according to their 
account was the god who created the world; and they painted him alone with a crown, as lord of 
all. They never offered sacrifices to this god, for they said that he did not regard them. All the 
others to whom they sacrificed, were men once on a time, or demons. 

PLATE II. 

QUECALCOATLE. 

Quecalcoatle { is he who was born of the virgin, who was called on. ..... .§, and in heaven 

Chalchihuitztli, which means the precious stone of penance or of sacrifice. He was saved in the 

* The letters, 6, m, and im, in the margin of the Plate, signify bueno, malo, and indifferente, (good, bad, and indifferent), and 
determine by the ruling signs the good or evil fortune of the days. 

+ The number seven is mentioned in Scripture in connection with abundance and scarcity. Pharaoh beheld in the dream which 
Joseph interpreted to him, seven lean and seven fat kine, and seven full and seven withered ears of corn, emblematical of seven years 
of plenty and seven of famine. 

§ Two or three words are here obliterated; perhaps “ on earth Chimalman” would complete the sentence. 

¢ The Messiah is shadowed in the Old Testament under many types; such as those of a lion, a lamb, a roe, the morning star, (or 
the planet Venus, otherwise called Lucifer,) the sun, light, a rock, a stone, the branch}, the vine, wine, bread, water, life, the way, and 
he is there recognized in the triple character of a king, a priest, and a prophet. It is very extraordinary that Quecalcoatle, whom the 
Mexicans believed equally to have been a king, a prophet, and a pontiff, should also have been named by them Ceyacatl, or the morning 
star; Tlavizcalpantecutli, or light; Mexitli, or the vine, (for Torquemada says that the core of the aloe, from which the Mexicans ob- 
tained wine, was so called); Votan, or the heart, metaphorically signifying life; and Toyoliatlaquatl, «‘ manjar de nuestra vida,” bread, 
(for his body made of dough was eaten by the Mexicans): and that the signs Ce Mazatl, or one stag; Nahui Ollin, four earthquakes; 

1 The branch was a very famous type of the Messiah, which is thus mentioned by the prophet Zechariah, “ Hear now, O Joshua, 
the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit before thee; for they are men wondered at: for, behold, I will bring forth my servant, 
The BRANCH. For behold the stone I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone shall be seven eyes. Behold, I will engrave the 
graving thereof, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.” ‘This passage of the third chapter of 
Zechariah is very remarkable; and it is impossible not to connect the branch here personified, as the branch of the house of Israel, as 
well as the prophecy of the Lord’s slaying the dragon of the sea in the twenty-seventh chapter of Isaiah (which may mean 

108 EXPLANATION OF THE 

deluge, and was born in Zivenavitzcatl, where he resides. They call this the Fast of the Lords; 
it lasted four days, that is to say, from the first day of Ocelotl * to Four Earthquakes +. 

This fast was a kind of preparation for the arrival of the end of the world, which they said 
would happen on the day of Four Earthquakes, so that they were thus in daily expectation of that 
event. 

* Tierra is written under the sign of Ce Ocelotl, or One Tiger, which means that that sign was applied to the earth. 

+ The sign of Nahui Ollin, or Four Earthquakes, was dedicated to Quecalcoatle, whose second advent, together with the end of the 
world, the Mexicans expected would be on the same sign. The sign of the sun in Four Earthquakes, or in its four movements, as later 
Spanish writers have wrongly explained ¢emblores to signify, is found in the centre of the Mexican calendar which was discovered some 
years ago in the Plaza Mayor of Mexico, and refers no doubt to that belief. 

and Ome Tochtli, two rabbits,—should have been dedicated to him. As also that the fables of Quetzalcoatle, preparing the way for Tlaloc 
(which some Spanish writers understand to allude to wind preceding the fall of rain); and of the flint which was thrown from heaven, 
which breaking into pieces, the fragments were changed into as many heroes, should have existed amongst the Mexicans, the latter of 
which assimilates itself to the notion of God’s raising up from the stones seed unto Abraham. The Mexican paintings afford some cu- 
rious representations of the flint, or tequepatl, named by Acosta fulmen, or the thunderbolt, giving as it were birth to children. And the 
Jews still believe that Armillus Harascha, or Antichrist, will, or has been, born from a stone; which idea they may have borrowed from 
Christ having called two of his disciples Boanerges, sons of thunder, which appellation some commentators suppose was given to them 
because they wished to call down lightning from heaven, on a village that refused to receive the annunciation of the Gospel. That 
something else, however, was alluded to by “ Quecalcoatle preparing the way for Tlaloc,” besides wind preceding the fall of rain, may 
be inferred from what Boturini says of Tlaloc, in the 98th page of his Idea of a New History of America: “ Tlaloc era el secretario 
de la Providencia, &c.” <“ The Mexicans believed that Tlaloc was the secretary of Providence, who in his name wrote his laws in 
lightning, and published them with thunder.” Quecalcoatle was also represented under the figure of Tlatocaogelotl, which name signifies 
the lion or the tiger of the human species. Other analogies, extending to all che symbols mentioned above, might be pointed out between 
the types referring in the Old Testament to Christ, and the epithets bestowed by the Mexicans upon Quecalcoatle, in whose person 
several of the ancient Hebrew prophecies relating to the Messiah are pretended to have been fulfilled. And if more of his history, and 

the leviathan, as it seems to be elsewhere called in Scripture; but is certainly not the whale, which is one of the most harmless 
inhabitants of the ocean), with the paintings contained in the eighty-ninth and ninety-sixtli pages of the lesser Vatican MS.: the last of 
which represents Quecalcoatle in the act of slaying some formidable sea-monster covered with scales. The Jews apply the line in 
Scripture, “ He shall slay the dragon which is in the sea,” to their expected Messiah; and they believe that that will be his last great 
exploit, and that the flesh of this sacrificed monster will be eaten at a great feast, to which he will only invite their nation. The stories 
of the Rabbis are in general absurd, and the frequent allusions which they make in the Talmud to animals which have no real existence, 
betray their ignorance of natural history; which need not, however, excite our surprise, since the Egyptians, a much wiser people, 
believed in the phoenix; and even long after Aristotle had composed his celebrated work on Natural History at the request of 
Alexander the Great, many Christian philosophers maintained that such imaginary beings did really exist; although, as they argued, 
much of the globe being undiscovered, and the torrid zone from its heat separating by an insuperable barrier one half of mankind from the 
rest,—the place of their habitation, like the site of the Terrestrial Paradise (in which they also, as well as the Mexicans, believed; the latter 
naming it Xochitlycacan, literally the garden), might remain unknown. The Mexicans, as it appears from the symbol of the 
city of Tuchconco contained in the fiftieth plate of the Collection of Mendoza, had formed to themselves an idea of an animal with a 
horn rising from its forehead, that, unlike the unicorn, which is a fabulous creature, between a horse and a deer, seems to have been 
of the rabbit or of the deer species only. The name of the city, as well as the form of the head of the animal which was its symbol, 
seems to point out that it belonged to the former class; and the other is merely suggested, because in Mexican paintings the head of the 
mazatl, or deer, is often very like that of the rabbit; and it is said, on very vague rumour, that in Thibet a species of deer or antelope 
exists with a single horn which grows from its forehead, which is exceedingly wild and difficult to catch. It must be admitted that the 
ancient paintings of the Mexicans are replete with Jewish images and conceptions. It has already been observed, that eyes, which are 
mentioned in several of the prophetical books of the Old Testament as mysteriously belonging to both animate and inanimate objects, 
are frequently found in these paintings, divested alike of all use and propriety of situation. Many words likewise occur in the Mexican 
language, which are strangely compounded of yx, the eye, as for example, Yxteocalli. On one of their festivals the Mexicans made a 
cake with the symbolical representation of eyes, to which perhaps the symbol of the city Cuezcomayxtlahuacan, represented in the 
fifteenth plate, No. 19, of the Collection of Mendoza, may refer. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 109 

 Quecalcoatle was he who they say created the world; and they bestowed on him the appellation 
of lord of the wind, because they said that Tonacatecotli, when it appeared good to him, breathed 

of the actions of his life had been preserved, we cannot tell where those analogies would have ceased. Isaiah says, “ Behold, a virgin 
shall conceive, and bear a son.” The Mexicans asserted that Quecalcoatle was born of the virgin Chimalman. And he adds, in the 
verse immediately following; “ Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and choose the good.” The cakes, 
called Uologopale, which were made of honey and eaten on the festival of Quecalcoatle, might bear some allusion’ to this incompre- 
hensible prediction. From the little that has been preserved of the life of Quecalcoatle, it would appear that he was very anxious to 
verify, in his own person, some of the ancient prophecies relating to the Messiah; and that for this purpose he went about studiously 
performing certain actions, by which they might appear to be fulfilled. The Jews refer the fourth verse of the third chapter of the 
Lamentations of Jeremiah, “ My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones,”—to the Messiah (which they 
perhaps have been the more inclined to do, because Christians declare, that Scripture had foretold that not a bone of him should be 
broken). In connection with the former of these predictions, the following passage of the twenty-fourth chapter of the sixth book of 
Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy, which treats of the life of Quecalcoatle, is deserving of consideration, “llegando 4 un lugar que 
se llama Quauhtitlan, estaba alli un arbol grande, grueso, y mui crecido, y arrimandose 4 él, pidio 4 uno de sus pajes un espejo, y 
mirandose en él, vidose mas viejo de lo que antes era, y dijo ‘ Ya estoi viejo,” y por esto se nombré desde entonces aquel lugar 
Huehuequauhtitlan, que quiere decir junto al arbol viejo, 6 de el viejo; y tomando piedras apedréo el arbol, y todas las metia dentro del 
tronco, que permanecieron asi por muchisimos afios. Paso de este lugar, y por todo el camino que iba le iban tafiendo flautas, y 
otros instrumentos muchas de las gentes que llevaba; lego 4 otro que es un cerro junto del pueblo de Tlalnepantla, dos leguas de esta 
ciudad de Mexico, donde se sentd en una piedra, y puso las manos en ella, y las dejo estampadas que hasta el dia de oi se ven las 
sefiales de todo en ella.” “ Coming to a place named Quauhtitlan, where was a large, thick and lofty tree, leaning on the trunk of it he 
desired one of his pages to give him a mirror, which looking into, and perceiving himself older than he before was, he exclaimed, ‘ I have 
become old ;’ whence the place was ever afterwards named Huehuequauhtitlan, which signifies ‘close to the old tree, or to the tree of 
the old man;’ and gathering up stones from the ground, he flung them at the tree 1, and lodged them all in the trunk, where they remained 
many years. From this place he passed on, and was accompanied on the whole of the way by a great multitude of people, who followed 
him playing flutes and other instruments. He arrived at another place, which was a hill adjoining the city of Tlalnepantla, two leagues 
distant from this city of Mexico, where he sat down on a stone, and laid his hands upon it, and left their impression there; the marks of 
which are at the present day quite visible”’ How many incidents, analogous to thosé which are related in the Gospels of Christ, occur 
in this short passage;—the withered fig tree ; the crowd which followed him, strewing branches in his way, and singing hosannas; his 
custom of sitting down on the ground and discoursing to the people; the disciples by which he was attended; the halt, lame, and 
deformed persons®, who pressed round him to be cured; and his laying on of hands,—all present themselves to the imagination. ‘The 
impressions of hands and feet are found in various parts of America engraved upon rocks, and are frequently associated by ancient 
traditions with the preaching of some religious missionary, who left that sign behind him. If the Indians had been acquainted with the 
following verses of the nineteenth chapter of Job, they could scarcely have exhibited a greater predilection for sculpturing figures and 
hieroglyphics, upon rocks, than they did: «« Oh that my words were now written. Oh that they were printed in a book; that they 
were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever. For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter 
day upon theearth’ The signs of One Cane and of Nahui Ollin, or Four Earthquakes, which were both dedicated to Quecalcoatle,—and 
the latter of which alluded, according to Mexican mythology, to the day of judgment and the end of the world,—were frequently 
engraved by the Mexicans upon stones and rocks; and that of Nahui Ollin occupies the centre of the large stone usually designated the 
Mexican calendar, which is fixed to one of the sides of the cathedral church of Mexico, and which also comprises the other signs of 
the days of the year. The following extract from the inedited History of Chille, by Rosales, contains a curious account of footsteps, 
accompanied with an inscription, which were sculptured on a rock, in Chille: “ Planto Valdivia su campo en el valle de Mapocho, 

1 Sahagun in the fourteenth chapter of the third book of his Universal History of New Spain, says, that it was an arrow which 
Quecalcoatle fired at the tree : .“ Y em otro lugar tird con una saeta 4 un arbol grande, que se lama Pochutl, y atravesole con la dicha 
saeta, y asi estaba hecha una cruz.” “ In another place he fired an arrow at a large tree, named a Pochutl, and pierced it through with 
the said arrow, which thus formed a cross.” Torquemada informs us that the Pochutl was a tree which the Spaniards named the 
Ceyba, and that it was very large, and of spreading foliage: “arbol que llaman Pochotl, que los Castellanos llaman Ceyba, que es 
mui grande, y mui copado.” It does not appear to have borne any fruit to which the Mexican appellation Pochutl would seem to allude; 
since this name probably signifies barren, being derived from ychpochtli virginity, the latter part of which word communicates an 
analogous sense to its derivatives, one of which was telpuchtli. ‘ 

. 2 Quecalcoatle is said to have been attended by many deformed persons and crook-backs, corcovados, on his road to Cholula. 

(ar) 

110 : EXPLANATION OF THE 

and begot Quecalcoatle. They erected round temples to him, without any corners. They said that 
it was he, (who was also the lord of the thirteen signs which are here represented), who formed the 

que propriamente se llama Mapuche, que quiere decir valle de gente, por la mucha que en el avia; y de ay tomo el esse nombre, mas 
los Espafioles, y el tiempo, han corrompido el vocablo, y en lugar de Mapuche, le llaman Mapocho. Dio buelta al valle, mirando los 
assientos, y la hermosura de sus campanas, y llanura, que es de los mejores y mas fertiles valles del reino, fecundado de un tio que 
liberal reparte sus aguas por differentes sangrias, para que todos rieguen sus sembrados. Y pareciendole ser el lugar mas acomodado 
donde Loncomilla le dezia, poblo la ciudad de Santiago en el sitio donde oy esta; cuia fundazion fue 4 doze de Febrero de T5215 
pidiendo 4 nuestro Seftor gracia para estender y entabler la fee entre aquella gente; y 4 catorce Caciques que alli le dieron la paz, rogo 
le ayudassen para hazer alli una casa de oracion del dios verdadero, que esta en los cielos, y crio el universo, donde se celebrassen los 
divinos officios; y para persuadirles 4 ello, les traxo 4 la memoria la honra que se debe al culto divino, y al verdadero dios; 4 que le 
respondieron, que ya tenian noticia de que avia un dios que abitaba en los cielos; porque avian oydo dezir 4 sus antepassados, que 
antiguamente. ayia estado un hombre maravilloso en esta tierra, con barba crezida, y con ojotas calzadas, y manta, al modo que ellos 
traian sus mantas sobre los hombros; el qual hazia muchos milagros, sanaba enfermos con agua, hazia llover, y crezer las plantas, 
y los sembrados, y con un soplo hazia encender fuego, y otras maravillas, sanando de tepente 4 los enfermos, y dando vista 4 los ciegos; 
y en la lengua de esta tierra hablava con tanta propriedad y elegancia, como si siempre hubiera estado en ella, con palabras mui 
dulces, y nuevas para ellos: diziendoles que en lo alto de los cielos estaba el criador de todas las cosas, y que tenia consigo mucha 
cantidad de hombres y mugeres que resplandecian como el sol, y que 4 poco tiempo se fue al Peru; y asi muchos a imitacion del habito 
y Qjotas que este varon usaba, las traen entre ellos calzadas, y la manta suelta sobre los hombros, 6 prendida en el pecho, 6 por las 
puntas anudada: Por donde se infiere que este varon era algun apostol, cuio nombre no saben. Quedo admirado Valdivia de esta 
relacion, y conociendo que Dios le tomaba 4 el por instrumento, para volver & planter la fee que el santo Apostolo avia predicado en 
este remo; y perdiose la noticia de ella por la injuria de los tiempos, 6 por los peccados de sus habitadores. Y confirma esta noticia 
de aver venido algun Apostolo & este reino 4 predicar el santo Evangelio, una cosa maravillosa, que hasta oy persevera en el valle de 
Taurua, donde esta una piedra de vara y media de alto, y dos de largo, en la qual estan estampadas las huellas de un hombre con 
ojotas, queen la piedra dejo ympressas; y sin duda sobre ella se subia 4 predicar 4 los Indios de aquel valle, y dejo las plantas 
ympressas; y demas de esto, en la frente de la piedra escribio tres renglones, abiertas las letras, en la pefia, y con caracteres que no 
ay quien los entienda, ni sepa explicarlos. Y aviendolos hecho sacar, y copiar fielmente el Padre Joseph Maria Adamo de la com- 
pafiia de Jesus, missionero de la provincia de Cuio, y que a trabaxado muchos afios gloriosamente en la conversion de los Indios 
de aquella provincia, las embio 4 tres padres de la provincia, noticiosos en lengua, al Padre Angelo de Magistris a Cordova, al Padre 
Conine al Peru, yal Padre Nicolas Mascardi a Chiloe, y ninguno acerto a leer las, conque hasta ahora no se sabe su significado.” In 
an old Lafe of Saint Patrick, contained in the Book of Armagh, and lately published by Sir William Betham, the impression of footsteps 
visible in a rock in Ireland is also mentioned, which were left there by an angel who frequently appeared to that Saint. “ Aliquando 
sues custodiens perdidit eas, et angelus veniens ad eum, sues indicavit illi; aliquando etiam angelus illi loquens, multa illi dixit; et 
postquam illi locutus est, pedem super petram ponens imscirit, in montem Miss coram se ascendit; vestigia, pedes angeli, in petra 
huc usque manentia cernuntur, et in illo loco XXX vicibus ad eum locutus est.” 

It is highly probable that the mysterious personage who appeared to the Indians of the valley of Taurua was a missionary; but 
whether he was a Christian missionary or an agent of Jewish proselytism, may be doubted: his pretended miracles were certainly gross 
frauds upon the credulity of an ignorant and superstitious people. But the story of his kindling fire with his breath, recalls to our 
recollection a passage in Basnage’s History of the Jews, in which that writer says that Barchochobas, the famous Jewish impostor, who 
lived in the reign of the Emperor Adrian, did precisely the same thing, in’ order to persuade the Jews that he was the Messiah, and the 
star which Balaam had seen afar off, and of which he prophesied, as recorded in the twenty-fourth chapter of Numbers, ver. 15—19. 
« And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the. son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: He hath 
said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into 
a trance, but having his eyes open: I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of 
Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth: And Edom 
shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly. Out of Jacob shall come he that 
shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the city.”” «This man having undertaken to persuade the Jews that he was 
the Messiah, did three things that facilitated the success of his enterprise: 1. He changed his name, and took that of the Son of the Star 
or Barchochobas, in order to have it believed that he was the star that Balaam had seen afar off: He maintained that he was one of 
the leis of heaven, sent to succour the people, and retrieve them from the oppression under which they groaned. 2. It was perhaps 
to confirm this notion that he.cast out fire and flame from his mouth when he spoke. At least, Saint Jerome has said that he had the 
art of deceiving the people by means of some lighted tow, by which he seemed to vomit fire. 3. He made choice of a fore-runner, of 
the same character with himself, who was very assistant to him in these designs.” —Basnage’s History of the Jews, lib. vi. cap. ix. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 111 

first man. They celebrated a festival, on the sign of Four Earthquakes, to the destroyer, with 
reference to the fate which again awaited the world; for they said that it had undergone four 
destructions, ,and that it would again be destroyed.* He alone had a human body like that of men, 

the other gods were of an incorporea! nature. 

* The word otra was undoubtedly followed by vez, in the obliterated text of the MS., the sense of which is here supplied. 

pag. 515. All will agree with Saint Jerome, that it was no very difficult thing to deceive the people; and certainly, if the Jews had 
penetrated, as it may be proved to demonstration that they did, in remote ages to the continent of America, it cannot be doubted that 
they would have found it an easy task to deceive the Indians, and firmly to establish amongst them their exploded rites, and the 
abolished institutions of the Old Law. But the secret, the consequences of which if openly divulged could not have been calculated, 
that the Spaniards did discover, on their first arrival in the continent of America, Judaism in a most monstrous form, mixed 
with all kinds of abominations, as of old was the case in Palestine, which like some noxious weed had attained an exuberant 
growth, that cast a deadly shade over the fairest provinces of the New World,—the policy of the age, and of the Spanish court, 
(where the highest dignitaries of the church occupied likewise the chief places in the cabinet,) firmly resolved to consign to everlasting 
oblivion. It cannot, however, be supposed that the true state of the case, of which the Pope became immediately apprised, 
exercised no influence upon his conduct, and upon that of some of his immediate successors, or might have had no share in paving 
the way for the Reformation.. Alexander the Sixth was the pontiff who then sat in the chair of Saint Peter: and as, in modern times, 
secret articles are sometimes found to have been inserted in treaties, without even the knowledge of all of the high contracting 
parties, what secret stipulations might not the court of Rome have made with Spain, when, in the plenitude of long-recognised and 
revered power, she granted to her nearly the whole of the New World? or what return could have been too great for an obedient daughter 
of the Church to have made to show her gratitude for such a gift? One clause in the bull of Alexander the Sixth, which annexed the 
Indies to the Crown of Spain, is very remarkable: it is, that in which a papal ordinance seconded the civil enactment of the Spanish 
law, which was immediately framed on the discovery of America, commanding that none but Spaniards should be permitted to visit its 
shores: “ Ac quibuscumque personis cujuscumque dignitatis, etiam imperialis et regalis status, gradus, ordinis, vel conditionis, sub 
excommunicationis late sententie poend, quam eo ipso (si contra fecerint) incurrant, districtius inhibemus, ne ad insulas, et terras-firmas 
inventas, et inveniendas, detectas, et detegendas, versus Occidentem et Meridiem, fabricando, et construendo unam lineam a Polo Arctico, 
ad Polum Antarcticum, sive terra-firme insule invente, et inveniende sint, versus Indiam, aut versus aliam quamcumque partem, que 
linea distet a quadlibet insularum, que vulgariter nuncupantur de los Acores, et Caboverde, centum leucis versus Occidentem, et 
Meridiem, (ut prefertur) pro mercibus habendis, vel qudvis alia de causd, accedere praesumant, absque vestra, ac haredum et successorum 
vestrorum predictorum licentia speciali.” Gomara says, that during the life of Queen Isabella, Castilians were only allowed to pass over 
to America, and no Aragonese, except by her licence and express command—®“ No consentia pasar a ellas (Indias) sino & Castellanos; 
e si algun Aragones alla yva, era con su licencia y espreso mandamiento.” It is evident, from the provision which was made, that no 
Spaniard whatsoever should proceed to America without first obtaining a licence, and registering his name at Seville; that Spain was 
very jealous even of her own subjects going thither; and as she absolutely forbade lawyers, surgeons, and clerks, (under which latter 
denomination all persons of studious habits and pursuits, and of an inquiring turn of mind, might be included,) as well as Jews, Moors, 
and heretics, and persons suspected by the Inquisition, and even the descendants of such, to the third generation, to visit the New 
World; it would appear, that, whether or no she wished to conceal from Europe a fact which she feared might shake its institutions, shock 
and confound the prejudices of ages, and remodel its laws, she took all the precautions which she could have done if she really had 
entertained such a fear. With respect even to the admission of ecclesiastics into America, it was very sparing in the beginning; four 
years elapsed after the destruction of the empire of Montezuma, before the first twelve preachers of the Gospel were sent to New Spain: 
and the reason of this delay is not satisfactorily explained. Cortes wrote himself to the Emperor, either spontaneously, or, as is much 
more probable, at the suggestion of others, who were nearer his person, to request that he would send neither bishops or secular clergy to 
that quarter of the globe ; but that the charge of converting the Indians should be entrusted to the two regular orders of the Dominicans 
and the Franciscans; and that the Pope should be supplicated to grant to him the proceeds of the tythe, on his consenting to take upon 
himself the expense of building churches and providing for the ministers of the Gospel. The result of this letter was, ‘that the Emperor 
» would not permit, during the whole course of his reign, (which lasted longer than thirty years,) that any of the secular clergy should pass 
over to Ainerica, with the exception of some particular persons, who had been strictly evamined, although some others secretly and privily 
found their way thither.” But the Pope did not equally approve of the plan of Cortes, which proposed the surrendering the tythe, or of 
delegating to others than bishops the powers and privileges of the church. ‘The letter of Cortes to the Emperor is so curious, that we 
here subjoin it, with the observations of Torquemada upon it, which follow. 
‘ Todas las veces, que 4 V.S. M. he escrito, he dicho a V. Altega, el aparejo, que ai en algunos de los Naturales, de estas Partes, para 
se conyertir a nuestra Santa Fé Catolica, y ser Christianos, y he embiado, 4 suplicar 42 V.C. M. para ello, mandase proveer de Personas 

ED EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE IIL 

They believed that he who was born on the ninth sign of air would be free and rich, and that 
although he might be of low origin, he would arrive at great offices in the state. 

Religiosas, de buena Vida, y Egemplo: y porque hasta agora han venido mui pocos, 6 casi ningunos, y es cierto, que haria grandisimo 

fruto, lo torno a traer 4 la memoria 4 V. A. y le suplico lo mande proveer, con toda brevedad, porque de ello Dios Nuestro Sefior sera 

servido, y se cumplira el deseo, que V. A., en este Caso, como Catolico, tiene. Y porque con los Procuradores Antonio de Quifiones, 

y Alonso de Avila, los Concejos, de las Villas de esta Nueva-Espafia, y Yo, embiamos & V. M. mandase proveer de Obispos, 6 otros 
Prelados, para la Administracion de los Oficios, y Culto Divino ; y entonces parecionos, que asi convenia: Aora, mirandolo bien, bhame 
parecido, que V.S. M. lo debe mandar proveer de otra manera, para que los Naturales de estas Partes, mas aina se conviertan, y puedan 
ser instruidos en las cosas de nuestra Santa Fé Catolica; y la manera, que & Mi en este Caso me parece, que se debe tener, es, que 

V.S. M. mande, que vengan, a estas Partes, muchas Personas Religiosas (como ya he dicho) y mui zelosas de este fin, 4la Conversion de 

estas Gentes ; y que de estos se hagan Casas, y Monasterios, por las Provincias, que aca nos pareciere, que conviene; y que A estos se 

les dé de los Diezmos, para hacer sus Casas, y sustener sus Vidas; y lo demas, que restare de ellos, sea para las Iglesias, y Ornamentos de 
los Pueblos, donde estuvieren los Espafioles, y para Clerigos, que los sirvan: y que estos Diezmos los cobren los Oficiales de V. M. 
y tengan cuenta, y ragon de ellos, y provean de ellos, alos dichos Ministros, é Iglesias, que bastard para todo, y aun sobrara harto, de 
que V.M. se puede servir; y que V. A. suplique 4 su Santidad, conceda & V. M. los Diezmos de estas Partes, para este efecto, 
haciendole entender, el servicio, que 4 Dios Nuestro Sefior se hace, en que esta Gente se convierta, y que esto no se podia hacer, sino por 
esta via: Porque aviendo Obispos, y Prelados, no dejarian de seguir la costumbre, que por nuestros pecados oi tienen algunos, en disponer 
de los bienes de la Iglesia, que es gastarlos en pompas, y en otras cosas, y en dejar Maiorazgos a sus Parientes. Y aun seria otro maior 
mal, que como los Naturales de estas Partes, tenian en sus Templos Personas Religiosas, que entendian en sus Ritos, y Ceremonias ; 
y estos eran tan recogidos (asst en Honestidad, como en Castidad) que si alguna cosa, fuera de esto, a alguno, le sentian, era punido con 
pena de Muerte: Si agora viesen las cosas de la Iglesia, y Servicio de Dios, en poder de Canonigos, y otras Dignidades, y supiesen, que 
aquellos eran Ministros de Dios, y los viesen usar de la profanidad, que agora, en nuestros tiempos, en esos Reinos usan, serta menospreciar 
nuestra Ee, y tenerla por cosa de burla; y serta tan gran dano, que no creo aprovecharia ninguna otra predicacion, que se les hiciese. 
Y pues tanto en esto va (y la principal intencion de V. M.es, y debe ser, que estas Gentes se conviertan; y los que acd en su Real 
Nombre residimos, la debemos seguir, y como Christianos tener de ello especial cuidado, he querido en esto, avisar 2 V.C.M. y decir 
en ello mi Parecer, el qual suplico a V. M. reciba, como de Persona, Subdito, y Vasallo suio : Que asi, como con las fuergas corporales, 
trabajo, y trabajare, que los Reinos, y Seforios de V. M. por estas Partes se ensanchen, y su Real Fama, y gran poder, entre estas 
Gentes se publique : asi deseo, y trabajaré con el Alma, para que V.A. en ellas mande sembrar nuestra Santa Fé; porque por ello merezca 
la Bienaventuranga dela Vida perpetua. Y porque para hacer ordenes, y bendecir Iglesias, Ornamentos, Olio, y Chrisma, y otras cosas, 
no aviendo Obispos, seria dificultoso ir @ buscar el remedio de ellas, otras Partes: Asimismo V.M. debe suplicar & su Santidad, que 
conceda su poder, y sean sus Subdelegados, en estas Partes, las dos Personas principales, que a ellas vinieren; uno de la Orden de San 
Francisco; y otro de la de Santo Domingo, los quales tengan los mas largos Poderes, que V. M. pudiere; porque por ser estas Tierras 
tan apartadas de la Iglesia Romana, y los Christianos, que en ellas residimos, y residieren, tan lejos de los Remedios de nuestras 
Conciencias, y como humanos tan sujetos apecado, ainecesidad, que enesto su Santidad, con nosotros, se estienda, en dar d estas 
Personas mui largos Poderes; y los tales Poderes succedan en las Personas, que siempre residan en estas Partes, que sea en el General, 
que fuere, en estas Tierras, y en el Provincial de cada una de estas Ordenes.” 

« Este Capitulo de Carta quadrd mucho al Emperador ; porque lo mismo leaconsejaron en Espana, las Personas, que consultd sobre este 
Negocio, en particular dos Hermanos, lamados los Coroneles, Famosisimos Letrados, los quales, 4 pedimento, y mandado de su Magestad, 
hicieron una Instruccion, y Doctrina mui docta, y curiosamente ordenada, de como se les avia de dar A entender, 4 estos Indios Jas cosas 
de nuestra Fé y Misterios de ella, por manera de Historia, conforme & la Relacion, que tenian de su capacidad, y (como he dicho) 
aconsejaron al Emperador, que para su Conversion embiase Ministros, que no recibiesen de ellos, sino sola la simple comida, 

y vestuario; porque de otra manera, no harian en ellos fruto alguno espiritual; y asi lo cumplid con grandisimo cuidado, como adelante 

se vera: y no permitio en todo el tiempo que despues reinod (que fueron mas de treinta Atos) que pasasen a estas Partes Clerigos Seculares, 
sino fuese algun Particular, y mui examinado: puesto que algunos otros pasaron @ escondidas, y ocultamente. Solo en lo de los - 

Diezmos, y en dejar de venir Obispos, no podia aver efecto la traga, que Cortés dava; porque, ni el Summo Pontifice concediera los 
Diezmos, de aquella suerte, ni eran menester para los Ministros, que al principio venian, pues eran Frailes Observantisimos de 
San Francisco, y ni ellos los recibieran, ni pudieran (aunque quisieran) segun su Regla, y Profesion, qué aunque pudiera hacer 

esta dispensacion el Vicario de Christo, eran ellos tan Pobres, y deseosos de serlo, que no admitieran Diezmos por ninguna manera 

del Mundo.” 

a NL Ls at 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 113 

After the deluge for a long period of time they sacrificed in this manner*, and did not kill 

men. 

* They merely drew blood from their tongues and ears, which the Spaniards called sacrificing those parts. 

The principal reasons which lead us to the conclusion that the Spaniards on their arrival in America discovered judaism, either more 
or less tinctured with other idolatrous rites and ceremonies (to which it seems in the course of ages to have given birth), to have been 
the prevailing religion of the people of that continent, are the following: First: the admission of the best informed Spanish historians, 
who were ecclesiastics, that the Indians generally throughout the continent of America had some knowledge of the true God: this 
was a great admission on their part, because it was opposed to their own prejudices, and to those of the age in which they lived, which 
was only inclined to view, in the exact resemblance which many of the Indian rites and ceremonies bore to the Levitical institutions 
and the ordinances of the old law, an excess of presumption in Satan which could thus lead him to imitate God. It was likewise 
opposed to the prejudices of former ages; we may even say, to those which Christianity itself had imbibed from Judaism, (which, 
though forced to admit that in the beginning man was not created without some knowledge of the true God, affirmed at the same time 
that that knowledge was speedily lost by the other nations of the earth, and only preserved in the line of their own virtuous patriarchs ;) 
for the early fathers would not acknowledge that under the name of Jove, the god to whom the philosophers of Greece and Rome 
attributed every perfection with which it was possible for human conception to invest divinity, the Supreme Being was really adored; 
although to surpass the idea which they formed of him, not narratives of miracies and prodigies wrought in favour of one nation in 
particular, or of all mankind in general, since they would not aggrandize the notion of preconceived omnipotence, but some new idea, 
according to the theory of Locke, infused into the understanding, would absolutely be requisite. ‘Torquemada affirms in the following 
passage of the thirty-third chapter of the sixth book of his Indian Monarchy, that the Indians of America had some knowledge of the 
true God: “ Por esta manera, y suerte iba la religion, en quanto alos Dioses de todas las naciones que avia en todas las provincias 
que avemos nombrado, y otras que dejamos de nombrar, que corren por muchas leguas, hasta entrar en los reinos del Pert, donde mas, 
donde menos, y casi la maior parte de este orbe, tiene algun conocimiento de el verdadero Dios; pero este mezclado, y ofuscado con el 
del Demonio, al qual adoraron, y reconocieron, como 4 Dios, segun lo mas, 6 menos, que del mismo Dios verdadero, Sefior Nuestro, 
le fue permitido.” This was the fashion of their religion, as regards the gods of all those nations which were worshiped in all the 
provinces which we have named, and in others which we have omitted to mention, which extend over many leagues of territory, until we 
come to the kingdom of Peru, with some shades of difference ; and the greater part of this continent has some knowledge of the true God ; 
but mixed up and obscured with that of the Devil, whom they worshiped and acknowledged as God, in different degrees, accordingly as 
was permitted by the same true God, our Lord.” Torquemada had supposed, in the preceding chapter, that the custom of placing the 
images of their ancestors in their houses and temples, had given rise, in some provinces of America, to idolatry; and he corroborates, by 
this supposition, the assertion of the interpreter of the Vatican Codex, that the seven tribes that proceeded from the seven caves to 
colonize America, worshiped the several founders of their respective lineages. He in another chapter incidentally relates a very 
curious fact, that Cabega de Vaca and some other Spaniards travelling through some unknown provinces of America, arrived amongst 
certain Indians, who, on being questioned as to their religion, informed them that they worshiped one God, the Creator of heaven and 
earth; and being further asked from whom they derived that doctrine, they replied, from their ancestors, who had handed it down by 
tradition to them, when the Spaniards bid them persevere in the faith which they professed. 

Cogolludo says, in his History of Yucatan, “ Creian los Indios de Yucathan, gue avia un Dios unico, vivo, y verdadero, que dezian ser 
el mayor de los dioses, y que no tenia figura, ni se podia figurar por ser incorporeo. A este llamaban Hunab Ku, como se halla en su 

* Vocabulario grande, que comienga con nuestro Castellano. De este dezian, que procedian todas los cosas, y como 4 incorporeo, no le 
adoraban con imagen alguna, ni dél la tenian, (como se dize en otra parte,) que tenia un hijo 4 quien llamaban Hun Ytzamna, 6 
Yaxcocahmut. Este parece ser el que aquel sefior dixo al clerigo llamado Francisco Hernandez. No solo supieron aquellos religiosos 
(eferidos en el capitulo antecedente) lo que se ha dicho; pero que tambien tenian, y usaban los Indios de Yucathan confession vocal 
de pecados, semejante en algo al santo sacramento de la penitencia, y algunas otras ceremonias de la Iglesia catolica. De lo que se 
confessaban, era de algunos pecados graves, y & quien los dezian era el sacerdote, 6 medico, y la muger al marido, y este 4 la muger. 
El que avia servido de ministro de la confession, publicaba los pecados, que se le avian dicho, entre los parientes, y esto para que todos 
pidiessen & Dios le fuessen perdonados, para lo qual hazian oracion particular. En un papel antiguo, dize el Padre Lizana, que hallo, 
que para este fin no buscaban Dios alguno de los que adoraban, mas que solo llamaban & Dios con muchos suspiros, diziendo Kue, que 
es lo mismo que Dios, y oy vemos, que el dezir d Dios Ku esta de la misma manera introduzido en este tiempo, porque en su lengua Ku 
es lo mismo que Dios en nuestra Castellana, y no sefala Dios alguno de los que vanamente adoraban los gentiles sino el solo Dios, que 
lo es verdadero. Aunque este modo de oracion con esta circunstancia parece especial de los Indios Yucathecos, pero no lo de la 
confession vocal, que otras naciones de la Nueva Espafia la hazian, como refiere Torquemada en diversas partes, y Remesal dize de los 
Indios de Chiapa, pero unos ni otros obraban con tan buen fin, como los Yucathecos. Avia entre estos Indios noticia alguna del 

(26) 

114, EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE IV. 

TEPEOLOTLEC*. 

This name refers to the manner in which the earth was preserved after the deluge. The sacrifices 
of these thirteen days were not deemed good; they might be interpreted in Spanish, sacrifices of 
dung 7. 

* This name is compounded of Tepec a mountain, and Yolotle a heart. The Mexicans believed that the deluge ceased at the sound 
of the echo proceeding from the heart of the mountains. 

The figure of Tepeolotlec at first appears to be a tiger, but on nearer examination it proves to be a man clothed in a tiger’s skin, 
whose head appears between the jaws of that animal, and whose feet are also visible. ‘This mode of representing the human species 
disguised almost completely in the animal form, was peculiar to the Mexican school of painting and sculpture. Amongst the drawings 
of M. Dupaix will be found a piece of sculpture resembling a bat, but which in reality is a human body immured within the skin of one, 
of which the face is the only part visible. ‘Tepeolotlec is also said to have been the voice or echo, at the sound of which the waters of 
the deluge ceased; and since the Jews attribute very miraculous effects to the daughter voice, which they say they received when 
prophetic inspiration was withdrawn from them, a deluge may only mean sin spreading over the face of the earth, or, understood 
literally, water by which sin was cleansed away and ceased, (for the Mexicans, like the Jews, considered water a great purifier; and the 
water of regeneration was the name which the inhabitants of Yucatan gave to that with which they baptized their children.) Tepeolotlec 
may have been the voice of Totec, who clothed in a raiment of skin ascended the mountain of thorns, which, perhaps, was also named 
Tezcatepec, and from thence called to the people to come and do penance with him, and to repent of theirsins. Many ages may create 
great confusion in old traditions, especially when the vehicle by which they have been transmitted to posterity has been such an imperfect 
one as allegorical paintings. It deserves further to be remarked, that in the Codex Telleriano-Remensis the figure of Tepeolotlec or 
Tescaulutli, (both which proper names signify the heart of the mountain,) immediately precedes, in the proper order of the Mexican 
Calendar, that of Quecalcoatle instituting sacrifices. It is not easy to explain why the symbols of some of the Apostles should have been 
wild and ferocious animals, since the lion of Saint Mark and the dragon of Saint George breathe nothing of Christian persuasion. 

+ Compare Ezekiel, chapter the fourth, verses 14 & 15. 

infierno, y parayso, 0 4 lo menos, que en el otro mundo despues de esta présente vida eran castigados los malos con muchas penas en 
lugar obscuro, y los buenos eran premiados en deleytosos, y agradables sitios, y en esta razon tenian cosas por ciertas, que les obligaban 
ano pecar, y saber pedir perdon, si pecaban, y tambien tenian tradicion de que el mundo se avia de acabar. Hablaban con el Demonio, 
& quien llamaban Xibilba, que quiere dezir el que se desaparece, 6 desvanece. Tenian fabulas muy perjudiciales dela creacion del 
mundo, y algunos (despues que supieron) las hizieron escrivir, y guardaban aun ya christianos bautizados, y las leian en sus juntas. El 
Doctor Aguilar refiere en su informe, que tuvyo un cartapacio de estos, que quit 4 un maestro de capilla, Ilamado por sobrenombre 
Cuytun del pueblo de Zucop, el qual se le huyd, y nunca lo pudo ayer, para saber el origen de este su Genesis. Recien venido yo de 
Espajfia, oi dezir 4 un religioso llamado Fr. Juan Gutierrez, y era gran lengua de estos Indios, que avia visto otro escrito semejante al 
dicho, y que en él tratando de la formacion del primer hombre se dezia, que avia sido formado de tierra y zacate, pajas delgadas, y que 
la carne y huessos se avian hecho de la tierra, y el cabello, barba, y pelo, que ay en el cuerpo, era de las pajas 6 zacate, con que se avia 
mezclado la tierra. No me acuerdo de mas singularidad, que si entonces yo presumiera aver de escrivir esto en algun tiempo, fuera 
possible huviesse tenido noticia de otros muchos desaciertos como el referido. Dize el Padre Lizana, que avia assimismo matrimonio 
muy natural entre estos Indios, porque jamds se les consintid tener dos mugeres, @ ellos, ni d ellas dos maridos: mas podia el marido por 
algunas causas repudiar la muger, y casarse con otra, y la repudiada con otro, y asst siempre era una sola la muger, y uno solo el marido. 
Contradize Aguilar en su informe lo de una muger sola, diziendo que tenian muchas, y aunque con dificultad en su conversion a la fé, 
las dexaron, quedandose con sola la primera.” Historia de Yucathan, lib. iv. p. 193.—It is certainly singular that the Indians of 
Yucatan should have invoked him whom they believed to be the one true and living God, of whom they made no graven image, by the 
appellation of Kue, in order to obtain remission after the act of confession for their sins; since this invocation reminds us of the Kugie 
2Aeqoov; which was said or sung in churches in the earliest ages of Christianity: and likewise that their Genesis, of which it isa pity that 
we should know so little, contained a history so analogous to the Mosaic account of the first formation of man from the dust of the 
ground which was perhaps the reason why they afterwards entertained so great a reverence for Moses, that, as Cogolludo informs us in 
the following passage of the fifteenth chapter of the seventh book of his History of Yucatan, a chieftain named Andrew Chi endeavoured 
at a period subsequent to the establishment of the Spaniards in that peninsula, to excite the people to idolatry by declaring that he was 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 115 

The sign under which No. 1 is written*, caused paralysis and evil humours. 2 was appropriated 
to drunkards ; and 3 was applied to the earth. ‘T'epeolotlec presided over these thirteen days, in 

* Cielo is written under the sign Ce Mazatl, or One Stag, to signify that that sign applied to heaven. 

him. El mismo afio el Capitan Palomar, teniente general desta governacion, condend & muerte (hecho processo por via juridica) & un 
Indio natural del pueblo de Zotuta, llamado Andrés Chi, que solicitaba 4 todos los. Indios de aquel territorio, para que fuessen a los 
montes 2 idolatrar, mintiendose otro Moyses, y diziendo que lo era, engafiaba a los de su pueblo, persuadiendoles, que lo que hazia, era 
revelado del Espiritu Santo. Para esto ponia un mucacho encubierto en su casa, que de noche le hablasse, y dixesse lo que queria, 
oyendolo los Indios, que ignorantes del embuste, ciegamente se dexaban engafiar.” “In the same year Captain Palomar, the lieutenant- 
governor of this district, condemned to death by a judicial process, an Indian, a native of the town of Zotuta, named Andrew Chi, who 
solicited all the Indians of that territory to go to the mountains to commit idolatry: feigning himself to be another Moses, and declaring 
that he was him, he deceived his fellow-citizens, persuading them that what he did was by a revelation from the Holy Spirit. For this 
purpose he placed a boy in a concealed situation in his house, who conversed with him by night, and said whatever he pleased in the 
hearing of the Indians, who, ignorant of the fraud, blindly suffered themselves to be deceived.” 

The Indians of Yucatan, besides practising confession, had a particular kind of mass, which Cogolludo takes occasion to notice in the 
fourteenth chapter of the eleventh book of his History. “ Dixeronle al Padre Estrada, que uno de aquellos apostatas era sacerdote 
idolatrico de los otros, que les dezia Missa, y que con aquella su comida de tortillas, y bebida de pozol la dezia, y que los demas Indios 
idolatras les dixeron: ‘ Esta si que es Missa, que no la que dize tu compafiero.’” It would appear from the following passage of the 
above-mentioned bull of Alexander the Sixth, that the Pope himself was not entirely ignorant of the fact, that one God the Creator, 
existing in heaven, was worshiped by the Indians. “ Et ut prefati nuntii vestri possunt opinari, gentes ipse insulis et terris pradictis 
habitantes, credunt unum Deum Creatorem in ceelis esse.”” To what god but the God of the Jews, can either the words of the Pope or 
the conjectures and suspicions of the Spanish messengers possibly here refer? or why, if by one God the Creator was only meant a 
deity whom the Pope believed to have been falsely, like the Olympian Jupiter, invested with that title; and who, like the supreme 
divinity of the Hindoos, it were unreasonable to suppose would quickly have been discarded from the minds of the Indians,—does the 
above paragraph serve as a sort of premice to the concluding portion of the sentence “ac ad fidem catholicam amplexandum, et bonis 
moribus imbuendum satis apti videntur, spesque habetur, quod si erudirentur, nomen Salvatoris Domini nostri Jesu Christi, in terris, et 
insulis preedictis facilé induceretur.” Pedro de Ciega de Leon admits in his Chronicle of Peru, that the Indians had some knowledge 
of God the Creator, which title he says the all-powerful God did not permit the Devil to assume. ‘No porque (como dixe) estas gentes 
ignoren, que ay un solo Dios hazedor del mundo: porque esta dignidad no permite el poderoso Dios, que el Demonio pueda atribuyr a 
si, lo que le es tan ageno.” Chronica del Peru, cap. xxiii. Although this passage is somewhat at variance with another which occurs 
in the seventy-second chapter of the same work: * Algunos Indios dizen, que en lugares secretos habla con los mas viejos este malvado 
demonio Pachacama: el qual como vee que ha perdido su credito y authoridad, y que muchos de los que le solian servir, tienen ya 
opinion contraria, conosciendo su error; les dize que el Dios que los Christianos predican y él, son wna cosa, y otras palabras dichas de 
tal adversario, y con engafios y falsas aparencias procura estorvar que no reciban agua del baptismo.” “Some Indians affirm that this 
malicious demon Pachacama converses with the oldest amongst them in secret places, who, perceiving that he has lost his credit and 
authority, and that many of those who were accustomed to serve him, discovering their error, have now adopted a contrary opinion, tells 
them, that the God whom the Christians preach to them and he, are the same, with other statements which such an adversary chooses to 
put forth ; and with artifices and false appearances he endeavours to prevent their receiving the water of baptism.” The extreme 
pettinacity which the Indians, both of Peru and Mexico, displayed in adhering to their old religion, frequently laying down their lives in 
its defence, and aflirming, when reasoned with upon the subject, that if Christianity was good for the Castilians, their own religion was 
no less so for them, is a convincing proof that the signs and wonders which the Mexicans believed that Huitzilopuchtli had wrought in 
their favour, (to which the hand and stretched-out arm so often occurring in Mexican paintings probably alludes,) and the oracles of 
Pachacama, revered in Peru, maintained the greatest ascendancy over their minds; and in this obstinacy, in blindly persisting in a 
persuasion which Christians told them was false, it must be confessed that the Indians closely resembled the Jews. ‘The second reason 
for believing that Judaism was the religion of the Indians is, that they used circumcision. The third, that they expected a Messiah. 
The fourth, that many words incorporated in their languages and connected with the celebration of their religious rites, were obviously 
either of Hebrew or of Greek derivation. The fifth, that Las Casas the bishop of Chiapa, who had the -best means of verifying the fact, 
was of this opinion. The sixth, that the Jews themselves, including some of their most eminent rabbis, such as Menasseh Ben Israel 
and Montecinio, who, though not a rabbi, was a Jew who had visited America, maintained it both by verbal statement and in writing. 

- The seventh is the dilemma in which the most learned Spanish authors, such as Acosta and Torquemada, have placed their readers 
by leaving them no other alternative than to come to the decision whether the Jews had colonized America and established their rites 
amongst the Indians, or whether the Devil had counterfeited in the New World the rites and ceremonies which God gave to his chosen 

116 EXPLANATION OF THE 

which they celebrated a festival; and during the last four of which (where the hands are marked*) 
they fasted. Tepeolotlec means the Lord of Animals +. 

The four days of the fast were in honour of SucrguzcaLt{, who was the man who remained in the 
earth which we now inhabit. 'Tepeolotlec is the same as the echo of the voice when it reverberates 
. in a valley from one mountain to the other. ‘They bestowed the appellation of the tiger on the earth, 
because the tiger is a very courageous animal, and they say that the deluge ceased at the reverberation 
caused by the echo in the mountains §. 

* These hands have not been introduced in the plates, as they have no connection with the original paintings. 

+ Tepeolotlec does not literally signify a tiger, but it refers to the earth, the symbol of which was the tiger. 

{ The inhabitants of Matalcingo are said to have offered sacrifices in the month Pactontly to the god Suchiquecal, so that this name 
was both masculine and feminine. 

§ A slight transposition of a sentence in the original text has here occurred. 

people. The eighth is the resemblance which many of the Indian rites and ceremonies bore to those of the Jews. The ninth is the 
similitude which existed between many of the Indian and many of the Hebrew moral laws. The tenth is the knowledge which the 
Mexican and Peruvian traditions implied that the Indians possessed of the history.contained in the Pentateuch. The eleventh is the 
Mexican tradition of the Teoamoxtli or divine book of the Tultecas. The twelfth is the Mexican history of their famous migration from 
Aztlan. The thirteenth is the traces of Jewish superstitions, history, traditions, laws, manners, and customs, which are found in the 
Mexican paintings. ‘The fourteenth is the frequency of sacrifices amongst the Indians, and the religious consecration of the blocd and 
the fat of the victims. The fifteenth is the style of architecture of their temples. The sixteenth is the fringes which the Mexicans wore 
fastened to their garments. The seventeenth is a similarity in the manners and customs of Indian tribes far removed from the central 
monarchies of Mexico and Peru (but still within the pale of religious proselytism) to those of the Jews, which writers who were not 
Spaniards have noticed, such as Sir William Pen, who, recognising a probably fanciful likeness between the features of Indian and 
Jewish children, says, “ When you look upon them, you would think yourself in the Jews’ quarter at London. Their eyes are little 
and black like the Jews. Moreover they reckon by moons; they offer the first fruits; and have a kind of feast of tabernacles. It is said 
their altar stands upon twelve stones. ‘Their mourning lasts a year. The customs of their women are like those of the Jews. Their 
language is masculine, short, concise, and full of energy, in which it much resembles the Hebrew. One word serves for three, and the 
rest is supplied by the understanding of the hearers. Lastly, they were to go into a country which was neither planted nor known, and 
he that imposed this condition upon them, was well able to level their passage thither; for we may go from the eastern extremities of 
Asia to the western extremities of America.” Pen’s Letter on the Present State of the Lands of the English in America, p. 156.—If Sir 
William Pen had had an opportunity of beholding on what purple thrones the sovereigns of Peru and Mexico sat, he would perhaps 
have exulted less at the idea of the Jews having miraculously passed from the old continent to the new, either by the division of the 
waters of the Euphrates, as foretold by Esdras, or of those of old ocean itself, the only remaining obstacle that could stop the march of 
the chosen people of God. We, for our own part, should be almost tempted at the bare mention of such a prodigy to declare ourselves 
of the same faith with the Irishman, who, on hearing a similar relation, gaily exclaimed, “1 believe it all but the first step,” if the subject 
itself, the credulity of mankind, was not calculated to excite rather our sorrow than our mirth, at beholding reason so fallen from her 
throne, and the great, the good, and the wise of ancient days deemed nought in comparison with an outcast race of jugglers who 
still pretend that they have “an oath in heaven,” for ever constituting them the favourite people of God, and ratifying for ever the articles 
of the old covenant, which comprises all the items of the old law which Christians assert has been long since abolished, and which even 
if Christianity had never been established, or the old superseded by the new covenant, it might be argued on the grounds of fitness 
ought to have been abolished, since those laws were certainly not fit to be everlasting, some of which God himself declares in the 
following passage of the Old Testament to have been not good: “‘ Wherefore also I gave them (the Jews) statutes that were not good, 
and judgments by which they should not live.” And also on the grounds of expediency, because many of the Mosaic laws would have 
been quite unsuitable to the present age, and one which the Jews were strictly commanded to obey, enjoins an act which we find 
registered in our statute books as a crime to which both legal penalties and infamy are equally attached. We shall not lengthen this 
list by adding to it any more general reasons for forming the conclusion that America was in early ages colonized by the Jews, but shall 
here insert, as well on account of its importance as an historical document, as because it is but rarely met with in books, the famous bull 
of Alexander the Sixth, which vested in the person of the king of Spain, his heirs and successors, the possession of nearly the entire 
continent of America. 

“ Alexander, Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei. Charissimo in Christo Filio Ferdinando, Regi, et Charissime in Christo Filize 

\ 

= 

Oe ee be yee oe 

. CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 117 

Le Iba, 
QUECALCOATLE. 

' After the deluge the custom of sacrificing commenced *. 

%* It says in the eighth chapter of Genesis, “ Egressus est ergo Noé et filii ejus, uxor illus, et uxores filiorum ejus cum eo: 
sed et omnia animantia, jumenta et reptilia, que reptant super terram secundum genus suum, egressa sunt de arca. Edificavit 
autem Noé altare Domino: et tollens de cunctis pecoribus et volucribus mundis, obtulit holocausta super altare. Odoratusque 
est Dominus odorem suavitatis, et ait ad eum: Nequaquam ultra maledicam terre propter homines.” According to Scripture, 
therefore, sacrifices commenced immediately after the deluge ; but sin, according to the notions of the Mexicans, commenced 
much earlier, for they believed that sin began with time. Noah was called by the Mexicans, Patecatle and Cipaquetona: they 
said that he invented the art of making wine, which it is generally agreed was not known before the deluge (since the patriarchs 
Noah and Lot were ignorant of its effects), and that he was preserved with six others in the ahuehuete, or ark of fir, (which is one 
less than Moses says were saved from the deluge; since eight persons entered the ark,) and that shortly afterwards his 
descendants built the tower of Tulan Cholula, partly from curiosity to see what was going on in heaven, and partly from fear of 
another deluge; but that Tonacatecutli, becoming incensed at their presumption, destroyed the tower with lightning, and scattered 
the workmen. Hence the Mexicans probably bestowed the epithet of Tepeva, or the disperser, on their supreme deity. M. de 
Humboldt says that ‘‘ The people of Mechoacan preserved a tradition, according to which Coxcox, whom they named Tezpi, 
embarked in a large acalli, (a word compounded of atl water, and calli a house,) with his wife, his children, and animals and 
seeds of various kinds, the preservation of which was valuable to mankind. As soon as the great spirit Tezcatlipoca commanded 
the waters to retire, Tezpi caused a vulture, the Zopilote, (Vultur aurea,) to leave the bark. This bird, whose food is carrion, did not 
return, on account of the number of dead bodies with which the earth only just drying was strewed. Tezpi sent other birds, of 
which the Colibri (or humming-bird) alone returned, bearing in its bill the leafy branch of a tree. Tezpi then perceiving that the 
earth began to be covered with new verdure, quitted his bark near the mountain of Colhuacan.” The ark of Noah rested on 
Mount Ararat in Armenia. It should further be observed, that the confusion of tongues, as well as the dispersion of tribes, was 
recorded in the traditions of the New World. In attempting to explain how the Indians could have become acquainted with events 
of such remote antiquity, coeval with the foundation of the earliest monarchies, it would be absurd to suppose that their annals 

and native traditions extended backwards to a period unknown to Egyptian, Persian, Greek, or Sanscrit history. 

Elisabeth, Regine Castella, necnon Legionis, Aragonum, Siciliz, et Grannate, Ilustribus ; Salutem, et Apostolicam Bene- 
dictionem: Inter cetera Divine Majestati beneplacita Opera, et cordis nostri desiderabilia, illud profecto potissimum existit, ut 
Fides Catholica, et Christiana Religio (nostris presertim temporibus) exaltetur, ac ubilibét amplietur, et dilatetur, animarumque 
salus procuretur, ac Barbare Nationes deprimantur, et ad Fidem ipsam reducantur. Unde cum ad hance Sacram Petri Sedem 
(Divina favente Clementia, meritis licét imparibus) evocati fuerimus: cognoscentes Vos, tamquam veros Catholicos Reges, et 
Principes (quales semper fuisse novimus, et a vobis preclara gesta, toti pene jam Orbi notissima demonstrant) ne dum id 
exoptare, sed omni conatu, studio, et diligentia, nullis laboribus, nullis impensis, nullisque parcendo periculis, etiam proprium 
sangtinem effundendo, efficere, ac omnem animum yestrum, omnesque conatus ad hoc, jam dudum, dedicasse: quemadmodum 
recuperatio Reeni Grannate, 4 Tyrannide Sarracenorum, hodiernis temporibus, per Vos, cum tanta Divini nominis Gloria facta, 
testatur: digné.ducimur, non inmeritd, et debemus illa vobis, etiam sponte, et favorabilitér concedere, per que hujusmodi 
Sanctum, et laudabile, ac immortali Deo acceptum propositum indies, ferventiori animo, ad ipsius Dei honorem, et Imperii 
Christiani propagationem prosequi valeatis. Sane accepimus, quod Vos, qui dudum animum proposueratis aliquas Insulas, et 
Terras-firmas, Remotas, et Incognitas, ac per alios hactenus, non partas, querere, et munire, ut illarum Incolas, et Habitatores 
ad colendum Redemptorem Nostrum, et:Fidem Catholicam profitendam reduceretis: hactentis in expugnatione, et recupe- 
ratione ipsius Reeni Grannate, plurimum: occupati, hujusmodi Sanctum, et laudabile propositum vestrum.ad optatum finem 
perducere nequivistis. Sed tandem (sicut Domino placuit) Regno predicto recuperato, volentes desiderium adimplere vestrum, 
dilectum Filium Christophorum Colon, virum utique dignum, et plurimum commendandum, ac tanto negotio aptum, cum Navigiis, 
et hominibus ad similia instructis, non sine maximis laboribus, et periculis, ac expensis destinatis, ut Terras-firmas, et Insulas, 

Remotas, et Incognitas, hujusmodi per Mare, ubi hactenis Navigatum non fuerat, diligentér inquireret. Qui tandem Divino 

C2) 

118 EXPLANATION OF THE 

Topilcin* Quecalcoatle was born on the day of Seven Canes; and they celebrated on this 
same day of Seven Canes a great festival in Cholula +, to which they came from all parts of the 

* Topilcin was a title of Quecalcoatle, originally signifying owr son, which in later times was assumed by the priest who presided 
at human sacrifices. 

+ A famous temple was dedicated in Cholula to Quecalcoatle, which was much frequented by pilgrims. The inhabitants of 
Cholula entertained the extraordinary superstitious notion, that, if their city was ever taken hostile possession of by a foe, and 
that they pierced the sides and broke off the plaster of this revered teocalli, water would immediately flow forth and inundate the 
city so as to destroy the enemy. Accordingly, in the full belief that Quecalcoatle would take speedy vengeance on the Spaniards, 
they admitted them within their walls and demolished, as Torquemada records in the fortieth chapter of the fourth book of his 

Indian Monarchy, nearly all the plastering on the sides of the teocalli; but no water flowed forth, and the Spaniards made a 
dreadful massacre of the priests and the citizens. 

Auxilio, facta extrema diligentia in Mari Occeano Navigantes certas Insulas Remotissimas, et etiam Terras-firmas, que. per alios 
hactenus reperte non fuerant, invenerunt. In quibus quam plurime Gentes pacifice viventes, et (ut asseritur) nudi incedentes, 
neque carnibus vescentes inhabitant: et ut prefati Nuntii vestri possunt opinari, Gentes ipse Insulis, et Terris predictis 
habitantes Credunt Unum Deum Creatorem in Ceelis esse, ac ad Fidem Catholicam amplexandum, et bonis moribus imbuendum 
satis apti videntur, spesque habetur, quod si erudirentur, Nomen Salvatoris Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, in Terris, et Insulis 
predictis facilé induceretur. Ac prefatus Christophorus, in una ex principalibus Insulis preedictis, jam unam Turrim satis 
munitam (in qua certos Christianos, qui secum iverant in custodiam, et ut alids Insulas, et Terras-firmas, Remotas, et Incognitas 
inquirerent, posuit) construi, et edificare fecit. In quibus quidem Insulis, et Terris jam repertis aurum, aromatha, et alice 
quam plurime res preciose diversi generis, et diversee qualitatis reperiuntur. Unde omnibus diligentér, et presertim Fidei 
Catholicee exaltatione, et dilatione (prout decet Catholicos Reges, et Principes) consideratis, more Progenitorum vestrorum clare 
memorize Regum, Terras-firmas, et Insulas predictas, illarumque Incolas, et Habitatores vobis (Divina favente Clementia) 
subjicere, et ad Fidem Catholicam reducere proposuistis. Nos igitur hujusmodi vestrum Sanctum, et laudabile propositum 
plurmum in Domino commendantes, ac cupientes, ut illud ad debitum finem perducatur, et ipsum nomen Salvatoris nostri in 
partibus illis inducatur, hortamur Vos, quam plurimum in Domino, et per Sacri Lavacri susceptionem, qua mandatis Apostolicis 
obligati estis, et per viscera Misericordie Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, attentd requirimus, ut cum expeditionem hujusmodi prosequi, 
et assumere prona mente Orthodoxe Fidei zelo intendatis, Populos in hujusmodi Insulis, et Terris degentes ad Christianam 
Religionem suscipiendam inducere velitis, et debeatis: nec pericula, neque labores ullo unquam tempore Vos deterreant, firma 
spe, fiduciaque conceptis, quod Deus Omnipotens conatus vestros felicitér prosequetur. Et ut tanti negotii Provinciam Apostolices 
Gratiz largitate donati liberius, et audatius assumatis, motu proprio, non ad vestram, vel alterius pro vobis super hoc nobis oblate 
petitionis instantia, sed de nostra mera liberalitate, et ex certa scientia, ac de Apostolice Potestatis plenitudine, omnes Insulas, 
et Terras-firmas inventas, et inveniendas, detectas, et detegendas, versus Occidentem, et Meridiem, fabricando, et construendo 
unam lineam a Polo Arctico, scilicét, Septentrione, ad Polum Antarcticum, scilicét, Meridiem, sive Terre-firme, et Insule 
invente, et inveniende sint, versus Indiam, aut versus aliam quamcumque partem, que linea distet A qualibét Insularum, quee 
vulgaritér nuncupantur, de los Agores, et Caboverde, centum leucis versus Occidentem, et Meridiem. Itaque omnes Insule, et 
Terre-firme, reperte, et reperiende, detect, et detegende a prefata linea versus Occidentem, que per alium Regem, aut 
Principem Christianum, non fuerint actualitér possesse, usque ad Diem Nativitatis Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, proximé 
preteritum, 4 quo incepit annus presens millessimus quadrigentessimus nonagessimus tertius, quando fuerunt per Nuntios, et 
Capitanos vestros invente alique predictarum Insularum, Authoritate Omnipotentis Dei nobis in Beato Petro Concessa, ac 
Vicariatus Jesu Christi, quo fungimur in Terris, cum omnibus illarum Dominiis, Civitatibus, Castris, Locis, et Villis, Turribusque, 
et Jurisdictionibus, ac pertinentiis universis, vobis, hereedibusque, et Successoribus vestris, Castella, et Legionis Regibus in 
perpetuum, tenore presentium, donamus, concedimus, et assignamus. Vosque heredes, ac Successores preefatos illarum 
Dominos, cum plena, libera, et omnimoda Potestate, Authoritate, et Jurisdictione facimus, constituimus, et deputamus. Decer- 
nentes nihilominus, per hujusmodi donationem, concessionem, et assignationem nostram, nulli Christiano Principi, qui actualiter 
prefatas Insulas, et Terras-firmas possederit, usque ad predictum Diem Nativitatis Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, jus quesitum 
sublatum intelligi posse, aut auferri debere. Et insuper mandamus vobis in virtute Sancte Obedientie, ut (et sicut etiam 
pollicemini, et non dubitamus pro vestra maxima devotione, et Regia magnanimitate vos esse facturos) ad Terras-firmas, et 
Insulas preedictas, viros, probos, et Deum timentes, Doctos, Peritos, et Expertos, ad instruendum Incolas, et Habitatores prefatos 
in Fide Catholica, et bonis moribus imbuendum destinare debeatis, omnem debitam diligentiam in premissis adhibentes. Ac 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 119 

country and the cities, and brought great presents to the lords and papas of the temple; and they did 
the same on the day * on which he disappeared or died, which was the day of One Cane. ‘These 
festivals happened at the expiration of every period of fifty-two years +. 

PLATE VI. 
QUEQUECOYOTL. 

They called the lord of these thirteen days Quequecoyotl}, which signifies the old fox. They 
here fasted during the last four days to Quecalcoatle of Tula, who is he who was named after 
the first Calcoatle§ ; and now they name him One Cane, which is the star Venus, of which they tell 
the fables accredited amongst them. Quequecoyotl is the same as the tale-bearer, the tempted, or 
he who suffered himself to be tempted. They here celebrated the Festival of Discord, or rather they 
implied by this figure the discord which exists amongst mankind. They believed that those who 
were born on this sign (One Rose) would be musicians, physicians, weavers, and principal persons. 
Here, in this week of One Rose, when the year of the Rabbit occurred, they fasted to the fall of the 
first man, who was accordingly called Quequecoyotl, which signifies the old man. 

* Perhaps day has been written by mistake for year ; since Quecalcoatle is elsewhere said to have disappeared on the day of 
Four Earthquakes. 

+ The line which follows in the Spanish text, ‘‘ Los que nacian en este dia de 7 Cafias si era mejor,” 

is unintelligible: serian 
mejores must certainly be the right reading of the MS.; the meaning of which would be, “‘ They believed that those who were 
born on the day of Seven Canes would excell.” The reason for their so thinking was because Quecalcoatle was born on that day. 

{ Coyotle signifies a wolf, and is a generic term for any wild animal of the canine species. Hue means old, and its reduplica- 
tion forms the superlative of the adjective. Mexican words commencing with h, are frequently spelt by Spanish writers with q or 
g; as huetlan, which signifies the old country, is written guetlan. ret 

§ An abbreviation probably for Quecalcoatle. 

quibuscumque Personis cujuscumque Dignitatis, etiam Imperialis et Regalis Status, gradus, ordinis, vel conditionis, sub Excom- 
municationis late sententiz pcena, quam eo ipso (si contra fecerint) incurrant, districtius mhibemus, ne ad Insulas, et Terras- 
firmas inventas, et inveniendas, detectas, et detegendas versus Occidentem, et Meridiem, fabricando, et construendo unam 
lineam a Polo Arctico, ad Polum Antarcticum, sive Terre-firme Insule invente, et inveniende sint, versus Indiam, aut versus 
aliam quamcumque partem, que linea distet A qualibet Insularum, que vulgaritér nuncupantur de los. Acores, et Caboverde, 
centum leucis versus Occidentem, et Meridiem (ut preefertur) pro mercibus habendis, vel quavis alia de causa accedere preesumant, 
absque vestra, ac Heredum, et Successorum vestrorum predictorum licentia speciali. Non obstantibus Constitutionibus, et 
Ordinationibus Apostolicis, cesterisque contrariis quibuscumque: in illo 4 quo Imperia, et Dominationes, ac bona cuncta 
procedunt Confidentes, quod dirigente Domino actus vestros, si hujusmodi Sanctum, et laudabile propositum prosequamini, brevi 
tempore cum felicitate, et gloria totius populi Christiani vestri labores, et conatus exitum felicissimum consequentur. Verim 
quia difficile foret preesentes litteras, ad singula queeque loca, in quibus expediens fuerit defferri, volumus, ac motu, et scientia 
similibus decernimus, quod illarum transumptis manu publici Notarit inde rogati subscriptis, et sigillo alicujus, Persone in 
Ecclesiastica Dignitate Constitute, seu Curie LEcclesiasticee munitis, ea prorsus fides in judicio, et extra, ac alias ubilibét 
adhibeatur, que presentibus adhiberetur, si essent exhibite, vel ostense. Nulli ergd omnind hominum liceat, hance paginam 
nostre commendationis, hortationis, requisitionis, donationis, concessionis, assignationis, constitutionis, .deputationis, decreti, 
mandati, inhibitionis, et voluntatis, infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem attente hoc prasumpeerit, indigna- 
tionem Omnipotentis Dei, ac Beatorum Petri, et Pauli Apostolorum ejus, se noverit incursurum. Datum Rome apud Sanctum 
Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominice. 1493. quarto nonas Maii, Pontificatus nostri, Anno primo.” 

120 EXPLANATION OF THE 

They recount a prodigy, that in the year of the Rabbit, on the day of ts Rose, a rose sprung up 
in that country, which immediately afterwards withered. 

1.* Hell. 2. Tatacoada, the god of the Otomies. 

PLATE VII. 

YSNEXTLL 

They represented her as Eve, always weeping and looking at her husband Apam. She is called 
Ysnextli, which signifies eyes blind with ashes; and this refers to the time subsequent to her 
sinning by plucking the roses. They accordingly declare, that they are still unable to look 
up to heaven ; and in recollection of the happy state which she lost, they fasted every eight 
years on account of this fall, and their fast was on bread and water only. They fasted the eight 
days preceding this sign of One Rose ; and on the arrival of this sign, they prepared to celebrate the 

festival. ‘They say that all the days of their calendar are applied to this fall, because on such a day 

sin was committed. ‘They were commanded to bathe themselves in the night, lest they should 
grow ill. 

1. Dung}. 2. Suchiquecal. 

PLATE VIII. i 
CHALCHIUHTLI. 

Chalchiuhtli, who presided over these thirteen days, saved herself in the deluge. She is the 
woman who remained after the deluge. Her name signifies, the woman who wears a dress adorned 
with precious stones§. ‘They here fasted four days, to death. They paint her holding in one hand 
a spinning-wheel, and in the other a certain wooden instrument with which they weave: and in order 
to show that of the sons which women ‘bring forth, some are slaves, and others die in war, and others 

in poverty, they paint her with a stream, as if carrying them away ; so that whether rich or poor, all 
were finally doomed to perish. 

' * 1. refers to the sign Ce Xochitl, or One Rose, which was dedicated to hell, probably on account of Suchiquecal having transgressed 
by plucking roses in Xochitlycacan, or paradise. 2. refers to Quequecoyotl, who was named by the Otomies, Tatacoada. The 
corresponding numbers have been omitted in the plate. 

+ These roses are elsewhere called “ Fruta del arbol,” the fruit of the tree. 

{ Father Fabrega says, in his Commentary on the Codex Borgianus, that the mother of the human race is there represented in a state 
of humiliation eating cuitlatl ea) The vessel in the left hand of Suchiquecal contains “ mierda,” according to the interpreter of these 
paintings. 

§ Torquemada says that she was also styled Chalchiuhtlatonac, which name signifies the queen of heaven, and was invoked by the 
Mexicans at the baptism of their children. ° Sahagun affirms that she was another Juno: but it is probable that she was the same as 
Chimalman. The Jews are said, in’the eighteenth verse of the seventh chapter of Jeremiah, to have made offerings to the queen of 
heaven: “ Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem? The children gather wood, and the 
fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven.” 

a a 

ee 

CODEX. TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 121 

1. On this sign of One Cane*, they celebrated the other great festival in Cholula to Quecal- 
coatle, their first papa or priest. It occurred on the twenty-second of April. 

PLATE IX. 

TLACOLTEOTLE. 

As soon as time commenced, sin began. They fasted on this sign of One Cane, when the year of 
the Cane occurred, in recollection of the various times in which the world had been destroyed. 
1. Heaven. 

PLATE X. 

TONATIHAU. 

Tonatihu signifies the sun: he presided over these thirteen signs. (Wherever, either here or in 
any other part of this Calendar, two hands are marked, a festival is celebrated ; and where there is 
only one, it is a fast.) ‘They believed that those who were born in these days would be principal 
persons amongst the people. They said, that if an earthquake or an eclipse of the sun should 
occur on the day dedicated to him, which was that of Four Earthquakes, that on such a day the world 
would come to an end, which was the fourth destruction which it was fated to undergo, ... . . figures 
disposed in such a manner as to represent a man divided, with his legs and arms apart +-. 

1. This sign (One Skull ¢) was a day dedicated to the Devil and to evil. They supposed that those 
who were born on this sign would be magicians; for they were much addicted to the magical art of 
metamorphosing themselves into the shapes of various animals. 

2. They pronounced sentence on this sign (Five Dogs) on adulterers and robbers. 3. Naolin, 
which signifies the four motions of the sun §. 

* The sign of One Cane was dedicated to heaven, as that of One Rose was to hell, the words cielo and infierno being written under 
these two signs in the Codex Telleriano-Remensis. 

+ The figure of a man divided in the middle seems sometimes to occur in Mexican paintings, which here being alluded to in the 
description of Tonatihu, or the sun, may possibly have reference to the following fable of the creation of the first man by the sun, which 
Torquemada, on the authority of Andrew de Olmos, thus relates as traditionary amongst the Indians of Tezcuco: ‘* Dicen, que estando 
el sol 4 la hora de las nueve, heché una flecha en el dicho termino, y hico un hoio, del qual salio un hombre, que fue el primero, no 
teniendo mas cuerpo, que de los bragos arriba, y que despues salié de alli la muger entera.’—Monarquia Indiana, lib. vi. cap. xliv. It 
cannot be expected that this mutilated passage should admit of any clearer elucidation. 

{ Moses Ben Maimonides mentions a superstition, which, as the Jews were acquainted with, it may be supposed they practised, of 
divining by a skull. i 

§ The Mexican sign Ollin is explained “ temblor de tierra,” an earthquake; and the sun in the sign Nahui Ollin, or Four Earth- 
quakes, was a symbol of the end of the world or of the day of judgment. The ideas originally associated with the sign Nahui Ollin 
were religious, and not astronomical ; but it being a great object with the early Spanish missionaries to efface from the minds of the 
Mexicans the remembrance of their former superstitions, which could be more easily accomplished by developing new meanings in the 
interpretation of their ancient monuments, than by attempting wholly to consign them to oblivion, the sign Nahui Ollin was referred 
to astronomy ; and El sol en quatro temblores de tierra, became El sol en los quatro temblores. 

(21) 

122 EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE XI. 
MEZT L IL, 

Meztli was otherwise named Tectziztecatl ; because, in the same way as the snail creeps from its 
shell, so man proceeds from his mother’s womb. 'They placed the moon opposite to the sun, because 
its course continually crosses his ; and they believed it to be the cause of human generation *. 

1+. Tectziztecatl, a kind of sea-snail. 2. The Moon. 

PLATE XII. 
NAVIHEHECATL. 

Navihehecatl presided over these thirteen days, during the four last of which they fasted. They 
killed before his image those whom they took ..... {. The merchants celebrated a great festival 
tohim..... ., since the deluge. The signification of this name is the four winds§; and they 
considered this sign unlucky: and accordingly when it arrived, all the merchants shut themselves 
up in their houses||; for they said that it caused them to risk the loss of their property. They 
neither danced or indulged in sports of any kind on these days; for if on such a day an accident 
happened to any one, it was sure to prove highly dangerous, and therefore, although they chanced 
to be on a journey, they stopped and shut themselves up in the house. * 

PLATE XIII. 
CINTEOTLI. 

Cinteotli was the origin of the gods, it signifies abundance. 

PLATE XIV. 
TLAVIZCALPANTECUTLI. 

Tlavizcalpantecutli is the star Venus, the first created light (Civahteltona) before the deluge. 

* The Egyptian women prayed in childbirth to Isis, or the moon; and the Jews entertained great respect for the moon, as being 
the lesser of the two great lights which God had created. 

+ No. 1. refers to the shell of the snail at the back of the head of the figure, and . to the figure of Men, or the moon itself. 

{ The concluding portions of these sentences have been obliterated. 

§ It is compounded of Nahui four, and Ehecatl wind. 

|| The Mexican merchants seem to have exceeded in superstition the other classes of the community, aia: by their staffs before 
setting out on a journey, which on their return home they laid up with great care. The Jews were also superstitious about journeys, 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 123 

They say that it was fire, or a star: it was created before the sun. ‘This star, Venus, is Quecalcoatle. 
They say this is the star which we call Lucifer, from its light; and they accordingly paint it with 
the sign of One Cane, which was the day dedicated to it. He took this name on the occasion of his 
departure or disappearance*. Tlavizcalpantecutli is the God of Morning when it begins to dawn; he 
is also the Lord of the Twilight on the approach of night ; he presided over these thirteen days, during 
the four last of which they fasted. It properly was the first light which appeared in the world; it 
here signifies the light which diffuses itself over things, or the surface of the earth. 

PLATE XV. 
MICHITLATECOTLE. 

They place Michitlatecotle- opposite to the sun, to see if he can rescue any of those seized upon 
by the lord of the dead{, for Michitla signifies the dead below. ‘hese nations painted only 
two of their gods with the crown called Altontcatecoatle, viz. the God of heaven and of abundance, 
and this Lord of the Dead, which kind of crown I have seen upon the captains in the war of Coatle. 

PLATE XVI. 
PATECATLE. 

Patecatle || was the god of these thirteen days, and of a kind of root which they put into wine ; 
since without this root, no quantity of wine, however much they drank, would produce intoxication. 
Patecatle taught them the art of making wine, for wine was made according to his instructions ; and 
as men when under the influence of wine are valiant, so they supposed that those who were born 
during this period would be courageous. They considered these thirteen days all as fortunate; for 
Patecatle, the god of wine, the husband of Mayaquel, who was otherwise called Cipaquetona, he 

and when proceeding on their travels invoked the angels Michael, Nemuel, and Shaatsiel, to accompany them. ‘This was the practice 
of the Jews in former times, which, with many of their other customs, has probably become long since obsolete and forgotten. 

* This alludes to the departure of Quecalcoatle to his former kingdom of Huetlapallan. 

+ Michitlatecotle, the Mexican Lord of the Dead, resembles Satan, or the Angel of Death of the Jews, whom they believe to stand 
by all dying persons with a drawn sword. View of the Jewish Religion, page 407. The Mexican proper name Xomunco bears also 
some likeness in sound to Munkir, the Angel of Death of the Mahometans. 

{ This curious passage deserves to be considered in connection with the first verse of the third chapter of the prophet Zechariah: “ And 
he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.” 

|| Patecatle was the Noah of the New World. He is called by some writers Coxcox, as well as Cipaquetona. Coxcox was the 
name likewise of the king of Colhuacan, in whose states the Mexicans sought an asylum after their long peregrinations. The engraving 
in the Giro del Mondo of Gemelli, taken from a Mexican painting in the possession of Siguenza, erroneously said to represent the 
universal deluge, but in reality a history of the Mexican migration, may have caused some confusion in these proper names. The same 
migration is also represented in an original Mexican painting that formerly belonged to Boturini, in the first page of which is the river; 
or the arm of the sea, which Torquemada says he had observed in all the ancient paintings of this migration, and which, perhaps, 
was Tlapallan, or the Red Sea._ 

124. EXPLANATION OF THE 

who was saved from the deluge, ruled over them. They placed the eagle and lion near him, as a 
sign that their sons would be valiant men. 

PLATE XVII. 

QUATLE. OCELOTLE. 

Those who bore these arms of the eagle and tiger were their most redoubted and valiant warriors. 

PLATE XVIII. 
YTZLACOLIUHQUI, THE LORD OF SIN*. 

Ytzlacoliuhqui was the lord of these thirteen days. They say he was the god of Frost}. They put 
to death before his image those who were convicted of adultery during these thirteen days: this 
was the punishment of married persons, both men and women; for, provided the parties were 
unmarried, the men were at liberty to keep as many concubines as they pleased §. 

Ytzlacolinhqui was the Lord of Sin, or of blindness, who committed sin in Paradise||; they 
therefore represent him with his eyes bandaged, and his day was accordingly the lizard, and like 

* He might have been called the Lord of Sin, from offenders being amenable to his laws. ' 

+ Some persons, indulging in an over-eager inclination to adapt heathen mythology to sacred history, have likened Moses to Saturn; 
others have confounded him with Bacchus :—but what likeness, we may ask, really exists between that youthful conqueror, whose praises 
were sung at Alexander’s feast, and the hoary legislator of the Jews? 

{ Boturini says that Tialoc was the god who punished adulterers, and that those who were sentenced to death by the Mexican laws 
for this. crime, were called by the common name, without distinction of sex, of Tlazolteominqui; but that men who died for this offence 
were designated by the term of Tlazolteotlahpaliuhqui, “ el que le aplastan la cabeza con una losa,” “he who has had his head smashed 
with stones ;” this name being given to the man from the punishment which he suffered for his crime, as among the Jews the name of 
«« he who has had his shoe loosed”’ was given, according to the law of Moses, to the man who refused to raise up seed to his brother 
by marrying his widow. Women who were put to death for adultery were called Tlazolteocihuatl. 

§ It says, in the third verse of the eleventh chapter of the First Book of Kings, of Solomon, “ And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, 
and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.” Solomon’s wisdom differed from the gwdpoouyy of the Greeks. 

|| Moses sinned, in the opinion of the ancient fathers, in the mountain, when he threw down and broke the tables of stone on which 
God had written the commandments. 

{ It is singular that the figure of a person with his eyes bandaged, or with a veil over his face, should frequently occur in Mexican 
paintings; as also the more curious representation of a hand half covering the mouth or lower part of the faces of other figures. 
Moses covering his face with a veil when he descended from Mount Sinai (after his continued conference for forty days and 
forty nights with Jehovah, without tasting food during that long period of time), in order that the children of Israel might not be 
dazzled by his countenance, is an act much applauded by the rabbis. But God’s covering the face of Moses when he put him in the 
cleft of the rock, while his glory passed before him, is much more celebrated by them; in commemoration of which, “on the feast of 
Expiation, er the Chipur, which is the festival mentioned in the sixteenth and twenty-third chapters of Leviticus, and the seventeenth 
verse: At the close of the day the rabbi extends his hands towards the people and gives them the benediction of Moses; which the 
people receive with great humility and devotion, covering their faces with their hands, imagining that God is behind the rabbi, and 
that man for that reason ought not to have the assurance to cast his eyes upon him. Thus the hand of God covered the face of 
Moses, whilst that holy legislator humbled himself before his Divine Majesty for the sins of the Israelites; and this, in all probability, is 
the real rise of this custom.” Religious Ceremonies of All Nations. Although it would appear from the thirty-third chapter of Exodus, 
that the hand of God was placed over the eyes of Moses until he entirely removed it on advancing a little beyond the rock where Moses 
stood, when his face could no longer be visible to him; still, as the Jews have frequently contradicted the text of Scripture by their 
traditions, and as it says in the tenth verse of the thirty-fourth chapter of Deuteronomy, “ And there arose not a prophet since in Israel 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 195 

the lizard he is naked. He is a star in heaven, which, as they pretend, proceeds in a backward 
course, with its eyes bandaged ; they considered it a great prognostic*. 

All these thirteen days were bad; for they affirmed that if evidence should be adduced in these 
days, it would be impossible to arrive at justice: but they imagined that judgment would be 
perverted in such a manner that unjust condemnations would ensue ; which was not the case in the 
days immediately following, when, if evidence was adduced, they supposed that justice would be 
made apparent. ‘They believed that those who were born on the sign dedicated to him, would be 
sinners and adulterers. 

1. Apam after he had sinned. 2. He+ is turned towards the south, which denotes toil. 

PLATE XIX. 

Women taken in adultery were put to death by being stoned}, as appears by this painting. They 
were strangled previously to being stoned, and were afterwards thrown into some public place where 
all might see them. 

PLATE XX. 

YXCUINA, THE WIFE OF MIQUITLATECOTLE. 

Yxcuina presided over these thirteen signs. She was the goddess who, according to their account, 
protected adulterers. She was the goddess of salt§ and of dissolute persons: they accordingly 

* This star was supposed by the Mexicans to exercise an influence in war. If the Jews, who always interpret the text of 
Scripture literally, had entertained any such superstitious notions respecting any particular star, they probably would have 
defended it by referring to the twentieth verse of the fifth chapter of Judges; “They fought from heaven, the stars in their 
courses fought against Sisera.” 

+ The star is here meant. The south was named Huiztlan, which signifies the place of thorns. 

{ Stoning to death was the common punishment for adultery among the Jews; but it was ordained in the ninth verse of the 
twenty-first chapter of Leviticus, that the daughter of a priest who violated her chastity should be burnt with fire. This 
punishment must have frequently taken place, as the priests among the Jews were so numerous, and the Scripture represents 
the people to have been so corrupt. It is a singular coincidence, that both among the Jews and the Mexicans, burning to death 
and stoning should have been the punishment of adultery and the breach of chastity, for a priest who was guilty of the latter 
offence was sentenced by the Mexican laws to be burnt alive. 

§ Salt was an article highly esteemed by the Mexicans ; and the Jews always offered it in their oblations, it being so ordained 
in the thirteenth verse of the second chapter of Leviticus: ‘‘ And every oblation of thy meat-offering shalt thou season with 
salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat-offering: with all thine offerings 
thou shalt offer salt.” It is probable that the Levites liked salt. 

hike unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face;” they might have maintained that it was the lower and not the upper 
part of the face of Moses that the hand of God covered. A veiled face occurs in the twenty-second plate of the Collection of 
Mendoza, No. 14, as the symbol of the city Yxquemecan. It is somewhat odd, in tracing up effects to causes, to find that the 
history of Moses covering his face with a veil in the Pentateuch, caused Moore more than three thousand years afterwards to write 
the poem of The Veiled Prophet of Khorassan; which is founded on the history of a Jew, who in the early ages pretended to be 
the Messiah, and wore a veil to verify the prophecy of Moses, that God would raise up a prophet like unto him; but whose 
imposture being detected, and the people refusing to serve him, the impostor himself disappeared, and his deluded followers 
spread abroad a fabulous story of the manner of his death. 

(Qik) 

126 EXPLANATION OF THE 

painted her with her cheeks of two colours; and they put to death adulterers before her image. 
She was likewise the goddess of prostitutes, and of immodest women and impostors. They believed 
that those who were born in these days would be profligate. 

1. They thought that those who were born on the sign of Five Cipactli,—if men would be rogues, 
and if women prostitutes. 2. Tlacolteotl, the goddess of dirt or of immodesty. 3. The woman who 
sinned before the deluge, who was the cause of all evil, and of all deceit. 

PLATE XXI. 
THE SERPENT QUECALCOATLE. 

This is the serpent Quecalcoatle. In order to show that this is a festival of fear, they paint 
this dragon in the act of devouring a man. 

PLATE XXII. 

YZPAPALOTLE. 

He was called Xounco, and after he sinned Yzpapalotle* or a Knife of Butterflies. The signification 
of this name is a knife of butterflies; and accordingly he is surrounded with knives and wings of 
butterflies ; for they say that he sometimes appears to them, and that they only see feet resembling 
those of an eagle. He was the lord of these thirteen days: they say that he always carries in his 
hands a knife. Yzpapalotle was one of those who fell from heaven with the rest who fell from 
thence, whose names are the following: Quecalcoatle, Ochululuchesi, Tetzcatlipoca, Oaletecotle, 
and Hatzcanpantecoatli. ‘These were the sons of Citlaliace and Citlalatonat, of whom they relate a 
fable, that being in a garden they ate some roses; but that this recreation lasted only a short time, as 
the tree presently afterwards cracked. 

1. They considered the day of One House bad; for they affirmed that on such a day demons came 
through the air from the sky in the shape of women, such as we name witches, who assembled 
where the highways met in the form of a cross, and in remote and solitary places: and accordingly, 
that wicked women and adulteresses, when they wished to free themselves of their sins, went alone 
by night, and without the covering of a veil§, to the crosses of the highways, where they said that 

* Hye is elsewhere called Yzpapalotle, or the goddess of pollution. 

+ As they only beheld the feet of an eagle, they were at liberty to represent in any fanciful manner they pleased ‘the rest of 
the person of Yzpapalotle. 

{ Or of the morning. 

§ Peter Martyr says that the women of Yucatan carefully covered their faces with veils, which was also eustomety with the 

Jewish women. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 127 

the witches assembled, and sacrificed there with their tongues ; and joining hands with them, gave 
them the clothes which they wore, which they left behind* ; and this was a sign that they left off sin. 
2. Death. 3. Eve after she had sinned. 

PLATE XXIII. 
TAMOANCHA or XUCHITLYCACAN. 

These words may be interpreted “there is the mansion from which they fell, and where they gathered 
the roses.” In order to show that this festival was not good, and that it was celebrated from fear, 
they painted this tree bloody and cracked in the middle, as if it were named the Festival of Toil by 
reason of that sin. This place, which is called Tamoancha or Xuchitlycacan, is the place where 
those gods were created whom they feared : it signifies the Terrestrial Paradise ; and accordingly they 
relate that those gods being in that place, transgressed by plucking roses and branches from the 
trees; and that on this account Tonacateutli and his wife Tonacacigua became highly incensed, and 
cast them out of that place; and that thus some of them came to the earth, and others went to hell, 
and that these were those who excited their fears. 

1. They believed that those who were born on Thirteen Eagles would be valiant men. 2. The Tree. 

PLATE XXIV. 

XOLOTLE. 

Xolotle saved himself before the deluge ; he presided over these thirteen days. ‘They say that he 
was the god of twins, and of all things which grow double, which we call twins, or when Nature 
produces any monsters out of her common course +. ‘They believed that he who was born in these 

days would be a tale-bearer {, or a rogue. 

PLATE XXV. 

TLALCHITONATIO. 

Tlalchitonatio § signifies properly the world. The real passage of the rays of the sun lies between 

1 

* The putting off the old clothes seems to have been a sign of their putting off the old man, or former evil habits. 

+ Xolotle signifies in the Mexican language play or sport ; and Clavigero says that the Axolotle, an ugly lizard of the Mexican 
lake, was so named on account of its ridiculous and monstrous shape. The European doctrine of the lusus nature seems to have 
traversed the Atlantic. 

{ It says in the sixteenth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, ‘‘ Thou shalt not go up and down as a tale-bearer among 
thy people.” Liars and tale-bearers were held in great abhorrence by the Mexicans. Quecalcoatle is said to have invented the 
custom of piercing the tongue and ears through with a sharp wooden skewer, as a remedy against the sin of lying and of listening 

to lies. 
§ The Mexicans bestowed very sublime epithets on their supreme deity, Tonacatecutl, which name signifies the Lord of 

128 EXPLANATION OF THE 

light and darkness ; and accordingly they painted the sun over his shoulders, and death beneath his 
feet. They say that is the warmth or heat which the sun communicates to the earth, and they there- 
fore affirm that when the sun sets, it goes to give light to the dead. 

1. They believed that he who was born on the sign of Six Winds would be rich and prudent. 
9. The Sun. 3. The Earth. 4. Darkness. 

PLATE XXVI. 

CHALCHIUHATOTOLI. 

Chalchiuhtotoli* is the same as the devil or Tetzcatlipoca before the deluge, whose name signifies 
a smoking mirror, or one that casts forth smoke. He was the lord of these thirteen days. This is 
the likeness of Tetzcatlipoca; they paint him in this manner, for they say that they never see the 
devil, but only the feet of a cock or of an eagle. 

PLATE XXVII. 

1. The sign of Seven Eagles was a day applied to the moon, and unlucky for all such as became 
ill on that day of diseases of the heart, which they affirmed would be incurable. Women who suffered 
from certain indispositions sacrificed to the moon on this day for the recovery of their health. 

Flesh ; viz. Tlaclitonatic, the Creator of Light; Teotl, God; Tloque-Nahuaque, the Self-existing ; Ipalnemoani, the Giver of Life ; 
Moyocayatzin, the Almighty; Titlacahua, the God whose servants we are ; Tlacahuepan, the God of Sacrifice ; Tetzcatlipoca, he 
who appeared on the smoking mountain of the mirror; Telpuctli, the Ever-young ; which last appellation Torquemada compares 
with the following passage in the Psalms ; ‘‘ Todas las cosas se acaban, y como vestidura se envejecen, pero vos, Sefior, perma- 
neceis en un mismo ser, y vuestros afios no descaecen ;” and Yaoteotle, the God of Armies or of Hosts, which resembles the 
ineffable name Yah, or Ya, of Jehovah, for teotle simply signifies God, and is added to the proper name Yao, of which it does not 
form a part. It deserves to be remarked, that the Mexicans likewise applied the term Ineffable to their supreme god Tonacatecutli : 
and in the same way as the Jews were accustomed to represent the Deity by the symbol of a human eye within a triangle, so they 
appear to have typified the divine intelligence by a mirror or an eye placed upon three sticks transversely crossing each other. 
The Peruvians, whose religion was derived from the same source as that of the Mexicans, believed in one supreme Deity, the sole 
creator and governor of the universe, whom they named Viracocha, and Pachacamack or Pachayachachik, which signifies the 
creator of heaven and earth, and called Usapu, or Wonderful ; and it is not a little singular, that the Ingas, as Acosta testifies, 

should have waged sanguinary wars to compel the surrounding nations to acknowledge Viracocha, and to embrace a religion 

which God himself had revealed: ‘ Narrant porrd Ingarum reges, cum ceteras hujus orbis gentes bellis infestarent, hanc sue — 

expeditionis unicam et palmariam causam asseruisse, quod equum esset mortales in universum omnes sibi subjici aut subjugari, 
ut ex quorum familia patriaque omnes orti essent, quibusque vera et genuina religio a Deo patefacta vigeret.””— Acosta De Natura 
Novi Orbis, lib. I. cap. xxv. 

* Chalchiuhtotoli is a proper name compounded of Totot/, a bird, and Chalchiutli, a precious stone of penance, and signifies 
the bird that wears the precious stone of penance. The figure of this bird frequently occurs in the Mexican mythological paintings, 
where it is always represented with a chain of jewels round its neck. It is also sculptured on the top of the Latin cross which 
M. Dupaix discovered among the ruins of Palenque. It is more probable that this god was the same as Tlaloc, than that he was 
Tetzcatlipoca; at the same time it must be observed, that the symbol called the smoking mirror was common to three of the 

Mexican gods ; to Tetzcatlipoca, Quecalcoatle or Huitzilopuchtli, and to Chalchiuhtotoli. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 129 

2. This painting shows their manner of sacrificing with their ears*, and the way in which they 
carried the bag containing the incense to offer to the Devil, corresponding to the sacrifices which 

they made to him. 

PLATE XXVIII. 
CHANTICO or CUAXOLOTLE, 

Chantico presided over these thirteen signs, and was the lord of Chile or of the yellow woman +. 
He was the first who offered sacrifice after having eaten a fried fish |; the smoke of which ascended 
to heaven: at which Tonacotle became incensed, and pronounced a curse against him that he 
should be changed into a dog, which accordingly happened, and they named him on this account 
Chantico, which is another name for Miquitlatecotle. From this transgression the destructions of the 
world ensued. He was called Nine Dogs, from the sign on which he was born. Chantico or 
Cuaxolotle is the symbol which the country people of Xolotle § wear on their heads. 

1. They believed that he who was born on the sign of One Wind would be healthy by his nativity ; 
but that if he grew ill, it would cause him severe pains of the side, and cancer, for those were the 

diseases applied to this day. 2. Fire. 3. Water. 

PLATE XXIX. 

QUECALCOATLE. 

Quecalcoatle is here represented in a golden house. ‘This sacrifice to Quecalcoatle accordingly 
corresponds with the preceding. ‘The day of Nine Dogs was applied to magicians, who were such 
persons as transformed themselves into the shapes of various things, such as beasts, serpents, 
and other similar things; they therefore feared this day exceedingly, and shut themselves up in 

their houses, in order not to be witnesses of such metamorphoses occurring in the city ||. 

* Piercing the tongue and ears, which the Spaniards called sacrificing those parts of the body, because it was a religious 
austerity attended with great effusion of blood, was according to Mexican tradition a remedy invented by Quecalcoatle against the 
sin of lying. The Mexican laws punished liars with the greatest severity. 

+ The complexion of the Mexican women was naturally tawny ; and in some paintings of the Collection of Mendoza their 
faces appear to be painted with yellow ochre. Perhaps by Chile, or the yellow woman, might be meant the Indian female race 
generally, in opposition to women inhabiting the other parts of the globe. 

{ It is said in the Vatican Manuscript that his crime consisted in his temerity in sacrificing without having previously fasted. 
It may here be observed that the Jews were not accustomed to offer sacrifices of fish. Compare Tobit, chap. viii. ver. 2. 

§ The symbol of the city of Xolotlan in the Collection of Mendoga is the head of a dog. 

|| The following account of two of these magicians is taken from Torquemada. “The first and holy bishop of Mexico, Brother 
Juan de Zumarraga, seized one of these conjurors, whose name was Ocelotl, and put him on board a ship with the intention of 
sending him to Spain as a very mischievous person; but the ship was lost near the port, and nothing more was heard of him. 
That holy man Brother Andrew de Olmos seized another, a disciple of the before-mentioned, and kept him in jail; when the same 
Indian informing the said Father that his master could release him from prison, the Father told him that he might release him if he 
could; but he did not do it, as in fact he could not. It is true that some time afterwards, handing him over to the said holy 

- bishop, and not being sufficiently attentive to his custody, he released himself and disappeared.” 

(21) 

130 EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE XXX. 
XOCHIQUECAL. 

Xochiquecal was the wife of Cinteutle, or the sin of the first woman *; she presided over these 
thirteen signs. 

Women who employed themselves in washing, weaving, and spinning, celebrated a festival in her 
honour, for she was the first who spun and wove. 

1. The day of One Eagle was applied to soldiers, for they said that on such a day many eagles 
came through the air and changed themselves into the figures of boys: this was to inspire them with 
courage to go to war and to die in it, which was what they most desired, for by this means they went 
to heaven. ‘This festival lasted during these thirteen days. They affirm that the fall or descent of 
the demons from heaven occurred on the sign of One Eagle : they believed likewise that women who 
were born on this day would be prostitutes. 

PLATE XXXI. 

THE DEVIL TEMPTING EVE BEFORE SHE SINNED. 

They also celebrated on the sign of Seven Cipactli the same festival of the coming of the eagles. 
1. The Devil in the act of tempting Evz before she sinned. 2. The smoking Mirror. 

PLATE XXXII. 

YZTAPALTOTEC. 

Y ztapaltotec is a flint or the knife of the warrior, or of the unhappy or afflicted, or rather it signifies 
the bloody knife of the mournful} Yztapali. It signifies properly the soil or the surface of the earth. 
They paint the figures behind, which are twenty {, each different from the other ; for as on each of 
these festivals, dances and sacrifices were celebrated, so they were obliged to appear dressed in the 
manner of the idol. Yztapaltotec presided over these thirteen days. ‘They paint him here sur- 
rounded with knives, or within a large knife, which is the same as a sword or fear. 

1. They believed that he who was born on the sign of One Rabbit would be long-lived. 

* It would appear from this passage that Xochiquecal, besides being the proper name of the first woman who sinned, was a 
peculiar term in the Mexican language by which to express original sin. 

+ “Mournful” is not the precise meaning of the Spanish word dolorido, nor did any English word present itself aah corre- 
sponding to it in signification; dolorido alludes to the painful austerities practised by Totec, who was accustomed to go about in 
a raiment of human skins, calling to the people to come to him and do penance on the Mountain of Thorns. 

{ These are the large figures represented in the Mexican calendar under the signs of the days of the year. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 131 

2. They thought that those who were born on the sign of Five Herbs* would be merchants, and 

rich. 
3. Toil, to which the corresponding figure is fire or purification immediately following. ‘They 

here kept a fast in commemoration of the fall of the first of the human race. This idol is represented 

with his mouth open ready to devour. 
The year of Six Canes commenced on the twenty-fourth of February. 

PLATE XXXIII. 

FIRE. 

Heaven was created on the sign of One Cane {, animals on that of One Flint, and the earth on that 

of One Rabbit; the earth in the proper acceptation of the term, or its surface, which is full of trouble 

and affliction. 

* The absurd sense in which some of the Jewish rabbis understand the twenty-second verse of the sixty-fifth chapter of 
Isaiah, “‘ For as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands,” affirming 
that when the restoration of the Jews shall take place, their lives will be lengthened in duration so as to equal that of trees, and 
that those who die at a hundred will die young,—makes it probable that if the Jews invented the signs of the Mexican calendar, 
the sign Malinalli, which is composed of the jaw-bone of a man with grass growing out of it, would refer to the fourteenth verse 
of the sixty-sixth chapter of Isaiah, which they say alludes to the resurrection, where it says, “ Your bones shall flourish like an 
herb,” which verse they commonly repeat at funerals. 

‘+ That is to say, the figure which accompanies it on the opposite page; for in the Mexican paintings two pages are seen at the 
same time, which from the flat manner in which they unfold appear to be only one. 

+ The Cane was dedicated to heaven, either on account of its being the symbol of Quecalcoatle, or because they kindled by 
means of it the new fire, by inserting the one end into a cylindrical hole bored ina plank, and turning the other round with 
extreme rapidity between the hands. This agrees with what is stated in the Vatican MS., that the first sign after the commence- 
ment of time began with the second figure, which was One Cane Chaos preceded the creation of heaven, and Yzpactli seems 
to have been the sign which presided over the elements when the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the 

face of it. 

132 EXPLANATION OF THE 

THE THIRD PART. 

PLATE I. 

THE eight tribes that proceeded from the seven caves, were the Chichimecas, the Nonoalcas, the 

Michiuacans, the Couixcas, the Totonacas, the Cuextecas, the Olmecas, and the Xicalangas. 

a. Vichilupuchitl. 1.Tonanicaca*. 2.Tezuactepetl. 3. Ayaualulco. 4.Culhuacan. 5. Puchutla. 
6. Tototepetl. 

PLATE II. 

1. Mechuaca. 2.'l'lacauacaltepetl+. 3. Maxuquetepetl. 4.Tentutepetl. 5. Pantepetl. 6. Tla- 
taltepetl. 

PLATE III. 

1. Hecatepetl. 2. Coacalco. 3. Tlacaxupantepetl. 4.Hulmetepetl. 5. Xilotepetl. 6. Cunpango. 

PLATE IV. 

1. Coatepetl. 2. Suchetepetl{. 3. Tezalco. 

PLATE V. 

1. Tolpatlac. 2. Pantepetl. 3. Ayaualulco. 4. Yaualultepetl. 5.Tezcatepetl. 6. Viztepetl. 
7. Tetepantepetl. 

* The country of our grandmother. 

+ This name signifies the mountain of sacrifice. The pyramid, or temple of Cholula, was designated by the Indians, Tlachihualtepetl, 
in allusion to the sacrifices performed on it; and Tetzcatlipoca was named Tlacahuapan, or the God of Sacrifice, in whose honour a 
famous temple was erected in Tezcuco. 

+ Tecontepetl has been printed by mistake for Suchetepetl, in the Spanish text. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 

PLATE VI. 

1. Coatepetl. 2. Tecontepetl. 3. Piazcontepetl. 

PLATE VII. 

1. Vixatitan. 2. Yxcuepaliztepetl. 3.Texcala. 4. Coaonepantepetl *. 

PLATE VIII. 

1. Tequepayuca. 

133 

% The place of reckoning the faggots.—The priests, whose office it was to burn the bodies of the dead, were named Coacuiles, 

whence coao came probably to signify a faggot. It may be inferred from certain passages in the Old Testament, that the Levites when 

about to prepare for the solemnity of a burnt sacrifice, laid the faggots in a certain order; and it would appear that this custom was 

observed by the Mexicans in their burnt sacrifices. 

ea 

134 EXPLANATION OF THE 

THE FOURTH PART. 

PLATE I. 

IN the year of Eleven Canes according to their computation, and 1399 according to ours, when the 
Mexicans had elected Acamapicuirty *, and after the war of Chapultepec, in which they were 
rendered subject to Culhuacan, in which state of servitude they continued for the space of one 
hundred years, they determined to become their own masters; which resolution they put into 

execution, and marched under their leader, and, as they affirm, set fire to the temple of Culhuacan. 
And this was the first war which they waged against others. 
1. Culhuacan. 2. AcamapicuiT ty. 

PLATE II. 

In the year of Five Rabbits according to their calculation, and 1406 according to ours, Acama- 
picuirty died, and Virziz1mvuitiy was elected king. Acamapicuiriy had given two of his 

daughters in marriage ; the one to the lord of Coatlichan, and the other to the lord of Culhuacan. 

* The origin and history of the Mexican kings is enveloped in much obscurity. The Collection of Mendoza only mentions eight; 
while Gomara gives a long list of sovereigns who preceded Acamapichitly upon the throne. This difference may perhaps be reconciled 
by supposing that the Mexican kings became possessed throngh maternal inheritance of the state of Culhuacan, and that the sovereigns 
enumerated by Gomara were their ancestors in the female line,—kings of Culhuacan, but not of Mexico,—which would also explain why 
Cortes continually calls the Mexicans the people of Culhua, when he evidently does not mean to confound them with those of 
Acolhuacan. From the following passage of Acosta’s History of America it will appear how much credit that learned writer thought 
was due to histories of their country written by the Indians themselves, and how little to accounts published by the Spaniards : 
“* Postquam vero ab Hispanis in India diutius agentibus, Indi novis literis legendi et scribendi artem edocti fuissent, gestorum 
suorum multa commentaria edebant, cum singulari gaudio ac admiratione a magnatibus Hispanis plurimis lectitata: et quidem qui 
Mexicanorum historiam evolvit, is nullo labore facile deprehendit merum eam Hispanorum commentum esse, non ipsorum Indorum 
collectionem.” Since these histories written by the Indians were read by many Spanish noblemen, it is evident that they must have been 
composed in Spanish; but numerous as they are said to have been, none of them have ever been published except the Peruvian 
Monarchy, by Garcilasso de la Vega, whose mother was an Indian of the royal race of the Ingas, but whose father was a Spaniard, and 
who cannot strictly speaking be called an Indian historian. Baron de Humboldt says, that some valuable works relating to the ancient 
history of Mexico, in the Mexican language, are still preserved in Mexico, especially one by Chimalpain, the publication of the original 
text of which, with an accompanying translation, would, at the same time that it removed all doubts as to its authenticity, throw 
much new light on the antiquities of America. With respect to the censure which Acosta has passed on the Spanish writers on the 
affairs of America, it may be observed that it cannot apply to the Indian Monarchy of Torquemada, which was not published when 
Acosta wrote his History, and which the author says he employed twenty years in composing. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 135 

And on the death of Acamaricurriy, the Mexicans determined to go to Azcapucalco, which was 
one of the capital cities of that country, to request a king to govern them; but in the mean time 
agreeing to return home and to elect from among themselves a king, they acted in conformity with 
this resolution, and the election fell on a certain person named VitziLinuitLy, who became their 
first king. 

1. ACAMAPICHITLY. 

PLATE 111. 

VirzitinvitLy allied himself in marriage with a grand-daughter of AcamMaricuitiy, the 
daughter of the princess of Coatlichan, by whom he had no sons: he therefore took two slaves ; the 
one named the Painter, and the other the Embroideress, by whom he had sons. 

1. They are supposed to go. 2. Virzininvitity. 3. The Painter. 4. They return. 

PLATE IV. 

In the year of Thirteen Rabbits, and 1414, Virzitinurriy died, and Cutmaxtropoca his son 
was elected king. 

1. Virzininvuitiy. 2. Cuimatpopoca, which name signifies A smoking shield. 3. The 
Smoking Shield. 

PLATE V. 

In the year of Twelve Rabbits, and 1426, Curmatropoca died, and YrzconuaTt was elected 
king. During the reign of Yrzconuati the Mexicans revolted, as they no longer chose to obey 
the state of Azcapucalco, and they remained free and exempt henceforward from servitude to the 
two cities*. The general who captured Azcapucalco was named Maxt ez and Ecuipse. 

1. Cuimatporoca. 2. YtzconuatTtL, the signification of which name is A serpent armed with 
knives. 3. Maxrxe and Ecripss. 

PLATE VI. 

In the year of Thirteen Flints, and according to our calculation 1440, Yrzconuatt died, and 
Hvenvemovutecoma was elected king. None of the sovereigns who ruled over Mexico, either 

before or after his time, placed on their heads a crown such as the God of Abundance wears and the 

* Culhuacan and Azcapucalco. 

136 EXPLANATION OF THE 

Lord of Hell, except this Morr¢goma, and the other whom the Marquis found when he conquered the 
country. It was a sign of their being great lords. 
1. Yrzconvati. 2%. Hurwuremoreucuccoma. 

IPIGAM Me) «WIDE 

In the year of Seven Canes, and 1447 according to our calculation, it snowed so heavily that lives 
were lost. In the year of One Rabbit, and 1404, so severe a famine occurred that the people died of 
starvation. In this year Tezcuco revolted, which had been a district subject to Coatlichan. This 
revolt was brought about by the intrigues of the Mexicans ; and accordingly, in the same year, the 
Mexicans added to the confederacy the state of Tlacuba ; and from this year, Tezcuco, Tlacuba, and 
Mexico, which had before been dependent states, remained in possession of the sovereign authority 
over all the cities of the lake ; which said cities the Marquis found at the head of the rest on his 
arrival in the country. 

1. Snow. 2. Famine. 3. NecavaLcunurtty. 

PLATE VIII. 

In the year 1456 the state of Guaxocingo seized on the province of Atlixo, and banished from 
thence the people of Guacachula, to whom this province and city had belonged. 

1. They represent by this symbol the binding of their years, which occurred at the expiration of 
every period of fifty-two years. 2. 'The year of 'I'wo Canes, or 1455, was fertile, and is therefore 
represented by the symbol of green branches. 

PLATE IX. 

In the year of Five Rabbits, and according to our calculation 1458, after the Mexicans had 
acquired sovereign rule, they reduced to obedience the province of Chicoaque, which is situated 
to the north of Mexico, and is near Panico. This was the first province which they subdued. In the 
year of Seven Flints, and 1460, an earthquake occurred. It deserves to be remarked that, since, 
according to their belief, the world was again to be destroyed by earthquakes, they recorded in their 
paintings, each year, the omens which occurred. 

PLATE X. 

In this year the Mexicans subjected the province of Coatlaxtla, which is twenty leagues distant 

from Vera Cruz, leaving every city in their rear conquered. This was in the year of Eight Houses, 

CODEX TELLERIANO- REMENSIS. Oe 
or in 1461, which province is the same as Guacacualco, which is in that district where the 
Spaniards found the Indian slave Marinate, whom they constantly name Marina. In the year 
of Nine Rabbits, or 1462, the Mexicans fought a battle with the Xiquipilcans, who inhabit a city in 

the valley of Matalcingo. This year an earthquake occurred. 

Acad Dy. © 

In the year of Twelve Houses, or in 1465, whilst the Chalchese were absent on an expedition 
against the provinces of Tlascala and Guaxocingo, the Mexicans entered their province in their 
rear and conquered it, which from that year remained subject to them. All the old people say 
that from the year 1465, in which the war occurred between the Mexicans and the Chalchese, the 
custom of sacrificing prisoners taken in war commenced; for until that period they sacrificed animals, 

and only drew blood from the bodies of men. 

PLATE XII. 

In the year of One Cane, or in 1467, the Mexicans and the T'laxcaltecas fought a great battle on 
the borders of Texcuco, on a mountain called Tliluquetepec, which signifies the black mountain. 
In the year of Three Houses, or in 1469, HuenuemourEeuuccoma died, and AxayacaTzIN was 

elected king. 

1. An earthquake. 2. HurnuEmMovurreunecoma. 3. AxayacatTzin. 4. Face of Water. 

PLATE XIII. 

In the year of Six Flints*, or of 1472, the Mexicans commenced making hostile incursions into . 
the valley of Matalcingo, which was their first entrance into Toluca. 

* In this year of Six Flints, Nezahualcoyotl the celebrated king of Tezcuco died, who was succeeded by Nezahualpilli the father 
of Cacamatzin. This prince was a poet, a statesman, a philosopher, and a warrior, and his son resembled him; but a shade of 
cruelty seems to have pervaded the character of both. ‘Torquemada (who considers Nezahualcoyotl the Solomon of the New World) 
likens him also to David, in the attachment which he formed for the wife of one of his bravest generals, Temictzin, and in the method 
which he devised of getting rid of him, by sending him to the army, and secretly desiring that he should be placed in the hottest part 
of the battle. It is impossible, on reading the following account of the stratagem on this occasion adopted by Nezahualcoyotl, 
not to fancy that the Mexicans might have had a tradition of that which ages before had been successfully practised by David. 

“« Despues que fueron creciendo, en numero, estas Poblacones, y poder de los Reies Mexicanos, y Tetzcucanos, fue tambien tenido 
por grande autoridad casar los Unos con los Otros; y asi sucedia, que aunque acostumbraban tener muchas Mugeres, no legitimaban 
sino aquella, que avian recibido de una de estas partes, y el Hijo maior, que de esta Sefiora nacia, hacian Heredero de sus Estados ; 
y aunque esto corrid en general, por la maior parte de esta Nueva-Espafia, se guardd mas en particular en el Reino de Tetzcuco. Y 
aunque Negahualcoyotl, que en esta sagon Reinaba en él, tenia muchas Mugeres, en las quales avia avido los Hijos, que dejamos 
referidos, y otros algunos mas, no tenia por legitima ninguna de ellas, por ser Hijas de sus Vasallos, y Criados; y pareciendole ser ya 
tiempo de buscar Muger, de quien pudiese dejar legitima sucesion, comengd & pensar el modo, que tendria, para averla. Sucedid, pues, 

(2m) 

138 EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE XIV. 

In the year of Seven Houses, or in 1473, Mexico and Tlatelulco went to war, when the Mexicans 

proving victorious, the others remained in a state of subjection, and never again had a king. 

que andando metido en estos cuidados, adolecid de enfermedad de melancolia, y llegd & estar de manera, que nada le daba gusto, ni 
contento, y viendole los Privados de su Casa, triste, y melancolico, y deseosos de que no lo estuviese, le persuadieron 2 que dejase la 
Ciudad, y los negocios de el Govierno, y se fuese 4 alguna parte, donde tomando placer, olvidase sus tristegas. Aceptodlo el Rei, y dijoles, 
que queria venirse & esta Ciudad, y parte de Tlatilulco, donde tenia uno de sus Famosos Capitanes, llamado Temictzin, de quien mas se 
fiaba, y que mucho queria; porque (como decimos en otra parte) desde el tiempo del Emperador Techotlala, avia en todos los Pueblos, 
y Ciudades grandes, Tetzcucanos, Mexicanos, y Chichimecas rebueltos, y mezclados, y manddles, que le diesen aviso de esto, en secreto, 
y ocultamente, sin que el Rei Motecuhguma, ni los Sefiores de la Ciudad lo supiesen, por escusar ruido, y cumplimientos publicos. 
Hicose asi, y avisado este Capitan, aderegdle su Casa, y Jardines, para aver de recibirle. Vinose Negahualcoyotl por Agua, y metidse 
en Casa de Temictzin, con la poca Gente, que trajo de su servicio, y en su Compafiia. Fue recibido de Temictzin, con grande 
reverencia, teniendose por dichoso, y bienaventurado, de que su Rei quisiese hacerle aquel favor, y merced. 

« Este Temictzin, aunque era Vasallo del Rei Negabualcoyotl, era tambien Descendiente de Sangre Real, por lo qual, y por ser grande 
Amigo de Totoquihuatzin, Rei de Tlacupan, le did una de sus Hijas, por Muger, pero quando la recibid, tenia la Nifia solo siete 
Afios, aunque ya en esta sagon era de diez y siete, 4 la qual Temictzin no avia tratado como & Muger, sino criado como & Hija; y asi 
la Moga se estaba Doncella, como quando de sus Padres la avia recibido, porque hasta entonces no le avia hecho falta, por tener otras, 
como tenia, las quales le servian en este ministerio. Llegdse la hora de comer, y para aver de servirle la hora de comer, y para aver 
de servirle la comida, le parecid & Temictzin seria bien, que la Doncella, su Muger, fuese la que sirviese en el Combite, tanto por ser 
Hija del Rei, quanto por ser tan grande Rei, a quien servia. Salid la Moga, con el primer servicio, y poniendolo delante Necahualcoyotl, 

‘higole una mui grande reverencia: Puso el Rei los ojos en ella, y fuele mui agradable la honestidad de sus Ojos, la gallardia de su 
Cuerpo, y hermosura de su Rostro; y pareciendole ser cosa nueva, salir Muger 4 administrar la vianda (por ser costumbre, que los 
Hombres sirviesen a la mesa) preguntd, que quien era aquella Doncella? y fuele respondido, que Muger de Temictzin, su Criado, y Hija 
del Rei Totoquihuatgin, Comid el Rei; pero ya otro del que a la mesa se avia sentado, por aver puesto los ojos en la Doncella, y 
aversele aficionado; y despues de aver comido, quedando solo, did orden, con un Privado suio, que inquiriese de su Casamiento, lo 
que avia, porque queria saber lo cierto de aquel caso; y como Temictzin avia recibido esta Doncella, por Muger, y si lo estaba, 6 
ya se avia aprovechado della. ‘Todo esto pasd en secreto, y con el mismo, le fue respondido, que hasta entonces Temictzin, la trataba, 
como a Hija, sin aver cuidado de mas. 

« Estuvose el Rei algunos pocos Dias en esta recreacion, y mas por ragon de gogar de la vista de Matlalcihuatcin (que asi se llamaba 
esta Doncella) que ya le tenia robado el Coragon, que por estar en este Jardin, y holgura (que para tenerlas mui a placer, mejores, y 
mas cumplidas, las tenia en su Casa) y aunque ya Matlalcihuatcin, era su maior pena, y cuidado, como era prudente, y Sabio, 
jamas lo quiso dar 4 entender. Fuese 4 Tetzcuco, con el mismo secreto, que vino, y ya llevaba Necahualcoyotl pensado de aver esta 
Doncella, por su Muger (pues por otra via, ni modo no le era licito, ni bien contado averla) y tambien llevaba tragada la manera, 
como entregarse de ella, si el Tiempo no le era contrario; y fue, que 4 pocos dias despues de aver llegado, ordend de embiar Gente, 
contra una Provincia, que se le avia rebelado, y junta la Gente, embid a llamar 4 Temictzin, y encarecidle lo mucho que le estimaba, 
la confianga, que de él hacia, y el credito con que lo trataba, y que por esto avia determinado de embiarle contra los Rebelados, dandole 
el Exercito, que avia hecho, para que fuese @ sujetarlos, y que le pedia acudiese en el caso, con las veras, que de él esperaba. 
Temictzin, que no sabia el intento del Rei, y entendiendo que era por honrarle, aventajandolo a los otros Principales Capitanes de su 
Reino, agradecidselo con la maior humildad, que pudo, ofreciendose de hacer lo que le mandaba. Dispuso su Gente, ordend su 
Jornada, y fuese en seguimiento de ella. El Rei, que por este modo ordenaba su casamiento, llamd 4 dos de sus mui Fieles, y Leales, 
que iban en la Jornada,’ y llevaban cargo de Tlacateccas (que eran como acompafiados de General) y dijoles, con grande encarecimiento, 
que quando estuviesen en lo mas fuerte de la Batalla, pusiesen 4 Temictzin en el maior riesgo de ella, para que los Enemigos le 
acometiesen, y viendole en el peligro, le dejasen, para que en él muriese, y que succediendo asi, como pensaba, le embiasen luego a 
dar aviso de lo hecho. Prometieronlo asi los Tlacochcalcas, y llegando contra los Rebelados, dieronse la Batalla, y aunque quedaron 
vencidos, murid en ella Temictzin, como el Rei lo avia ordenado: Delo qual tuvo aviso mui presto. El que huviere leido las Sagradas 
Escripturas, hechara de vér, ser este caso el mismo (6 poco menos diferenciado) que el que le succedid al Rei David, en el adulterio, 
que tuvo con Bersabé, Muger de el Fidelisimo, Leal Vasallo suio Urias; pues para encubrir el pecado, y adulterio que contra él 
avia cometido, le embid & la Guerra, y mando al Capitan Joab, que lo pusiese en lo mas fuerte de la Batalla, y alli lo dejase morir, 
como sucedio, y despues de muerto, se caso con Bersabé, Muger que avia sido del Inocente Urias. 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. : 139 

PLATE XV. 

In the year of Ten Canes, or in 1475, the province of Coatlaxtla, which had been subdued by the 
Mexicans in former years, revolted, which they proceeded to reduce again to obedience. 

In the year of Eleven Flints, or in 1476, the Mexicans conquered the province of Oquila. In this 
year there was an eclipse of the sun. 

PLATE XVI. 

In the year of Twelve Rabbits, or in 1478, the Mexicans conquered Xiquipilco. 

PLATE XVII. 

In the year of One Flint, or in 1480 according to our computation, an earthquake took place. 

“‘ Teniendo, pues, aviso el Rei Necahualcoyotl, de lo hecho, y que esta muerte no se le podia atribuir 4 él, por aver sido tan en 
secreto, embid luego sus Embajadores al Rei Totoquihuatcin, pidiendole & su Hija Matlalcihuatcin, por Muger; pues aunque lo 
avia sido de TYemictzin (ya Difunto) sabia, que estaba Doncella, y que mas la avia tratado, como 4 Hija, que como 4 Muger. 
Totoquibuatgin, que vido mejorado el Estado de su Hija, en esta ocasion, otorgd con la peticion de Negahualcoyotl, y embidle & 
decir, que no solo gustaba de recibirle por Yerno, sino tambien de estimarle por Senor. Trataronse las Bodas, y vinieron Embajadores 
al Rei Motecuhguma, que era Tio, del Desposado, y @ otros Sefiores Mexicanos, los quales, todos vinieron en el casamiento; y 
entregaron la Doncella & Necahualcoyotl, la qual recibid por su legitima Muger. Dicen sus Historias (como se vé en las Pinturas 
de sus Libros) que quando la llevd & Tetzcuco, le fueron acompafiando los Reies de Mexico, y Tlacupan, cada qual, con los 
Sefiores de su Corte.. Y que alla duraron las Fiestas, y Regocijos de las Bodas, espacio de quatro Meses. Y a un Afio despues de 
averse casado con esta Sefiora, nacid de ella Necahualpilli, que fue el que le succedid, en su Reinado. 

« Estaba Negahualcoyotl, en este tiempo, ocupado en hacer sus Casas Reales, y Palacios, que fueron llamados Hueitecpan (que quiere 
decir el Gran Palacio) porque aunque los Reies, sus Antecesores, avian tenido sus Casas mui cumplidas, y grandes, no eran de tanta 
Magestad, como el Sefiorio, que tenian, pedia; pero Necahualcoyotl, que sabia la Grande Authoridad de un Rei, y él en si la 
representaba, quiso, que las Casas de su asistencia, mostrasen con su grandeca, lo mismo que sentia de su autoridad. Acabadas las 
cosas, con muchos cumplimientos (como Yo las vide, antes que comencaran 4 derribarlas los Espafioles, para aprovecharse de los 
‘Materiales, en el Edificio de sus Casas) hico llamamiento de todos los Seftures, sujetos & su Imperio, y los de Mexico, y Tlacupan, 
para que se hallasen a la Estrena de ellas (porque asi era costumbre, entre ellos.) Fue mui de vér, todo lo que en orden de esto huvo; 
los Gastos fueron mui grandes, las Fiestas, muchas, los Combidados, bien hospedados, y todos mui contentos, de vér la Prudencia, 
y buen Govierno del Rei. Quando fue tiempo, de despedirlos, hicoles & todos un Combite General, donde fueron servidos, mui 
conforme 4 sus Reales Estados, y Personas. Despues de aver comido, mandd A sus Cantores, que viniesen 4 regocijar los estremos, y 
finales de la Fiesta; y como era Hombre de grande Entendimiento, y mucha, y profunda Consideracion, viendo tanto Rei, y Sefiores, 
y Capitanes Valerosos juntos, y que las cosas de esta vida se acaban, quiso darselo & entender 4 todos, para que movidos de esta 
consideracion, usasen de ellas, como de Censo, que es al quitar, y mandd a sus Cantores, que cantasen un Cantar, que él mismo avia 
compuesto, que comengaba asi: Xochitl mamani in huehuetitlan, &c. que quiere decir: Entre las Coposas, y Sabinas, ai frescas, y 
olorosas Flores, y prosiguiendo adelante, dice: Que aunque por algun tiempo estan frescas, y vistosas, llegan A sacon, que se 
marchitan, y secan. Iba prosiguiendo en decir, que todos los Presentes, avian de acabar, y no avian de tornar A Reinar; y que 
todas sus Grandegas, avian de tener fin, y que sus Tesoros, avian de ser Poseidos de otros; y queuo avian de bolver 4 gocar de esto, 
que una vez dejasen, y los que avian comengado 4 comer con gusto, fenecieron la Fiesta con lagrimas, oiendo las palabras del 
Cantar, y viendo ser asi verdad, lo que decia.” 

140 EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE XVIII. 

In the year of Four Canes, or in 1483, Axavacarzin died, and Trcocie was elected king. In 
this year the first stone was laid of the great Cu* which the Christians found on their arrival in the 
country. In the year of Five Flints, or in 1484, the city of Cinacantepec+ revolted, which had been 
subject to the Mexicans, who marched against it, and caused such a massacre that scarcely a man 
was left alive ; for they dragged them all to the Cut of Mexico, to sacrifice them upon the great Cu, 
which was not as yet finished. All the old people say that this was the first sacrifice of men which 
occurred in that country, for till that period they had only sacrificed animals and birds§. This 

* Torquemada says that this temple was erected on the site of one more ancient; and as the temple founded by Solomon is said in the 
Old Testament to have been enriched out of the spoils taken in war, so the temple of Huitzilopuchtli in Mexico was rendered 
sumptuous in the same manner. The same historian says, in the forty-sixth chapter of the second book of the Indian Monarchy, that 
the first Montezuma, returning a conqueror from a war in which he had been engaged, enlarged and adorned this temple with the spoils. 
“¥ de buelta de esta guerra ensanché el templo, y casa de su major dios Huitzilopuchtli, y la adornd de muchas cosas de los despojos 
que trajd desta guerra.” Bernal Diaz asserts, in the ninety-second chapter of his True History of the Conquest of New Spain, that the 
foundations on which the greater temple of Mexico stood had been laid more than a thousand years before the arrival of the Spaniards 
in that country ; and that they found, on digging them up and partitioning for building the ground which they occupied, gold, silver, 
pearls, chalchiuitles, and other precious stones in considerable abundance amongst them, which gave rise to a law-suit between those 
who claimed this treasure on the part of the king, and some of the tenants of the soil; which was decided in favour, as it would appear, 
of the king, and appropriated for the expenses of building the church of Saint James in Mexico, for the reason alleged by Bernal Diaz, — 
that the nobles of Guatemuz the last king of Mexico, who was still living, affirmed “ that all the citizens of Mexico who lived at that 
period (the period of laying the first foundation of the temple,) threw those jewels and whatsoever else was found in the foundations into 
them ; and that it was so recorded in the books and paintings of their antiquities.’ We shall extract the entire of this curious passage 
from the history of Bernal Diaz, because he gives a much greater antiquity to the city of Mexico than other historians assign to it, and 
fixes the epoch of its foundation at the beginning of the sixth century. Where so much is involved in mystery, much must also be doubtful ; 
but other Spanish writers have significantly remarked, that the temple of Huitzilopuchtli was twice rebuilt, like that of Jerusalem, which 
was in fact three times rebuilt, although some commentators on Scripture deny that the temple which Herod built was a new temple, 
because it does not agree with their interpretation of the prophecies. “ Y porque ay muchos Cues pintados en reposteros de con- 
quistadores, ¢ en uno que yo tengo, que qualquiera dellos al que los ha visto, podra colegir la manera que tenian por de fuera; mas lo 
’ que yo vi y entendi, é dello huvo fama en aquellos tiempos que fundaron aquel gran Cu, en el cimiento dél avian ofrecido de todos los 
vezinos de aquella gran ciudad, oro é plata y aljofar ¢ piedras ricas, é que le avian bafiado con mucha sangre de Indios que sacrificaron, 
que avian tomado en las guerras, y de toda manera de diversidad de semillas que avia en toda la tierra, porque les diessen sus idolos 
victorias, € riquezas, y muchos frutos. Diran aora algunos lectores muy curiosos; que como pudimos alcangar 4 saber que en el 
cimiento de aquel gran Cu echaron oro y plata, é piedras de chalchiuis ricas, y semillas, y lo rociavan con sangre humana de Indios que 
sacrificavan, aviendo sobre mil anos que se fabrico, y se hizo? A esto doy por respuesta, que desde que ganamos aquella fuerte y gran 
ciudad, y se repartieron los solares, que luego propusimos, que en aquel gran Cu aviamos de hazer la iglesia de nuestro patron é guiador 
Sefior Santiago, ¢ cupo mucha parte de solar del alto Cu para el solar de la santa iglesia, y quando abrian los cimientos para hazerlos 
mas fixos, hallaron mucho oro y plata, y chalchihuis, y perlas, é aljofar, y otras piedras. Y assi mismo 4 un vezino de Mexico, que le 
cupo otra parte del mismo solar, hallo lo mismo: y los oficiales de la hazienda de su Magestad demandavanlo por de su Magestad, que 
le venia de derecho, y sobre ello huvo pleyto, é no se me acuerda lo que passd; mas de que se informaron de los caciques y principales de 
Mexico, y de Guatemuz, que entonces era vivo, é dixeron, que es verdad, que todos los vezinos de Mexico de aquel tiempo echaron en los 
cimientos aquellas joyas, é todo lo demds, é que assi lo tenian por memoria en sus libros, y pinturas de cosas antiguas, é por esta causa 
se quedo para la obra de la Santa Iglesia de Senor Santiago.”— Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva- Espana, cap. 1xxxxii. 

+ The signification of Cinacantepec is the mountain of bats. The sculptured head of this animal is found among the monuments of 
M. Dupaix. 

{ Cu, pronounced Su, was a name which the Spaniards gave to the great temple of Mexico, or to the largest teocalli inclosed within 
its walls. ‘They borrowed this word from the language of the island of Hayti or St. Domingo. ; 

§ It deserves to be remarked, that although Peter de los Rios frequently refers to the traditions preserved in the recollections of the 

old inhabitants of the country, he never in a single instance appeals to the testimony of ancient Mexican paintings; from which omission 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 141 

chastisement and slaughter was to strike terror, in order that, whilst prosecuting the conquest of the 
country, others might fear them. 
1. Ticogic. 2. A Face of Water. 3. AxayacaTziIN. 

PLATE XIX. 

In the year of Seven Rabbits, or in 1487 according to our computation, Trco¢1c died, and 
Auvutrzott was elected king. In the year of Eight Canes, or in 1487 according to our computation, 
the great Cu of Mexico was completed. The old people affirm that in this year four thousand* 
men were sacrificed, who were dragged from the ‘provinces conquered by the Mexicans}. The 
number four hundred is signified by each of the branches painted above in black. 

1. Tigogic. 2. Auurrzorz, which is the name of an aquatic animal famous in Mexican 

mythology. 

PLATE XX. 

In the year of Nine Flints, or in 1498, the Mexicans conquered a city of Thiapa called 
Cabelilotepec, and the city of Cuxcaquatenango. In the year of Ten Houses, or in 1489, a very 
large comet, which they name Xihuitli, appeared. 

1. The comet. 

may be inferred their great scarcity, as well as from the fact of his having undertaken the laborious task of copying out an entire 
Mexican Calendar, together with so many other historical paintings. Acosta thus describes the proscription which these paintings 
underwent three hundred years ago in the province of Yucatan, which was equally carried into effect in all the other provinces of South 
America: “In provincia Yucatan qua episcopatus Honduras est, libri sunt reperti, quorum folia cert’ form’ complicata et colligata 
videbantur. In his Indi, tum divisiones temporum, tum planetarum motus, ut et animalium ac rerum naturalium aliarum naturas 
proprietatesque, und cum rerum gestarum exemplis, operosa diligentia descripserant. Cum yero concionatorum quispiam ad populum 
subinde vociferaretur, libros eos mere magicos et nigromanticos existere, adeoque ut universim collecti exurerentur, urgeret, facile quod 
voluit, impetravit. Quod tamen factum non Indi solum, sed ipsi quoque Hispani ut qui terre illius secreta et abdita vehementer 
sciturirent, paulo post gravissime doluerunt.”—Acosta, Indie Occidentalis Historia, lib. vi. cap. 7. It is not at all surprising that the 
Spaniards should have been curious to learn the secret history of Yucatan, where they found the cross adored, the doctrine of the 
Trinity known, and many rites analogous to those practised amongst Christians established. 

* Pedro de los Rios, in estimating the number of prisoners sacrificed by Ahuitzotl at only four thousand, has omitted to reckon the 
two Mexican numerals in the painting, resembling in figure purses, each of which signifies eight thousand. ‘These numerals were called 
Xiquipilli, which name means a purse... In the Ottoman dominions they reckon large sums of money by purses, which amount to a 
certain sum in specie, and bear a fixed value. 

+ Acosta says that the conquests of this king extended over New Spain as far as Guatimala, which province was 300 miles distant 
from Mexico; and Torquemada estimates the number of prisoners sacrificed by Ahuitzotl at the dedication of the great temple, at 
seventy-two thousand three hundred and forty-four. This enormous butchery of human victims some Mexican historians appear to have 
considered as an act merely of a religious nature, in accordance with the manners of that age and people; for Acosta says that Abhuitzotl 
was “mitis et humanus supra modum,” and the interpreter of the Collection of Mendoza, that he was a man of “ alegre condicion.” 
If this was really the case, and superstition could so mar a naturally good disposition, how true is that line in Lucretius, by which his 
enemies have endeavoured to prove him an atheist, who only rejected the Roman mythology because he thought it contained fables 
unworthy of the gods. 

+ The comet is represented in the plate by the symbol of a caterpillar; in allusion, perhaps, to its supposed pernicious influence in 
causing blights. 

(20) 

142 ; EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE XXI. 

In the year of Twelve Canes, or in 1491, the people of Tlacuva sacrificed a lord of Huaxotzingo 
named Tovoracaque, whom they had taken prisoner in war. In the year of One House, or in 

1493, the Mexicans conquered the provinces of Atlicapa and Xicochimalco*. 

PLATE XXII. 

In the year of Two Rabbits, or in 1494, the Mexicans conquered the city of Mictla, which is in the 
province of Huaxaca. In this year an earthquake occurred. In the year of Four Flints, or in 1496, 
the Mexicans conquered the city of Cultepec, where, at present, are the mines. In this year there 
was a great eclipse of the sun}. 

1. The sun. 

PLATE XXIII¢. 

This daughter of Mounrrcoma, after she had sons by the lord of Tequantepec, informed her 
husband that her father never would have given her to him as a wife, except for the purpose of 

* Atlicapa y Xicochimalco is the right reading of the Spanish text. The latter name signifies a wasp on a shield, which symbol is 
found in the painting. 

+ Baron de Humboldt infers from this painting that the Mexicans were informed of the real cause of eclipses: which would not be 
at all surprising, considering the many other curious things with which they were acquainted, the knowledge of which they must have 
derived from the West. It is proper to observe, that in the 127th page of the Vatican MS., where a representation of the same eclipse 
occurs, the disk of the moon does not appear to be projecting over that of the sun. The Vatican MS. appears to have been copied 
from a Mexican painting similar to, but not the same as Pedro de los Rios copied, whose notes and interpretations the Italian interpreter 
had before his eyes, and strictly followed. 

{ Two paintings with their explanations, containing an account of the remarkable events that occurred during the last five years of 
the reign of Ahuitzotl, have been here torn out. Their loss is however supplied by the Vatican MS. These events appear to have been ng 
the inundation of Mexico, mentioned by Acosta, (who says that it was represented in a Mexican painting preserved in the Vatican te 
library, and seen by a brother of his own Company of Jesus, who highly gratified the librarian by explaining the meaning of it to him,) : 
and some triumph gained by Montezuma, as general of the Mexican armies, during the life-time of Ahuitzotl, who, it is singular, should be 
painted bearing two banners in the form of a cross, and wearing a human skin, which confirms what would otherwise be deemed an 

eats cge = = 

incredible account of Torquemada: “ Este acto y manera de vestidura, dicen que usd aquel famoso y excelente rei Motecuhcuma en 

alguna fiesta, y no debié de ser él solo, sino que debidé de venir corriendo la costumbre de mas atras, de otros sus antepasados y reies 

comarcanos, para lo qual guardaban algun cautivo que fuese sefior y principal, para que su piel ajustase en lo noble de la sangre con la 

del rei, que se la vestia, y bailaba con ella un rato, haciendo sus ademanes y contenencias reales en servicio de sus dioses, al qual 

espectaculo dicen que concurria todo el pueblo, y de muchas partes de la comarca, como 4 yer cosa particular y rara, que siempre lo son u 

las acciones de los reies.”—Monarquia Indiana, lib. vii. cap. 20. 
The spectacle of a king performing a dance as an act of religion, was witnessed by the Jews as well as by the Mexicans; for it says in 

the sixth ‘chapter of the Second Book of Samuel: “ So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the 

city of David with gladness. And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the Lord had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and 

fatlings. And David danced before the Lord with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod. So David and all the 

house of Israel brought up the ark of the Lord with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet. And as the ark of the Lord canie into i 

the city of David, Michal Saul’s daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the Lord ; and she 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 143 

contracting ties of amity with him, and of having the opportunity of entering into his country.and of 
subduing it; which when he became aware of, he took such precautions that no Mexican was in 
future admitted into his country until the arrival of the Spaniards, who conquered it. In the year of 
Ten Rabbits, or in 1502, Auurrzorz died, and they elected Mounrrcomwa as king, whom. the 
“Marquis found on his arrival in the country. In the year of Eleven Canes, or in 1503, there were 

heavy falls of snow in Tlachquiaco, in the province of Mixteca. 1. Morruccoma. 

PLATE XXIV. 

In the year of Thirteen Houses, or in 1505, there was a great famine in the Mexican province, and 
they went as far as the province of Pango for bread. In the year of One Rabbit, or in 1506, so 
many rats appeared in the province of Mexico, that they devoured the grain sowed in the fields, and 
the inhabitants were consequently obliged to get up by night and to carry torches through the fields. 
In this year Mounrsecuma caused a man to be shot to death with arrows in this manner. The old 
people say that this was for to appease the gods; since, during a period of two hundred years, they 
had always been afflicted with famine in the year of One Rabbit. In this year they had been 
accustomed to bind their years, according to their mode of reckoning; but as it had always proved 

disastrous to them, Mounrecuma changed it to that of Two Canes. 

PLATE XXV. 

In the year of T'wo Canes, or in 1507, there was an eclipse of the sun and likewise an earthquake, 
and eighteen hundred soldiers were drowned in the river of Tucac, which is beyond Ytzuca on the 
road to Mixteca, whilst engaged on a military expedition against the provinces. In this year the 
temple of the New Fire was completed (for they always kindled new fire at the expiration of every 
period of fifty-two years). This temple was situated on the mountain Visasthl, four leagues distant 

despised him in her heart.” And in the twentieth verse of the same chapter: “Then David returned to bless his household ; and 
Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, ‘How glorious was the king of Israel to-day, who uncovered himself 
to-day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!’ ” 

The early Spanish writers, many of whom believed that both the Mexican and Peruvian governments, laws, and commonwealths, 
were modelled after the Jews, (though the reason they assign for this being the case is absurd, viz. that Satan was jealous of the 
institutions which God had given to his chosen people, and therefore determined to imitate them in the New World,) have not failed to 
point out some curious traits of resemblance to Hebrew usages, in certain public acts performed by the king, or Inga, and in the 
external marks of reverence which those monarchs received from their subjects. These consisted in the king’s presiding at sacrifices; 
in his dancing on great religious festivals; in his being consecrated to the regal dignity by the hands of the high priest with a pretended 
holy unction ; in his being invested with a crown and bracelets, as the insignia of majesty; in his wearing a signet fastened to his arm; 
in his keeping, as a matter of state, many wives and concubines; in his rending his garments on receiving the intelligence of any national 
calamity, such as the defeat of his armies; in his saluting with a kiss the general who brought him tidings of a victory; in his 
employing regular couriers for the dispatch of news of a public nature; and in the ceremonies with which his subjects were accustomed 
to enter the palace, taking off their sandals as on approaching the temples of their gods; and when speaking to the king not presuming to 
look him in the face, but keeping their eyes fixed on the ground; and finally, in the ceremony of burning incense and precious perfumes 
at his funeral. 

144 EXPLANATION OF THE 

from. Mexico: it was named Cabeculihuacan, whence the new fire was transported over the whole 
country ; for they affirmed, that whosoever on that day kept in the old fire in his house would 
meet with a thousand misfortunes. In the year of Four Houses, or in 1509, they perceived a light 
by night, which lasted longer than forty days. Those who saw it say that it.was discernible 
throughout all New Spain, and that it was very great and very brilliant ; that it was situated in 
the East; and that, ascending from the earth, it reached the skies. This was one of the prodigies 
which they beheld before the arrival of the Christians ; and they thought that it was Quecalcoatle, 
whom they expected *. 

In this year the city of Cocola +, which is six leagues distant from Huaxaca, rebelled against 
the Mexicans, who marched against it, and left not a single inhabitant alive, as the old men say 

who chanced to be present on that occasion. 1. Mexpanitli +. 

PLATE XXVI. 

In the year of Five Rabbits, or in 1510, there was an eclipse of the sun: they take no account of 
the eclipses of the moon, but only of those of the sun; for they say that the sun devours the moon 

* A slight transposition of the original text has here occurred. 

‘+ Cocola, or Zozola, was a province from which the Mexicans obtained gold, to which Cortes, shortly after his arrival in Mexico, 
dispatched, with the consent of Moteccuma, Spaniards, accompanied with many Indians, to make inquiries after that precious metal. 

} The numerical reference has been omitted in the plate; but Mexpanitli was the name of that part of the sky where the light 
appeared. The sky itself is represented by the planets, and the light which they believed to ascend from the earth appears in the 
painting to proceed from a mountain. ‘The signification of Mexpanitliis the place of Mewi, or Quecalcoatle. With respect to the 
number of days during which the light was visible, it must be observed that forty was a favourite number with the Jews, because Moses 
was forty days with God in the mountain, in remembrance of whose fasting they occasionally fast, eating very little, for forty days. A fast 
of this duration was also kept by the Mexicans, which was rigidly observed by Nezahualcoyotl the king of Tezcuco. . In inflicting 
punishment the Jews also have regard to this number, which they take care never to exceed ; and therefore stripes must be only thirty- 
nine. M.de Humboldt, noticing this curious passage of the manuscript of Le Tellier, which the extreme badness of the handwriting 
might in some places have prevented him from deciphering, says: ‘“‘ Cette lumiére qui paroissoit s’élever de la terre méme, étoit 
peut-étre la lumiére zodiacale, dont la vivacité est trés-grande et trés-inégale sous les Tropiques. Le peuple regarde comme nouveaux 
les phénoménes les plus communs, dés que la superstition se plait a y attacher un sens mysterieux.” ‘The appearance of this light 
might otherwise be accounted for by the eruption of some of those volcanoes with which New Spain abounds. 

It has been observed above that the great light which was visible to the Mexicans some short time previous to the destruction of their 
city, and which appearing to ascend from the earth reached the skies, and lasted, as the Spaniards pretend, for the exact space of forty 
days, was probably some volcanic eruption, which was afterwards converted into a prodigy, portending the approaching destruction of 
the Mexican empire. In. order to show the probability of this supposition, the following account of the volcano of Masaya, situated in 
the province of Nicaragua, is here inserted, from the fourteenth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy. This province can hardly be 
considered a part of New Spain, although contiguous to it: but a traveller, in a recent narrative of a Land Journey from Vera Cruz to 
Mexico, states, that he observed in the whole progress of it indications that the soil of New Spain had been the frequent theatre of mighty 
volcanic eruptions, as the rocks themselves seeined in many places to be merely lava. Many other prodigies are related to have preceded 
the fall of Mexico, equal both in number, in magnitude, and in impossibility, to those declared by Josephus to have attended the 
destruction of Jerusalem. Strange voices are said to have been heard in the air, and the serene vault of heaven to have been disturbed 
by the mimic combats of armed hosts. The sister of Montezuma, who was dead and buried, is pretended to have come to life, and many 
other signs and wonders to have happened. In general, nothing is more easy than to relate a prodigy or to attest one, and nothing more 
rare than to witness one. If human virtue and excellence, which, according to the opinion of the most famous of the ancient philo- 
sophers, is the most moving spectacle that the Deity can behold, has never yet (except in the case of two Jews) been able to reverse 
the decree of death pronounced on all of human race; how absurd is the supposition that Providence would disturb the whole order of 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 145 

when an eclipse of the moon takes place. In the year of Six Canes, or in 1511, the Mexicans 

conquered the city of Ycpaltepec: they employed ladders in the ascent, as the city was situated on 

nature, in order to bring about some comparatively insignificant object, when it is admitted by all philosophers and theologists that 
Nature always proportions her means to the end. It is surprising that the author of Salathied should attach credit to those omens of the fall 
of Jerusalem, which Greek and Roman authors would have recorded if they had not thought that the bare mention of them would disgrace 
the page of history, and tarnish the lustre of the philosophic age in which they lived. The following description of the volcano of Masaya 
will be interesting to naturalists, because its authenticity may be relied upon; nor is that portion of it least curious, in which mention is 
made of the birds which frequented its terrific crater, since it agrees with what ancient writers have said of Etna. These birds kept of 
course out of the reach of whatever could affect animal life, but still their nature must be very extraordinary: at the same time, we do 
not attach so much implicit credit to this account as Doctor Johnson, the most learned and credulous man of his age, did to the story of 
swallows at the approach of winter “conglomerating together,” and flinging themselves into some pond, and there reposing in the mud 
till the genial solar rays again called them forth into life and activity. ‘This was certainly a curious way of accounting for the absence of 
swallows in the winter ; and the fable of the phoenix visiting Egyptian Thebes was not half so romantic. 

“ De las cosas, que se han dicho en los Capitulos pasados se conocen las maravillosas obras de la Naturalega, que por secreto 
beneplacito de Dios, ha obrado, y obra cada Dia, en los estrafios efectos de estos Volcanes ; pero aunque estas cosas pueden causar 
espanto, diré aqui de otro que parece, que excede su consideracion 4 todas las cosas, que de semejantes Lugares pueden decirse, que es 
el de Masaya, en la Provincia de Nicaragua ; porque aunque hai muchos en esta grande, y estendida Tierra, excede a todos ellos, y aun 
entiendo, que a todos los que hasta el Dia de oi se han visto en el Mundo; porque pienso no haver otro su semejante, ni tan espantoso. 
A este Volcan Ilamaron 4 los principios, los Nuestros, el Infierno de la Provincia de Nicaragua, 0 el Intierno de Masaya, porque lo situd 
Dios, en aquella Provincia, que despues, los que la moraron, Ja llamaron de Masaya. En una parte de esta Provincia, cerca de poblado, 
y tres leguas de dos mui grandes Lagunas (de que despues haremos mencion) esta una Sierra levantada, no en mui alta distancia, aunque 
el Cerro es redondo, y todo el sitio de su contorno, es cabernoso, y retumba andando, por ella, como si estuviese hueca: La subida de 
esta Sierra es rasa, y no mui trabajosa, porque se puede ir hasta lo alto 4 Cavallo, y es poco mas de media legua, el camino, que hai desde 
lollano, 4 su Cumbre. Esta Cumbre, 0 Cabega de Sierra esta toda abierta, y su abertura es del mismo tamafio, y grueso de su Cabeca, 
y tiene esta abertura, en redondo, mas de mil y quinientos pasos; esta abertura, y hueco, con sus paredes, en lo alto, y en lo bajo, es tan 
patente, y manifiesto, como lo es una Plaga grande de una Ciudad de estas de las Indias, ude Espafia; porque sin ningun impedimento 
lo bafta el Sol todo, como baiia, y clarifica los Campos mui escombrados. Esta abertura, y hueco va casi & un peso hasta abajo, aunque, 
segun dice el Padre Frai Toribio, que la vid, que es de hechura, 6 forma de sombrero, buelto lo de arriba A bajo; de manera, que lo 
extremo, y bajo de esta hoia, es un suelo, y Plaga, poco menos ancho, que el hueco de la abertura, por lo que va disminuiendo en la 
forma, que decimos de sombrero, buelta la faldaacia arriba. Hai desde lo alto de esta Sierra al suelo, que esta dentro de ella, que hace 
manera de plaga, docientos, y mas estados (segun cuenta el Obispo de Chiapa, que lo vid, y se lo certificaron otros Compafieros) la Plaga 
es mui llana, como si de proposito la hicieran 4 mano; pero no hai que maravillar, pues es hecha de la Mano Poderosa de Dios, y aunque 
la bafta el Sol, no tiene ierva verde, porque el calor del Fuego debe de abrasarla. Alli en aquello alto de aquel Volcan estin unos 
Teocales, 6 Altares, sobre los quales llamaban & sus Dioses, y ofrecian sacrificio los Indios, de aquellas Provincias ; y quando les faltaba 
el Agua, para los Temporales, en Tiempo de secas, en lugar de los Sacrificios ordinarios, despefiaban por alli abajo Nifios, y Muchachos, 
para que fuesen por Agua, y los moradores de aquella Provincia creian, que luego que alli ofreciesen aquellos Nifios havia de llover, los 
quales, antes de llegar 4 bajo, iban hechos muchos pedacos. 

SN 

“Esta quasi enmedio, aunque algo 4 un lado mas acostado de la Placa, un pogo redondo, como si fuera hecho & mano, y 
puedese andar todo a la redonda, y & todas partes, por el buen espacio, que hai de suelo; la boca de este pogo tiene (segun 
dice el Padre Frai Toribio) de través un buen tiro de Ballesta ; y segun el Obispo de Chiapa, veinte y cinco, 6 treinta pasos, 
que sera lo mismo, poco mas, 6 menos; y lo que parece de hondo son mas de treinta estados. En este parejo de hondura esta 
el Fuego, 6 Metal, que se ve, y es de la misma manera, que Metal derretido, de que se funden los Tiros de Artilleria, 3 las 
Campanas; desde lo alto de aquella Plaga se ve bien el Fuego, d Metal, que abajo anda, y esta treinta y cinco, d quarenta 
bragas de este suelo, que la hoia hace, y hai hasta arriba A la Cumbre, docientas y veinte: Esta este Metal siempre moviendose, 
y hierve espantosisimamente, y anda un hervor, enmedio, que parece, que viene del profundo del Infierno, y en espacio, y tiempo, 
que puede decirse un Credo, se levanta una ola como una Torre, y repentinamente se deshace, y desbarata, y dad tan gran golpe, 
y hace tan grande ruido, como quando quiebran las olas de la Mar de tumbo, y nunca cesa aquel espantoso, y bravo hervor, y 
ruido tan furioso, y hecha de si parte de aquel metal, como chispas, que se pegan por las paredes, dos, y tres estados en alto, 
las quales luego se apagan. Dentro de ste poco, andan muchos Pajaros, y Aves pequefias, y A lo que parece, no mucha 
distancia apartados, que no hace poco espanto tambien esto. Todo lo dicho ge vé desde arriba, tan claramente (dice el Obispo 
de Chiapa) como si estuviesen los que lo ven, y ello, juntos en un llano; verdad es (dice luego) que como aquella hondura sea 

tan grande, y desde la abertura, hasta lo bajo, vaian las paredes casi por nivel tajadas, no sin gran riesgo, y peligro de caer nos 

(2p) 

164, EXPLANATION OF THE 

a steep rock. In this year there were heavy falls of snow, and three earthquakes occurred. In the 
year of Seven Flints, or in 1512, the Mexicans conquered the cities of Quimichintepec and Nopala, 

acercamos para verlo a la vera de la abertura. - Los Indios Naturales, ni sus antepasados (dice el Padre Frai Toribio) que le 
dijeron, no haverle visto hacer mudanga, salvo, que aquel Metal sube, y baja, y quando mas llueve, mas se inflama, como la 
Fragua del Herrero bien encendida, quando le hechan Agua ; y hasta tanto acontece subir (prosigue luego) que hinchandose, 
como la Caldera, que le dan mucho Fuego, llega hasta aquella placa, y suelo donde comienga la boca de este pogo, y luego 
dice: Io vi esta boca del Infierno el afio de mil y quinientos y quarenta y quatro, en principio del Mes de Agosto, y havia 
subido aquel Metal hasta la plaga, y aun vertid un poquillo encima, acia la parte de Oriente, y ia tornaba bajando dos, 6 tres 
estados, y entonces estaba mui de vér aquel espantosisimo Fuego, y vilo de Dia, y de Noche, que es mas de vér, y esta tan 
claro, como de Dia, y en una Noche, que dormi encima de la boca, como el ruido es tan grande, despierta muchas veces & los 
que alli duermen, y todas las veces, que despertaba, me paraba a mirarlo, y siempre me parecia cosa nueva, y mui espantosa. 

“Lo que de todo esto parece ser mas admirable, es, que siendo aquel Fuego, 5 Metal, no Mama, sino brasa, y estando tan 
hondo, solo el baho, 0 resplandor, que de el sale, se sube a las Nubes encima, por linea recta, y se ve, y resplandece treinta 
leguas la Mar adentro, y parece lama, que arde. Y prosigue el Obispo de Chiapa en la Relacion, que hace de este Volcan, 
diciendo: Para gogar bien de verlo, y vér quanta es su claridad, conviene subir, y dormir en lo alto de la Sierra una Noche, y 
asi lo hice io, porque con el Sol de Dia no se vé quanta es su claridad ; estuvimos toda una noche ciertos Frailes, y lo, y regamos 
Maitines, sin otra lumbre mas de la que nos comunicd el resplandor del Volcan, y vimos ser tanta la claridad, que hacia, quanta 
hace el Dia en las mafianas nubladas; y estando mi Compafiero, y io, en un Pueblo, que llaman los Indios Nindiri, legua y 
media del Volcan, y andandonos paseando, juzgabamos, que con nuestros Cuerpos haciamos tanta sombra de la parte contraria, 
donde teniamos el resplandor del Volcan, como la hicieramos, si tuvieramos la Luna de ocho Dias, por aquella parte. Esto 
dice este Apostolico Obispo ; y a esto afiade el Venerable Padre Frai Toribio: El estremado, y mucho Fuego, que siempre anda 
en aquella hoia, da tanta claridad, que de Noche se vé @ leer una Carta cerca de una legua; y otros quieren decir, que de mas 
lejos, y todo puede ser verdad; porque quando llueve, con el Agua, y con las Nubes, que se bajan, hacen reverberar el 
resplandor, y que repercuta acia abajo, y con esto dd mas claridad en sus alderredores, mas io le vi casi en todo el Tiempo de 
las Aguas, y pareceme, que apenas se podia bien leer una Carta, mas de la distancia dicha. Est este Volcan cinco leguas de 
la Mar del Sur, y vese su claridad veinte, 0 veinte y cinco leguas la Mar adentro. Para vér aquel Fuego, que alli sale, ponense 
a mirarlo desde arriba encima de unas Pefias, y miran para abajo, como quien mira una profunda Cueva. Estas son palabras 
de este Bendito Padre. 

“Visto lo que dejamos dicho, de las Causas Naturales, de que el Fuego se engendra, en los Volcanes, podemos creer, que 
aqueste se causa de los grandes movimientos de las Aguas de dos Lagunas mui grandes, que tiene en su vecindad, y cercania ; 
porque desde medio Dia abajo, y algunas veces antes de medio Dia, hai en ellas ordinarios, y recios vientos, tanto, que se 
levantan tantas, y tan altas olas, como en la Mar quando hai Borrasca, y Tormenta. Estos golpes, y movimientos, como estén 
dos, y tres leguas del Volcan, deben de entrar, por algunas Cuevas, 6 Cavernas en Cl, y esto engendrar Viento, y el Viento 
encender la Piedra-acufre, y haver alli mucho del Betun, id dicho, que lo sustenta; y con esta agitacion, y permanencia hacerse 
Fuego continuo, que es el que en aquella hoia, 5 poco permanece. Quando aquel Fuego rebienta (que debe de ser quando hai 
grandes lluvias, por las ragones dichas de los otros Volcanes, 6 por otra alguna causa oculta) sube a lo alto, con grande 
estruendo, y furor, y lleva consigo grandisima cantidad de Piedra Pomez, y las mas livianas de ellas las avienta distancia de 
quatro leguas, poco mas, 6 menos, y con ellas, y con la ceniga, que va a bueltas, que es a manera de rescoldo, quema la Tierra, 
que alcanga en sus alderredores; en el Vallecillo, que hace en su contorno este Volcan, hai de esta Piedra liviana, 0 Pomez, 
que parece como las escorias de las Fraguas de los Herreros, y esto en mas de un millon de carretadas, en tanta manera, que no 
se puede andar, sino sobre ellas; y porque quanto mas pesada es la Piedra, tanto menos la aparta de si, de aqui es, que en lo 
alto de la Sierra estd todo Ileno de la Piedra mas pesada, y aspera, que son como la escoria, que decimos, que sale del Hierro 
purificado en la Fragua, y esto en tanta cantidad, y ella toda tan aspera, que casi en toda la Sierra apenas se halla Tierra 
desocupada de aquellas Piedras, donde se pueda facilmente acostar un Hombre. Esta Piedra, que esta sobre esta Sierra, no es 
distinta una, de otra, como son las Piedras Pomez, que caen en el llano, 6 Valle donde este Monte, 6 Volcan esta sentado, sino 
que estan pegadas unas con otras, y hechas Pefla asperisima, y no parecen arrojadas del Fuego, so nacidas en los mismos 
lugares, donde parecen, como suelen estar en los mal Palses, y Sierras asperas las Pefias picarrefias, que son como puntas de 
Diamantes, i de Alesnas; y porque (como iad dije) quanto mas pesado es lo que de si hecha, tanto menos lo avienta; de aqui es, 
que junto a la boca tiene grandes pedagos de Piedra, } Metal (segun io no dudo que sea) no de la aguda, y pigarrefia, smo casi 
lisa, y de color de Hierro, y mas parece Cobre, que Hierro; y para Argumento, que aquel Metal sale, 6 sube mui tierno quando 

lo despide, es ver, que aquellos pedagos estan resquebrajados, como suele abrirse, 0 resquebrajarse un gran pedago de masa del 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 147 

which are situated towards the province of Tototepec. In this year the stones apparently smoked 

to such a degree that the smoke reached the sky. 

Pan, que comemos, quando la masa de mui levada, se avinagra, 0 aceda, porque parece, que se resquebraja, embeviendose en si, 
© enjugandose poco a poco quando se iela; y esto hace mucha fuerga para creer, que aquel es Metal de Hierro, 6 Cobre, del 
qual aquel Fuego se sustenta, si acd solo es, aunque es cosa mul dudosa. Concuerda con esto lo que arriba hemos referido de 
los demas Volcanes donde sale Metal, 6 cosa, que lo parece; y puedese creer, que la Tierra de esta Sierra es jugosa de jugo, 
que engendra esta materia, que produce este Fuego, y que se engendra en los poros de estas Piedras esponjosas, 6 Pomez ; y 
quando se acaba de consumir el humor, 6 jugo de ellas, convirtiendose en aquel Metal, 6 Fuego, entonces quedan livianas, y las 
puede arrojar tan lejos, y las que no estan del todo gastadas, no tanto, sino mas cerca. 

“Tgnorando las ragones, y cosas naturales, arriba referidas, de como estos Fuegos se engendran, todo el Vulgo, de los 
Espafioles, que aquel Volcan han visto, han tenido imaginacion, que aquel Metal, 6 Fuego, que alli se sustenta, es Plata, 1 Oro, 
6 otra cosa de valor; porque como dice San Ambrosio: Al codicioso todo lo que ve, y cie se le antoja Dinero; y por esta causa 
se ofrecieron algunas Personas al Rei, diciendo, que a su costa querian saber, é inquirir lo que alli havia, pidiendo las albricias 
de ser Minas de grande importancia ; otros, de callada, trabajaron de hacer cierto instrumento, para entrar dentro, y se ocuparon 
un Afio en hacerlo, y hecho, acordaron de entrar quatro juntos, y por curiosidad fue un Fraile, con ellos, y al tiempo de entrar 
en un Vaso de madera, que tenian hecho, para el efecto, viendo tanta hondura, y pareciendoles cosa mui peligrosa, temieron ; 
pero el Fraile, con mas temeridad, que esfuergo, quiso entrar solo, y tomando una Cruz en la una mano, y un martillo en la otra, 
para quebrar alguna piedra, si la huviese por las paredes del pogo, que le fuese estorvo, 6 impedimento, para bajar abajo, higose 
bajar, y llegd sano, y bueno al suelo de la placa, y pasedse por ella mui a su placer, con risa, y goco, escarneciendo de los que 
no havian osado ser sus compafieros; llevaba sus sogas largas, y al cabo una buena cadena, y en ella un Capacete de hierro 
para coger de aquel Metal lo que cupiese, y hechando abajo sus sogas, y en ellas la Cadena con el Capacete, llegd al Fuego, y 
todo lo que entrd de la Cadena, y vaso dentro de él, lo cortd, como si fuera con cuchillo ; no saco nada el Fraile, pero considerd 
mui de espacio todas las cosas, que havia de este Metal, que ardia, y Fuego, hondura del pogo, y lo demas, que havia en 1; y 
lo que despues afirmd, fue, que aquel Metal (0 lo que es) que alli parece estar ardiendo, no estd quedo, sino que es un rio de 
ello, que pasa de camino, como si lo fuese de Agua, y que aquel Rio de Metal, 6 Fuego es tan ancho como una calle de las de 
esta Ciudad de Mexico, que son mui anchas, pero despues tornaron a entrar ciertos Espafioles, con mas instrumentos de Hierro 
mas fuertes, para coger del Metal, y tambien los corto, y derritid el Fuego. El Padre Frai Toribio dice, que el Afio de 153 8, 
entraron diez, 6 doce Espafioles, en aquella Hoia, y Plaga, poniendo arriba un cabestrante, y bajaban uno A uno, metiendose en 
un cesto, y mui atados, y con otras muchas diligencias (y dice, que con todo fue una mui gran locura, y que se pusieron 4 mui 
grande riesgo, y peligro) y que desde aquella Placa donde esta la poga tornaron 4 poner otro cabestrante con una soga, y por 
remate una gruesa cadena de Hierro, con un servidor de Oro, para coger de aquel Metal, que en todo su seso pensaban, que era 
Oro, diciendo, que a ser otro Metal, lo gastara, y consumiera el ardentisimo Fuego de aquella hornaga, porque el Fuego gasta 
todos los Metales, sino es el Oro. Durmieron alld bajo una noche, porque como iad diximos, hai por todas partes a la redonda 
de la boca donde anda el Fuego buen espacio; metieron su soga, y cadena, y en Negando la Cadena al Metal, luego la torcid, y 
cortd, y quedése alla el servidor; y de creer es, que no tardd mucho en derretirse; y en la punta de la Cadena salieron pegados 
ciertos granos de aquel Metal, que alli hierve, y llevados 4 los Plateros, nunca conocieron, qué Metal fuese, y puesto sobre una 
Vigornia, 6 Tunque, y dandole con el martillo, que estaba acerado, no lo podian ablandar; antes el Metal entraba por el Acero, 
como si se metiera por cera, que es mucho de considerar. \ Esto dice él Padre Frai Toribio. Mas Animo parece, que mostrd 
(segun dicen algunos) el otro condenado 4 muerte, que entro en el Monte Etna, que estos que bajaron A esta Plaga, del qual 
dicen los que escriven sus maravillas, que cierto Rei de Sicilia, queriendo inquirir lo que havia dentro de aquel Volcan, obligd a 
un condenado 4 muerte, a que entrase dentro, y que si saliese, con vida, lo dejaria ir libremente; el qual alentado, con la vida, 
que se le prometia, saliendo con ella, de aquella boca, se metid en un cesto, con comida dentro, y con cierto artificio, que para 
ello hicieron, bajo hasta increible hondura, la qual no se presumia; y estando todo el Dia dentro, al poner del Sol lo sacaron, 
y dijo, que en los lados, y paredes del Monte havia muchos nidos de Aves, y que por toda aquella hondura por donde bajé, 
nunca vido cosa, mas de que oid grandes ruidos, y estruendos de Aguas, que por lo mas bajo corrian; y esta es la verdad de 
aquel Fuego, que las Aguas de la Mar, que por alli estan cerca (como sea Isla) con sus golpes, y movimientos continuos 
engendran el Viento, y el Viento enciende la Piedra-agufre, y asi se hace aquel Fuego; pero digo, que aunque fue mucho el 
Animo de este condenado 4 muerte, lo fue maior el de estos, que entraron en este de Masaya, porque eran libres, y se ponian 
voluntariamente al peligro, y esotro era condenado, y asi, como asi, estaba sentenciado a muerte, y mas cierta la tenia por otra 
via, que entrando en aquella boca de aquel Monte. 

“Por lo dicho vemos no haverse conocido nada de este Fuego, 6 Metal, y asi quedan todos hasta oi, con la duda, 6 sospecha, 

148 EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE XXVII. 

In the year of Kight Houses, or in 1513, the Mexicans conquered Tototepec, a province eighty 
leagues distant from Mexico, situated on the coast of the South Sea. In this year there was such 
an earthquake, that the people who witnessed it say, that so great was the number of birds which 
flew from the east to the west, that they darkened the sun; and that some of them having been 
taken, they were found to have no entrails, and the entire cavity of their bodies to be full of feathers 
and dirt. In the year 1514, or of Nine Rabbits, the Mexicans conquered the province of Hayocingo, 
which is that which so long defended itself against them; they pretended accordingly that they came 
to serve them, bringing chains of gold. In the year of Ten Canes, or in 1515, the Mexicans 

conquered Ytzlaquetlaloca. 

PLATE XXVIII*. 

PLATE XXIX. 
In the year of Eleven Houses, or in 1529, Nuno de Guzman set out for Yalisco on his march to 

que de antes tenian, si es Plata, Oro, Cobre, 6 Hierro, 6 otra cosa de valor aquella materia, que por alli corre; y estan mui engafiados, 
en esta imaginacion; porque no debe ser otra cosa, sino que aquel Fuego se enciende, y arde, y conserva naturalmente, con la 
Piedra-agufre, y jugo, 6 betun de aquellas Piedras-pomez, y con ella especie de Metal, que tiene color de Cobre, 5 Hierro, y no de 
otra manera: y todo esto se puede colegir de lo que de los otros Volcanes havemos dicho. Lo que me podia 4 mi ser de maior 
admiracion, era lo que el Religioso havia dicho, que era Rio que pasaba de camino, y se pudiera dudar de esto, sino concertara con 
ello, lo que los Autores escriven @ cerca de los Volcanes, arriba nombrados; y siendo aquello verdad, lo puede ser esto; porque no hai 
mas ragon para creer lo uno, que lo otro: que por probar esta verdad en este, he traido 4 consequencia esotros; y estan tan mal 
acreditadas las cosas de las Indias, que como se digan, y presenten desnudas, y sin camisa, las tienen por suefio, 6 por patrafia, y por 
esto es menester vestirlas, con otras cosas, que hai en las otras partes del Mundo, que son sus semejantes, para que con vestido, que 
en otros se ha visto, se conozcan estas, a las quales tambien les viene: y se debe creer, que aquel Rio de Fuego, y Metal encendido, 
va 4 parar por sus caiios, y venas por debajo de Tierra 4 otros Volcanes, que hai muchos por aquella Tierra, cerca, d lejos, y por 
ventura, va 4 dar ala Provincia, donde tienen los Espafioles poblada la Villa de San Miguél, quarenta leguas de este sitio, donde hai 
Volcan, y Volcanes, y debe correr adelante otras cinquenta, 4 la de Guatemala, donde estan los otros dos, que digimos ; aunque todos estos 
son de la manera del de la Isla de Sicilia, obscuros, y con bocas estrechas, por las quales hechan humo, y de quando en quando rebientan, 
y hechan Fuego, y desparcen, y derraman la ceniga, por mucha distancia de Tierra. Podemos colegir de lo dicho, que los Volcanes 
de que hablaron los Antiguos, y oi aun viven, como los de Sicilia, tienen su Fuego, y Metal, 6 betumen, de que se mantienen, como 
aqueste de Masaya, salvo que como estan cerrados, y no tienen mas de aquellas bocas estrechas, no se vé, por ellas, el Metal, o Fuego, 
que tienen, y asi este nos ensefia lo que en los otros hai, aunque en ellos no lo vemos. ‘Tambien se debe colegir no ser matavilla, que 
crien Aves, y tengan sus nidos en Jas paredes dentro del Monte Etna, pues en este se vén bolar tan cercanas al Fuego: cierto se debe 
tener aquesto por una de las maravillas de el Mundo, obrado con particular Mano de la Omnipotencia de Dios: y podemos tambien 
colegir, para confirmacion de nuestra Fe, un Christiano argumento, y es, que pues la Naturaleca obra un Fuego, asi tan perpetuo, 
que es cosa mui creedera haver Fuego infernal, para punicion, y tormento de los dafiados, como la Fé expresamente nos lo dice, y 
ensefia, el qual ha de ser eterno, constituido por la Divina Justicia, é infalible Providencia de Dios. De este argumento trata el 
Glorioso Padre San Agustin, en los Libros de la Ciudad de Dios. Un quarto de legua de la boca de este, algo mas bajo, en la misma 
Sierra esta otro Volcan ia ciego de la Tierra, que ha caido en él, que antiguamente (segun afirman los Indios) ardia, como este; y 

-tendra de hondo en lo que ha quedado por cegar, hasta seis, 5 ocho estados, segun de arriba parece.” 
* The explanation of Plate xxviii. is wanting, the MS. having lost some leaves; but it appears from the painting that Nezahualpilli 

the king of Tescuco died in the year 1516, or Eleven Flints. His successor is omitted in this history. 

CODEX. TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 149 

subdue that territory: they pretend that a serpent descended from the sky, exclaiming that troubles 
were preparing for the natives, since the Christians were directing their course thither *. 

In the year of Twelve Rabbits, or in 1530, three earthquakes occurred. In the year of Thirteen 
Canes, or in 1531, there was an eclipse of the sun. 

iS Superstition and credulity abounded in Europe in the sixteenth century amongst all orders; but as ignorance is the soil in which 
those noxious weeds best thrive, it may be presumed that the Spanish settlers in America, who were composed of illiterate soldiers 
and the dregs of the people, were nearly as credulous and superstitious as the Indians themselves. If Cabeza de Vacca, a military 
adventurer, could take credit to himself, and persuade his countrymen to believe, that he had raised a man from the dead; if other 
Spanish soldiers, with hands dripping with blood and hearts thirsting after gold, could profess to cure the sick, “ rezando, soplando, y 
santiguando,” by praying, blowing upon them, and making the sign of the cross,—what attention ought to be paid to all the prodigies 
which grave historians state on the authority of the Spanish soldiers and natives, to have preceded and followed the destruction of the 
Mexican empire, some of which must be rejected from the conflicting evidence of those who if the alleged facts had really taken 
place must have witnessed them, and others on account of their great absurdity? To the first class belongs the apparition of Saint 
James, who according to Gomara saved the Spanish army from annihilation, by dealing death and destruction amongst the Indian 
foe. ‘The saint is said to have appeared on a grey steed, and therefore must have been conspicuous to the whole army, or at least to 
a part of it: but Bernal Diaz del Castillo, a distinguished officer who served under Cortes, who many years after the conquest of 
Mexico wrote a history of that event, says, remarking on the relation of Gomara: “I acknowledge that all our exploits and victories 
are owing to our Lord Jesus Christ; and that in this battle there was such a number of Indians to every one of us, that if each had 
thrown a handful of earth they might have buried us, if by the great mercy of God we had not been protected. It may be that 
the person who Gomara mentions as having appeared on a mottled grey horse, was the glorious apostle Saint James or Saint Peter ; 
and that I, as being a sinner, was not worthy to see him. This I know, that I saw Francisco de Morla on such a horse, but as an 
unworthy transgressor did not deserve to see any of the holy Apostles. It may have been the will of God that it was so as Gomara 
relates ; but until I read his Chronicle, I never heard among any of the conquerors that such a thing had happened.” ‘To the second 
class, the extraordinary circumstances which accompanied the destruction of Quauhtemallan by a hurricane, in which six hundred 
persons perished, and which Gomara (disbelievingly it must be confessed) relates, must be referred: «They beheld a cow pacing 
through the squares and streets with one horn broken, and a rope hanging from the other, which attacked those who went to carry help 
to the house of Donna Beatrix, and twice threw down a Spaniard who persisted in the attempt, who with difficulty escaped from being 
trampled in the mire. Another Spaniard and his wife had fallen on the ground, and over them lay a large beam. A strange negro 
chanced to pass by, whom they entreated to lift up the beam, and to assist them to rise. The negro inquired whether the man who 
had fallen was Morales, who, on hearing that he was, lifted up the beam, assisted the husband, left the woman to be suffocated, and 
scampered away through the water and the mud. They also speak of strange and fearful things that they saw and heard in the air. 
It is possible: but fear distorts every thing. Many believed that the negro was the Devil, and the cow a woman of the name of 
Augustina, the wife of Captain Francisco Cava, and the daughter of one who had been whipped for witchcraft and lewdness in 
Cordova, who had bewitched and caused the death of Don Pedro Portocarrero in Quauhtemallan, because he forsook her for another 
mistress.” ‘The miracles performed by the Spanish soldiers are thus related by Gomara; and it would be wrong to omit that they 
received credit not only in America, but in Spain. In Barcia’s Collection of American Historians, an entire treatise is found, the 
object of which is to prove that Cabeza de Vaca did really raise a man from the dead. “ En tierra de Avavares curo Alonso del Castello 
muchos Indios a soplos, como Saludador, de mal de cabeza por lo qual le dieron Tunas, que son buena fruta, y carne de venado, y 
arcos y flechas. Santiguo assi mesmo cinco tullidos que sanaron, no sin grande admiracion de los Indios, y aun de los Espafioles: Ca 
los adoravan como a personas celestiales. A fama de tales curas acudian a ellos de muchas partes, y los de Susola le rogaron fuesse con 
ellos a sanar un herido. Fue Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, y Andres Dorantes, que tambien curavan. Mas quando llegaron allA 
era muerto el herido, y confiados en Jesu Christo que obra sanidades, y por conservar sus vidas entre aquellos barbaros lo santiguo, y 
soplo tres vezes Alvar Nunez, y revivio, que fue Milagro. Assi lo cuenta el mismo.” « Alonso del Castillo cured many Indians of the 

headache in the province of Avavares, by breathing on them like the Saviour; in return for which they presented him with Tunas, 

which are a good fruit, and with venison, and bows and arrows. He made the sign of the cross likewise over five cripples, who 

recovered, to the great astonishment of the Indians, and even of the Spaniards; for they (the Indians) adored them as celestial personages, 

and through the fame of such cures, flocked to them from many parts. The people of Susola requested him to go with them to heal a 
wounded man. Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, and Andres Dorantes, who also wrought cures, 

went; but when they arrived at the place, 
the wounded man was dead; confiding, however, in Jesus Christ, who works cures, 

and in order to preserve their own lives amongst 
those barbarians, Alvar Nunez made the sign of the cross over him, and breathed three times, 

miracle. If is related in this manner by himself.”—La Istoria de lus Indias, fo. xxiv. 

(2Q) 

when he came to life, which was a 

150 EXPLANATION OF THE 

PLATE XXX. 

In the year of One Flint, or in 1532, the first bishop of Mexico, Brother Don Juan pr 
CumarraGa, arrived. In the year of Two Houses, or in 1533, an earthquake occurred; and they 
pretend that the star which they name Sitlal-choloha smoked, which is that which we call Venus, 
of which they make great account. In the year of Three Rabbits, or in 1534, Don Anronto pr 

Mewnvo¢a arrived as Viceroy of New Spain. They say that the star smoked. 

PLATE XXXII. 

In the year of Four Canes, or in 1535, the star smoked. In the year of Six Houses, or in 1537, 
the negroes of the city of Mexico meditated an insurrection, the chief conspirators of whom were 
hung. The star smoked, and an earthquake occurred; the greatest that I have seen, although I 

have seen many in these parts. 

PLATE XXXII. 

In the year of Seven Rabbits, or in 1538, many of the people died of the small-pox. In the year 
of Eight Canes, or in 1539, they commenced entrusting the wands of the magistracy to the Indians 
of Mexico. The star smoked. In the year of Nine Flints, or in 1540, Don Antonio pr Menvoca 
made a part of the aqueduct which comes from Capultepec to the city*. He caused the fountain 

to be cleared out, in order to convey the water from a deeper spring, and inclosed it in the manner 

in which it at present is. 

PLATE XXXII. 

In the year of Ten Houses, or in 1541, the Indians of Yalisco revolted, and were reduced to 

obedience by Don Antonro pr Menvoca. Don Psepro pe Atvaravo +, whom the Indians 

named Tonatihu, which signifies the Sun, died in retreating from the Indians. In this year of 
Eleven Rabbits, or in 1542, an earthquake occurred. 

1. Pepro pre Atvaranpo. 2. Tonatihu. 

* The hill of Capultepec, or of grasshoppers, which was so named from its extreme verdure, was the site of the country palace of 
the kings of Mexico. Ancient cypresses of excessive growth, and the recollections of past times, still contribute to give an interest to 
the spot. Acosta says, that in his days two statues, the one of Montezuma and the other of his son, were still standing by the side of 
the fountain. } 

+ Gomara, describing the character of Pedro de Alvarado, says, that he was cruel to the Indians, gallant to their wives, and faithless 
to his friends : and that dying from contusions which he had received by falling from a steep rock, being asked where he suffered pain, 

he always replied in his soul, “ Preguntado que le dolia, respondia siempre que la alma.” He nevertheless adds, that he died “ con buen 

sentido, y juyzio de Christiano.” 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 151 

PLATE XXXIV. 

In 1544 and 1545 there was a great mortality among the Indians. 1. Violent tempests which 
blew down the trees. 

PLATE XXXV. 

In the year of Five Houses, or in 1549, the first bishop of Mexico, Brother Juan pr CuMARRAGA, 
died*. ‘The year 1549, when the bishop died, was the year of Atamal, when they ate unleavened + 
bread: for it should be observed, that every eight years on the year of the Flint the people all fasted 
four days, during which period they ate nothing but bread steeped in water and without salt: the 
fast was accordingly always, as I say, on this sign; but although it always fell on the four signs of 
the Flint, still it sometimes occurred in the year of Four Flints, and sometimes in that of Nine 
Flints, and again in that of One Flint, which was when the bishop came to the country. 

PLATE XXXVI. 

In the year of Six Rabbits, or in 1550, many Indians died in New Spain of the measles. 

PLATE XXXVII. 

In the year 1555, according to the computation of the Mexicans, three hundred and sixty-four 
years had elapsed since they quitted their own country; when in the year thirteen hundred and 

seventy-six they arrived at Mexico, I mean at the site which their city at present occupies. 

PLATE XXXVIII. 

The year Twelve Tecpatl, or 1556, was that of the fast (of Atamal). If this calculation is duly 
considered, it will be found that in the year of One Rabbit, whenever this year occurred, famine and 

mortality followed: and accordingly, in the year 1558 the greatest frost that the natives recollect 

* The death of the bishop is not signified by the skull placed near him, but this symbol seems to refer to the first syllable of his 
name ; for xon, or fzom, is a skull in the Mexican language, by which abbreviation the Indians might have intended to express the proper 
name Zumarraga. 

+ Unleavened must here be understood to mean, bread differing from that in common use, and which was only eaten on festivals. 
Salt seems to have been the chief thing omitted in the preparation of it. 

{ Reference to any Mexican painting in which the four signs of the year follow each other in their proper order, will show that four, 
nine, one, and twelve, are the years of the Flint, which succeed to each other at intervals of eight years. 

152 EXPLANATION OF THE 

occurred, and scarcity in many places; they consequently regarded the year of One Rabbit, 
whenever it chanced to be that year, as very ominous. It is for able astrologers to consider whether 
certain conjunctions of the stars and planets may not take place on such years ;—with such precision 
do they compute the period of a day from the middle of one day to another day at mid-day; and 

their year, like ours, contains three hundred and sixty-five days. 

PLATE XXXIX. 

They here (in the year of Two Canes) bind their years and commence their reckoning of another 
cycle of fifty-two years: this year began always on the twenty-fourth of February ; I mean the new 
year. In the year of Five Rabbits, on the day in which the sign of One Rose entered, they 
celebrated the festival; and in the year 1562, on the twenty-third of July, this festival occurred. 
They record a prodigy, that on the day in which this sign of One Rose entered, a rose appeared in 

the province of Mixteca, which was called after this highly-valued name. 

SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS. 

_In the year 1547, in the month of April, on the first day of Easter, the Capotecas of Coatlan and 
Tetapa revolted: they were reduced to submission on the twenty-third day of January of the same 
year. 

In the year 1549 the Capotequillas and Uijes took up arms: they marched against the city on 
the nineteenth of November, on the day of Saint Isabel; and on the same day the Indians were 
defeated. 

The bridge on the road going from Ycuan to Mixteca was built in the year 1554. 

The bridge on the royal road going from Mexico to Puebla was built in the year 1540. 

In the year 1550, on the twenty-sixth of February, the Conrruras assassinated the bishop of 
Nicaragua. 

In the year 1551, on the thirteenth of August, Don Luis pr Vretasco entered as viceroy. Don 
Antonio pr Mrennoca departed at the same time as viceroy to Peru, having governed New Spain 
for the space of seventeen years. The said Don Awronto died in Peru, in the city of Lima, in the 
year 1552, on the second of July of the said year. 

In 1552, on Saint Lawrence’s day, (which is in August,) the Lord of 'Tezcuco was created a Knight: 
he was knighted by privilege, and not on account of any act of valour which he had performed. 

In the year 1551, in the month of December, the first bishop of Yalisco died. 

In the year 1552, in the month of August, water proceeded in such abundance from the 
volcanoes in New Spain, that inundations took place in many parts, and numbers of people were 
drowned, especially in Villarica and in the port of Saint Juan de Lua; as the water rose thirty 
feet above the island. At this same time and month, a similar disaster happened in the island 

of Saint Domingo, which did much damage in the port of Saint Juan de Lua. Sixteen ships were 

CODEX TELLERIANO-REMENSIS. 153 

lost. They say that the number of those which were lost in the port of Saint Domingo was thirteen, 
besides the others which were lost. 

In the year 1541, on Sunday, on the twenty-fifth of July, at eleven o’clock in the day, the Marquis 
Ferpinanp Pizarro was assassinated in the city of Lima. 

In the year 1519 Don Fuarpinanp CorTEs entered New Spain in the month of October of the 
said year. 

In the year 1521, on the day of Saint Hypolitus, which is the thirteenth of August, the city of 
Mexico was taken. 

In the year 1547, on the fourth of December, Don FErprnanp Cortzs, Marquis of the Valley, 
died in Castille. 

In the year 1555 a mule belonging to the bishop of Mechuacan foaled, and another belonging to 
a factor; and another mule was born with six feet. 

In the year 1553, on the twenty-fourth of November, a person was saved for the first time by the 
brotherhood of the city of Mexico *. 

In the year 1554, on the twenty-third of July of the said year, the entrance of the first archbishop 
into Mexico took place. On the twenty-third of March, on the day of Saint Peter the Martyr, 
three ships were lost on the coast of Florida; all on board perished except Brother Mark and Brother 
Dominic. 

In the year 1555, on the tenth of September, the first bishop of Guaxaca died. 

Tn the year 1557 the second bishop of Tlaxcala died, on the fourteenth of October, at seven o’clock 
at night. 

* The “ hermandad,” or brotherhood of the city of Mexico, probably signified the members of the Inquisition, who were styled the 
Holy Brotherhood. The Inquisition was not established in the city of Mexico at so early a period as in the West Indian Islands; that is 
to say, a separate office was not allotted to it in Mexico till some years after; but since delegates from the office at Madrid took 
cognizance in the mean time of offences that came within the jurisdiction of the Inquisition, its absence could scarcely have been felt. 
That the Inquisition was very active immediately after its establishment in Mexico, we learn from the following passage of the twenty- 
fourth chapter of the fifth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy: “ El afio de 1571, llegé 4 esta Nueva-Espafia y Ciudad de Mexico 
el Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion con sus oficiales, y vino por inquisidor Don Pedro Moia de Contreras, que despues fue Arcgobispo de 
esta metropolitana, y hombre de gran govierno, como parecera en su lugar. Ha sido este santo tribunal en esta Nueva-Espafia de 
grandisimo bien y provecho; y ha limpiado la tierra, que estaba contaminadisima de Judios, y hereges, en especial de gente Portuguesa, 
6 & lo menos de Judios mezclados con ellos de los tiempos que fueron admitidos en el reino de Portugal.” “Tn the year 1571, the Holy 
Office of the Inquisition, with its familiars, arrived in New Spain and the city of Mexico; Don Pedro Moia de Contreras, who was 
afterwards archbishop of this metropolis, and a man skilled in the affairs of government, (as will appear in its proper place,) came as 
inquisitor. This holy tribunal has been of the greatest utility and advantage in New Spain, and has purified the soil which was most 
contaminated with Jews and heretics, especially Portuguese, or at least with Jews mixed with them, from the time when permission was 
given to them to enter the kingdom of Portugal.” It is very extraordinary how the Jews, who on the discovery of America were forbidden 
by an express law to proceed thither, should have become so numerous in New Spain in half a century ; or that they should have had the 
temerity, having already had experience of the severity with which the Spanish laws were put in force against them, to infringe those 
laws; or that it should have been possible for them so long to escape detection from the vigilance of the Spanish clergy, to whose hands 
such large power was entrusted in the New World, and to whom confession, as they well knew, revealed all kinds of secrets. Neither 
is it likely that the Jews discovered in New Spain were of the number of those who had been previously expelled from Spain, and who it 
is said were received into Portugal; since the greater part of those Jews sought an asylum at Constantinople, where their descendants 
still remain; or that they would so soon again have trusted themselves to the mercy of a nation by whom they had been so barbarously 
treated. . It is more probable that these Jews had been long settled in America, and that they formed a part of the native population. 

(2x) 

THE TRANSLATION OF THE EXPLANATION OF THE MEXICAN 
PAINTINGS OF THE CODEX VATICANUS*. 

HOW truly Saint Paul, in his First Epistle to the Romans, observes that men, by the light of 
reason, attain a partial knowledge of the invisible things of Gop, is demonstrated in the natives 
of New Spain, who, although so barbarous a people and of such inferior understandings, believed, 
according to their paintings, in the existence of nine superior causes, which we call heavens, to 
which they attributed all the effects of the universe, in which they placed the First Cause, the cause 
of all the rest. These nine causes or heavens they distinguished by the comets + which they observed ; 

and from the colour of the comet each cause or heaven received its appellation. 

* The paintings of the Vatican Codex, No. 3738, resemble, by being merely copies of ancient Mexican paintings, those of the 
Collection of Mendoza: the outlines of the figures are done with a pen, and the extremely coarse style of the original drawing is ‘not 
at all exaggerated in the plates. From the method which has been adopted in every instance in copying the Mexican paintings 
contained in the present work by means of transparent paper, the greatest correctness has been the result; and the minute hieroglyphics 
of the Dresden MS. have been no less closely imitated in this manner than the larger figures of the paintings of Veletri, &c. 

It is singular that Acosta should have mentioned, in the nineteenth chapter of the second book of his Natural History of the Indies, this 
Vatican Codex, describing the inundation which befell Mexico in the reign of Ahuitzotl, in consequence of that king’s having introduced 
water into the city by a new aqueduct. He says: ‘“ Et hecimago hodie quoque in fastis Mexicanis quos Rome in consecrata Vaticani 
bibliothecd ostendunt depicta visitur. Hanc ac similes historias quidam e societate Pater, isti qui horum librorum curator est, aliquando 
ita percensuit; qui quidem re istd suaviter afficiebatur, ut qui pridem illorum explicationem certam desiderasset.” It deserves likewise 
to be noticed, that the only paintings to which Acosta can refer are those which are contained in the Third Part of this Codex, which 
are of an historical nature, and not accompanied, as the others are, with any interpretations, and which therefore the librarian might have 
wished to have had explained. The inundation above alluded to is represented in two of these paintings, one of which, since it 
interrupts the order of the years, and differs from the rest in the signs of the years being placed wnder instead of over the historical events 
to which they refer, was probably afterwards inserted, perhaps by the Father of the Society to whom the librarian showed the Codex. 
The explanation alluded to was also, it is to be presumed, of a verbal nature, as it no where occurs in the pages of the MS. This 
defect is however supplied by the interpretation which accompanies a similar series of historical paintings in the manuscript of Pedro de 
los Rios, which is preserved in the Royal Library at Paris, under the title of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis. 

+ It is singular that the Mexicans should have believed that there was this precise number of heavens: that such was their opinion may 
be further proved from Boturini, who says that king Netzahualcoyotl built in Tezcuco a tower of nine stories, emblematical of the nine 
heavens, in which to worship the Creator of the universe.—JIdea de una Nueva Historia, page 79. The solemn dance of the Mexicans 
described by Clavigero seems likewise connected with astronomical notions as well as with religion, and intended to represent the motion 
of the heavens as imagined by the ancients, and explained by Aristotle in his treatise De Mundo, cap. ii. The old idea of a firmament, 
and of the possibility of heaven’s falling, and involving the earth in a common destruction, was also entertained by the Mexicans, as is 
evident from the questions put by Nicaragua to Gil Goncalez: nearly similar accounts of which are given by Gomara, and by Peter 
Martyr in the fourth chapter of his Sixth Decade, page 396, vol. v. of Hakluyt’s Early Voyages. To this notion the Mexican sign 
Nahuiollin, or the sun in the sign of Four Earthquakes, may refer. This sign occupies the centre of one of the two large stones discovered 
in the principal square of Mexico in the year 1790, and described by Don Antonio de Gama, in a short treatise published in Mexico 
in 1792. 

{ The Mexicans and Peruvians entertained the same notions of the baneful influence of comets as were formerly prevalent in Europe. 
The appearance of a comet was recorded in the Mexican paintings by the symbol of a worm or caterpillar placed under the sign of the 
year in which these phenomena occurred, to denote blights and famine. 

156 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

PLATE I.* 

1. Homeyoca, which signifies the place in which exists the Creator of the universe, or the First Cause, 
to whom they gave the other name of Hometeuli, which means the God of threefold dignity, or three 

* Since the interpretation of the first painting in the Vatican Codex is very brief, and it does not appear to have been the 
intention of the interpreter to have done more than merely to affix the names of the nine heavens to the corresponding number of 
symbols contained in the first page,—without offering any explanation of those which follow in the second, we may be permitted to 
attempt to supply by conjecture what is here wanting, and also to suggest a slight alteration in the interpretation. The referring 
the nine symbols contained in the first page to the nine heavens involves some difficulties; since in this case the entire number of 
heavens would be eleven, as two symbols designated Yihuicatl, or heaven, occur in the next page. . On the supposition, however, 
that the first heaven, signified by the blank space immediately surrounding Hometeuli!, or Tonacatecutli, in which that supreme 
deity of the Mexicans is represented as dwelling, has been omitted, that the symbols of the four ages have been. inserted between 
Homeyocan and the inferior heavens; and that the seven symbols named Ylhuicatl, together with Tlalticpac, the last in order of 

the heavens, are to be reckoned along with Homeyocan, the highest heaven,—these difficulties would be removed, the number of 

1 Hometeuli, perhaps, instead of being the name of the supreme god of the Mexicans, may signify the heaven to which the two 
leaders of the Aztec migration, Mexi and Tecpactzin, were translated after death ; since ome means in the Mexican language two, 
and teulzis a chief. The signification of Trinity cannot be given to the propername Ometeuli; and it would be interesting to 
discover the exact epithet by which the Mexicans designated the god whom they believed to be “ unus trino” and “ trinus uno.” 
The doctrine of the Trinity has been impugned, not only by the modern Unitarians, but by the Arians of old ; the co-existence of 
the Son with the Father from all eternity was opposed to the prejudices of the latter, who contended that to believe, it was 
necessary first to be able to comprehend, and who were too well versed in the school of Aristotle not fully to understand the 
difference which exists between that which is above reason, and that which appears to contradict it, which to deny priority in 
time to a cause in relation to an effect, or to declare that to be begotten does not imply a subsequent to a prior existence, they 
maintained to be the case. They also asserted, citing the words of Christ himself in the New Testament, in reply to the person 
“good Master,” “Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is God ;” that he disclaimed 
the perfect equality with God which the Athanasian Creed lays down as an article of faith, and that that equality and co-existence 
were the invention and doctrine of the centuries which immediately succeeded to the establishment of Christianity. What reply 
can Protestants make to this last objection of the Arians, who themselves affirm that so vital a doctrine of the Catholic religion as 
that of transubstantiation was an error which crept into the church in the early days of Christianity ? The worst argument that has 

been used to defend the doctrine of the Trinity, and one that displays the greatest ignorance, is that by which reasoners, like 

who called him 

Doctor Warburton in his “ Divine Legation of Moses,” seek to address common-place arguments to unreflecting minds: viz. 
that if this doctrine had not been revealed to man by divine inspiration, it would never have entered human contemplation ; since, 
laying aside the consideration of whether such a belief was entertained by the Indians, who on this admission cannot be supposed, 
from the rude state of science amongst them, to have been the inventors of it, but rather to have derived it, with the knowledge of 
many other Christian mysteries, from some more civilized region of the globe. It is allowed that the Hindoos have for ages believed 
in the doctrine of the Trimurti, or of a Trinity ; and to this belief they were probably led by those speculations on the divine 
nature and essence in which the Brahmins loved to indulge, who, considermg the many attributes inseparable from the essence of 
the Deity, and necessary to his perfection, which they typified by the many arms with which they represented his image, con- 
templated with superior veneration the three great powers which more immediately control the destiny of the universe, his 
creating, preserving, and destroying energies, which they therefore symbolized by three majestic heads or countenances combined 
and united to one body with many arms: and hence it is probable that the Asiatics derived their notion of three persons in one 
God, and that the doctrine of the Indian Trimurti originated. Since the signification of Ometeuli is literally the two chiefs, or 
two lords, who in all probability were supposed by the Mexicans to reside in the highest heaven, or Homeyocan (so named, 
perhaps, after them), with Tonacatecutli or Tetzcatlipoca ; it may be curious to know (the Jews disbelieving in the doctrine of the 
Trinity) in what sense they understand, or who they suppose are alluded to, by the two anointed ones mentioned in the fourteenth 

verse of the fourth chapter of Zechariah: ‘ Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole 
earth.” 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 157 

Gods, the same as Olomris. They call this place in which he resides Zivenavichnepaniucha * 
which signifies. .......-; and by another name, Homeiocan, that is to say, the place of the Holy 

* Pedro de los Rios says that Quecalcoatle was born in Zivenavitzcatl, which name has some resemblance to Zivenavichne- 
paniucha. 

+ As the passage which is omitted is curious, and the original letters could not be deciphered, a fac-simile of the entire context 
is here given, in order that the right signification of it may be ascertained. 

chs peash dia? typ Levy au Hs) Wht ore 

heavens would be complete, and each would have its corresponding symbol. The remaining eight symbols in the second page, 
it is to be supposed, refer to the Mexican notions of a place of suffering or purgatory, and the troubles which awaited them in its 
eight different states. The insertion of the symbols of the four ages between Homeyocan and the inferior heavens, is perhaps emble- 
matical of the existence of Tonacatecutli, being prior to time as well as to the heavens. That these symbols denote ages and not 
heavens, may be further proved from their names and their nature : Teot/ signifies, in the Mexican language, both the sun and an age, 
and the image of the sun surrounded with rays was the symbol of the latter; two pointed rays of light, substituted for the image 
of the sun, accordingly enter into the composition of the three first symbols ; the fourth differed, both in name and character, from 
the others. Since these paintings illustrate the religious opinions of the Mexicans, and the person who copied them appears to 
have prefixed them to the calendar, with the view of explaining their notions on the subject of the immortality of the soul, and of 
a future state of rewards and punishments, and also their historical traditions respecting the four ages or epochs of the world, with 
their belief in Quecalcoatle, and some other circumstances connected with his history,—this note will not perhaps appear unne~ 
cessarily long if we again notice in a summary manner the contents of the first plate. Homeyocan, the heaven of heavens, or the 
highest heaven, in which the Mexicans supposed Tonacatecutli to reside, occupies the upper part of this plate; next follow the 
four symbols of the four ages of the world, the last of which is that of Quecalcoatle, or the age of Flints and Roses, which with the 
Mexicans would be the present age. It should also be observed, that they entertained the singular notion of a fifth age, the 
commencement of which was to date from the re-appearance of Quecalcoatle, or from the destruction of the world for the fourth 
time by earthquakes, which they supposed would occur on the sign Nahuiollin. The age of Quecalcoatle is not named Teotl, the 
appellation by which the three preceding ages are distinguished, nor is it symbolized like them by a ray of the sun, because in this 
age no destruction of the world, no extinction of the sun or creation of a new one, were supposed to have taken place. The 
catastrophe which befell the province of Tulan was that which gave rise to a new epoch; this age was called Yztapal Nanazcaya, 
which is here interpreted the heaven of roses; the signification of Yztapal is a flint: the symbol of this fourth age was characterized 
by two flints encompassed with branches, or inserted in a cane, between which the head of Miquitlantecotli, the God of Hell or of 
the Dead, is placed ; and in a following plate, representing the fourth age, it will be observed that these two flints, decorated with 
flowers or branches, again occur, alluding perhaps to the commencement of penance by Quecalcoatle, or indicating the epoch of 
some remarkable event in his life. The heaven next in order to Homeyoca was the green or light azure heaven, to which suc- 
ceeded the green and black or dark azure heaven. The names of the five heavens following are unaccompanied with any 
explanation. The symbol distinguishing the fifth heaven is the head of the goddess Chalchiuitlicue, the mother of Quecalcoatle ; 
this goddess may always be recognised by the symbol of Atl, or water, upon her head, denoting that she presided over that 
element. Ylhuicatl Tunatiuh, the name of the sixth heaven, signifies the heaven of the sun. The name of the seventh heaven is 
pethaps Ylhuicatl Citlalicoe, instead of Tetlalicoe, and its signification would then be the heaven of the stars; since citlal, in the 
Mexican language, is a star. Ylhuicatl Tlalocaypanmeztli, the name of the eighth heaven, signifies the heaven of the God Ti laloque 
and of the moon, or of Paradise and of the moon. The ninth and last heaven was called Tlalticpac, which is here interpreted the 
earth, because the earth is contained immediately within its compass; Tlalticpac was likewise an epithet which the Mexicans be- 
stowed on their supreme deity Tonacatecutli, which signified creator generally, although its etymology refers more immediately to 
the creation of light, or the work of the first day. The symbol of the ninth heaven resembles in its square form those of the 
superior heavens. The eight remaining symbols contained in the lower part of the plate, it has already been observed, refer to the 
Mexican notion of a place of hardship and toil where departed souls went immediately after death. 

The following description!, from Clavigero’s History of Mexico, of the funeral rites of the Mexicans, may enable us to euess 

1 This description is borrowed from the Indian Monarchy of Torquemada, which writer Clavigero chiefly consulted in com- 
posing his Ancéent History of Mexico. 

(2s) 

158 © EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

Trinity *, who, according to the opinion of many of their old men, begot, by their word, CrpaTenaL 
and a woman named Xumro; and these are the pair who existed before the deluge, who begot 

their signification in part, which the names attached to them will serve further to indicate. ‘“‘ However superstitious the 
Mexicans were in other matters, in the rites which they observed at funerals they exceeded themselves. As soon as any person 
died, certain masters of funeral ceremonies were called, who were generally men advanced in years. They cut a number of 
pieces of paper with which they dressed the dead body, and took a glass of water with which they sprinkled the head, saying 
that that was the water used in the time of their life. They then dressed it in a habit suitable to the rank, the wealth, and the 
circumstances attending the death of the party. If the deceased had been a warrior, they clothed him in the habit of 
Huitzilopochth; if a merchant, in that of Iacateutli; if an artist, in that of the protecting god of his art or trade: one who 
had been drowned was dressed in the habit of Tlaloc; one who had been executed for adultery, in that of Tlazolteotl; and a 
drunkard, in the habit of Tezcatzoncatl the godof wine. In short, as Gomara has well observed, they wore more garments after 
they were dead than while they were living. With the habit they gave the dead a jug of water, which was to serve on the 
journey to the other world; and also, at successive different times, different pieces of paper, mentioning the use of each. On 
consigning the first piece to the dead, they said, By means of this you will pass without danger between the two mountains 
which fight against each other. With the second they said, By means of this you will walk without obstruction along the road 
which is defended by the great serpent. With the third, By this you will go securely through the place where there is the 
crocodile Xochitonal. The fourth was a safe passport through the eight deserts ; the fifth through the eight hills ; and the sixth 
was given in order to pass without hurt through the sharp wind ; for they pretended that it was necessary to pass a place called 
Itzehecajan, where a wind blew so violently as to tear up rocks, and so sharp that it cut like a knife, on which account they 
burned all the habits which the deceased had worn during life, their arms and some household gods, in order that the heat of 
this fire might defend them from the cold of that terrible wind. One of the chief and most ridiculous ceremonies at funerals 
was the killing a techichi, a domestic quadruped, which we have already mentioned, resembling a little dog, to accompany the 
deceased in their journey to the other world; they fixed a string about its neck, believing that necessary to enable it to pass 
the deep river of Chiuhnahuapan, or New Waters. They buried the techichi, or burned it along with the body of its master, 
according to the kind of death of which he died: while the masters of the ceremonies were lighting up the fire in which the 
body was to be burned, the other priests kept singing in a melancholy strain. After burning the body they gathered the 
ashes in an earthern pot, amongst which, according to the circumstances of the deceased, they put a gem of more or less value, 
which they said would serve him in place of a heart in the other world. They buried this earthen pot in a deep ditch, and 
fourscore days after made oblations of bread and wine over it.”—Clavigero’s History of Mewico, vol. i. p. 322. On reference 
to the plate, after the perusal of this description by Clavigero, and on examining the symbols above alluded to, it will appear 
probable that that marked 4. represents the river of New Waters, named Chiuhnahuapan, and the dog; that 5. signifies the 
passage of the two mountains which fought against each other; that 7. means the sharp wind, called by Clavigero Itzehecajan, 
or The place of the wind of razors or flints, and here named Yee Hecaya or the place of the three winds, which consists of the 
usual Mexican hieroglyphic for wind, although badly copied with the pen, and knives or flints to denote its sharpness. The 
other symbols do not exactly agree with Clavigero’s account. That called Teocoylqualoya, the divine wolf devouring a heart, 
might also be the place of the crocodile Xochitonal. 8. resembles the stone lancets with which the Mexicans, in imitation of 
Quecalcoatle, offered their own blood to propitiate the gods. ; 

* Amongst the many arguments which might be brought forward to show that Christianity had in very early ages extended 
itself to America, one of the strongest and most convincing is the fact that the doctrine of the Trinity was known in Peru, New 
Spain, and Yucatan. This fact rests on the authority of very respectable writers. Acosta, in his Natural and Moral History of 
the Indies, distinctly asserts it’; and the celebrated Las Casas, bishop of Chiapa, as cited by Torquemada, says that he had 

? 

* Acosta repeats the assertion in the following passage of the last chapter of his History: “‘ Certissimum siquidem est, Indos 
occidentales ided potissimum doctrinam Evangelicam promptius agnovisse, quod antea multis tributorum ac servitutum, ut et 
superstitiosorum cultuum oneribus ferendis assueti essent. Jugi enim Sathanici jam pridem certum fastidium ceperant: ideo 
de mitioribus et placidioribus diis querendis dudum apud se consilium inierant. His ita herentibus et nutantibus, cum sana de 
Deo religio offerretur : ejus leges illicd equas, tolerabiles, ac gratiosas esse, facile ex collatione videre poterant. Eosdem etiam 
res persepé arduas ac gravissimas facile captare ideo potuisse certum est, quod anté A Diabolo de multo gravioribus instituti 
essent. Qui ex Evangelica quoque doctrina plura suffuratus, pro suis venditarat Indis: cujusmodi sunt, cna Dominica, 
Confessio, adoratio trium im uno, et untus in trino, et similia alia. Hee cum anted in mendacio suscepissent: multo facilius 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 159 

Tocatiutle, as we shall presently relate*. 2. Hometeuli. 3. Teotl Tlatlaucha, which signifies the 
Red Heaven. 4. Teotl Cocaucha, the Yellow Heaven. 5. Teotl Yztaca, the White Heaven. 

* No further mention is made of Tocatiutle. 

heard it from a person worthy of credit whom he had charged to make inquiries into the religion of the inhabitants of the 
Peninsula of Yucatan. A distinguished writer also of the present age, the Baron de Humboldt, says that the Muyscas, the 
ancient inhabitants of the plains of Bogota, likewise believed in the existence of a Trinity. The words of Acosta are these: 
‘Hoe vero loco id ante omnia attendendum est, stygium Plutona pro cultus sui majestate cumulanda, ipsd quoque sanct& 
Trinitate introducté veteratorie abuti voluisse. Tribus enim superius dictis solis simulachris hec nomina Indi indiderant, 
Apointi, Churiunti, et Intiquaoqui, quod est, pater et dominus solis, filius ipse sol, et frater solis. Hec eadem nomina tribus 
simulachris, Chuquilla, id est, isti deo qui in plaga seu regione aéris, ex qua tonitrua, pluvie et nix prodeunt, agere credebatur, 
quoque imponebant. In Chuquisacd idolum nobis aliquando monstrabatur, ante quod Indi preces funderent. Id Tangatanga 
dicebatur. Hoc credebatur deus, qui in uno trinus, et in trino unus existeret.””—Acosta, lib. v. cap. xxviii. The passage 
alluded to in Torquemada is the following, which is taken from the forty-ninth chapter of the Fifteenth Book of his Indian 
Monarchy: “The Bishop of Chiapa, brother Don Bartholomew de Las Casas, relates in his Apology, which is preserved in 
manuscript in the convent of Saint Dominic in Mexico! , that when he disembarked on the coast of Yucatan, for on that occasion 

eadem in veritate amplecti poterant. Sic Deus plerumque hostem suum armis propriis jugulat, et caput ei precidit. Sic Deus 
Sathanam nolentem quoque compulit, ut de vero Christi et salvifico verbo, testaretur, vaticinareturque, ex signis illis, que in 
Peru aliisque locis apparuerant: sicut id ipso magorum ore proditum scimus. Sed et hoc notum universis est, non commodé 
in iis locis versari Sathanam, in quibus sinceram Christi Ecclesiam collectam pernovit. Cessarunt hodié omnia oracula, lingue, 
visiones ac apparitiones, alids apud incredulos frequentes ac solennes.” The reason which this learned writer assigns for the 
Indians more readily allowing themselves to be converted to Christianity, reminds us of the argument which the Apostles chiefly 
used with the Jews to induce them to accept the new covenant and to become Christians : viz. that the burthen imposed upon 
them by the old law was intolerable. With respect to the dreams, visions, and apparitions which are said to have been so 
frequent amongst the Indians, they furnish strong evidence of what hold Jewish superstitions had taken of their minds; for 
what nation ever dreamed like the Jews, or beheld such numerous visions? It cannot either be doubted that if the Jews had 
succeeded in establishing their institutions in America and reviving the old law, reducing at the same time a great portion of the 
Indian population under their domination, and thus restoring the sceptre to Judah, that their rabbis would have taken care that 
this new order of things should be accompanied with all the signs which the prophet Joel had foretold in his second chapter 
should mark the Jewish millennium, ‘‘ And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and 
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. And also 
upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. And I will show wonders in the heavens 
and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before 
the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.” It is remarkable that the figure of the sun and moon turned into blood 
frequently occurs in the Mexican paintings. A material difference in sentiment prevails between Jews and Christians, as to the 
period when this gift of prophecying and seeing visions was to be conferred; the Jews affirm that it will be in the latter days, 
and that it is to come; Christians, that it was in the apostolic age, and is past; the latter relying upon many passages in the 
New Testament, and amongst others on the fifth verse of the eleventh chapter of Saint Paul’s First Epistle to the Corinthians, 
where that Apostle seems to speak of women prophesying as a very common thing in his days, although we may fairly demand 
why have not those prophecies been transmitted to posterity,—since to suppose that they were either unimportant, or that, 
proceeding from the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, they did not possess as much authority as those uttered by the Apostles 
themselves, would be to contradict all received doctrine. The following are the words of Saint Paul: “But every woman that 
prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered, dishonoureth her head.” 

? This account is so curious that it is here inserted in the original Spanish, together with some other passages of the Indian 
Monarchy, in which mention is made of paintings and even of books discovered amongst the Indians, which the Spanish 
missionaries supposed treated of Christian doctrines. ; 

“El Obispo de Chiapa Don Fr. Bartolomé de las Cases, en una su Apologia, que escrita de Mano, se guarda en el Convento 

160 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

6. Yztapal Nanazcaya, the Heaven of Roses. 7.* Ylhuicatl Xoxoucha, the Green Heaven. 
8. Ylhuicatl Yayaucha, the Green and Black Heaven. 9. Ylhuicatl Mamaluacoca. 10. Ylhui- 
catl Huixtutla}. 11. Ylhuicatl Tunatiuh. 

he passed through that kingdom on account of its vicinity to his own diocese, he found there a respectable ecclesiastic (un clerigo 
honrado) of mature age, who understood the language of the Indians; and as he himself was hastening to the capital of his 
diocese, he requested and charged this ecclesiastic, in his name, to proceed into the interior of the country, visiting the Indians, 
taking with him a certain plan of instruction which he gave him, in order to preach to them. And he says that at the end of 
a year or thereabouts, this ecclesiastic wrote to him that he had met with a principal iord, who, on his questioning him respecting 
the faith and ancient religion which prevailed in that country, informed him that they knew and believed in God who resided in 

* The Mexicans seem to have confounded together, in their tradition of four ages and four destructions of the world, the 
fictions of Greece respecting the four ages; the traditions of the Hebrews relating to the fall of man, the loss of paradise, and the 
deluge ; the belief of Christians in the accomplishment of prophecy in the downfall of the four great empires of antiquity, and 
the Jewish accounts of the destruction of Jerusalem. 

+ Huixtutlan appears to be compounded of huey old, ix rays or splendour, tu or to our mother, and ddan place or residence ; 
and to signify the heaven of our ancient mother surrounded with glory. Yz or yx seems peculiarly to mean rays of light 
or of the sun, which may have been thus named from their pomted shape and their resemblance to the knives or razors which the 
Mexicans formed of the stone which they called yztli, which possesses one affinity to light in being perfectly transparent, and 
was the substance of which the ancient Mexicans formed their mirrors. Yzpatli is another word compounded of yz, which is 
elsewhere explained to be the moon surrounded with splendour, and to be emblamatical of the creation as regards the work of the 
first day or the production of light. It is the first of the twenty signs of the Mexican days, and is represented by the head of 
a serpent surrounded with rays. This sign is sometimes called Cipactli and Teoctpactli. Tlaltigpaque is also compounded of 
iz, and was an epithet which the Mexicans bestowed on their supreme deity, Tonacatecutli; believing that light had been 
created at his word. Yz or yx also signifies the eyes, undoubtedly from their relation to light, as in the proper name Yznextli, 
which is interpreted eyes blind with ashes. 

de Santo Domingo de Mexico, cuenta, que desembarcando él en la Costa de Yucatan (porque 4 la sagon entrava aquel Reino por 
cercania en los Terminos de su Obispado) halld alli un Clerigo Honrado, de madura edad, que sabia la Lengua de los Indios; y 
porque él pasava de paso a la Cabeca de su Obispado, dejo rogado, y encargado A este Clerigo, que en su Nombre anduviese la 
Tierra adentro, visitando los Indios, con cierta forma, é instruccion, que le did, para que les predicase. Y al cabo de un Afio, poco 
menos, dice, que le escrivid este Clerigo, como avia. hallado un Sefior Principal, que inquiriendole de su creencia, y Religion Antigua, 
que por aquel Reino solian tener, le dijo, que ellos conocian, y creian en Dios, que estava en el Cielo, y que aqueste Dios era Padre, 
y Hijo, y Espiritu Santo ; y que el Padre se llamava Ycona, que avia criado los Hombres, y todas las cosas; y el Hijo tenia por 
Nombre, Bacab, el qual nacid de una Doncella Virgen, llamada Chibirias, que esta en el Cielo con Dios, y que la Madre de Chibi 

rias, se llamava Ischel; y al Espiritu Santo Ilamavan Echuah. De Bacab (que es el Hijo) dicen, que lo matd Eopuco, y lo higo 
agotar, y puso una Corona de Espinas, y que lo puso tendidos los Bragos en un Palo, y no entendian, que estava clavado, sino atado, 
y alli murid ; y estuvo tres dias muerto, y al tercero tornd a vivir, y se subid al Cielo, y que alla est& con su Padre; y despues 
de esto, luego vino Echuah, que es el Espiritu Santo, y hartd la Tierra, de todo lo que avia menester. Preguntado, qué querian 
significar aquellos tres Nombres, de las Tres Personas? dijo, que Ycona queria decir, el Gran Padre, y Bacab, Hijo del Gran 
Padre, y Echuah, Mercader. Y a la verdad, buenas Mercaderias bajo el Espiritu Santo, al Mundo; pues hartd la Tierra, 
que son los Hombres Terrenos, de sus Dones, y Gracias tan copiosas, y Divinas. Y preguntado tambien, como tenian noticia 
de estas cosas? Respondid, que los Sefiores lo ensefiavan 4 sus Hijos; y asi decendia, de mano, en mano, esta Doctrina. 
Y afirmavan aquellos Indios, que en el tiempo Antiguo vinieron a aquella Tierra veinte Hombres, y el Principal de ellos se 
llamava Cocolean, y que traian las Ropas largas, y Sandalias, por Calgado, las Barbas grandes, y no traian Bonetes sobre 
sus Cabegas; y que estos mandavan, que se confesasen las Gentes, y que aiunasen. Esto escrive el Obispo de Chiapa; 
Pero afiade luego: Si estas cosas son verdad, parece aver sido en aquella Tierra nuestra Santa Fe, sabida; pero como en 
ninguna parte de las Indias, avemos tal nueva hallado, puesto que en la Tierra del Brasil, que poseen los Portugueses, se 
imagina hallarse rastro de Santo Tomas Apostol; pero como aquella Nueva no vold adelante, ciertamente la Tierra, y Reino de 

Yucatan da a entender cosas mas especiales, y de major antiguedad, por las grandes, admirables, y exquisitas maneras de 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 161 

PLATE II. 

1. Ylhuicatl Tetlalicoe. 2. Yihuicatl Tlalocaypanmeztli. 3. Tlalticpac, the Earth. 4. Apano 
Huaya, the Passage of the Water. 5. Tepetli Monanamycia, the Mountains which join. 6. Yztepetl, 

Heaven; and that this God was the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and that the Father was named Ycgona, who had created 
men and all things; and that the Son was called Bacab, who was born of a virgin named Chibirias, who was in heaven with 
God ; and that the name of the mother of Chibirias was Ischel ; and that the Holy Ghost was called Echuah. Bacab the Son, 
they said, was put to death by Eopuco, who scourged him and put a crown of thorns upon his head, and placed him with his 
arms stretched out upon a beam of wood, to which they believed that he had not been nailed but tied: and that he died there, and 
remained during three days dead ; and that on the third day he came to life and ascended into heaven, where he is with his Father : 
and immediately afterwards Echuah came, who is the Holy Ghost, and filled the earth with whatsoever it stood in need of. 

Edificios antiquisimos, y Letreros de ciertos Caractéres, que en otra ninguna parte. Finalmente, secretos son estos, que solo 
Dios los sabe. Estas son Palabras formales del Obispo de Chiapa ; y lo cierto es, que aquello, no se tuvo por cierto. 

“ Otra cosa contd un Religioso, mui conocido, por verdadero Siervo de Dios, y Fraile de S. Francisco, llamado Fr. Francisco 
Gomez, que por ser todavia vivo, y mui viejo, pierde la Memoria, que en esta Historia se debia a sus fieles, y largos trabajos, 
en esta Vifia del Sefior; y es, que viniendo él, de Guatemala, en compafia del Varon Santo Fr. Alonso de Escalona, pasando 
por el Pueblo de Nexapa, de la Provincia de Guaxaca, el Vicario de aquel Convento, que es de la Orden de Santo Domingo, les 
mostrd unos Papeles pintados, que avian sacado de unas Pinturas antiquisimas, hechas en unos Cueros largos, rolligos, y mui 
ahumados, donde estavan tres, 6 quatro cosas, tocantes 4 nuestra Fé; y eran la Madre de Nuestra Sefiora, y tres Hermanas, 
Hijas suias, que las tenian por Santas; y la que representava 4 Nuestra Sefiora, estava con el Cabello cogido, al modo que lo 
cogen, y atan las Indias, y en el nudo, que tienen atras, tenia metida una Cruz pequefia, por la qual se dava a entender, que era 
mas Santa; y que de aquella avia de nacer un Gran Profeta, que avia de venir del Cielo, y lo avia de parir sin ajuntamiento de 
Varon, quedando ella Virgen; y que a este Gran Profeta, los de su Pueblo, lo avian de perseguir, y querer mal, y lo avian de 
matar, crucificandolo en una Cruz. Y asi estava pintado Crucificado, y tenia atadas las Manos, y los Pies en la Cruz, sin 
Clavos. Estava tambien pintado el Articulo de la Resurreccion, como avia de resucitar, y subir al Cielo. Decian estos Padres 
Dominicos, que hallaron estos Cueros, entre unos Indios, que vivian acia la Costa del Mar del Sur, los quales contavan, que sus 
Antepasados les dejaron aquella Memoria. ; 

“Otro Religioso, llamado Fr. Diego de Mercado, Padre Grave, y que ha sido Difinidor, de esta Provincia del Santo Evangelio, 
y uno de los mas egemplares, y Penitentes de este tiempo, contd, y did firmado de su Nombre, que en Aftos atras, platicando 
con un Indio Viejo Otomi, de mas de setenta Afios, sobre las cosas de nuestra Fé, le dijo aquel Indio, como ellos, en su 
Antiguedad, tenian un Libro, que venia sucessivamente, de. Padres, 4 Hijos, en las Personas Majores, que para lo guardar, y 
ensefar tenian dedicadas. En este Libro tenian escrita Doctrina en dos Colunas, por todas las Planas del Libro, y entre Coluna, 
y Coluna estava pintado Christo Crucificado, con rostro como enojado; y asi decian ellos, que reftia Dios; y las hojas bolvian, 
por reverencia, no con la mano, sino con una Barita, que para ello tenian hecha, y guardavanla con el mismo Libro. Y pregun- 
tandole este Religioso, al Indio, de lo que contenia aquel Libro, en su Doctrina, no le supo dar cuenta en particular, mas de 
que le respondio: Que si aquel Libro no se huyiera perdido, viera como la Doctrina, que él les ensefiava, y predicava, y la que 
alli se contenia, era una misma; y que el Libro se pudrio debajo de Tierra, donde lo enterraron los que lo guardavan, quando 
vinieron los Espafioles. Tambien le dijo, que tuvieron noticia de la Destruccion del Diluvio, y que solas siete Personas se 
salvaron en el Arca, y todas las demas perecieron, con todos los Animales, y Aves, eceto las que alli se salvaron. Tuvieron 
tambien noticia de la Embajada, que higo el Angel, 4 Nuestra Sefiora, por una Metafora, diciendo, que una cosa mui blanca, 
como Pluma de Ave, caid del Cielo, y una Virgen se abajo, y la cogid, y metid en su Vientre, y quedo prefiada; pero no sabian 
decir, qué se higo, lo que parid. Lo que estos digeron del Diluvio, atestiguaron tambien en Guatemala, los Indios Achies, 
afirmando, que lo tenian pintado, entre otras sus Antiguallas, las quales todas los Frailes, con el Kspiritu, y Celo, que llevavan 
de destruir la Idolatria, se las quitaron, y quemaron, teniendolas por sospechosas. 

“Tambien se halls, que en algunas Provincias, de esta Nueva-Espafia, como era en la Totonaca, esperavan la Venida del Hijo 
del Gran Dios (que era el Sol) al Mundo: y decia, que avian de venir, para renovarlo en todas las cosas. Aunque esto no lo 

tenian, ni interpretavan en lo Espiritual, smo en lo Temporal, y Terreno: como decir, que con su Venida, los Panes avian de ser 

(27) 

162 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

the Mountain of Razors. 7. Yee Hecaya. 8. Pacoecoe Tlacaya. 9. Temimina Loya, the Place 
of shooting with arrows. 10. Teocoylqualoya. 11. Yzmictlan Apochcaloca. 

Being asked what the significations were of the three names of the three persons, he said, that Yocona signified the oreat 
Father, and Bacab the Son of the great Father, and Echuah the merchant; and in truth the Holy Ghost brought precious 
merchandize into the world, since he filled the earth, that is to say, mankind who inhabit it, with his gifts and graces, which are 
so abundant and divine. Being questioned also as to the manner in which they became acquainted with these things, he replied, 
that the lords instructed their sons in them, and that thus this doctrine descended from one to the other. These. Indians 
likewise affirm, that in ancient times twenty men came to that country, the principal person of whom was called Cocolan ; and 
that they wore long vests, and sandals as shoes, had large beards, and wore no covering upon their heads; and that-they enjoined 
these people to practise confession, and to fast. The Bishop of Chiapa thus writes, but he immediately afterwards adds: If these 
things are true, it would appear that our holy faith had been known in that country; but as we have not found this to be the 
case in any part of the Indies,—except that in the kingdom of Brazil, which is in the possession of the Portuguese, traces are 
supposed to have been found of Saint Thomas the Apostle, the tidings of which however have flown no further,—certainly the 
land and kingdom of Yucatan gives us reason to hope more especial things, on account of the large, wonderful, and exquisite 
fashion of its ancient edifices; together with inscriptions in certain characters which have no where else been discovered. 
Finally, these are secrets which God alone knows. These are the formal words of the Bishop of Chiapa. That which is certain 
is, that these things are uncertain.” In further confirmation of the truth of a portion of this curious relation; the testimony of 
Stephen de Salagar may be adduced: and although his account may appear in some measure to contradict that of Las Casas, where 
he says that the doctrine of the Trinity was known in Chiapa; still, if the proximity of Chiapa to the peninsula of Yucatan be 
taken into consideration, and the great extent of the former province, it will neither appear singular if the doctrine of the Trinity 
was known in Yucatan, that it should also have been known in the province of Chiapa; or that the Bishop of the diocese might 
have remained ignorant of the fact. The words of De Salagar are these: “ The chiefs and men of rank in the province of 
Chiapa were acquainted with the doctrine of the most Holu Trinity. They called the Father Icona, the Son Vacah, and 
the Holy Ghost Estruach: and certainly these names resemble the Hebrew; at least Estruach, that of the Holy Ghost, does, for 
Ruach in Hebrew is the Holy Ghost'.”—Garcia: Origen de los Indios, p. 122. 

The similitude of many words of the Indian idioms to Hebrew had also struck Las Casas, and induced him to believe that 

mas purificados, y substanciales, y las Frutas mas sabrosas, y de major virtud; y que las Vidas de los Hombres avian de ser 
mas largas ; y todo lo demas, segun esta mejoria. Y para alcangar esta Venida del Hijo del Gran Dios, celebravan, y ofrecian 
a cierto tiempo del Afto, un Sacrificio de diez y ocho Personas, Hombres, y Mugeres, animandolos, y amonestandoles, que 
tuviesen 4 buena dicha ser Mensageros de la Republica, que los embiava al Gran Dios, para pedirle, y suplicarle, tuviese por 
bien de embiarles 4 su Hijo, para que los librase de tantas miserias, y angustias: majormente de aquella obligacion, y cautiverio, 
que tenian de sacrificar Hombres: que (como en otra parte se dijo) lo llevavan por terrible, y pesada carga, y les era intolerable 
tormento, y dolor, y lo hacian, cumpliendo el mandato de sus falfos Dioses, por el temor grande, que les tenian. 

“Estos Casos ultimos, cuenta el Padre Fr. Geronimo de Mendieta; pero aunque él, con las Personas, que se lo contaron, son 
de grandisima opinion, y credito, es lo cierto, que todos estos Hombres, Moradores de esta Nueva-Espafia, estavan ignorantes de logs 
Misterios altos de nuestra Santa Fe, de los quales carecian, no por falta de averlos, en el Mundo, y ser ya su Predicacion hecha, 
en él; sino porque, por culpas que cometian, les avia hecho Dios indignos de tan grandes Mercedes; y lo mui cierto, y averiguado 
es, que la noticia del Verdadero Dios Nuestro, entro, com la entrada de los Espaiioles, que profesan su Santa Lei, y Evangelio, 
como dejamos dicho, y probado en los Capitulos atras referidos.” 

1 Cogolludo in the sixth chapter of the fourth book of his History of Yucatan corroborates in the following words the relation 
of Las Casas. ‘No se sabe con certidumbre, que la predicacion evangelica huviesse passado a dar luz A las gentes de esta 
America, antes que 4 nuestros Espafioles fuesse manifiesta. Si alguna cosa pudo, y causo admiracion, fue la credencia particular, 
que entre todas las demas naciones de estos dilatados reynos tenian los Indios de Yucathan, que por lo menos haze dificil 
entender, como pudo ser, sm averseles predicado los misterios de la ley evangelica, y para prueba de esto diré lo que refiere él 
Padre Remesal en su Historia. Dize pues, que quando el Obispo Don Fr. Bartolomé de Las Casas passd A su obispado, que 
como se dixo en el libro tercero, fue el afto de mil y quinientos y quarenta y cinco, encomendd a un clerigo, que halls en 
Campeche, llamado Francisco Hernandez (y es de quien queda hecha memoria en la fundacion de la Ciudad de Merida, y otros 

capitulos) que sabia la lengua de los Indios, que los visitasse con cierta instruccion de lo que les avia de predicar, y 4 poco 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 163 

PLATE Ube Se ING 

The second place in which these unfortunate people believed was Hell, where they affirmed that 
the souls of those who died by the hands of justice, or by disease, or by any other kind of natural or 

some of the tribes of New Spain were descended from the Jews, as Torquemada asserts in the ninth chapter of the first book of 
his Indian Monarchy, where he says that, examining some papers containing clauses of the will of that prelate, he found a long 
train of argument on this curious subject, concluding with these remarkable words: “ Loquela tua manifestum te facit,” “ Your 
speech hetrays you.” The following account is also taken from Torquemada; which in some of its circumstances tends to 
corroborate the relation of Las Casas. “ Another fact is stated by an ecclesiastic well known as a true servant of God, and 
brother of Saint Francis, named Brother Francis Gomez, who on account of his being still living and very old, does not receive 
that place in this History to which he is entitled by his faithful and long-continued labours in this vineyard of the Lord. It is, 
that returning from Guatemala in company with that holy man Brother Alonzo de Escalona, and passing through the town of 
Nexapa in the province of Guaxaca, the vicar of the convent belonging to the order of Saint Dominic showed them some sheets 
of paper containing drawings which had been copied from some extremely ancient paintings, on long pieces of leather rolled up 
and much smoked, wherein were contained three or four matters appertaining to our faith, namely the mother of Our Lady with 
three sisters, her daughters, whom they reputed saints. She who represented Our Lady had her hair tied up in the manner in 
which the Indian women tie and fasten their hair, and in the knot behind was inserted a small cross, by which it was intended to 
show that she was the most holy, and that a great prophet would be born of her, who would come from heaven, whom she 
should bring forth without connection with man, still remaining a virgin; and that his own people would persecute that great 
prophet, and meditate evil against him, and would put him to death, crucifying him upon a cross ;—and accordingly he was 
represented in the painting as crucified, with his hands and feet tied to the cross and without nails. The article of the resurrec 

tion, how he had to return again to life and to ascend into heaven, was likewise painted. The Dominican Fathers said that they had 
found these skins among some Indians who inhabited the borders of the coasts of the South Sea, who stated that they had received 
these memorials from their ancestors.”—Monarquia Indiana, lib. xv. cap. xlix. It may here be observed, that the province of 
Chiapa bordered, with a very extensive line of coast, on the South Sea. With respect to the belief of the Muyscas in a Trinity, 
which has been already mentioned, it is noticed by Baron de Humboldt in the following curious passage, which is extracted from 
his celebrated work, entitled American Monuments: “ Le commencement de chaque indiction étoit marqué par un sacrifice 
dont les cérémonies barbares, d’aprés le peu que nous en savons, paroissent toutes avoir eu rapport A des idées astrologiques. 
La victime humaine étoit appelée Guesa, errant, sans maison, et Quihica, porte, parce que sa mort annongoit pour ainsi dire 
‘Pouverture d’un nouveau cycle de cent quatre-vingt-cing lunes. Cette dénomination rappelle le Janus des Romains placé aux 
portes du ciel, et auquel Numa dédia le premier mois de V’année, tanquam bicipitis dei mensem. Le Guesa étoit un enfant que 
Von arrachoit a la maison patemelle. [1 devoit nécessairement tre pris d’un certain village situé dans les plaines que nous 
appelons aujourd’hui les Llanos de San Juan, et qui s’étendent depuis la pente orientale de la Cordilltre jusque vers les rives du 

Guaviare. C’est de cette méme contrée de l’Orient qu’étoit yvenu Bochica, symbole du soleil, lors de sa premidre apparition parmi 
? P PP P 

menos de un afio le escrivio el clerigo, que avia hallado un sefior principal, que preguntandole de su religion antigua que 
observaban, le dixo: que ellos conocian, y creian en Dios que estaba en el cielo, y que aqueste Dios era Padre, Hijo, y Espiritu 
Santo, y que el Padre se llamaba Yzdna, que ayia criado los hombres, y el Hijo tenia por nombre Bacab, el qual nacid de una 
doncella virgen, llamada Chiribirias, que esta en el cielo con Dios, y que la madre de Chiribirias se llamaba Yxchel, y al Espiritu 
Santo Hamaban Echvah. De Bacab, que es el Hijo, dizen que le matd, & hizo acotar, y puso una corona de espinas, y que lo 
puso tendido los bragos en un palo, y no entendian que estaba clavado, sino atado, y alli murid, y estuvo tres dias muerto, 
y al tercero dia tornd a vivir, y se subid al cielo, y que esta alla con su Padre. Y despues de esto luego vino Echyah, que es 
el Espiritu Santo, y hartd la tierra de todo lo que avia menester. Preguntado, que queria significar aquellos tres nombres 
de las Tres Personas, dixo, que Yzona queria dezir el Gran Padre, y Bacdb, Hijo del Gran Padre, y Echvah, Méreader. 
Chiribirias suena Madre del Hijo del°Gran Padre. Afiadia mas, que por tiempo se avian de morir todos los hombres, pero 
de la resurreccion de la carne no sabiati nada. Preguntado tambien como tenian noticia de estas cosas, respondid, que los 
sefiores lo ensefiaban A sus hijos, y assi decendia de mano en mano esta doctrina. Afirmaban, que en el tiempo antiguo 
vinieron a esta tierra veinte hombres, y el principal de ellos se llamaba Cozas, y que estos mandaban que se confessassen las gentes, 

y que ayunassen. Por esto algunos ayunaban el dia que corresponde al Viernes, diziendo avia muerto en el Bacab.” 

164. EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

violent death, were conducted; the souls of those who perished in war excepted, which passed to 
heaven. In this region of hell they supposed that there existed four gods, or principal demons, one 

les Muyscas. Le Guesa étoit élevé avec beaucoup de soin dans le temple de soleil 4 Sogamozo, jusq’d VAge de dix ans: alors on lé 
faisoit sortir pour le promener par les chemins que Bochica avoit suivis, 4 l’epoque ou, parcourant les mémes lieux pour instiuire le 
peuple, il les avoit rendus célébres par ses miracles. Al’Age de quinze ans, lorsque la victime avoit atteint wn nombre de sunas éval 
A celui que renferme V’indiction du cycle Muysca, elle étoit immolée dans une de ces places circulaires dont le centre étoit occupé par 
une colonne élevée. Les Péruviens connoissoient les observations gnomoniques. Ils avoient surtout dela vénération pour les colonnes 
érigées dans la ville de Quito, parce que le soleil, 4 ce qu’ils disoient, ‘se plagoit immédiatement sur leur sommet, et que les ombres 
du gnomon y étoient plus courtes que dans le reste de l’empire de I’Inca.’ Les pieux et les colonnes des Muyscas, représentés dans 
plusieurs de leurs sculptures, ne servoient-ils de méme pour observer la longueur des ombres équinoxiales ou solsticiales? Cette 
supposition est d’autant plus vraisemblable que, parmi les dix signes des mois, nous trouvons deux fois, dans les chiffres ta et suhuza, 
une corde ajoutée 4 un pieu, et que les Mexicains connoissoient l’'usage du gnomon filaire. Lors de la celebration du sacrifice qui 
marquoit l’ouverture d’une nouvelle indiction ou d’un cycle de quinze années, la victime, Guesa, <toit menée en procession par le 
Suna, qui donnoit son nom au mois lunaire. On la conduisoit vers la colonne qui paroit avoir servi pour mesurer les ombres 
solsticiales ou equinoxiales, et les passages du soleil par le zénith. Les prétres Keques, suivoient la victime: ils étoient masqués 
comme les prétres Egyptiens. Les uns representoient Bochica, que est l’Osiris ou le Mithras de Bogota, et auquel on attribuoit 
trois tétes, parceque, semblable au Trimurti des Hindoux, al renfermoit trois personnes qui ne formoient qu’une seule divinité: 
d’autres portoient les emblémes de Chia la femme de Bochica, Isis, ou la lune; d’autres étoient couverts de masques semblables 4 
des grenouilles, pour faire allusion au premier signe de V’année, ata; d’autres enfin représentoient le monstre Fomagata, symbole 
du mal, figuré avec un cil, quatre oreilles, et une longue queue. Ce Fomagata, dont le nom, en langue Chibcha, signifie few ou 
masse fondue qui bouillonne, étoit regardé comme un mauvais esprit. Il voyageoit par l’air, entre Tunja et Sogamozo, et trans- 
formoit les hommes en serpens, en lézards, et en tigres. Selon d’autres traditions, Fomagata étoit originairement un prince cruel. 
Pour assurer la succession 4 son frére, Tusatua, Bochica Vavoit fait traiter, la nuit de ses noces comme Uranus l’avoit été par 
Saturne. . Nous ignorons quelle constellation portoit le nom de ce fantome ; mais M. Duquesne croit que les Indiens y attachoient 
le souvenir confus de l’apparition d’une comcte. Lorsque la procession, qui rappelle les. processions astrologiques des Chinois et 
celle de la féte d’Isis, étoit arrivée A Vextremité du Suna, on lioit la victime 41a colonne dont nous avons fait mention plus haut: 
une nuée de fiéches la couvroit, et on lui arrachoit le cceur pour en faire offrande au Roi soleil, 4 Bochica. Le sang du Guesa 
étoit recueilli dans des vases sacrés. Cette cérémonie barbare presente des rapports frappans avec celle que les Mexicains cele- 
broient a la fin de leur grand cycle de cinquante-deux ans.” Further proofs of the doctrine of the Trinity having been known in 
America, and of Christianity having been established in that continent before the arrival of the Spaniards, may be found in the 
fifth book of Acosta’s Natural History of the Indies, and especially in the twenty-eighth chapter, the title of which is “ De festis 
nonnullis Cuscanorum solennioribus et quod Sathanas festum sacrosancte Trinitatis emulari sategerit.” 

“Tt is not known with certainty that the annunciation of the Gospel had crossed over to enlighten the people of America before 
that continent became known to the Spaniards. If any thing is calculated to produce astonishment, it is the particular belief 
which the Indians of Yucathan, above all the other nations of these extensive kingdoms, entertained; which renders it at least 
very difficult to comprehend how that was possible, without the mysteries of the evangelical law having been preached to them 2 
in proof of which I shall cite what Father Remesal relates in his History. He affirms then, that when the Bishop Don 
Bartholomew de las Casas proceeded to his bishoprick, which as has been observed in the third book was in fifteen hundred and 
forty-five, he commissioned an ecclesiastic whom he found in Campeche, whose name was Francis Hernandez, (who is the person 
who is mentioned in the chapter which treats of the foundation of the city of Merida and in other chapters,) who was well acquainted 
with the language of the Indians, to visit them, carrying with him a sort of catechism of what he was about to preach to them; 
and that nearly at the end of a year the ecclesiastic wrote to him that he had met with a principal lord, who, on being questioned 
respecting the ancient religion which they professed, told him that they knew and believed in the God who was in heaven, and 
that this God was the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that the Father was named Yzona, who had created men; and that the 
Son was called Bacab, who was born of a virgin of the name of Chiribirias, and that the mother of Chiribirias was named Yxchel ; 
and that the Holy Ghost was called Echvah. Of Bacab, the Son, they said that he was put to death, and scourged and crowned 
with thorns, and placed with his arms extended upon a beam of wood, to which they did not suppose that he had been nailed, 
but that he was tied, where he died, and remained dead during three days, and on the third day came to life and ascended into 
heaven, where he is with his Father ; and that immediately afterwards Echvah, who is the Holy Ghost, came and filled the earth 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 165 

of whom was superior, whom they called Zitzimitl, who is the same as Miquitlamtecotl, the great god 
of hell. Yzpuzteque, the lame demon, was he who appeared in the streets with the feet of a cock. 
Nextepehua* was the scatterer of ashes. Contemoque signifies he who descends head foremost ; an 
allusion being made to the etymology which learned men assign to the name of the Devil, which 
signifies “‘ deorsum cadens,” which mode of descent after souls they attributed to him from this name 
and Zon-}. Yzpuzteque is he whose abode is in the streets, the same as Satan, he who on a sudden 

* Tepehua signifies a scatterer or disperser, and was an epithet which the Mexicans applied to. Tonacatecutli. 
+ Contemoque is derived from con or zon the head, and temoque falling or descending. Ata(3oXoe is the name to the etymology 

of which allusion is here said to be made, which some learned men may derive from dtaBadXw in the sense of motion, and not of 

accusation. 

with whatsoever it stood in need of. Being asked what signification he assigned to the three names of the three persons, he 
said, that Yzona signified the great Father, and Bacab the Son of the great Father, and Echvah the Merchant. Chiribirias he 
understood to mean the mother of the son of the great Father. He further added, that all mankind would in course of time 
perish ; but they knew nothing of the resurrection of the flesh. Being questioned likewise as to the manner in which they 
became acquainted with these things, he replied that the lords instructed their sons in them, and that thus the doctrine was 
handed down from generation to generation. They declared that in ancient times twenty men had come to that country, the 
chief of whom was named Cozas, who commanded the people to use confession, and to fast, for which reason some of them fasted 
on the day corresponding to Friday, affirming that Bacab had been put to death on that day.” Cogolludo further observes in the 
same chapter of his History of Yucatan, that other circumstances besides their religious creed induced the Dominicans to believe 
that Christianity had been preached to the inhabitants. “ No solo lo referido parece denotar aver tenido noticia de nuestra fe los 
Indios de Yucathan, sino lo que supieron de ellos los religiosos de nuestro Padre Santo Domingo, quando estuvieron en Campeche, 
passando con el obispo a Chiapa, como se dixo, porque les dixeron, como los primeros Espafioles hallaron entre estos Indios 
bautismo, con yocablo en su lengua, que en la nuestra significa, macer otra vez; y oy dia el santo bautismo se les da a entender 
con aquel nombre. Creian que recibian en él una entera disposicion para ser buenos, no recibir dafto de los demonios, y conseguir 
la gloria que esperaban. Dabaseles de edad de tres afios, hasta doze, y ninguno se casaba sin él, porque segun afirma el Padre 
Lizana, dezian que el que no avia recibidole estaba endemoniado, y que no podia hazer cosa buena, ni ser hombre 6 muger de 
buena vida. Elegianle para darle dia que no fuesse aciago, y los padres ayunaban tres dias antes, y se abstenian de las mugeres.”” 
—Cogolludo, Historia de Yucathan, lib. iv. cap. vi. It is to be regretted that the same writer has to record in the following terms 
the extensive destruction of ancient monuments and paintings which immediately followed the arrival of the first Spanish 
missionaries in Yucatan, which it is to be presumed would have thrown some light on the history of its ancient colonization by 
Cozas and his companions, whose name bears some resemblance to Cozoi, the epithet by which the four divine personages of 
whom the Mexicans entreated rain were designated, from whom he might have received that appellation. ‘‘ The ecclesiastics of 
this province, whose care accelerated the conversion of these Indians to our holy Catholic faith, animated with the zeal which they 
felt for their interests, not only destroyed and burned all the idols which they worshiped, but likewise all the books (todos los 
escritos) which they possessed, composed after their peculiar style, by which they were enabled to preserve the memory of past 
events, and whatsoever else they imagined might furnish occasion for the practice of superstition or any pagan rites. This is the 
reason why some particular facts which I wished to notice in this work cannot be ascertained ; but even the knowledge of their 
historical annals has been denied to posterity, for nearly all their histories were committed to the flames without any attention 
being paid to the difference of the matter of which they treated. Neither do I approve of that suggestion, nor do I condemn it : 
but it appears to me, that secular history might have been preserved in the same manner as that of New Spain and of other con- 
quered provinces has been preserved without its being considered to be any obstacle to the progress of Christianity. I shall, 
however, in consequence, be able to say little more than that which has already been written of their religious usages in the time 
of paganism.”— Historia de Yucathan, lib. iv. cap. vi. If more of the historical paintings and monuments of Yucatan had been 
preserved, we should probably have been able to have determined whether Bacab and Quecalcoatle were only two different names 
for the same deity, who was worshiped alike by the Mexicans and the people of Yucatan. Torquemada informs us, on the 
authority of Las Casas, that Quecalcoatle had been in Yucatan, and was there adored. The interpreter of the Vatican Codex 
says, in the following curious passage, that the Mexicans had a tradition that he, like Bacab, died upon the cross, and he seems 
to add, according to their belief, for the sins of mankind: “ E certo da condolersi della cecitd di questa miserabile gente, sopra 
la quale, dice St. Paolo, che-s’ ha da rivelare l’ ira di Dio, perche la sua veritd eterna fi intervenuta per tanto tempo nell’ ingiuz- 

(20 ) 

166 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

appears sideways. It appears that they have been acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, although 
clearer arguments in proof of this fact are adduced in the course of the following pages. They say 

tizia d’attribuire a questi demoni quello che € suo; perché essendo lui il vero Creatore del universo, e quello che ha fatto la 
divisione dell’ acque, che adesso attribuiscono questi poveretti al demonio; che quando é piaciuto a lui mando il celeste ambas- 
ciatore ad annunziare alla Vergine, che aveva ad esser madre del suo Verbo Eterno, il quale, come troyasse il mondo corrotto, lo 
reform6, facendo penitenza, e morendo sulla croce per li peccati nostri, e non il misero Quetzalcoatle, al quale questi misert attri- 
buiscono quest’ opera.” ‘This tradition, which rested solely upon the authority of the anonymous interpreter of that MS., acquires 
the most authentic character from the corroboration which it receives from several paintings in the Codex Borgianus, which 
actually represent Quecalcoatle crucified and nailed: to the cross. These paintings are contained in the fourth, seventy-second, 
seventy-third, and seventy-fifth pages of the above-mentioned MS.; the article of his resurrection, burial, and descent into hell, appears 
also to be represented in the seventy-first and seventy-third pages of the same MS. 

As in the tradition current in Yucatan of Bacab and his crucifixion (which both Remesal and Torquemada have recorded, the latter 
on the authority of Las Casas himself, and which it deserves particularly to be noticed, each author has accompanied with some new 
circumstance in his relation, Remesal informing us that the name of the respectable ecclesiastic who gave the information to Las 
Casas was Francis Hernandez, and Torquemada that it was Eopuco who scourged and put to death Bacab), so in these Mexican 
paintings many analogies may be traced between the events to which they evidently relate, and the history of the crucifixion of Christ 
as contained in the New Testament. The subject of them all is the same,—the death of Quecalcoatle upon the cross, as an atonement 
for the sins of mankind. In the fourth page of the Borgian MS., he seems to be crucified between two persons who are in the act of 
reviling him, who hold, as it would appear, halters in their hands, the symbols perhaps of some crime for which they were themselves going 
to suffer. It is very remarkable that, although Quecalcoatle strictly enjoined honesty, temperance, and chastity to the Mexicans, he 
still should have been esteemed by thieves as their patron god, as we learn from the following passage of the twenty-second chapter of the 
fourteenth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy: « Entre las cosas de abuso que estas gentes usaban, era una, que en su falsa ciencia 
Judiciaria havia un signo, que se llamaba Ceacatl, del qual decian, que los que nacian en dl, si eran nobles, havian de ser mui inquietos; y 
si gente comun y baja, havian de dar en ladrones, por arte supersticiosa y mala de los que entre ellos Jlamaban Temacpalytotique. Estos 
en numero solian ser quince, 6 veinte; y quando querian robar alguna casa, hacian la imagen de Ceacatl, d la del Dios Quetzalcohuatl, y 
iban todos juntos bailando adonde querian hacer el hurto, y ibalos guiando el que llevaba la figura, 6 idolo de este falso dios (que bien 
falso era, pues iba guiando a gente tan mala como esta) y otro que tambien Ilevaba un brago de alguna muger, que havia muerto de el 
primer parto.” “ Amongst the abuses which these nations practised, one was, they had a sign in their false judicial astrology which 
they named Ceacatl, of which they said that those who were born on it, if they were nobles, would be turbulent, and if they were low 
and common people, would become thieves, addicting themselves to the superstitious and wicked art of those whom they called 
Temacpalytotique: these were generally fifteen or twenty in number, who, when they wished to rob any house, made an image of 
Ceacatl, or one of the god Quetzalcohuatl, and went in a body dancing to the place where they intended to commit the robbery; and he 
who carried the figure or the idol of this false god (who assuredly was false, since he led such a worthless band as these) preceded them 
leading the way, and likewise another who carried the arm of a woman who had died in her first childbed.” Torquemada in recording this 
superstitious practice of the Mexicans, does not attempt to explain in what it might have originated; regarded simply in the light of a 
superstition, the Mexican belief that one of their principal gods favoured and protected thieves is not more open to the keen shafts 
of satire than those fables of classical antiquity, against which the early fathers launched all their wit and learning, and often sullied with 
exceptionable passages their otherwise pure and spotless pages. In the seventy-second page of the Borgian MS., Yztapal Nanazcaya, or 
the fourth age of the Mexicans, that of Flints and Canes, memorable for being the era of the birth of Quecalcoatle and of the destruction 
of the province and city of Tulan, seems to be represented. Quecalcoatle is there painted in the attitude of a person crucified, with the 
impression of nails both in his hands and feet, but not actually upon a cross, and with the image of death beneath his feet, which an 
angry serpent seems threatening to devour. The skulls above'signify that the place is Tzonpantli, a word which exactly corresponds 
with the Hebrew proper name Golgotha. The body of Quecalcoatle seems to be formed out of a resplendent sun, and two female 
figures with children on their backs are very conspicuously presenting an offering at his feet. The Mexicans sometimes added the 
epithet of T'latzolli to Tzonpantli, when the signification of both names became, The place of precious death or martyrdom ; tlatzolli 
taeaning in the Mexican language, precious or desired. The seventy-third page of the Borgian MS. is the most remarkable of all: for 
Quecalcoatle is not only represented there as crucified upon a cross of the Greek form, but his burial and descent into hell are also 
depicted in a very curious manner; his grave, which is somewhat in the shape of a cross, and strewed with bones and skulls symbolical 
of death, resembles likewise that kind of building which the Indians of New Spain constructed in the courts of their temples, which they 
called tlacho, and in which they played the religious game of the ball, instituted perhaps in commemoration of him. The head of the 
devouring monster on the left signifies his descent into hell, and that he had been swallowed up in death, which could only dismember, 
but could not cause his body wholly to corrupt or decay away, since he reassumes his perfect form in hell, and seems to compel 
Mictlantecutli, the lord of the dead, to do him homage. Mictlantecutli, it may be observed, was a different personage from Zontemoque, 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. | 167 

that these four gods or demons have goddesses, and they affirm the same of all the gods of heaven ; 
that each has a goddess—not as a wife but as a companion: perhaps there may be some allusion to 

the former presiding over hell, the region of the dead, and the latter over hell, the place of punishment for the wicked. The Mexicans, 
like the early Christians, seem sometimes to have personified death and hell; and Milton has followed their example, unwisely gilding 
error with poetry. Quecalcoatle is again represented as crucified in the seventy-fifth page of the Borgian MS., and one of his hands 
and both his feet seem to bear the impression of nails; he appears from the phonetic symbol placed near his mouth to be uttering an 
exclamation, and his body is strangely covered with suns. If the Jews had wished to apply to their Messiah the metaphor of the sun 
of righteousness, they would perhaps have painted him with such emblems; and perverting in like manner another expression of 
Scripture-—“ I am alpha and omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end ;” have painted the signs dedicated to Quecalcoatle 
before aud after the signs allotted to the twelve tribes of Israel, as seems to be the case in the seventy-fourth page of the Borgian MS., 
where the skull or symbol of death placed over the other signs may signify that he had redeemed them from it. The two signs dedicated 
to Quecalcoatle were Ehecatl, or the wind, and the green feathered serpent which occupy the first and the last places amongst these 
signs. The seventy-first page of the same MS. seems to represent a cross overshadowed by the wings of a cherub, beneath which 
Quecalcoatle is reclining, whilst the figures on the sides and the mutilated human limbs around, may bear some allusion to the punish- 
ment of his enemies. The eagles which are represented in the same page, remind us that that bird is sometimes mentioned in the Old 
Testament as an instrument of divine wrath, as in the eleventh verse of the forty-sixth chapter of Isaiah,—‘ Callmg a ravenous bird 
from the East, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have 
purposed it, I will also do it.” Since the Jews interpret the Old Testament in so very different a manner from Christians, and contend 
that the Messiah is spoken of under innumerable types which the latter refuse to recognize, because they have not been noticed by 
the Apostles, we may reasonably demand whether the eagle was one of them, and whether the representation of Quecalcoatle, borne 
upon the wings of an eagle, which occurs in the fourth page of the Borgian MS., may not allude in some manner to the fourth verse 
of the nineteenth chapter of Exodus,—“ Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought 
you unto myself.” It is remarkable that in these Mexican paintings the faces of many of the figures are black, whilst the nails on the 
hands and feet of others are long, and more like the talons of birds than human nails, and that the visage of Quecalcoatle is frequently 
painted in a very deformed manner. Even here Jewish absurdity and the perversion of ancient prophecy seem to betray themselves. ‘The 
Jews esteemed long nails as the symbol of the divine ordinance, “ Be ye fruitful and multiply;” and it is therefore probable from this 
as well as from other reasons which are enumerated in the following passage, taken from a little work treating of their religion, that they 
would have added them to the representations of their heroic or mythological personages. ‘‘They look so attentively to their nailes, 
because of their great fruitfulnesse, for though they cut them every Friday, yet they quickly grow againe. Some say, they doe it by reason 
of the garments which God gave to Adam in Paradise, which were naile coloured. Some say they doe it by reason of the wonderfull 
difference which is between the nailes and the flesh, of which wonderfull difference a wonderfull consideration proceeded from the first 
man. For when Adam saw the world covered with darknesse, he cryed out, ‘ O miserable man that | am, for whose sin the world is 
become darke”” Here God put a most clear minde into man, that he should strike two flints one against the other, by the stroke whereof 
fire came forth, and he lighted a candle by it; and when he saw himselfe stark naked, but onely upon the ends of his fingers that were 
covered with nailes, falling into a wonderfull admiration he praised God therefore, as it is found in a book, called Rabz, cap. 41.” The 
verse in the Old Testament, « All faces shall gather blackness,” may explain the reason why figures with such faces often occur in 
Mexican paintings: and as regards the deformity of features which the Mexicans attributed to Quecalcoatle, .the words of Isaiah in the 
fifty-second chapter of his Prophecies, which the Jews believed to refer to their Messiah, and which they might have understood in an 
exaggerated sense, must also be recollected : “ Behold, my servant Shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high. 
As many were astonished at thee ; his visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of meu: so shall he 
sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which 
they had not heard shall they consider:” and the prophecy contained in the fifty-third and following chapter, ‘which is more frequently 
cited: “ He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.” If some persons, 
recollecting that Christ disproves in the twenty-second chapter of Saint Matthew the Messiah to he David’s son, by putting the question 
to the Pharisees, —‘ If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?” should contend that the passage first quoted from Isaiah cannot 
refer to the Messiah, because God would not call his son and equal his servant; this objection may be answered by citing the eighth 
verse of the third chapter of Zechariah,—“ Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit before thee: for they 
are men wondered at: for, behold, I will bring forth my servant The BRANCH.” By the branch the Messiah is here signified, as is 
unequivocally declared in the twelfth and thirteenth verses of the sixth chapter of the same Prophet,—* And speak unto him, saying, 
Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he 
shall build the temple of the Lord: Even he shall build the temple of the Lord ; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his 
throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.” Notwithstanding the reserve which 
the early Spanish historians imposed upon themselves in treating of Quecalcoatle, (whose name in fact would scarcely have been handed 

168 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

the four fates*, or goddesses of hell, that the poets feign, Alethio, Megara, Thesiphonte, and 
Proserpine. 

* Tt is scarcely necessary to observe, that the Furies are here confounded with the Fates; that the latter were but three in number, 
and that Proserpine was the wife of Pluto and the queen of hell. 

down to us but for the preservation of a chance copy of the first edition of the Indian Monarchy of Torquemada, from which a second 
edition was printed at Madrid in 1723,) we are still enabled to give some description of his busts, some of which, it may be supposed, 
were very deformed and others much less so. Herrera says: “ En Chulula, republica cerca de Mexico, adoraban un famoso idolo, que 
era dios de las mercaderias, porque eran grandes mercaderes, i oi dia son dados & tratos. Llamabanle Quatzalcoatl: i estaba en una gran 
placa, en un templo mui alto; tenia al rededor de si oro, plata, plumas, ropas de valor, en figura de hombre, la cara de pajaro, con el 
pico colorado, i sobre él una cresta, i berrugas, con unas rengleras de dientes: i la lengua defuera: en la cabega una mitra de papel 
puntiaguda ; i pintada una hoz en la mano, i muchos aderegos de oro en las piernas, porque,hacia ricos 4 los que queria: i su nombre 
significaba culebra de pluma rica.”—Historia de las Indias Occidentales, dec. iii. lib. ii. cap. xv. 

“In Chulula, a republic in the neighbourhood of Mexico, they worshiped a famous idol, who was the god of merchandize ; for they 
were great merchants, and at present they are addicted to traffic. They called him Quatzalcoatl. He was placed in a large square, in a 
very lofty temple. He was surrounded with gold and silver, feathers, and precious apparel, and was of the shape of a man, with the face 
of a bird with a scarlet bill, over which was a crest, with warts and rows of teeth: he had a protruding tongue: on his head he wore 
a mitre, terminating in a point; a sickle was painted in his hand, and many golden ornaments were fastened to his legs, for he enriched 
those whom he pleased. The signification of his name was, ‘ the serpent of rich plumage.” In Yucatan, Echuah was probably the 
god of merchants, although Quecalcoatle was revered in that character in Mexico. The sickle mentioned by Herrera seems to have 
been distinguished by the Mexicans by the appellation of Xiuhatlatli, erroneously supposed elsewhere to have been a warlike weapon 
for impelling darts; because the representation of it as if employed for that purpose frequently occurs in the mythological paintings of 
the Mexicans, but which (since no Spanish authors notice such a military weapon as customary amongst the Mexicans or any other 
Indian tribes) it is to be presumed was rather a symbol of divine than civil warfare. It may be interesting to compare Herrera’s 
description of the bust of Quecalcoatle with the following account transmitted to us by Acosta of the three principal images of 
Tezcatlipoca, Huitzilopuchtli, and Tlaloc, which were adored by the Mexicans: ‘“ Primarium Mexicanorum idolum, ut diximus, 
Vitzlipuzli erat, ex ligno celatum forma viri, in sella, que supra arceram seu lecticam fundabatur, considentis.. Ex hujus utrisque 
lateribus, baculus, colubrino capite preeeminens, porrigebatur. Per sellam autem, significabatur, eum eo gestu in celo residere. Idoli 
preputium undiquaque livescebat. Per transversum nasum livida macula ab una aure usque ad alteram ducta erat. _Caput ejus crista 
pretiosissima, rostro avium simili, tegebatur. Hujus apex aut extremitas levigato auro obducta erat. Ipsum idolum leva manu 
rotundam candentemque parmam, quinque albis pennis zm crucis morem decussatis, gerebat: ex cujus summitate palme ramulus ex auro 
factus, prominebat. In latere ejus quatuor tela conspicua erant, que Mexicani ipsi celitus missa pretendunt, ut us facinura lla, de 
quibus suo loco dicemus, designaret. Ad dextram fulcrum quoddam, anguis forma statutum erat, granis ac striis ceruleis undiquaque 
exsculptum. Omnibus et singulis his ornamentis, quorum adhuc multd plura erant, sue peculiares interpretationes conveniebant, que 
apud Mexicanos tales erant. Vitzliputzli nomen idem est, ac inversa, et conspectu pulchra crista seu penna. De templi vero insigni 
_ ornatu, ac sacrificiis, jejuniis, et ceremoniis, idolo exhibitis, in sequentibus mentio fiet. Dictum idolum in aram editiorem locatum 
pannis integebatur, et insuper ornamentis variis, ex auro, pennisque, ac pennatis clypeis, opera exquisitissima et ingeniosissima 
fabrefactis, cingebatur. Cujus quidem veneratio ut esset illustrior, ante ejus fuciem perpetud Gordiin suspendebatur. Juxta hujus 
sacellum, aliud quoque aditum, non usqueaded excultum erat. Hoc aliud idolum Tlaloc vocatum condebatur, quod Vitzliputzli semper 
proximum statuebatur, ut quod ejusdem cum illo potentie particeps esset. Preeter hec etiam tertium quoddaim idolum colebatur apud 
Mexicanos, quod remittendis peccatis destinabatur. Hoc Tezcathlipuca vocabatur. Id ex nitente nigro saxo exculptum, vestibus 
pretiosis habitu Mexicanorum sartis tegebatur. Aures ejus aureis, labra verd inferiora argenteis annulis transmissis, conspicua erant. 
Fis interdum virides, nonnunquam cerulee penne, externa facie Smaragdos aut cyanos referentes, inserebantur. Capilli pars inferior 
filo aureo innexa erat: in cujus extremitate auris aurea, fumo quodam volitante ‘(is autem idea precum, a peccatoribus fusarum, ac ab 
idolo exaudiendarum erat) insignis, figebatur. Intra verd aures geminas Clenodiorum magna vis conspiciebatur. Ex collo etiam 
clenodium, totum pectus anterius integens, suspensum erat,” &c. &c. 

Both a fan and a sickle were sometimes placed in the hands of Quecalcoatle, as it would appear from a bust which is preserved in 
the British Museum, the countenance of which is mutilated though not deformed, and the curve of the sickle in the right hand broken off. 
Reasons are given in another place for assuming this bust to be one of Quecalcoatle ; but it would seem that the Mexican artist intended 
to give an expression of youth and beauty to the face; nor is it surprising that his image should not always have been sculptured with 
a deformed visage, according to the description of Torquemada: “ Su imagen tenia la cara mui fea, y la cabega larga, y mut barbado.” 
“ His image had a very ugly face, a large head, and a thick beard:” since the same motives which induced some Spanish writers, whilst 

openly reviling the other Mexican gods, to speak almost in respectful terms of Quecalcoatle,—viz. a regard for the excellence of his 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 169 

1. Miquitlantecotli*, the god of hell, otherwise called Tzitzimitl, who is the same as Lucifer. 
2. Miquitecacigua. 3. Yxpuzteque, the lame demon who appeared in the streets with the feet of 

-* The infernal gods of the Mexicans, or those who according to their notions presided over hell, may be immediately recognized in 
their paintings by a kind of spike projecting from the back of their heads, and usually painted of a red colour to represent perhaps the 
point of a lance bathed in blood; this symbol is common to Miquitlantecotli and the other gods of hell. 

moral precepts, and the exemplary conduct of his life, might have inclined the Mexicans occasionally to represent him with a sweet and 
benignant expression of countenance. Torquemada, in the sixth book of his Indian Monarchy, thus eulogizes Quecalcoatle: “ A la 
verdad el sefiorio de este Quetzalcohuatl fue suave, y no les pidid en servicio sino cosas ligeras, y no penosas, y les ensefio las que eran 
virtuosas, prohibiendoles las malas, nocivas, y dafiosas, ensefiandoles tambien 4 aborrecerlas.” ‘In truth, the dominion of Quetzalcohuatl 
was sweet, and he exacted no service from them but easy and light things, instructing them in such as were virtuous, and prohibiting such 
as were wicked, evil, and injurious, teaching them likewise to abhor them.” The passage in the New Testament, “‘ Come unto me, ye 
that are heavy laden,” &c. seems to have occurred to the recollection of Torquemada when writing these lines, if he did not borrow 
- them from the writings of some of the’more ancient missionaries, many of whose works he acknowledges came into his hands. He has, 
however, fallen into the same inconsistency as several other Spanish authors, such as Gomara and Herrera, who sometimes praise 
and at other times speak in terms of execration, of Quecalcoatle, whose name seems, by the tacit consent of the Spanish historians, to 
have been allowed speedily to sink into oblivion, without any attempt being made to clear up his most mysterious history. In Mexico, it 
is probable that great pains were taken by the monks and clergy to root out the remembrance of him, and that legendary tales relating to 
his life were not allowed to be inserted in books published either in that city or in Spain. It is certainly very remarkable that Bernal 
Diaz, who wrote a circumstantial account of the conquest of New Spain, and whose memory seems scarcely ever to have failed him, 
should, in describing the city of Cholula and its famous temple, have declared that he had forgotten the name of the idol to which it was 
dedicated; although it appears, from what he says a few chapters afterwards, that he had not forgotten the number of steps of which the 
staircase leading to the upper area of that temple consisted : “ Diré que en Cholula el gran adoratorio que en él tenian, era de mayor altor 
que no el de Mexico, porque tenia ciento y veinte gradas.’—Historia Verdadera dela Conquista de la Nueva-Espana, cap. 1xxxxii. 
pag. 72. Since Bernal Diaz could not have been really ignorant of a fact which was so notorious to all Spaniards at all conversant with 
the history of the Mexicans,—that both the city and the temple of Cholula were dedicated to Quecalcoatle,—it is possible that what has 
been asserted by a Spanish author, who wrote in Mexico in the seventeenth century, may be true; that he possessed a MS. copy of Bernal 
Diaz’s History which differed materially in many passages from the printed edition. If, however, the printed edition be in this place 
correct, it is probable that Bernal Diaz dissimulates his knowledge, either in compliance with the wishes, or in obedience to the com- 
mands, of others, of some portion of the religious history of the New World. The passage in which he professes to have forgotten the name 
of the idol to which the temple of Cholula was dedicated is the following: ‘ Tenia aquella ciudad en aquel tiempo sobre cien torres 
muy altas, que eran cues, ¢ adoratorios, donde estavan sus idolos, especial el cu mayor era de mas altor que el de Mexico, puesto que 
era muy suntuoso y alto el cu Mexicano, y tenia otros cien patios para el servicio de los cues, y segun entendimos, avia alli un idolo muy 
grande, el nombre del no me acuerdo, mas entre ellos tenia gran devocton, y venian de muchas partes & le sacrificar, y tenia como 4 
manera de novenas, y le presentavan de las haziendas que tenian.” 

M. Dupaix discovered in the province of Tlascala, which bordered on Cholula, a bust which so exactly corresponds with the 
description given by Herrera of the image of Quecalcoatle, which was adored in that city, that we cannot refrain from referring to the 
58rd plate of the Second Part of his Monuments, which contains a representation of it under the number 123. The bird’s face was 
perhaps only a mask or vizor, symbolical of his absence; or it might have been the bill of the Huicilan, and have alluded to the proper 
name Huitzilopuchtli, and to the bird which invited the Mexicans out of the bush to set out on their pilgrimage from Aztlan. It 
deserves to be remarked, that both the hands of this figure seem to be pierced by nails, the heads of which are visible. The tradition 
current in Yucatan, that Eopuco crowned Bacab with thorns, appears also to be preserved in its head-dress. A crown of thorns of 
another fashion may perhaps be recognized on the head of another piece of ancient sculpture discovered by M. Dupaix. This figure, in 
relievo, is represented in the 9th plate of his Monuments, Part the Third, No. 13; and the crown seems to be formed out of the 
thorny leaves of the aloe. If such testimony as that of Las Casas, Remesal, De Salacar, and Torquemada, may still, from the importance 
of the subject, stand in need of further corroboration before belief can be yielded to the traditions of Yucatan, which even went so 
far as to affirm that Bacab had been crucified by Eopuco, it is afforded by the discovery which M. Dupaix made of a cross in a temple, 
when investigating the ruins of the ancient city of Palenque, which was situated on the borders of Yucatan. Although, in anticipation 
of the objection which some persons may be inclined to make, that the finding of a cross on the confines of Yucatan, was no proof 
that the people of that province believed as a matter of faith in the crucifixion of an individual, we shall insert a passage from 
Cogolludo’s History of Yucatan, which is very remarkable, as the cross there mentioned had the image of a person crucified sculptured 
upon it: “ En medio del patio, que haze el claustro de nuestro Convento de la Ciudad de Merida, ay una cruz de piedra, que ser& del 

(2x) 

170 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

a cock as he is here represented; he is the same as Satan, or the adversary. 4. Nexoxocho. 
5. Nextepeua, the scatterer of ashes. 6. Micapetlacoli. 7. Contemoque, he who descends head 
foremost from the sky. 'The signification of this name is the same as that of Diabolus, viz. deorsum 
cadens, falling downwards ; for they say that he descends for souls as the spider lowers itself with its 
head downwards from the web*. 8. Chalmecaciuatl. 

* The following is a curious passage extracted from the forty-fifth chapter of the sixth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy : 
“ Otros dijeron que Tezcatlipuca avia decendido del cielo, descolgandose por una soga que avia hecho de tela de arafia, y que andando 
por este mundo, desterré 4 Quetzalcohuatl que en Tulla fue muchos afios sefior.” “Others relate that Tezcatlipuca descended from 
heaven, letting himself down by a rope which he had formed of spiders’ webs, and that directing his course through the world, he 
banished Quetzalcohuatl who had been many years king in Tulla.” In another chapter Torquemada makes Quecalcoatle joint king of 
Tula with Huemac. ‘The daughter of Huemac, according to Sahagun, fell likewise a victim to the temptation and fraud of Tetzcatlipuca. 
If the Mexicans imputed the temptation and persecutions of Quecalcoatle to an evil spirit, it is more probable that they believed Conte- 
moque to have been the cause of them than Tezcatlipoca, who was one of their supreme deities; and who if not the same as 
Tonacatecuth, was supposed to reside with him in the ninth or highest heaven. It is evident from the plate, that Tezcatlipoca was not 
one of the infernal gods of the Mexicans, although some authors have confounded him with Miquitlantecotli, since their symbol was the 
head of a lance, whilst his was a smoking mirror, as it is explained by the interpreter, which was likewise common to Quecalcoatle and 
Chalchiuhtotoli; they inhabited hell, and he appears to have presided over limbo}. 

* Assuming this to be the case, as the plate seems clearly to indicate, the belief of the Mexicans, that children were more immediately 
under the protection of Tezcatlipoca, must seem very extraordinary; as it would almost imply some acquaintance with the tenth verse 
of the eighteenth chapter of Saint Matthew, “Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven 
their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.” 

gruesso de una sesma por cada parte de los quatro lados, y como una vara de largo, y se echa de vér estar su longitud quebrada, y faltarle 
algun pedago. iene sacado de medio relieve en la misma piedra una figura de un santo crucifixo, como de media vara de largo. 
Entiendese aver sido una de las que en el tiempo de la infidelidad de los Indios se hallaron en la Isla de Cozumel. Avia muchos afios 
que estaba en lo superior de laiglesia, y se dezia, que desde que la pusieron alli, no daba casi rayo alguno, y que de antes solian caer 
muchos en el Convento. Caydse con algun temporal, y la baxaron & Ja iglesia, donde algun tiempo la vimos arrimada al pie del altar de 
la capilla de el Capitan Alonso Carrio de Valdés, con poca decencia. Aviendo sido electo Provincial el Reverendo Padre Fr. Antonio 
Ramirez, por dezirse lo que se dezia de esta santa cruz, y colocarla mas decentemente ; hizo labrar un assiento de piedra de silleria, y sobre 
él unas gradas, en medio una coluna de altura competente, en cuyo remate hizo fixar el de la cruz, quedando derecha, y la efigie del 
santo crucifixo-a la parte Oriental ; dorados los remates de la cruz, que son labrados de vistosas molduras. Por la voz comun, asi de 
religiosos como seculares, y por no afirmar cosa de que no ay total certidumbre, se puso a las espaldas de ella un rotulo, que dize: Esta 
cruz se hallo en Cozumel sin tradicion. Aviendo sabido Don Eugenio de Alcantara (que murid beneficiado del partido de Hoctun, y fué 
de los ministros doctrineros, que mas lengua han sabido de estos Indios ; curiosissimo en averiguar antiguallas suyas, grande eclesiastico, 
y zelosissimo de que fuessen verdaderamente Christianos,) que andaba yo ocupado en estos escritos, me dixo no una vez sola, que podia 
escrivir con seguridad, que esta santa cruz la tenian los Indios en Cozumel en tiempo de su infidelidad, y que avia afios, que se llevd 
4 Merida, porque aviendo oido a muchos lo que se dezia de ella, avia hecho particular inquisicion con Indios muy viejos de por alla, y se 
lo avian afirmado assi. Podia hazer dificultad la efigie del santo crucifixo que tiene; pero considerado lo que se ha dicho en este libro, 
que creian estos Indios, que el Hijo del Dios 4 quien llamaban Bacab, avia muerto puesto en una cruz, tendidos los bragos, no parece tan 
dificil de entender le tuviessen figurado, segun el credito de religion que tenian.”—Historia de Yucathan, lib. iv. cap. ix. “In the 
middle of the court formed by the cloister of our convent in the city of Merida, there is a stone cross, the thickness of the four several 
sides of which is about six inches, and their length a yard; its length has evidently been diminished by a part having been 
broken off. The figure of a saint crucified, of about half a yard in length, is sculptured in mezzo-relievo on the same stone. It is 
understood to have been one of the crosses which in the times of Indian paganism were discovered in the island of Cozumel. Many 
years ago it stood ?n the upper part of the church; and it is reported that, from the period when it was placed there, scarcely any flashes 
of lightning struck the convent, although it had often been struck before that time. Being blown down in a storm, they carried it into 
the lower body of the church where we saw it for some time leaning against the foot of the altar of the chapel of captain Alonso Carrio 
de Valdes, with little decency. The reverend father, brother Antonio Ramirez, on being elected Provincial, both on account of that 
which was rumoured of this cross, and in order to place it in a more decent situation, caused a foundation, composed of stones, to be 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. al 

PLATE V. 

This was the third place for souls which passed from this life, to which the souls alone of children 
who died before attaining the use of.reason went. ‘They feigned the existence of a tree from which 
milk distilled, where all children who died at such an age were carried; for the Devil, who is so 
inimical to the honour of Gon, even in this instance has wished to show his rivalry : for in the same 
way as our holy doctors teach the existence of limbo for children who die without baptism, or without 
the circumcision of the old law, or without the sacrifice of the natural man, so he has caused these 
poor people to believe that there was such a place for their children; and he has superadded another 
error—the persuading them that these children have to return from thence to re-people the world 
after the third destruction which they suppose that it has to undergo, for they believe that the world 
has already been twice destroyed. 

1. Chichiualquauitl*, which signifies the tree of milk which nourishes children who die before 

attaining the use of reason. 

* The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus seems to be here guilty of some inadvertence, in saying that the Mexicans believed 
that the world had been only twice destroyed. A reason may be assigned for an apparent contradiction which occasionally 
occurs in the course of the following pages, respecting the precise number of destructions which they supposed that the world had 
undergone, since the destruction of the province of Tulan may sometimes be reckoned, and sometimes omitted as a catastrophe 
which did not affect the entire world: but even this supposition would not explain a difference of two in the estimate of the total 
number of these destructions ; as in other places it is said that the world had undergone four destructions, and would again be 
destroyed; except we admit that the destruction of the world by fire may have been represented prospectively instead of retro- 
spectively in the Mexican paintings; and that hence may have originated a mistake on the part of those who did not understand 
the right interpretation of these paintings in computing this number, and the occasion of confounding the fifth age, which the 
fourth destruction of the world was to usher in, with the fourth destruction itself. The Mexicans certainly believed that the 
world would again be destroyed by fire, that it had been inundated by water; and the age of wind probably refers to the first 
great catastrophe which befel the earth in consequence of the sin and disobedience of our first parents. The curse pronounced 
against Adam, which is supposed to have operated so great a change in its state, and to have converted it from a garden into a 
wilderness, seems to be alluded to in the Peruvian tradition of Con, and of the people he created, which is thus related by 
Gomara: “ Inché la tierra de ombres y mugeres que crié, y dié les mucha fruta y pan con lo demas 4 la vida necessario. Mas 
empero por enojo que algunos le hizieron, bolvié la buena tierra que les avia dado, en arenales secos y esteriles, como son los de 
la costa, y les quité la Iluvia, ca nunca despues aca Ilovio alli. Dexdles solamente los rios de piadoso, para que se mantuviessen 
con regadio y trabajo.” “ He filled the earth with men and women whom he had created, and gave them fruits and bread in 
abundance, with every other necessary of life. But notwithstanding, on account of some offence which they were guilty of 
towards him, he changed the good soil which he had given them into dry and barren sands, like those situated on the sea-coast, 
and deprived them of rain; for never from that period did rain fall again in that country: out of compassion alone he left them 
the rivers, that they might support life by means of irrigation and toil.” On the supposition that the destruction by winds 
was the first in order of the destructions which the Mexicans conceived that the world had undergone, and that it referred to 
some great change operated in the soil of the earth, affecting vegetation and its productive powers, Ehecatl, or the sign of 
wind, which is generally the forerunner and cause of blights and famine, was a not ill-chosen symbol of the diminished 
fertility of the earth, and the sterility inflicted upon it by a divine malediction. 

constructed for it, with steps up to it, and a pillar in the middle of sufficient height, on the top of which was fixed the cross in an upright 
position, with the image of the crucified saint turned towards the East, its extremities being gilt and worked with beautiful mouldings. 
With the general consent both of the ecclesiastics and of the laity, and in order not to affirm aught which was not entirely certain, an 
inscription was placed on the back of it, which says, ‘ This cross was found in Cozumel, without tradition,’ Having become 
acquainted with Don Eugenio de Alcantara (who died possessing the benefice of Hoctun, and was one of those teachers of the Gospel 

172 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

PLATE VI. 

Tezcatlipoca*, here represented, was one of their most potent deities : they say that he appeared 
in that country on the top of a mountain called Tezcatepec, which signifies the Mountain of 
Mirrors. ‘They paid him great reverence and adoration, and addressed him in their prayers with 
the appellation of Titlaclahuan, which means, Lord, whose servants we are. ‘They paint in his 
hands a certain sort of weapon}, together with a shield and a quiver of arrows; and at his feet 
a serpent and a heap of fire, denoting that he is the creator of the elements: alluding, perhaps, to 
the error of the Manicheans, who considered these wretched portions of matter as the principle of 
visible things. They believed him, likewise, to be the originator of wars; as they affirm that he was 
one of those who fell from heaven. The old people of the country say, that those who entered where 
his idol stood, ‘‘ cecidebant in facies suas,” fell on their faces and thus adored him; and that they 
took a little earth from the ground, which they swallowed with the greatest reverence, and addressed 
him ‘ Lord, since we are thy servants, grant us all which we may stand in need of +.” 

2. Tezcatlipoca. 3. Serpent. 4. Water. 5. Fire. 

PLATE VII. 

This is the first age which they record, in which Water reigned, till at last it destroyed the world 
which these two first of the human race had peopled, whom the great triune God had in the 

who was most versed in the languages of these Indians, and very curious in verifying their antiquities, a great ecclesiastic, and most desirous 
of their becoming true Christians,) when engaged in the composition of this History, he told me, not once only, that I might safely write 
that the Indians of Cozumel possessed this holy cross in the time of their paganism, and that some years had elapsed since it was brought 
to Merida: for having heard from many persons what was reported of it, he had made particular inquiries of some very old Indians who 
resided there, who assured him that it was the fact. ‘The image which it bears of the crucified saint may cause some difficulty: but if 
that which is said in this book be considered, that these Indians believed that the Son of God, whom they called Bacab, had died upon 
across, with his arms stretched out upon it, it cannot appear so difficult a matter to comprehend that they should have formed his image 
according to the religious creed which they professed.” 

* This proper name is compounded of the following words, Tezca the name of the mountain on which this god is said to have 
appeared to the Mexicans, ¢/i/ dark, and poca smoke, with reference no doubt to the manner in which he manifested himself. 

+ The name of this weapon was Xiuatlatli, which appears to have been used to propel a spear with greater force: it was 
peculiar to the New World. The Mexicans displayed much ingenuity in their warlike weapons, but they did not employ 
poisoned arrows against their enemies like many other Indian tribes. They used, in the diversion of the chase, a weapon called 
by the Spaniards a cerbatana, which was a kind of tube through which they blew with the breath a ball, and hit a mark with 
great exactness. Cortes, in his letter to Charles the Fifth, says that Montezuma gave him some of these tubes painted so 
exquisitely with birds and flowers, that he could not describe to the Emperor their perfection. This appears to have been an 
invention of African origin. 

+ Torquemada, describing the adoration which the Mexicans paid to Tezcatlipoca, says, “ quien de los que saben algo de historia, 
y leen en ella los errores de los antiguos, no dira que este es Jupiter tan celebrado de todos ellos?” ‘“‘ who at all conversant with 
history, and who has read the errors of the ancients, will not say that this was Jupiter so celebrated by them?” He has 
preserved a prayer which the Mexicans addressed to this God, which commences, ‘‘O Almighty God, who givest life to those 
who invoke thee by the appellation of Titlaclahua, deign to grant me all that is necessary for my maintenance, both meat and 
drink.” “O Dios todo poderoso, que dais vida 4 los hombres que os Ilamais Titlaclahua, hacedme esta tan seflalada merced, de 

darme todo lo necessario para el sustento de la vida, asi del comer, como del beber.” 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 3 

beginning placed in it. This age, according to their computation, lasted four thousand and eight 
years ; and on the occurrence of that great deluge, they say that men were changed into fish: these 
large fish they named Tlacamichin, which signifies Men-fish. Most of the old people of Mexico say 
that a single man and a single woman escaped from this deluge, from whom, in course of time, 
mankind multiplied. The tree in which they saved themselves was called the Ahuehuete*; and they 
say that this deluge happened in the tenth sign, according to their computation, which they 
represented by Water, which on account of its clearness they place in their calendar. They say that 
during the first age men ate no bread, but only of a certain kind of wild maize which they call 
Atzitziutli. They name this first age Coniztal}, which signifies the White Head; others say that not 
only did these two who were preserved in the tree escape, but that seven others remained hid in a 
certain cave, and that the deluge having passed away, they came forth and restored the population of 
the earth, dispersing themselves over it; and that their descendants in course of time worshiped 
them as gods, each in his own nation ; and thus the Tepanechi adored one whom they called Hul- 
hueteotlit ; and the Chishimeche, Quetzalcouatl ; and the Culhue, Tzinacouatl,—for from these their 
generations had descended§. For this cause they held lineage in great account, and wherever they 
chanced to be, they said “I am of such a lineage ||.” They likewise worshiped their first founder, 
and offered him sacrifice, and called him the Heart of the People, to whom they made an idol, which 
was preserved in a very secure place, and covered with vestments; and all their descendants deposited 
in that place rich jewels, such as gold and precious stones. Before this idol, which they called their 
Heart |, wood was always burning, with which they had mixed copal or incense. 

In this first age, giants, of whom the accompanying figure is the representation, existed in that 
country, who were those whom they called Tzocuillicxeque, of such vast stature that a monk of the 
order of Saint Dominic, named Brother Putrr pz tos Rios, who is the person who copied the 

greatest part of these paintings, relates that he beheld with his own eyes a molar tooth** from the jaw 

* Abuehuete is the Mexican name for the fir. The manner in which this man and woman escaped is not very clearly 
explained in the text, but the plate shows that it was in an ark or boat. 

+ In allusion perhaps to its great antiquity, or because silver is of that colour. 

{ If this proper name were written Huehueteotli, it would signify the anceent God. 

§ Those missionaries who, as Torquemada informs us, supposed that Quecalcoatle was an Irishman, because he was called 
Cuculcan in Yucatan, and wore a hood and a vest covered with red crosses, and ate raw flesh,—a practice which they seem to 
think was common amongst the ancient Irish, (although Ireland was a country renowned for its learning and the resort of scholars 
from all parts of Europe, when Spain under the Goths had actually forgotten the use of letters,)—might as well attempt to prove 
that he was a Carthusian monk, because the Carthusians were originally so named from the paper covering which they wore on 
their heads: the Italian word cartoccio being defined by Facciolati in his Lexicon to be ‘‘involucrum chartaceum quo a 
pharmacopolis aliisque institoribus pulveres ac similia clauduntur ;” and Quecalcoatle is said to have worn.a pointed paper mitre, 
and is so represented in Mexican paintings. 

|| The Jews were great genealogists. 

q Clavigero mentions a very precious emerald with a bird carved upon it, and worshiped by the Indians as the Heart of the 
People, which was destroyed by a missionary. The signification of the name of Votan, who was the Quecalcoatle of the 
Chiapanese, was a heart. 

** The science of geology, which has made such considerable advances in England during the brilliant reign of His present 
Majesty, seems destined to promote the cause of truth. The bones of elephants and of unknown species of animals, which for 
thousands of years have ceased to exist, are no longer considered even by the common people as indubitable proofs of the 
existence of giants in days of yore; and although Torquemada says, ‘‘ Se dice que huvo gran noticia en el Peru de unos gigantes 

que vinieron 4 aquellas partes, cuios huesos se hallan oi dia de disforme grandega cerca de Manta y de Puerto Viejo; y en 

(2y) 

174 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

of one of these giants, which was discovered by the Indians of Amaquemecam whilst repairing the 
streets of Mexico in the year 1556, which he himself weighed, and found to be three pounds wanting 
one ounce : he presented it to the Viceroy Don Luis pr Vexasco ; and other persons saw it ; whence 
an opinion may: be formed of the size of these giants, and likewise from other bones which have been 
found in those countries. They relate of one of the seven, whom they mention as having escaped 
from the deluge, that the earth becoming populous he went to Chululan, and there began to build a 
tower, which is that of which the brick base is still visible. The name of that chief was Xelua; he 
built it in order, should a deluge again happen, to escape upon it; its base is eighteen hundred feet 
in circumference*. When it had already reached a great height, lightning from heaven fell and 
destroyed it. This event struck terror into the Mexicans, whose chief was named Quemoque}; and 
on this they deliberated together, whether they should ask advice of their god Toseque, who 
commanded them to fast eight years, the four first on bread and water, and the other four on bread 
of the seed of Bledos; and many of them completed this fast, and at its termination the earth 
swallowed them up ; and those who remained, availing themselves of this history, have recorded it, 
together with the destruction of Tula, which happened shortly afterwards}. They still sing, in their 
dances and festivals, the song which commences with A vlamanhutulee7 §, in which they recite the 
history. 

1. Apachihuilliztli. 2. Each of these circles stands for a mita, or year. 3. Each of these branches 
equals four hundred years, and the sum of all is four thousand and eight years. 4. Chalchiuitlicue. 
5. Water. 6. Tzocuillicxeque, which means a giant. 

ac) Dy. Mt a 

Ecacocoe. They paint in this manner the second age, which they say lasted four thousand and 
ten years, at the conclusion of which they record that the world ended by the force of very violent 
winds, and that men were changed into apes. ‘They say that one man and one woman escaped from 
this deluge || within a stone. This deluge happened in the sign which they name One Dog, which is 

proporcion avian de ser aquellos hombres mas que tres tanto majores que los Indios de aora. Dicen que aquellos gigantes vinieron 
por mar, y que hicieron guerra 4 los de la tierra, y que edificaron edificios sobervios, y muestran oi un pogo hecho de piedras de 
gran valor. Dicen mas que aquellos hombres haciendo pecados enormes, y especialmente usandolo contra natura, fueron 
abrasados, y consumidos con fuego que vino del cielo,”—-we may be permitted to doubt the fact. 

* M. Dupaix gives a drawing of this pyramid, or Teocali, in its present state, with an accompanying scale of measurement. 
Clavigero says that he had ascended it on horseback, and that it was half a mile in circumference at the base; and according to 
M. de Humboldt it is hollow. There can be little doubt that the principle of the arch was understood by those who constructed 
this vast monument, and that it was built on the same plan as the other Teocalis of New Spain. 

+ The first syllable of Quemoque was probably hue, signifying old or great, of which the ccaupienden forming the 
superlative of the adjective, is found in the proper name Quequecoyotl. This name, as well as that of Moquihuix, has some 
resemblance to Moses; the symbol of the latter was the head of a man with a remarkable ornament or memorial attached to 
the nose, of very frequent occurrence in the Mexican paintings. This symbol is represented in the nineteenth plate of the 
Collection of Mendoza, under the number 20. 

{ The original text is difficult to be understood in this place. 

§ Tulanianhululaez seems to be a metrical line resembling in measure the Antiphonaria, accustomed in ancient times to be 
sung in convents. 

||. Deluge is the literal translation of the Italian, which means destruction in a general sense. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. Wo 

found in their calendar ; for from such an accident they took occasion to invent those figures which 
preside over all the days of the month and of the year, as will presently be seen. In this age, as in 
the first, they ate no bread, but only forest fruits, called Acotzintli. This age they named 
Coneuztuque, that is the Golden Age. 

1. The sign of One Dog. 2. Citlaltotonametle. 

PLATE IX. 

Tlequiyahuilli, the third age, they say took its origin from a man and woman who escaped in a 
subterraneous cavern * when the world was destroyed for the third time by fire. -This age lasted 
four thousand eight hundred and one years. The fire happened in the sign which they name Nine 
Earthquakes, which they place in their calendar. In this age they ate no bread, but only the fruit 
of the Izlucoco. They call this age Tzonchichiltuque, which means the Coloured or Red Age. 

1. The sign of Nine Earthquakes. 2. Xiuitecotle. 3. Tlequiyahuilli. 

PLATE X. 

The fourth age, according to their calculation, is that in which the destruction of the province of 
Tulan took place, which they say was destroyed on account of the vices of the inhabitants; and 
accordingly they represent in their paintings men occupied in dances: and in consequence of these 
vices a very severe famine befel them, and in this manner the province was destroyed. They say 
that this famine continued five thousand and forty-two years}. They add, moreover, that it rained 
blood, and that many died of terror. ‘They call this age the age of Black Hairt. The entire 
people were not destroyed, but only a considerable portion of them. 

1. Sochiquetzal § ; that is to say, the Holding up of Roses |. 

These miserable men hence invented certain dreams, the result of their own blindness, relating that 
a god of the name of Citlallatonac, which is the sign seen in heaven called Saint James’s or the 
Milky Way, sent an ambassador from heaven on an embassy to a virgin of Tulan called Chimal- 

* The stone or rock, in the hollow of which a remnant of the human race was saved when the world was destroyed by winds, would 
have afforded no security against fire ; this pair therefore retreated into a subterraneous cavern. 

+ A slight mistake has been here made in reckoning up the Mexican symbols of number. 

{ In opposition, perhaps, to that of White Hair, the name by which the first of the four ages was distinguished. As by the metaphor 
of white hair age and antiquity were denoted, so black hair may have been the symbol of youth and of that which was modern. 

§ This proper name is more probably the same as Suchiquecal. This goddess of the New World seems to have had many epithets 
bestowed upon her; and being called Chimalman, it becomes also a matter of conjecture whether she might not have been Tocateutle 
mentioned above, which latter name bears much similarity to the Greek appellation of @coroxos, which was assigned to the Virgin Mary, 
because she was the mother of the Messiah.—The signification of tewtle in the Mexican language exactly corresponds with that of 
O06. 

|| This plate refers to the fourth age of the Mexicans, or that of Quecalcoatle, and was probably designated Yztapal Nanazcaya, or 
the Age of Roses. Yztapal signifies a flint knife; and two knives of this description, partly concealed by branches of the rose-tree, are 
represented in the plate: these symbols denote the commencement of penance which began with Quecalcoatle. The subject of the 
painting seems to be the annunciation to Chimalman, who is here named Sochiquetzal, that she should be the mother of Quecalcoatle. 

176 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

man*, (which name signifies a shield,) who had two sisters, the one named Tzochitlique, and the 
other Conatlique ; and that the three being alone in the house, two of them on perceiving the ambas- 
sador of heaven died of fright, Chimalman remaining alive, to whom the ambassador announced that 
it was the will of this god that she should conceive a son}; and. having delivered to her the message, 
he rose and left the house: and as soon as he had left it, she conceived a son, without connection with 
man, who was called Quetzalcoatle, who they say is the god of air; and his temples are round in 
the manner of churches{, although till that time such was not the fashion of their temples : he was 
the inventor of temples of this form, as we shall show. He it was, as they say, who caused hurricanes, 
and in my opinion was the god who was called Citaladuali, and it was he who destroyed the world by 
winds§. This painting is here wanting ||, together with another, which represented that as soon as 
this son of the Virgin was born he possessed the use of reason. The son of the Virgin, Topilcin 
Quecalcoatle, knowing that the vices of men were necessarily the cause of the troubles of the 
world, determined on asking the goddess Chalchiuitlicue , who is she who remained after the 
deluge with the man in the tree, and is the mother of the god Tlaloque, whom they have made 
goddess of water, that they might obtain rain when they stood in need of it; and accordingly Que- 
calcoatle commenced offering sacrifices to obtain rain, as a period of four years had elapsed since 

The proper name Sochiquetzal is here interpreted the lifting up of roses. A curious tradition of the Mahometans respecting the birth 
of Christ may here be noticed: they say that he was the last of the prophets who was sent by God to prepare the way for Mahomet, 
and that he was born of the Virgin by the smelling of a rose. The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus has made a mistake in 
calculating the number of years signified by the Mexican symbols; these symbols added together amount exactly to five thousand two 
hundred and six years. It is singular that this famine, by which may be meant generally a state of suffering and affliction, from which, 
according to the belief of the Mexicans, mankind were relieved by the coming of Quecalcoatle, should have nearly corresponded in its 
duration with the period of time which, according to the Septuagint, intervened between Adam and the birth of Christ. Boturini, 
commending the exact chronology of the ancient Mexicans, says, ‘No pagan nation refers primitive events to fixed dates like the 
Indians. They recount to us the history of the creation of the world, of the deluge, of the confusion of tongues at the time of the Tower 
of Babel, of the other epochs and ages of the world, of their ancestors’ long travels in Asia, with the years precisely distinguished by 
their corresponding characters. ‘They record in the year of Seven Rabbits the great eclipse which happened at the crucifixion of 
Christ our Lord ; and the first Indians who were converted to Christianity, who at that time were perfectly well acquainted with their 
own chronology, and applied themselves with the utmost diligence to ours, have transmitted to us the information, that from the creation 
of the world to the happy nativity of Christ, five thousand one hundred and ninety-nine years had elapsed, which is the opinion or 
computation of the Seventy.”—Idea de una nueva Historia general de la America Septentrional, p. 6. 

* Gomara says that Chimalmatlh was the mother of Quecalcoatle.—La Conquista de Mexico, fol. cxx. 

+ The painting represents the ambassador or angel announcing this message to Suchiquecal, who was Eve, or the woman whose 
seed was to bruise the serpent’s head, which prediction seems to be alluded to in the seventy-fourth page of the lesser Vatican MS., 
which immediately follows another, representing Quecalcoatle slaying the beast whose power was in its tail. It is singular that 
Suchiquecal should appear to be receiving a nosegay from the ambassador; since the Mahometans have a tradition that Christ was 
born of the Virgin Mary by the smelling of a rose. This age was called the Age of Roses. 

{ This style of ecclesiastical architecture must have been extremely ancient. Irish antiquarians have doubted whether the round 
towers near several of the old cathedrals in Ireland were not the remains of pagan superstition. 

§ Perhaps the order in which the Mexican ages should follow each other, which seems to have been inverted, should be this, viz. 
the Age of Water first, then the Age of the Earth or Fire, then that of Quecalcoatle, and lastly that of Winds. 

|| The subject of the fourth plate is the destruction of the world by winds, which is perhaps the painting here supposed to be wanting. 
The symbolical image of the Sun, the Flints, and the Green Feathered Serpent, sufficiently denote that the deity who is there designated 
Citlaltotonametle, is Quecalcoatle. If the former name was Citlaltotonateotle, its signification would be the star bird divimty; and 
it is possible that a mistake may have occurred in transcribing it. 

4 Chalchiuitlicue was the name by which.the virgin Chimalman was designated in heaven; she was also called Chalchiuhtlatonac, 
which signifies the queen of heaven, and Suchiquecal, which seems to mean woman in a general sense, or human nature, without 
reference to sex; since Ysnextli was also called Suchiquecal, and the inhabitants of the valley of Matalcingo are said to have offered 

sacrifices to the god Suchiquecal. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 177 

it had rained. They paint this goddess in the midst of a lake, wearing a crown, with a wood near her, 
to signify Tulan*, and with a censer before her to denote the commencement of sacrifice; she was 
clothed in blue: they dressed themselves in the same fashion when they celebrated her festival. 

T cannot omit to point out in this place the cunning of our adversary, who so long ago devised 
this falsehood amongst these poor people, in order that if at any time they should attain the 
knowledge of the origin of the mystery of our redemption, which was when the angel Gabriel was 
sent by God to Our Lady the Virgin Mary on that divine embassy, when she displayed to him the 
most profound humility, calling herself servant when the angel called her lady; whence Saint 
Bernard says, that she conceived the true Son of God without connection with man,—they might 
attribute it to the Father of Lies, falsified and counterfeited in this false god Citlallatonac, and in his 
ambassador and in that virgin. The said Quetzaleoatletopiltzin, (which name means Our Dearly 
Beloved Son+,) perceiving that neither sin nor the troubles of the world ceased, they affirm of him, 
that in the same way as he was the first who commenced offering up prayers to the gods and 
performing sacrifices to them, so likewise that he was the first who did penance, in order to 
propitiate the gods to pardon his people. They say that he sacrificed himself, drawing forth his 
own blood with thorns, as a new kind of penance. He was accustomed to throw into the flames 
gold, gems, and incense ; as it appeared to him that, since the troubles of his people had ensued 
from the little reverence which men felt towards the gods, as not only did they not serve them or 
offer to them such things as are held in estimation in the world, but that their intent was to 
give themselves up to the pleasures and recreations of this life {, and to commit many other sins, 
contrariwise it might be possible for him to appease them by means of these sacrifices, and above 
all, by his own blood. By these offerings therefore, and by other acts of penance, he appeased the 
gods to such a degree, that at the expiration of a long period, during which he had continued engaged 
in the practice of penance, a lizard appeared scratching the ground, giving him to understand that 
the scourge of Heaven had ceased, and that the earth would with joy produce its fruits, which quickly 
came to pass; and accordingly they relate, that on a sudden such abundance followed, that the 
earth, which had remained so many years barren, bore many kinds of fruit; and from that event 
they took four of their superstitious signs, which they have continued to use to the present time. The 
first sign is that by which they represent ungrateful men under the similitude of a stag ;—and would 
to God that they had been under no other error than that! since the beast of burden, to which they 
are compared by the Psalmist, is a viler animal. For the second sign, which was intended to 

represent sterility, they painted a stone with a withered ear of maize upon it. The third, the 

* Tulan, signifies in the Mexican language, rushes. The symbol of this city was a Bunch of Rushes, which has some similitude to 
a wood in Mexican paintings, 

‘+ Quetzalcoatle signifies precious or dear, and Topiltzin our son. The high esteem in which the green feathers of a bird named 
the Huitzilan were held by the Mexicans, (bunches of the feathers of which were called quetzalli,) attached the idea of something highly 
valuable or precious to this name. Vide Clavigero’s History of Mewico, page 250 (note). It is an extraordinary thing, that in course 
of time this name or epithet of Quecalcoatle should have become a title of high dignity, with which the chief priest who presided over 
human sacrifices was invested.— Clavigero’s History of Mexico, page 278. 

~ The Mexican religion was peculiarly austere: unlike the religions of antiquity, and those which still prevail in Asia, with the 
exception of the Lamaism of Thibet, which somelearned.men have supposed to be an offshoot of Nestorianism it permitted not even 
the slightest levity in the service of the gods; cruel and sanguinary in the extreme, it notwithstanding professed to inculcate 
rigid morality. 

(27) 

178 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

meaning of which was abundance of water, was typified by a lizard. And the fourth, denoting 
abundance, was represented by a green ear of maize. Mankind, perceiving that through Quecal- 
coatle so fortunate an wra had commenced, began to imitate him ; and, following his example, to 
practise penance *, and to make offerings to the gods, not only of their temporal possessions, but also 
of what belonged to them in a corporal sense, and of their own blood, as has been already said. For 
the more due performance of these rites, Quetzalcoatle invented temples, or Quis, which were the 
common places of prayer amongst these people: he founded the four} here represented: in the 
first of which the princes and nobles fasted; and in the second the lower classes of the people: the 
third was designated the House of Fear, or, by another name, the House of the Serpent, in which it ~ 
was unlawful for those who entered to lift their eyes from the ground: the fourth was the Temple of 
Shame, where they sent all sinners and men of immoral lives. When using reproachful language 
towards each other, it was a common expression to say, “‘ Go to Tlazapulcalco !” . 

The Mexicans wished to attribute to their own industry that style of lofty architecture in the 
temples which are found in this country, which they called Quis; and they say that after their 
arrival here, as we shall presently relate, they invented them ; adducing in confirmation of this the 
fact, that in those provinces where they were unable to penetrate, the ancient method of sacrifices was 
still practised, which were not performed in temples, but on certain altars + or mounds of earth in 
mountains or in groves, as in the Scriptures, where it is said of a certain good king, that the people 

were not allowed to offer the sacrifices of the high places or of the groves, as lately was the custom 
. amongst the Mixis, which are a nation of this country, adjoining the state of Oaxacadi, where, when 
Lu1s pp Lionr Tomano was governor, in the year 1555, he caused several of these groves to be 
cut down. ‘The Mexicans may possibly have added height and that particular mode of ascent and 
platform § to the four different kinds of houses or temples invented by Quetzalcoatle, and on this 
account have wished to attribute still more to themselves. 

PLATES XI. and XII. 

1. Quetzalcohuatl. 2. A thorn. 3. Acenser. 4. Macatl, a stag, which they say is the emblem 
of ungrateful men. 5. Tetl, a stone, the symbol of sterility. 6. Guetzpalli, a lizard, the symbol 
of water. 7. Centli, corn, the symbol of abundance. 8. Caquancalli, the house of fasting for the 
holy. 9. Xecaualcalco, the house of common fasting. 10. Cauacalco, the house of fear. 11. 'Taxa- 
pocalco, the prison-house of sorrow. f 

# Humility was also esteemed a virtue by the Mexicans. Accordingly, those who went to announce to Montezuma, who was already 
aware of the fact, his election to the imperial dignity, found him occupied in sweeping the court of the temple, and even took from his 
hands the broom.—Monarquia Indiana, cap. \xviii. lib. ii. ! 

‘+ The Mexicans, like the Jews, manifested a predilection for certain numbers. These numbers were, 4, 5, 8, 9, 13, 18, 20, 40, 
and 52. Amongst the Chiapanese the number 7 was held in high esteem, and their week consisted of that number of days. ae 

t Itisa remarkable fact, that the Brazen Altar in. Leviticus, an engraving of which may be found in the old editions of Prideaua’s Con- 
nection, is a model in miniature of the Mexican Teocallis: they are quite alike, except that the ascent to the Teocallis was by stairs 
consisting of steps, and the ascent to the Brazen Altar was by an inclined plane. 

§ That this was not the case is fully proved by the researches of M. Dupaix. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 179 

Amongst those who began to follow the example of Quetzalcoatle and his austerities by their own : 

acts of penance, Totec * is very famous, who, on account of his having been a great sinner, first stood 
in the House of Sorrow called Tlaxipuchicalco, where, having completed his penance, he ascended 
the mountain Catcitepetli, (which signifies the mountain which speaks,) which mountain was covered 
with thorns: there continuing his penance, he cried from thence, reproving very strongly his people 
of Tulan, calling to them to come and to do penance with him, for the enormous guilt which they 
had incurred, in forgetting the service and sacrifices of their gods, and in having abandoned 
themselves so much to pleasure. They say that Totec was accustomed to go about clothed in a 
human skin; and so it has been the custom till these times, when Gon illuminated their darkness 
by the arrival of the Spaniards amongst them. In the festivals likewise which they celebrated to 
Totec, men clothed themselves in the skins of those whom they had slain in war, and in this manner 
danced and celebrated the festival of the sign dedicated to him, (for from him they say wars ori- 
ginated), and accordingly they paint him with these insignia, viz. a lance, banner, and shield. They 
held him in the utmost veneration ; for they said that he was the first who opened to them the way 
to heaven; for they were under this error amongst others; they supposed that only those who died 
in war went to heaven, as we have already said. 

1. Tlacaxipehualliztli +. 2. Totec. 3. Machicaztli-totec}. 4. A banner. 5. A shield. 6. A 

thorn. 17. Catcitepetli, the mountain which speaks. 

leTWaVdh Ts, OSTHUL 

Whilst Totec still continued doing penance, preaching and crying from the top of the mountain 
which has been named, they pretend that he dreamed each night that he beheld this horrible figure 
with its bowels protruding, which was the cause of the great abomination of his people. On this, 
praying to his god to reveal to him what the figure signified, he answered that it was the sin of his 

* [tis a singular thing that Torquemada, who was so well acquainted with the Mexican mythology, should say so little of Totec, 
occupying as he does the place next to Quecalcoatle in the Mexican calendar. ‘This silence on the part of Torquemada must either be 
attributed to the oblivion in which half a century had already involved many of the religious traditions of the Mexicans, which is not 
improbable; since Acosta, who was a contemporary historian, is equally silent respecting him,—or to the manuscript copy of the Indian 
Monarchy, which served for the impression of the first edition, having been mutilated (borrado) previously to licence being granted to 
publish it. ‘Two writers have declared that this was the case: one of them, the editor of the second edition published in the year 1723 
at Madrid, and the other an American Spaniard, nearly a century before, who had an original copy of the manuscript of the Indian 
Monarchy in his possession. The editor of the second edition complains that the first chapter of the second book, which he calls Clave de 
la Idea de esta Obra, had been entirely omitted; nor did he think it convenient, as he himself says, to request licence to print it, although 
he adds, “ Ja parecia cesavan las causas del recato,’ ‘‘ Reasons for secresy seemed no longer to exist.” 

This deity (Totec), who was variously designated Xipe, Chipe, and Thipe, which names are in fact the same, and signify shorn or bald, 
is represented very frequently in Mexican paintings. One of the Mexican months was named after him: he twice occurs in the calendar 
as presiding over the lesser divisions of the days of the year, and is there named Thipetotec, and Yztapaltotec. And what is said above, 
of persons clothing themselves in human skins in his honour, is confirmed by a curious historical painting in the Codex Vaticanus, repre- 
senting Montezuma himself, as a priest and generalissimo of the Mexican armies in the reign of Ahuitzotl, attired in this dress; and what 
is no less remarkable, bearing as his banner a cross. 

++ The name of the month dedicated to Totec; the literal meaning of which is the stripping off of skins. 

+ The lance of Totec was so called. 

% 

180 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

people *, and that he should issue an order to the people, and cause them all to be assembled, 
charging them to bring thick ropes and to bind that miserable spectre, as it was the cause of all 
their sins, and that, dragging it away +, they should remove it from the people ; who, giving faith 
to the words of Totec, were by him conducted to a certain wild place, where they found this 
figure of Death {, which having bound, they dragged it to a distance, and drawing it backwards, 
they fell all into a cavity between two mountains, which closed together; and there they have 
remained buried ever since; none of them having effected their escape, with the exception of the 
innocent children who remained in Tulan: and accordingly they represent in their paintings the 
people going forth dancing and jesting, and the Devil leading the way, directing the mintut §, or 
dance: and this was the cause of their ruin and destruction. 

1. Macaxoguemigui, sin. 2.Tulan. 3. The Tultecas. 

PLATE XIV. 

The two masters of penance were Quetzalcoatle and Totec, who was called by another name Chipe ; 
who having taken the children and innocent people who had remained in Tulan, proceeded with 

them ||, peopling the world, and collecting along with them other people whom they chanced to find. 

* The angel made nearly a similar answer to the prophet Zechariah, who inquired of him the meaning of the vision in which he beheld 
a female figure in an ephah. When he replied, “ This 2s wickedness.” Abstract sin, both in the vision of Totec and in that of Zechariah, 
was represented under a bodily form; and the difference of sex is scarcely worth remarking. It is in the fifth chapter of Zechariah that 
the following curious passage occurs, ver. 5—8: “ Then the angel that talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift up now thine 
eyes, and see what is this that goeth forth. And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah that goeth forth. He said, more- 
over, This is their resemblance through all the earth. And, behold, there was lifted up a talent of lead: and this is a woinan that sitteth 
in the midst of the ephah. And he said, This is wickedness. And he cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead 
upon the mouth thereof.” ; 

+ Isaiah says, in the eighteenth verse of the fifth chapter of his Book of Prophecies, “ Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords 
of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope.” 

{ Torquemada says that the Tultecas were destroyed by the pestilence caused by the phantom of a child with a putrid head ; which 
fable probably refers to the great pestilence which befell Jerusalem during the days of the siege. 

§ Mintut is a Mexican dance mentioned by Torquemada. 

|| Many circumstances seem to point out Phoenicia, Palestine, and Egypt, as the countries of the Old Continent from which colonies 
passed over to America. In briefly adverting to some of the reasons which have induced us to adopt this opinion, it is unnecessary to 
preserve any particular order in the notice of analogies, which here comprised in a’note might easily be multiplied into a volume. In 
connection with the universally received tradition of the Mexicans, that their ancestors had come by sea from distant countries (“ partes 
muy estrafias,” and “ tierra muy lejos,” as Montezuma designates them in his speech to Cortes), a similarity between the names of places 
in the New Continent and those of the Old at once presents itself. Aztlan, Tulan, and Cholula, or Churula as Cortes, and Chiurula as 
Peter Martyr, call that city, resemble Asia, ‘T'yre, and Jerusalem: and if these names are not exactly alike, it must be recollected that 
the genius of the Mexican language, by excluding certain letters from its alphabet, would not allow of a closer approximation between 
them. Omitting here all consideration of the religion of Palestine, faint traces of that of Egypt and of the ancient worship of Osiris and 
Isis are found in the Mexican adoration of the sun and of the moon; and the symbol of the eye in the Mexican temples, placed on three 
pieces of wood, horizontally crossing each other, recalls to our recollection the famous symbol of the eye placed on a sceptre, sacred in 
Egypt to Osiris or the sun. Isis or the moon, whom the Egyptians invoked in cases of illness, the Mexican women are also said to 
have put up prayers to, in certain indispositions; and the goddess Maiaguil, fabled by the Mexicans to have had four hundred 
breasts, and Quecalcoatle believed by them to support the heavens on his shoulders, as would appear from a curious representation of 
this deity in the Manuscript of Vienna, remind us of that goddess of ancient mythology whose fruitfulness was typified by the many 
breasts surrounding her bust, and of Atlas who sustained the starry firmament. The exact likeness to the head of a rhinoceros occurring 
in one of the Mexican paintings preserved in the Bodleian Library, either as an ornament or a religious symbol of a temple, seems to 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 181 

They further add, that journeying in this manner with these people they arrived at a certain 
mountain, which not being able to pass, they feign that they bored a subterraneous way through 

confirm what Boturini asserts of the people of New Spain preserving recollections in their ancient paintings of the Old Continent, from 
which their ancestors had migrated; and Aztlan, the name of the country from which they proceeded to colonize the New World, (com- 
pounded of ¢lan, country, and az,) would serve likewise as an argument of their Asiatic origine 

The dress and costume of the Mexicans, and their sandals, resemble the apparel and sandals worn in early ages in the East, 
especially by the Jews: and the serpent with which the Mexican priests ornamented their heads and persons, was perhaps a 
fashion introduced from Egypt into the New World; since we know from ancient monuments still in existence, as well as 
from the testimony of historians, that a part of the insignia of the highest pontifical dignity, as well as of the royal power in 
Egypt (for the kings of Egypt were of the sacerdotal order, and although not uniting in their own persons ostensibly the 
character of high priests, were still supreme in the Egyptian hierarchy), was that most dangerous species of serpent the asp, 
twined round their heads,—an emblem (as Herodotus or Diodorus Siculus says) of how formidable is the power belonging to 
kings, and that their persons ought to be held in fear by their subjects. On the supposition that in very early ages, before all 
traces of former superstition and ancient ceremonies had become extinct, (and the most respectable writers on ecclesiastical 
history affirm that in Egypt such traces long continued, and that even the primitive Christians adopted some of the Egyptian 
symbols to explain their mysteries ; for instance, the scarabeus or beetle,) a colony had proceeded from Egypt to the New 
World,—it would not have been surprising, whatever might have been the religion of the colonists, that they should have 
conveyed along with them some of the rites, ceremonies, and traditions of Egypt: and the Mexican priests might, in imitation 
of the sovereigns of that country, have worn on their heads a serpent as a sacred symbol. A strong argument, however, of the 
religion of the Mexicans not being of Egyptian origin, is the total absence of all traces ‘du culte de lingam,” or of homage 
paid to the procreative power in the Mexican paintings, as M. de Humboldt observes ; and the positive testimony of the best 
informed writers, even of those whose pens have exhibited that religion in its truest and most odious colours, proves that they 
never violated decency and decorum in their religious rites and ceremonies. Boturini and Torquemada both point out this 
essential difference between the Mexican mythology and that of the Greeks, Romans, ancient Egyptians, and modern Hindoos. 
The Mexicans never attributed to their deities sensual desires, lust, or even the passion of love; and so exalted an idea did they 
entertain of their divine nature, that, as Clavigero observes, they would have read with equal horror and disgust the fabled 
amours of the Olympian gods. He should, however, also have observed, that whilst beneficence was the characteristic of the 
Grecian deities, stern misanthropy was the prevailing feature of the religion of the Mexicans. It is almost unnecessary in this place 
to adduce passages from ancient authors, to show that some of the West Indian islands and a portion of the continent of America, 
as itis highly probable, were known to the ancients; and consequently that there would have been nothing extraordinary in 
colonies having passed from the Old World to the New at a period antecedent, as well as immediately subsequent, to the 
Christian era: and this supposition is not inconsistent with another, equally probable, that America was also colonized by 
Europeans in a much more recent age. Diodorus Siculus gives a very curious account in the fifth book of his Universal History, of 
the discovery by the Carthaginians of a large and rich island situated in the ocean far beyond the Pillars of Hercules, which 
they would not allow their own subjects to colonize lest Carthage should be drained of its population, nor the Tyrrhenians from 
motives of political jealousy to occupy. 

Although the Spanish historians of the sixteenth century, who were little disposed to admit (chiefly on account of the state 
in which religion was found in the New Continent) that America had ever been colonized from the West, have unanimously 
agreed that this island was one of the Canaries, and the writers of other countries have adopted their sentiments, we, 
for the reasons which follow, may be allowed to venture a different opinion in regard to this island, which is chiefly founded on 
what Diodorus Siculus relates of its discovery, where, treating of the ancient Carthaginian navigations, that eminent historian 
says: “ O: 8 ovv Bounxec Sta rac Mpoeipnuevac airiac épevverrec Thy exroe Tw ornAwy mapahiay, Kat apa Thy AiBuny wAcovres 
on avepwy peyadwy amnvey Onoay éme awoAup ov wkeavov. xepacberrec ie éme moAAaG nuepac, mpoonvey Onoav on] T POEipnMEevy) vnowW, 
Kat cn evdarpoviay avurne Kat uow KATOTTEVOAVYTEC, amract yvwpluwov éroijcay. 810 Kat Tuppnvey Oararrokparouvruy, Kae TEMTEW 
€lg avTny amoikiay émPBadopevwy, StexwAvoay avTous Kapyndovor, aa pev évrAaBovpevor pn Sia nv aperny TNG vyooU ToOAAOL Tey 
éx TING Kapyndovog €lG éxewny PETACTWOLY, aja de TOG Ta mapaBova TNG TUKNG KataokevaZomevot katraduyny, él TU TEPL THY 
Kapyndova oAoy Epes TTALOMA ovpPawor. Suvncecbar ye avrouc GadrarroKparouvrac aTapat TAVOLKLOUG etc ayvooupevny uTo TWYV 
dmepeyovTwy vycov.” 

‘The Carthaginians, for the above-mentioned reasons, exploring the line of coast situated without the Pillars (of Hercules), and 
sailing along the shores of Africa, were driven out of their course by violent tempests, so as to encounter a long sea voyage ; 
and having been tossed about for a considerable time on the ocean, they arrived at the said island, and beholding its richness 

(3a) 

182 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

it, and so passed*. Others say, that they remained shut up, and that they were transformed into 

stones :—and other such fables. 
1. Quetzalcohuatl. 2. Chipe, otherwise called Totec. 

* This probably alludes to a secret passage to America. Votan is elsewhere said to have gone by the road which his brethren the 

Culebras had bored, and to have arrived in Europe. 

and the fertility of its soil, made it generally known to all. The Tyrrhenians accordingly, who were powerful by sea, were 
desirous of sending a colony thither, but were prevented by the Carthaginians, who, on the one hand, adopted precautionary 
measures lest many of their own citizens should emigrate to that island, on account of its excellence ; and on the other, reserved 
it as a place of refuge against the stroke of fortune, should Carthage at any time experience some great reverse; since they, 
being possessed of naval superiority, would be enabled to sail away with the entire population to an island the existence of which 
would be unknown to their more powerful foe.” If this island was Madeira or any of the lesser Canary Islands, it is surprising 
that Diodorus should not have noticed its vicinity to Africa, but should have given us to understand that the Carthaginians 
arrived at it after a long voyage across the ocean; which, considering with what speed a vessel proceeds in a storm, could only 
have been the case on the supposition that it was situated many thousand leagues from the shore. It may here be observed, 
that the words of Diodorus Siculus imply length of space as regards the distance of the voyage, as well as length of time as 
regards its duration; for the words ém woAdag iepac signify an indefinitely long period of time. If it be said that the 
Carthaginian vessel or vessels might have been driven to and fro by the winds, and need not have proceeded in a straight- 
forward direction, and that thus much time and sailing might have been employed in navigating but a small portion of the 
ocean; it may be replied, that if this was the case, and their ships had been driven in a circuitous course, it would have been 
extraordinary that they did not discover the other Canary Isles ; and that Diodorus Siculus does not mention them. With respect to 
the fear which the Carthayinians are said to have entertained, lest, if this island was permitted to be colonized, many of their citizens 
would have been inclined to emigrate; it is singular, since Sicily, Malta, Majorca and Minorca, Spain and Gades, had been 
colonized by the Carthaginians, and their policy led them to establish colonies in every island and maritime station favourable 
to commerce, that this fear should have been felt, and that precautionary measures should in consequence have been adopted. It 
can only be accounted for by supposing that the newly discovered island was so vast in magnitude, and its riches so alluring, that 
the Carthaginian senate feared that at some future time the question might be agitated, not whether some Carthaginian citizens 
should emigrate, but whether the site of Carthage should not itself be changed!; and from affection to their native country, they 
might have provided against the danger, by decreeing that Carthaginian citizens should not colonize it :—on this supposition it would 
become highly probable that this reputed island was either one of the larger West India islands, or a portion of the continent of 
America; perhaps the peninsula of Yucatan. That the Pheenicians as well as the Carthaginians visited the aHores of America, and 
exchanged their merchandize with the Indians for gold and silver, is also probable : and perhaps the famous Myrrhine vases of anti- 
quity and the mysterious Tyrian dye were, the one the product of the cochineal or of the shell fish found on the coast of Yucatan2, 

' Two Punic wars already past, and the vicinity of so formidable a rival as Rome, in whose senate was pronounced the sentence 
“ Carthago est delenda,” might have induced a faction in Carthage to propose emigration, which to prevent, the more powerful 
party might have passed a law, that no colonization should be allowed to the part which the others recommended. The fact may 

not be generally known, that in the reign of Charles the Second the Dutch seriously meditated emigration to the Philippine or 

some other islands in the Indian Archipelago. The original supposition, however, that the Carthaginians might. have felt 

disposed to emigrate, must. be considered to refer merely to what may have been possible, without being equally probable; and 
their jealousy of the Tyrrhenian or Etrurian power must have been long before the age of the Punic wars. . 

2 Cardinal Lorenzana, describing in a note the natural productions of the province of Guaxaca, after observing that its mines 
were no longer worked, says: “Todo el trabajo se emplea en la grana 6 cochinilla, que se cria en los Tunales.6 Higueras finas 
de este pais, pegandose el gusanillo 4 las palmas de las‘hojas, que han de estar muy limpias y sin espinas. Los gusanos, 
> cochinillas madres, se fomentan con el calor de el cuerpo como el gusano de la seda; asu tiempo se esparcen por las hojas 
de el Nopal, y alli hacen su cria. Esta cochinilla es de mucho aprecio; pero mas singular es el caracol que se pesca en las 
costas de Nicaragua, y- Santiago de Veraguas, que cria dentro una ampollita de licor, que es la verdadera Puipura 6 Murice pues 
sin-mas que pasar un hilo por aquel humor, queda perfectamente tefiido, y labandolo, se refina mas. Se coje en las crecientes 
dela luna, y despues de aprovechado, se arroja en la playa, y en otra creciente buelve & dar el licor.”—Carta de Relacion 

de D. Fernando Cortes, p. 306. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 183 

PLATE XV. 

Of Quetzalcoatle they relate, that proceeding on his journey, he arrived at the Red Sea*, which 
is here painted, and which they named Tlapallan ; and that entering into it, they saw no more of him, 

* It would appear on the first perusal of this passage, that what is here said refers to the journey undertaken by Quecalcoatle 
and Totec, together with the Tultecas, in search of a new habitation, and that Quecalcoatle had disappeared from them on arriving 
at Tlapallan ; but this was not the case, for it was not till after Quecalcocatle had resided some time with the Tultecas, and insti~ 
tuted many religious rites among them, and built four temples or Teocallis, that he resolved to absent himself from them, and 
proceeded on his journey to Tlapallan, or the country of the Red Sea. 

and the other a manufacture from the transparent Mexican stone called the Yztli. Scarcely any reason can be imagined for the 
Carthaginians preventing the Tyrrhenians colonizing the newly discovered country, except that it might have been extremely 
rich in mines of gold and silver; which precious metals, especially the latter, which the Carthaginians obtained in great 
abundance from Spain, they were very jealous of the monopoly of. It certainly deserves to be remarked, that if the ancient 
traditions of the Old Continent warrant the belief that America was known to the Carthaginians, much more do those of the 
New World lead us to suppose that it had been visited and colonized in early ages from our quarter of the globe. Bernard de 
Sahagun, one of the first preachers of the Gospel in New Spain, says that he found it to be an universally received tradition 
amongst the natives, confirmed by the testimony of all their historical paintings, that a colony! had arrived before the Christian 
zra on the coast of America from a region situated to the north-east, called Chicomoztoc ; which first touching on the shores of 
Florida, proceeded across the Gulf of Mexico and landed in the Peninsula of Yucatan or the adjoming province, where they 
immediately founded the city of Tulancingo, and shortly afterwards that of Tula, about fifty miles distant from the former city. 
He also says that this famous city was situated four hundred miles from Mexico, and that it had been destroyed a thousand 
years before the arrival of the Spaniards in America; that Quecalcoatle was its king at the period of its destruction, and that 
great ruins of it continued to exist in his day. 

The archbishop of Mexico, Cardinal Lorenzana, afterwards archbishop of Toledo, who published an edition of Cortes’s Letters in 
Mexico in the year 1770, which he illustrated with notes, would have derived some instruction from the perusal of the History of 
Sahagun, and certainly would not have assumed it as an undeniable fact, that America had never been colonized from its European 
side, or that the ancestors of the Mexicans had migrated from the north-west ; neither would he have put a different construction 
on that passage in the speech of Montezuma to Cortes, where he declares that his ancestors came from the East, than the words 
of that monarch fairly admit?, We shall omit in this place to adduce any arguments collateral to that of generally received 
tradition 3, to show that communications must have subsisted in early ages between the two continents, reasoning from the facts 

* Sahagun says that this colony declared that they had ‘crossed the ocean in search of Tamoancha or the terrestrial paradise. 
It is singular that the Copts should have believed in the existence of the terrestrial paradise. 

2 The archbishop Says, in a note subjoined to Montezuma’s speech, ‘“ Los Mexicanos por tradicion vinieron por el Norte de la 
Provincia de Quivira, y se saben ciertamente sus manstones.” This information he perhaps derived from the examination of some of 
the confiscated papers of Boturini, which remained in Mexico in the Vice-regal archives, some of which he says were submitted to 
his inspection. 

3 Antonio Galvan says, that a Portuguese boasted, that having in the year 1448 been driven by a tempest over the Atlantic, he 
arrived at an island (which Garcia says some believed to be New Spain) in which he found seven cities, with seven bishops who 
understood Portuguese. Garcia treats this story as mere fiction ; but admits that at the time of the first colonization of America 
by the Spaniards, there was a tumour of seven cities, the situation of which could never be discovered. Since the voyage from 
the Canary Islands to the West Indies may be accomplished in less than a fortnight, as Acosta expressly states: “ A mi me 
acaecid, pasando a Indias, verme en la primera tierra poblada de Espafioles en quince dias, despues de salido de las Canarias, i sin 
duda fuera mas breve el viage, si le dieran velas a la brisa fresca que corria; asi que me parece cosa mui verisimil, que aian en 
tiempos pasados venido 4 Indias hombres vencidos de la furia del viento, sin tener ellos tal pensamiento.” The return of the 

Portuguese to Europe was a much more extraordinary event than the shipwreck of his vessel on some part of the coast of America, 

184. EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

nor knew what became of him, except that they say that he desired them, at the time of his departure, 
to restrain their grief and to expect his return, which would take place at the appointed time; and 

of coins of several of the Cxsars having been found in different parts of America}, of the discovery of the ancient hulk of a ship 
by labourers excavating a mine, of the curious method of ascertaining the weight of gold employed in Cumana, of metallic money 
found in use amongst some of the more civilized states of America, of arches employed in the American buildings, of ancient 
inscriptions noticed by several authors, and the colony of Jews settled near Carthagena, so singular an account of which is given 
by one of their own race, a Portuguese Jew named Antonio Montecinio2. It is also unnecessary to enter into any long disquisition 
as to whether the island of Ophir might not have been one of the West India Islands, and where the fleet of Solomon, after 
quitting the Red Sea navigated; whether, instead of sailing to the left, and trading with those countries by sea, which, it should 
be observed, the Jews already traded with by land by means of caravans and camels, called by the Arabian poets, ‘ the ships of 
the desert,” it might not have coasted along Africa as far as the Cape, trafficking with Ethiopia by the way, and getting into the 
strong current of the ocean which runs from East to West, naturally favouring a passage from Africa to America, have so crossed 
the Atlantic. We know from history that the ships of Solomon were three years on their voyage, and that they brought back 

or of the West Indian Islands; and this remark is generally applicable to all navigations which might have been performed over 
the Atlantic in earlier ages under similar compulsory circumstances; since many persons it is probable would have been 
driven by storms on the continent of America before one could have been able to effect his return td Europe. An ignorant 
mariner might even have supposed that he recognized bishops amongst some of the Indian priests, who on certain festivals 
dressed in the same costume as their idols, whose habit very much resembled that worn by bishops ; as Gomara informs us in the 
following passage of his History of the Indies: “‘ Entre sus muchas Guacas, assi llaman los idolos, avia muchas con baculos y 
mitras de obispos ; mas la causa dello aun no se sabe: y los Indios quando vieron obispo con mitra preguntavan si era Guaca 
de los Christianos.” ‘‘ Amongst their many Guacas, (for this is the appellation which they give to their idols,) there were many 
with croziers and bishops’ mitres, the reason for which is not yet known; and the Indians, when they first saw a bishop with a 
mitre, asked if he was the Guaca of the Christians.” 

' Coins of Augustus and Claudius are said to have been discovered in America; the first of which, according to Marineus, 
was sent by the Consentine Archbishop Don Juan Rufus to the Pope. Vide Garcia’s Origin of the Indians, cap. xix. lib. 4. Many 
inferences have been drawn from the assumed fact, that the Indians were altogether unacquainted with iron: the first and prin- 
cipal of which is, that wanting an article of such indispensable utility, their progress in civilization could have scarcely raised 
them above the savage state; the second, that communications could never have existed between the Old and New Continent in 
ages anterior to that of Columbus. This mode of reasoning betrays carelessness and great disregard to alleged facts, as 
respectable writers affirm that the Indians were acquainted with iron; and Garcia says that the Indians of Paraguay had iron 
money, in shape resembling the shell of a tortoise. Neither would it follow, that, because the Indians did not employ iron in the 
mechanical arts, the state of the arts amongst them and of society must necessarily have been rude and barbarous. The 
instruments which they used were generally of stone or copper, to which they had the secret of giving a temper like iron. 
Torquemada, in the thirty-fourth chapter of the thirteenth book of his Indian Monarchy, gives a long account of the way in 
which the Mexicans manufactured their stone knives, which constituted amongst them an art by itself, which he designates 
admirable and marvellous; and Peter Martyr says, in the fourth chapter of his Fifth Decade, speaking of some of these stone 
knives, “I stroke with all my force upon iron barres, and dented the iron with my strokes without spoyling or hurting of the 
stone in any part thereof.” So inclined are some writers to oppose their own theories to facts, that it is almost surprising they 
have not construed the silence of authors, respecting the use of wheel carriages in America, into a fresh proof of the barbarism 
of the Indians, without waiting to consider whether there were animals in that continent to draw them. That the Indians, 
however, moved great weights by means of rollers placed under them, is evident from what Peter Martyr says of the method 
they employed to transport from the mountains to Mexico the vast beams of cypress of which the palace of Montezuma was 
constructed. 

2 This account was published by Menasseh Ben Israel, a Jew of acknowledged learning and probity, and high priest of the 
Jewish synagogue at Amsterdam; he published it under the title of Spes Israel, and dedicated it to the English parliament in 
the days of Cromwell, for which he received the thanks of that puritanical assembly. It was replied to by Spizelius, who, 
arguing in the way in which it was the fashion in Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to discuss all questions 
connected with the ancient history of America, and the manners and customs of the Indians, viz. by flat denial of facts alleged, 

disproved the entire relation of Montecinio. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 185 

accordingly they expect him even to the present time: and when the Spaniards came to this country 
they believed that it was he; and even at a later period, in the year 1550, when the Capotecas 

gold, ivory, peacocks, and apes; although some writers have argued that, ivory and peacocks not being found in any of the West 
Indian islands, and the elephant not existing in America, the island of Ophir must either have been Ceylon, or some island of the 
Indian Archipelago. ‘Without entering into the question of whether Ceylon abounded in gold in former days, as we know it did 
im ivory, or whether a voyage to the Philippine Islands from the straits of the Red Sea is much shorter than to the West Indies 
from the same place, it is sufficient to observe that the Bible informs us that silver was as stones in Jerusalem in the days 
of Solomon ; and it would be curious to know whence such an abundance of that metal could have been obtained, since it is 
certain that the relative scarcity of silver compared with gold is greater in the East than in Europe; or in other words, that silver 
is more abundant in the West of the globe than in the Hast. If, therefore, silver was so common in Jerusalem in the days of 
Solomon, it is likely that he imported it in his ships (although it is not expressly mentioned) ; and since silver is found in greater 
abundance in America and the West Indies than in any other part of the world, the supposition that the ships of Solomon might 
have crossed the Atlantic and visited the New World, and brought both gold and silver from thence, although highly improbable, 
is not so chimerical as it would at first appear. With respect to the importation of ivory and peacocks, those articles of luxury might 
as easily have been procured on the coast of Africa as in Asia. And as to the objection, that Ophir could not have been any one 
of the West Indian islands, because the Jews were not accustomed to the sea, and would not undertake long voyages, since the 
fleet of Solomon was in all probability entirely manned by the hired subjects of his ally Hieram king of Tyre, and the naval skill 
and enterprise of the Tyrians were celebrated in the earliest ages,—this objection must also lose part of its weight. Returning to 
the consideration of from what part of the Old Continent colonies may have proceeded to the New World: if we may venture an 
opinion on this interesting subject, it would be, that America was in early ages colonized from Egypt. But the absence of all well 
supported and material analogies between the religion of Mexico and that of ancient Egypt, and the mere fortuitous occurrence of 
others, afford no grounds for presuming that the colony carried with them the religion of Egypt. On the contrary, it seems not 
improbable, from the mixture of Jewish ceremonies and Christian doctrines discovered amongst the Indians, that they were Coptic 
monks, and Christians of that persuasion, who, flying from the persecution of the Saracens, arrived in America. The history of the 
Coptic or of the Abyssinian church, informs us that Jewish ceremonies, laws and customs, entered largely into its ritual: circum- 
cision it strictly enjomed ; stoning to death was customary ; fasts and mortifications exceeded all bounds; and the perforation of 
the nostrils, and the insertion of a sharp piece of wood or metal, to which allusion seems to be made by some authors as an 
Abyssinian custom, might have been resorted to by them as an act of penance, which became afterwards amongst the 
Mexicans an ornamental fashion, The motto, likewise, which appears to have belonged “to the ecclesiastical state of 
Abyssinia, “vicit leo tribts Jude,” might lead us to suppose that that church had originally been formed out of Jewish 
proselytes, although we cannot be unacquainted with its other allusion. It is a certain fact, that America had been colonized 
from Africa previously to the arrival of the Spaniards in that continent; since negroes were discovered in some of its provinces by 
‘Balboa, and by others. Their presence in that continent in a considerable body, where they carried on perpetual hostilities with 
the neighbouring Indian tribes, is very unsatisfactorily accounted for by the supposition of a chance shipwreck ; and we may here 
remark, that whilst questions of little importance, as regards the history of America, are discussed at great length by Spanish 
writers, the most curious facts are often passed over in total silence; nor is it easy to explain the motives for this reserve. 
Mention having been made of a colonization of America, whether accidental or not, by negroes, it deserves to be noticed that 
in a Mexican painting which once formed a part of the historical museum of Boturini, a facsimile of which is contained in the 
present work, and which represents the migration of the Mexicans from Aztlan, the country of their ancestors, a figure very like 
that of a Negro paddling a canoe occurs: the thick curly hair on the head is very remarkable, as the hair of the Indians is 
naturally straight; and it seems to have been the intention of the Mexican painter decidedly to indicate that peculiarity. It is 
unnecessary to add, that in the lithographic plate the likeness to the original painting has been scrupulously preserved. M. de 
Humboldt, in illustrating with his interesting observations a plate in Gemelli Carreri, the subject of which is the same migration, 
observes, that a palm is growing near the Teocalli, and that that tree does not grow in the northern climates, from which the 
Mexicans were generally believed to have migrated, but in southern regions, such as Egypt, Palestine, and Judea, in which latter 
country they were famous for their stately beauty. On the supposition that colonies had proceeded from these countries to 
America, the following names of places in the New Continent, which the Mexicans said were called after the names of places in 
the country which their ancestors had formerly inhabited, might seem to have some correspondence with the names of other 
places situated within the territory of these three kingdoms. Omitting Aztlan in this enumeration, which name does not correspond 
with that of any province or city, but with Asia, Tulan, as has already been observed, resembles Tyre ; Churula is like Jerusalem ; 
Tlapallan, (the country of the Red Sea,) might refer to Egypt ; Chicomoztoc, (the seven caves,) to the seven mouths of the Nile, 

(3B) 

186 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

revolted, they alleged, as the cause of their insurrection, the report that their god, who was to 
redeem them, had already come*. Quetzalcoatle was born on the sign which they call One Cane; 

* “Che gia era venuto il suo dio che aveva da redimerli.”—It is certainly remarkable, as connected with the expectation 
which the Mexicans entertained of a future redeemer, that Quecalcoatle should have been called by them by the other name of 
Mecitli. Cortes, in describing to the Emperor Charles the Fifth the horrors which the Mexicans sustained during the last days 
of the siege, and Gomara, in repeating the same history, both mention that they consoled themselves in their last sufferings with 
the hopes of going to heaven to Quecalcoatle. Quecalcoatle was worshiped by the Mexicans under the name of Huitzilopuchtli, 
which name was corrupted by the Spaniards into Ochilobus, so that the accounts of Cortes and Gomara perfectly agree. In 
Cholula this god was known by the peculiar appellation of Quecalcoatle, which signifies the green feathered serpent. With 
respect to the appellation Mecitli, (the Spanish ¢ thus marked being always pronounced like z,) it is very remarkable that it is 
precisely the same as the Hebrew name Mw; for tl does not form a part of that proper name, but is a common termination to 
Mexican names. This name, from which Xprorog in Greek is derived, signifies anointed, and is peculiarly applied by Christians 
to Christ. The following passage, translated from the second section of the seventh chapter of the Third Book of Garcia’s 
Origin of the Indians, shows that the attention of that learned writer had been drawn to this coincidence: “‘ In New Spain the 
word Mesico is found, which, as Brother Stephen de Salacar remarks, is Hebrew, and is therefore introduced in the second 
Psalm, and signifies his anointed: and although there in that province it is the name of a city, and here in the Psalm the name 
which the Jews bestowed on their kings and priests, and on Christ our Lord, who, as they expected, was to come and redeem 
them, still I do not attend to this difference, as this name might easily have been given to a city ; since the leader who 
conducted those who peopled Mexico was named Mesi, or as others write Mexi; and the city and nation were afterwards called 
after him, in the same way as we see that many cities, provinces, and nations have been named after those who peopled or 
founded them, or to whom they owed their origin, as we shall presently pot out. The word Mesi should be noted as being 
really Hebrew, and it agrees surprisingly with the name of the chief, head, or captain of the Mexicans.” 

(which name Sahagun thinks may have reference to the ships in which the colony which proceeded in search of Tamoancha 
came, rather than to the country which they left;) and Colhuacan and Teocolhuacan, (the hill of God,) to the hill on which the 
temple of Jerusalem was founded. It may here be observed, that the particle ¢eo, in the Mexican language prefixed to the 
names of persons, places and nations, and meaning divine, as in Teocipactli, Teocolhuacan, Teochichimeca, corresponds exactly 
with jeru in Hebrew, which signifies, in the same manner, holy or divine, and is prefixed to Hebrew words, as in Jerusalem, (the 
City of holy peace,) Jerubabel, and many other proper names. If it be objected to the supposition that has been advanced,— 
that Coptic Christians might have passed in early ages to America,—that if Christianity had ever been established in the New 
World, it never could have degenerated or become confounded with idolatrous superstitions; sacred as well as profane history 
show the invalidity of the objection. The Jews, the chosen people of God, were continually relapsing into idolatry, though for 
many ages exclusively the favoured people of the earth. The awful thunders of Mount Sinai, the presence of the Deity, the 
thick cloud resting on the mountain, the mysterious absence of Moses conferring amidst lightnings with Jehovah, could not 
prevent that infatuated people from calling wpon Aaron to make them a molten calf; and their first high priest, the brother of 
their prophet, himself countenanced and assisted in idolatry. When the ambassadors of John the Fourth, king of Portugal, first 
visited Abyssinia, in what a degraded state they found that ancient Christian church, religion has been spared a blush by much 
of the history of the Ethiopian church, and many of the Coptic writings, having been destroyed; but let those who doubt what is 
here asserted, peruse Ludolfus’s Historia Ethiopica, and the account of the Ethiopian church by Damian a Goéz, and they will 
see what changes ages may effect in doctrines and institutions, however excellent they may have been in the beginning. 
Montezuma himself, in a very remarkable reply which he made to Cortes, who had reproached him on account of his religion, 
seems plainly to intimate to him his belief that the religion of Mexico, such as the Spaniards found it, had become greatly 
corrupted in the course of ages, and that it was not originally polluted with barbarous rites: he seems also to suppose that it had 
been the same as that of the Spaniards, as the following extract from Cortes’s Letter to Charles the Fifth will show: “ Y todos, 
en especial el dicho Muteczuma, me respondieron, que ya me habian dicho, que ellos no eran naturales de esta tierra, y que habia 
muchos tiempos que sus predecesores habian venido a ella, y que bien creian que podrian estar errados en algo de aquello que 
tenian, por haber tanto tiempo que salieron de su naturaleza ; y que yo, como mas nuevamente venido, sabria mejor las cosas que 
debian tener, y creer, que no ellos; que se las dijesse, y hiciesse entender, que ellos harian lo que yo les dijesse, que era lo 
mejor.” All, especially the said Muteczuma, replied, that they had already informed me that they were not of the native race of 
that country, and that a long period of time had elapsed since their forefathers came to settle in it, and that they could easily 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 187 

and the year in which the Spaniards arrived commenced on the sign of One Cane, according to 

their ancient computation: whence the occasion arose of their believing that the Spaniards were 

believe that they might have erred in some matters of their former faith, since it was so long since they had quitted their mother 
country ; and that I, as having more recently arrived, should be better acquainted with the things which they ought to yield their 
faith to and believe, than they themselves ; and that I should tell them these things and cause them to comprehend them, and that 
they would do that which I desired them, which was better.” An infinite variety of facts connected with the customs, religious rites © 
and ceremonies, and opinions of the Indians, are utterly inexplicable, except on the supposition that America had in early ages been 
colonized by Christians; and not a few others are difficult to be accounted for, unless we suppose that colonies had proceeded to 
that continent from Egypt. In the first class may be reckoned the Christian doctrines and traditions discovered in America ; in the 
second, the discovery of Greek crosses in many provinces of New Spain, and of brass money, in the shape of a cross, or of the Greek 
letter (T); the art of embalming, which in Peru was carried to the highest perfection ; the pyramidal shape of the Mexican Teocallis, 
some of which, for example the temple of Chollula, and that discovered by M. Dupaix amongst the ruins of the city of Palenque, 
were, like the Egyptian pyramids, hollow in the interior ; the use of the Temazcalli or vapour-bath, which was very general in New 
Spain; but above all, the invention of the Mexican calendar, which nearly agreeing with the Coptic, especially in an extraordinary 
intercalation of a month every four years, displayed an exact knowledge of the duration of the year,—which it is impossible to suppose 
their own proficiency in astronomy enabled the Mexicans to attain, and for which the Copts were indebted to the ancient Egyptians. 
The Mexican calendar seems likewise to have borrowed certain numbers which it employed, from the Coptic: four was a number in 
high esteem in the Abyssinian church, because it was that of the Evangelists; five was that of the dies quinta, or day of jejunium, 
or fasting, amongst the primitive Christians, which.the Copts esteemed equally with or more than the sabbath : the number eight was 
also much prized, because the ceremony of circumcision took place on the eighth day after the birth of the infant; this Jewish rite 
adopted by the Copts, was performed originally with a stone knife, as is evident from the twenty-fifth verse of the fourth chapter 
of Exodus, and from other passages in Scripture; which circumstance induced Garcia to suppose that the reason why the Tecpatl, 
or flint knife, was held in such reverence by the Mexicans, was on account of its connection with circumcision; and Torquemada 
says that the Totonacas, a numerous nation of New Spain inhabiting a mountainous country to the east of Mexico, near the 
sea-coast, circumcised their children on the twenty-eighth or twenty-ninth day after their birth, and that the high priest, or the 
priest next to him in rank, performed the ceremony with a stone knife. Monarquia Indiana, lib. vi. cap. xlviii. It deserves also 
to be remarked, that in the Mexican calendar the number eight, in connection with the sign of the Flint, was much esteemed. 
Nine was the number of the saints who first announced the Gospel in Abyssinia! ; thirteen was that of Christ and the Apostles ; 
and fifty-two, a number associated in the Mexican calendar with festivities and rejoicings, and with the ceremony of kindling new 
fire, in consequence of the commencement of a new cycle of fifty-two years, (for at the expiration of every period of fifty-two 
years a new cycle commenced with the Mexicans,) nearly corresponded with the number of the Jewish year of jubilee, which was 
fifty, which it is probable was also esteemed in the Abyssinian church. A strangely superstitious notion, entertained likewise by 
the Coptic Christians, of the efficacy of holy fire to drive away demons, and their mode of procuring it from Christ’s sepulchre at 
Jerusalem, reminds us of the Mexican ceremony above alluded to, of kindling new or holy fire, which was always performed by 
the priests by means of a cane inserted in a cylindrical hole bored in a plank, which they turned round rapidly in their hands so 
as to produce ignition by the friction. The rad superstition of the Copts, as Ludolfus terms it, was founded on the belief that 
fire, in the first instance, had proceeded from the holy sepulchre, and that after the resurrection of Christ it still continued to 
appear in his tomb: accordingly, at stated periods of the year a monk descended into the holy sepulchre, and with many 
ceremonies drew forth the fire, which he distributed to persons deputed from the various surrounding monasteries and convents to 
receive it. Ludolfus, in the commentaries to his Ethiopian History, takes occasion, in explaining the Arabic name for this fire, to 
give the following description of .it: ‘‘ The Eastern Christians call it light, but the Latins usually name it holy fire, which all 
Eastern Christians, Greeks, Armenians, Syrians, Copts, and Abyssinians, believe descends from heaven. They wait for it 
during some hours on the vigil of Easter, running round the holy sepulchre with mad shouting, A monk, in the mean time, 
who is generally an Abyssinian, and who is let down into the holy sepulchre, having testified, by kindling his own lamp, that the 
fire had descended, all tumultuously hasten to him and kindle their lamps; and men as well as women convert them to the 
purposes of a detestable superstition. They accordingly become objects of ridicule to the Latins and Turks, who behold with 
laughter this tumult, which should rather cause them to weep.” —Ludolfi ad Athiopicam Historiam Commentarius, page 302, note, 

* Nine was also the number of the Mexican divinities or saints who presided over the lesser periods of thirteen days in the 
Mexican calendar, to each of whom a separate sign or day was allotted. 

188 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

their god; because they say that he had foretold that a bearded nation would arrive in those countries, 
who would subject them ; and they did not comprehend how the Devil, who invented all that, could 

In Ireland, at the present day, a custom prevails of kindling fires throughout the country on the eve of a certain festival, and 
many travellers have described it as a remnant of pagan superstition. Since, however, little doubt can be entertained of the Irish 
church having held very early intercourse with that of the East, this custom may perhaps have been derived from thence!: but 
even tradition has ceased to associate it with religion, and it serves merely as a diversion to country-people and boys. The 
effect is not unpleasing, in the dusk of the evening, to see these small fires blazing on the hills. The nuns of Kildare were 
likewise famous for having preserved for several centuries in their convent a holy fire, which the Irish annals bitterly complain 
that the English, on their arrival in the country, caused to be extinguished.—We shall close these observations by pointing out 
a curious analogy between the Mexican names, Papa and Teopixqui, which served to distinguish their higher and lower order of 
priests, and the modern Greek and Spanish appellations Papa and Obispo. Teopixqui was a title of high ecclesiastical dignity 
amongst the Mexicans, and is compounded of ¢eo, divine or holy, and opirqui, which nearly resembles obispo ; it was inferior, 
however, to that of Teoteuctli. Papa was the name by which it would appear that all priests of inferior rank were designated by 
the Mexicans, and Papa is the term by which a modern Greek priest is still called. If it could be proved that Papa was not a 
general appellation in the early ages for priests, both of the Latin and Greek church, there would be strong grounds for supposing 
that Ireland had originally belonged to the latter church, and that its inhabitants had been converted by Greek missionaries to 
Christianity ; for the Irish monks were certainly called Papas, as the two following passages, the one from Dicuil’s treatise De 
Mensuré Orbis Terra, and the other from Ionas’s History of Iceland, considered in connection with each other, evidently show. 
Tonas, an Icelandic historian, giving an account of the first colonization of Iceland by the Norwegians under Ingulfus, in the 
year eight hundred and seventy-four, says: ‘But Ingulfus found and possessed Island altogether barren and desolate, on 
every side beset with very thicke woods, and scarsly fertile of any but birches, so that hee was faine every where to open the 
woods with the axe for journeyes and habitation. Yet in the meane space we might gather by certayne signes, I know not what 
mariners had sometimes touched upon certayne shoares of the countrey, but not inhabited them; for Infulgus found little sacring 
bels and wooden crosses, and other things made by the workmanship and arte of the Irish and Brytains, but no. token of culture 
or habitation. Whereupon it is likely that Irish or Scottish fishermen, as are the English at this day, accustomed to fish neere 
Island, as sometimes it cometh to passe, went ashoare, and so by chance left sacring bells and crosses, the utensils? of . Christian 
religion ; for at that time the Irish were instructed in Christianisme as they say, and those whosoever were the ancient Islanders 
they called Papa or Papas, from whom, as seemeth probable to me, the iland of East Island, called Papey, derived the name, 
because they were often wont to touch there, or their monuments, such as I sayd were chiefly found there. This side of Island 3 

to such as sayle from England, Ireland, and Scotland, is most exposed towards the north-west. Moreover what and from whence 

1 The following curious passage occurs in the Life of Saint Patrick, lately published by Sir William Betham, from a very 
ancient MS., which clearly proves that to kindle holy fire was a Christian as well as a pagan custom: “Sanctus ergo Patricius 
sanctum Pasca celebrans, incendit divinum ignem valde lucidum et benedictum, qui in nocte refulgens a cunctis pene plani campi 
habitantibus visus est.” In another passage of the same Life the epithet benedictus is applied even to the smoke of the holy fire 
kindled by Saint Patrick: “ Kannanus episcopus quem ordinavit Patricius in primo Pascha Hifferti virorum Feicc ; qui portavit 
secum ignem primum benedictum, ac ceriales lucernas primus Patricii de manibus portavit domi, ut accenderet Sumum benedictum 
in oculos ac nares hominum gentilium, et regis Loigairi, et majorum illius.”—Liber Ardmache. Vita 8. Patricii. It is singular 
that to fumigate the nostrils of persons of distinction with smoke from a censer, should have been equally a custom with the 
Mexicans, Jews, and Christians :—this mark of honour amongst Christians was only paid to ecclesiastical dignitaries, who should 
excuse Homer for introducing in some scenes of the Iliad the Father of gods and men quaffing nectar and ambrosia from a golden 
goblet, rather than inhaling the smoke and steam of bloody altars. 

2 The former of these utensils were certainly made of brass or metal, and perhaps, occasionally, the latter also; and being 
considered by the early Christians of such indispensable service for the due performance of their sacred rites, the clergy themselves, 
like Quecalcoatle, might have thought it not beneath their dignity to learn the art of working in metals. It is said of a certain 
bishop, in an old Life of Saint Patrick, elsewhere referred to, that he understood the trade of a smith, and made altars: “ Asicus 
sanctus episcopus faber cereus erat Patricio, et faciebat altaria.” It would appear from the same Life of Saint Patrick, that the 
graves of the primitive Christians were distinguished from those of Pagans by crosses being placed over them; and Gomara 
informs us that brass crosses were found placed over graves in the province of Yucatan. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 189 

know what was at a future time to happen ; because there were no grounds for inferring this, except that 

as wars have been so common and natural amongst men, from the beginning of time when sin began, 

these Pape or Pappe came, I cannot sufficiently speake, unlesse peradventure from the ilands of Scotland, whereof one is named 
Pappa, and another Westrapappa, as we may see in the mappes.”—Purchas’s Pilgrimes, vol. 11. page 657. The following 
account by Dicuil should be compared with that borrowed from Ionas, as they tend mutually to corroborate each other; and 
no doubt can be entertained but that the Papz, whose crosses and sacring bells were discovered by Ingulfus and the Norwegians 
in the year eight hundred and seventy-four, were Irish monks, who at a period as early as the eighth century, and perhaps long 
before, had passed over to Iceland ; for we know from Dicuil, who completed his treatise De Mensura Orbis in the year eight 

hundred and twenty-five, as he declares himself in these closing stanzas to his work,— 

“ Post octingentos viginti quinque peractos 
Summi annos Domini, Terre, ethers, carceris atri, 
Semine triticeo sub ruris pulvere tecto, 
Nocte bobus requies largitur fine laboris.” 

That thirty years at least before that time, monks who had returned from Iceland to Ireland, gave him a description of thatisland. Since 
“it was not till nearly a century after the arrival of those monks in Ireland that the Norwegian colonies landed in Iceland, the deserted 
state in which they then found that island may be accounted for, on the supposition that the Norman rovers had in the intermediate 
time infested it, and massacred or driven away the monks. The passage which we here insert from Dicuil is very interesting, as his 
own relation takes us back a thousand years, and proves that at that early period the Northern Ocean had been explored nearly as far as 
the pole; and the authorities of more ancient writers which he quotes, show that in preceding centuries the art of navigation had made 
considerable progress. It is hardly necessary to remark, that in proportion as that art can be proved to have advanced in the ages 
immediately succeeding to the Christian era, that the improbability of America having been colonized in those ages by Christians, is 
diminished. “ Plinius secundus in secundo libro edocet quod Pytheas Massiliensis, sex dierum navigatione in septentrionem a 
Britanniaé Thulen distantem narrat. De eddem semper deserta, in eodem xiili. Etymologiarum libro, Isidorus infit: Thule ultima 
insula Oceani inter septentrionalem et occidentalem plagam, ultra Britanniam, a sole nomen habens, quia in e& estivum solstitium sol 

facit. Priscianus de eAdem in Periegesi manifestius quam Isidorus inquit :-— - 

Oceani tranans hic navibus equor apertum, 
Ad Thulen venies, que nocte dieque relucet 
Titanis radiis, cum curru scandit ad axes 
Signiferl, boreas succendens lampade partes. 

De eadem manifestius et plenius quam Priscianus, Julius Solinus de Britannia loquens, in Collectaneis ita scripsit. Thule ultima in 
qua, sxstivo solstitio sole de Cancri sidere faciente transitum, nox nulla, brumali solstitio perinde nullus dies. 

“ Trigesimus nunc annus est a quo nuntiaverunt mihi clerici, qui a kalendis februarii usque kalendas augusti, in ill4 insula manserunt, 
quod, non solum in estivo solstitio, sed in diebus circa illud, in vespertind hora, occidens sol abscondit se quasi trans parvulum 
tumulum: ita ut, nihil tenebrarum in minimo spatio ipso fiat; sed quicquid homo operari voluerit, vel pediculos de camisia abstrahere, 
tanquam in preesentia solis potest: et si in altitudine montium ejus fuissent, forsitan nunquam sol absconderetur ab illis. In medio 
illius minimi temporis, medium noctis fit in medio orbis terre; et sic puto, e contrario in hiemali solstitio, et in paucis diebus circa 
illud, auroram in minimo spatio in Thule apparere, quando in medio meridies fit orbis terre. Idcirco mentientes falluntur, qui circum 
eam concretum fore mare scripserunt, et quia vernali equinoctio usque ad autumnale continuum diem sine nocte, atque ab autumnali, 
versa vice, usque ad vernale equinoctium, assiduam quidem noctem, dum illi navigantes in naturali tempore magni frigoris eam 
intrabant, ac manentes in ipsa, dies noctesque semper preeter solstitii tempus, alternatim habebant: sed navigatione unius diei ex illa 
ad boream, congelatum mare invenerunt. Sunt alie insule multe in septentrionali Britannize oceano, qu a septentrionalibus 
Britannie insulis, duorum dierum ac noctium recté navigatione, plenis velis, assiduo feliciter vento, adiri queunt. Aliquis probus 
religiosus mihi retulit quod, in duobus estivis diebus, et una intercedente nocte, navigans in duorum naviculé transtrorum, in 
unam illarum iatroivit. Ile insule sunt alie parve, fere cuncte simul angustis distantes fretis, in quibus, in centum ferme annis, 
eremite ex nostra Scottié navigantes habitaverunt. Sed, sicut a principio mundi deserte semper fuerunt; ita nunc, causa latronum 

Nortmannorum, vacue anachoretis, plenee innumerabilibus ovibus, ac diversis generibus multis nimis marinarum avium. Nunquam 

1 Treland was called Scotia major, or simply Scotia, formerly ; and the Gaelic tribes, it is probable, from the similarity of the 
Gaelic language to Irish, were of Irish origin. Perhaps the Pape proceeded from the island of Columb-kil. 

(3c) 

190 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

and mankind are so ambitious of usurping the dominions of others, he might have chosen to utter this 
prediction, in order that when any other nation should subject them, he might take credit to himself, 

eas insulas in libris auctorum memoratas invenimus.” The age in which Dicuil lived has already been mentioned ; that he was an Irishman 
may be proved from this passage in his treatise: “ Circum nostram insulam Hiberniam sunt insulz, sed aliz parve atque alize minima.” 
“ Around our island of Hibernia there are islands, some of which are small, and the rest quite insignificant.” On the supposition that 
priests, whether of the Latin or Greek church, were formerly designated Papas, and that the crosses which had been left in Iceland by 
the Irish monks were Latin crosses, may we not imagine, without exceeding the bounds of probability, that the same kind of crosses 
discovered in Yucatan had been carried there also by Irish monks? especially as M.de Humboldt informs us that the first Spanish 
monks and missionaries gravely discussed the question of whether Quecalcoatle was an Irishman. In respect to the Greek crosses which 
were found in that continent we have already expressed an opinion that they were taken there by Coptic monks. The zeal of the 
Irish monks in the early ages of Christianity in the cause of conversion was quite incredible. These pious men in pursuit of their object 
despised alike the dangers of sea and land; and the extreme shores of Italy, as far as Tarentum and Sicily, and Iceland, even Greenland, 
it is highly probable were visited by them before the tenth century. The establishment of Christianity in Greenland in the ninth 
century, and the subsequent foundation of the monastery of Saint Thomas in that island, deserve to be particularly noticed here; for 
although the name of the monastery affords no indication of the country of those by whom it was founded, since Saint Thomas was 
esteemed the general patron of foreign conversions, still its existence during many centuries in the very precincts of the New World is 
very remarkable, and renders it extremely probable that missionaries had proceeded from it to many different parts of America; for 
Saint Thomas seems to have possessed a kind of ubiquity in that continent, and wherever the Spaniards arrived they imagined that 
they discovered traces of that Saint. Garcia in discussing the probability of the Norwegians and Danes having colonized America, 
says, “ La Peyrere proves against Arngrim Jonas, that it (Iceland) had been peopled already (before the year eight hundred and sixty- 
four) from ancient times; not only because the natives called the English and Scotch, who landed accidentally on its shores, Papas, 
inasmuch as they called the sea-coast Papey, but likewise because being the Thule of the ancients, no doubt could be entertained of its 
having been peopled. George Hickes' accordingly makes mention of the chronology of this island, and of the events connected with 
its history from the year seven hundred and forty of the Christian era to that of twelve hundred and ninety-five, mixing them up with 
the affairs of Denmark and Norway; and at least it is evident that in the year eight hundred and thirty-four, Lewis the Pious nominated 
Ansgarius to the Archbishopric of Hamburg, extending his jurisdiction over Iceland and Greenland, where he affirms that a door had 
been opened to the Gospel, which appointment was confirmed by Gregory the Fourth on the following year, according to Pontanus.” 
Origen de los Indios, page 266. The following account of the monastery of Saint Thomas, founded in Greenland, is taken from the 
relation of the discoveries of two distinguished Italian voyagers, Nicholas and Antonio Zeno, inserted in the first instance by Ramusio, 
in his Collection of Voyages, and afterwards translated and published in English, by Hakluyt®. “ M. Nicolo remaining now in Bres, 
determined in the spring to go forth and discover land; wherefore arming out three small barkes in the month of July, he sayled to the 
northwards and arrived in Engroneland, where he found a monasterie of friers of the order of the Predicators, and a church dedicated to 
Saint Thomas, hard by a hill that casteth forth fire like Vesuvius and Etna. There is a fountaine of hot burning water, with the whiche 
they heate the church of the monastery and the fryers’ chambers; it commeth also into the kitchin so boyling hot that they use no other 
fire to dresse their meate, and putting their breade into brasse pots without any water, it doth bake as it were in an hot oven. They 
have also smal gardens covered over in the winter time, which being watered with this water are defended from the force of the snow 
and colde, whiche in those partes being situate farre under the pole is very extreme, and by this meanes they produce flowers and 
fruites, and herbes of sundry sorts, even as in other temperate countries in their seasons, in such sort that the rude and savage people 
of those partes, seeing these supernatural effects, doe take those fryers for gods, and bring them many presents, as chickens, flesh, and 
divers other things, and have them all in great reverence as lords. When the frost and snow is great they heate their houses in manner 
before said, and will, by letting in the water or opening the windowes, at an instant temper the heate and cold at their pleasure. In 
the buildings of the monasterie they use no other matter but that which is ministred unto them by the fire; for they take the burning 
stones that are cast out as it were sparkles or cinders at the fierie mouth of the hill, and when they are most inflamed cast water upon 
them, whereby they are dissolved and become excellent white lime, and so tough that being contrived in building it lasteth for ever; and 
the very sparkles after the fire is out of them doe serve, instead of stones, to make walles and vautes, for being once cold they wil never 

* Hickes was a learned Englishman of the seventeenth century. He published Institutiones Grammatice Anglo-Saxonica, and Antique 
Laterature Septentrionalis Thesaurus. 

* This relation was published by Francesco Marcolini, in Venice, in the year 1558, together with the Persian Voyage of M. Caterino 
Zeno. The little volume in which it is contained is very rare; and considering that in it the Zeno family lay some claim to the honour 
of having discovered the northern coasts of America before Columbus had sailed to the southern, on grounds which three such excellent 
ancient cosmographers as Ramusio, Ortelius, and Hakluyt, have judged to be plausible, it deserves to be rescued from oblivion. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 191 

saying, that long ago he had prophesied it to them ;—and in fact so it happened: they adored him as - 
a god, as will be seen* ; for they believed it certain that he had ascended into heaven--, and was that 
star which is visible at the north of the sun before the break of day, which is the planet Venus; and 
they represented him accordingly, as has already been shown. 

IL, Quetzalcoatl. 2. Tlapallan, which signifies the Red Sea. 

* Superstitious nations are too ready to ascribe to prophetic inspiration things which have been foretold, merely because they were 

highly probable, and which accordingly afterwards came to pass. Seneca says, in the chorus of one of his tragedies 

ater ct Venient Annis 
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus 
Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens 
Pateat tellus, Typhisque novos 
Detegat orbes, nec sit terris ultima Thule.” 

This prophecy, whether the magnitude of the event predicted, or the distance of time previous to its accomplishment be considered, 
will bear comparison with any delivered by the famous oracles of old. 

4 Quecalcoatle, according to the opinion of some authors, received the other appellation of Huitzilopuchtli, from the belief which 
the Mexicans entertained that he had ascended into heaven, and was seated on the left hand of Tonacatecutli. Huitzilopuchtli is come 
pounded of Huicilan or Huitzilan, the name of a bird of beautiful plumage, (from which the Mexicans obtained the green feathers 

called Quecalli, which they so highly prized,) and Opuchtli, the left hand. 

dissolve or breake, except they be cut with some iron toole; and the vautes that are made of them are so light, that they need no 
sustentacle or prop to holde them up, and they will endure continually very faire and whole. By reason of these great commodities, 
the fryers have made there so many buildings and walles that it isa wonder to see. ‘The coverts or roofes of their houses, for the most 
part are made in manner following: first they raise up the wall up to its full height, then they make it enclining or bowing in by little 
and little in fourme of a vaut. But they are not greatly troubled with raine in those parts, because the climate, as I have saide, is 
extreme cold; for the first snow being fallen it thaweth no more for the space of nine months, for so long dureth their winter. They 
feede of the flesh of wilde foule and of fish; for whereas the warme water falleth into the sea, there is a large and wide haven, which by 
reason of the heate of the water doeth never freeze all the winter, by meanes whereof there is such concourse and flocks of sea foule 
and such abundance of fish, that they take thereof infinite multitudes, whereby they maintaine a great number of people round about, 
which they kepe in continuall worke both in building and taking of foules and fish, and in a thousand other necessarie affaires and business 
about the monasterie. Their houses are built about the hill on every side, in forme round and twenty-five foote broad, and in mounting 
upwards they goe narower and narower, leaving at the top a little hole, whereat the aire commeth in to give light to the house, and 
the flore of the house is so hot that being within they feele no cold at all: hither in the summer-time come many barkes from the islands 
their about, and from the cape above Norway and from Trondon, and bring to the friers al maner of things that may be desired, taking 
in change thereof fish, which they dry in the sunne or in the cold, and skins of divers kindes of beasts, for the which they have woode 
to burne, and timber very artificially carved, and corne, and cloth to make them apparell; for in change of the two aforesaid com- 
modities all the nations bordering round about them covet to trafficke with them, and so they, without any travell or expences, have 
that which they desire. To this monasterie resort fryers of Norway, of Suetia, and of other countreys, but the most part are of Islande. 
There are continually in that part many barks, which are kept in there by reason of the sea being frozen, waiting for the spring of the 
yere to dyssolve the yce. The fishers’ boates are made like unto a weaver’s shuttle: taking the skins of fishes they fashion them with 
the bones of the same fishes, and sowing them together in many doubles, they make them so sure and substanciall that it is miraculous to 
see howe in tempests they will shut themselves close within, and let the sea and winde carry them they care not whether, without any 
feare either of breaking or drowning; and if they chance to be driven upon any rocks, they remain sound without the least bruse in the 
world ; and they have as it were a sleeve in the bottome, which is tyed fast in the middle, and when there commeth any water into the 
boat they put it into the one-halfe of the sleeve, then fastening the end thereof with two pieces of wood and loosing the band beneath, 
they convey the water forth of the boat, and this they doe as often as they have occasion without any perill or impediment at all. 
Moreover the water of the monastery being of sulphurious or brimstonie nature is conveyed into the lodgings of the principall friers 
by certaine vesselles of brasse, tinne, or stone, so hot that it heateth the place as it were a stove, not carying with it any stinke or other 
noysome smell; besides this, they have another conveyance to bring hot water, with a wall under the ground, to the end it should not 
freeze unto the middle of the court, where it falleth into a great vessel of brasse that standeth in the middle of a boyling fountaine, and 
this is to heate their water to drinke, and to water their gardens; and thus they have from the hill the greatest commodities that may 

192 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

PLATE XVI. 

This they say is the representation of that tower which we have already mentioned that they 

built in Chulula, which the old men say was constructed in this manner. Those Indians who were 

be wished; and so these fryers employ al their travaile and studie for the most part in trimming their gardens, and in making faire 
and beautifull buildings, but especially handsome and commodious. Neyther are they destitute of ingenious and painful artificers for 
the purpose, for they give very large payment; and to them that bring them fruits and seedes they are very bountiful, and give they 
care not what; so that there is great resort of workmen and masters in divers faculties, by reason of the good gaines and large allowance 
that is there. The most of them speake the Latine tongue, and specially the superiours and principals? of the monastery. And this 
is as much as is known of Engroneland, which is all by the relation of M. Nicolo, who maketh also particular description of a river 
that he discovered, as is to be seene in the carde that I drew. And in the end, M. Nicolo not being used and acquainted with these cruell 
coldes, fel sicke, and a litle while after returned into Frisland, where he dyed. He left behind him in Venice two sons, M. Giovanni and 
M. Toma, who had two sonnes, M. Nicolo the father of the famous Cardinal Zeno, and M. Pietro, of whom descended the other 
Zenos that are living at this day. Now M. Nicolo being dead, M. Antonio succeeded him both in his goods and in his dignities and 
honour; and albeit he attempted divers wayes and made great supplication, he could never obtaine license to returne into his countrey ; 
for Zichmni being a man of great courage and valour, had determined to make himself lord of the sea, wherefore using alwayes the 
counsaile and service of M. Antonio, he determined to send him with certaine barks to the westwards, for that towards those parts 
some of his fishermen had discovered certaine islands very rich and populous, which discovery M. Antonio, in a letter to his brother 
M. Carlo, recounteth from point to point in this maner, saving that we have changed some old words, leaving the matter entire as 
it was. 

“Sixe and twentie yeeres agoe, there departed four fisher boats, the which a mightie tempest arising, were tossed for the space of many 
dayes very desperately upon the sea, when-at length the tempest ceasing, and the wether waxing faire, they discovered an island, called 
Estotiland, lying to the westwards, above one thousand miles from Frisland, upon the which one of the boats was cast away, and sixe men 
that were in it were taken of the inhabitants and brought into a faire and populous citie, where the king of the place sent for many inter- 
preters; but there was none could be found that understood the language of the fishermen except one that spake Latine, who was also 
cast by chance upon the same island, who, in the behalfe of the king, asked them what countrymen they were? and so understanding 
their case, rehearsed it unto the king, who willed that they should tary in the countrey: wherefore they obeying his commandment, for 
that they could not otherwise doe, dwelt five years in the island, and learned the language ; and one of them was in divers parts of the 
island, and reporteth that it is a very rich countrey, abounding with all the commodities of the world, and that it is litle lesse then Island, 
but farre more fruitful, having in the middle thereof a very high mountaine, from the which there spring foure rivers, that passe through 
the whole countrey. ‘The inhabitants are very wittie people, and have all artes and faculties as we have; and it is credible that in time 
past they have had trafficke with our men; for he said that he saw Latin bookes in the king’s librarie, which they at this present do not 
understand. ‘They have a peculiar language and letters or caracters to themselves; they have mines of all maner of metals, but especial 
they abound with gold; they have their trade in Engroneland, from whence they bring furres, brimstone, and pitch : and he saith that to 
the southwards there is a great populous countrey, very rich of gold. They sow corne, and make beere and ale, which is a kinde of 
drinke that North people do use as we do wine. They have mighty great woods; they make their buildings with wals, and there are 

1 The Irish monks who followed the rule of Saint Columbus, who were very numerous, as that Saint was indefatigable in founding 
monasteries, studied with great diligence the Latin language, in imitation of the example of their patron, and in obedience to his 
precept to cultivate the sciences : accordingly the light of learning still shone in his celebrated monastery of Iona for many centuries after 
the rest of Europe had been plunged in darkness. Some modern writers, amongst others, Dr. M‘Cullogh, are inclined to be more 
sceptical than Gibbon was, as to the contents of the famous library of that monastery ; they cannot reconcile to their ideas of probability, 
the supposition that it might have contained some of the long lost works of antiquity, or that the libraries of monasteries in general 
were places in which such discoveries were likely to be made: if so, it might be asked, from whence did the mass of ancient learning 
which we still possess, proceed ? for Universities were an institution of later ages. But if monasteries were likely places in which to find 
the valuable works of former days, the monastery of Iona was eminently so; neither should the boast of its having possessed a 
considerable number of Arabic MSS. throw any discredit on the account which has been transmitted to us of its other contents; since 
these MSS. might easily have been brought from Spain, between which country and Ireland considerable intercourse in former ages 
subsisted, the Irish laying claim to Milesian or Spanish descent, and where it is highly probable the monks of Iona sometimes went. 

i 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 193 

under that chief who had escaped from the deluge, named Xelua, made bricks out of a mountain in 
Tlalmanalco called Cocotle: and from Tlalmanalco to Chulula, Indians were placed to pass the bricks 

many cities and castles. They build small barks, and have sayling ; but they have not the loadstone, nor know not the use of the compasse. 
Wherefore these fishers were had in great estimation ; insomuch that the king sent them with twelve barks to the southwards, to a countrey 
which they call Drogio: but in their voyage they had such contrary weather, that they thought to have perished in the sea; but escaping 
that cruell death, they fell into another more cruell, for they were taken in the countrey and the most parte of them eaten by the savage 
people, which fed upon mans flesh, as the sweetest meat in their judgments that is. But that fisher with his fellowes shewing them the 
maner of taking fish with nets, saved their lives ; and would goe every day a fishing to the sea and in fresh rivers, and take great abundance 
of fish, and give it to the chiefe men of the countrey ; whereby he gate himself so great favour that he was very well beloved and honoured 
of every one. The fame of this man being spread abroad in the countrey, there was a lord thereby that was very desirous to have him 
with him, and to see how he used his miraculous arte of catching fish, in so much that he made warre with the other lord with whom he 
was before; and in the end prevaling, for that he was more mightie and a better warriour, the fisherman was sent unto him with the rest 
of his company: and for the space of thirteene yeres that he dwelt in those parts, he saith that he was sent in this order to more than 
twenty-five lords ; for they had continuall war amongst themselves, this lord with that lord, and he with another, onely to have him to 
dwell with them; so that wandering up and downe the countrey, without any certaine abode in one place, he knew almost all those 
parts. He saith that itisa very greate countrey, and as it were a new world; the people are very rude and voide of all goodnesse; 
they goe all naked, so that they are miserably vexed with colde; neither have they the wit to cover their bodyes with beasts skins which 

they take in hunting; they have no kinde of mettal; they live by hunting; they carry certaine lances of wood, made sharpe at the 
point; they have bowes the strings whereof are made of beasts skins: they are very fierce people; they make cruell warres one with 
another, and eate one another: they have governours and certaine lawes very divers among themselves ; but the farther to the southwest- 
wards the more civiltie there is ; the ayre being somewhat temperate, so that there they have cities, and temples to idols, wherein they 
sacrifice men and afterwards eate them. They have there some knowledge and use of gold and silver.” 

It is unnecessary to insert here what follows in the original relation, of an expedition undertaken by Zichmni against Estotiland, in 
consequence of the report of the fisherman who had contrived to escape from the savages. The relation itself is in fact extremely brief, 
occupying in the entire but a few pages of Hakluyt; and it was compiled in the first instance by Francisco Marcolino, from 
fragments of letters written by Nicolo Zeno to his brother Antonio, to induce him to go to him at Frisland, and from the 
latter at Frisland to his brother Carlo, who remained in Venice. It does not appear how Marcolino became possessed of their 
correspondence :—reasons however, for its not having been sooner published, and for much of it having been lost, may be found on 
the one hand, in the fact that it took place seventy or eighty years before the art of printing was invented; and on the other, in the extreme 
jealousy of the Venetian government, which had much reason at that time, for the preservation of its own rich commerce in the esta- 
blished channel, to divert the attention of the other states of Europe from naval enterprizes; and certainly none to encourage them to 
embark in them, by allowing its citizens to publish interesting relations of voyages to the west; especially as it was the opinion of learned 
men of that age, who knew nothing of the existence of America, that a short passage to Asia might be discovered by navigating the 
Atlantic,—which would have deprived Venice of its monopoly of the trade of the East. This they inferred from the spherical shape of 
the earth: and accordingly when America was discovered, it was called India; and Columbus supposed that he had reached some 
portion of the territories of the Great Cham of Tartary. There is certainly something improbable in the account which Marcolino gives 
of the book which Antonio Zeno composed, and of many of the letters which he wrote to his brother Carlo having been torn and 
destroyed by himself when a child. But the exception which might hence be taken to the relation itself must be very slight, since two 
such eminent cosmographers as Hakluyt and Ortelius, not to mention Ramusio, have given their testimony in its favour; and it likewise 
contains very strong internal proofs of authenticity. ‘The terms, indeed, in which Marcolino speaks of his inability to give a detailed 
narrative of the voyages and discoveries of Nicolo and Antonio Zeno, seem suggested by real regret at the recollection of the loss of the 
materials which would have enabled him to have executed the task. <¢ All these letters,” he observes, “were written by M. Antonio to 
Messer Carlo his brother; and it grieveth me that the booke and divers other writings concerning these purposes are miserably lost; for 
being but a child when they came to my hands, and not knowing what they were, as the maner of children is, I tore them and rent them 
in pieces, which now I cannot cal to remembrance but to my exceeding great griefe. Notwithstanding, that the memory of so many 
good things should not bee lost, whatsoever I could get of this matter [ have disposed and put in order in the former discourse, to the 
ende that this age might be partly satistied, to the which we are more beholding for the great discoveries made in those partes, then to any 
other of the time past, being most studious of the newe relations and discoveries of strange countries made by the great mindes and 
industrie of our ancestours.” ‘The original relation of Marcolino here terminating, Hakluyt takes occasion, in the following terms, to 
signify his own opinion of its veracity, and to cite that of Ortelius to the same effect: « For the more credite and confirmation of the 
former historie of Messer Nicolas and Messer Antonio Zeni, which for some fewe respects may perhaps bee called in question, I have 
heere annexed the judgment of that famous cosmographer Abraham Ortelius, or rather the yealding and submitting of his judgment 
thereunto, who in his Theatrum Orbis, fol. 6, next before the map of Mar del Zur, borroweth proofe and authoritie out of this 

(3p) 

194. EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

and cement from hand to hand; and thus they built this tower, that was named Tulan Culula, 
which was so high that it appeared to reach heaven. And being content, since it seemed to them that 

relation to shew that the northeast parte of America called Estotiland, and in the original always affirmed to bee an islande, was about 
the yeere thirteen hundred and ninety discovered by the aforesayd Venetian gentleman Messer Antonio Zeno, above one hundred yeeres 
before ever Christopher Columbus set saile for those western regions; and that the Northern seas were even then sayled by our European 
pilots, through the helpe of the loadstone, with divers other particulars concerning the customes, religion, and wealth, of the Southern 
Americans, which are most evidently confirmed by all the late and modern Spanish histories of Nueva Espafia and Peru.” 

The passage above alluded to of Ortelius is as follows: “ And here I shall not, as I suppose, commit any great inconvenience or 
absurditie in adding unto this history of the New World certaine particulars as touching the first discovery thereof not commonly known; — 
which discoverie al the writers of our time ascribe, and that not unworthily, unto Christopher Columbus, for by him it was in a maner 
first discovered, made knowen, and profitably communicated unto the Christian world in the yere of our Lord fourteen hundred and 
ninety-two. Howbeit, I find that the north part thereof calied Estotiland, which most of all extendeth towards our Europe, and the - 
ilands of the same, namely Groneland, Island, and Frisland, was long ago found out by certaine fishers of the Isle of Frisland, driven by 
tempest upon the shore thereof, and was afterwards, about the yeere thirteen hundred and ninety, discovered a new by one Antonio 
Zeno, a gentleman of Venice, which sayled thither under the-conduct of Zichmni, king of the saide Isle of Frisland, a prince in those 
parts of great valour, and renowned for his martial exploits and victories; of which expedition of Zichmni there are extant in Italian 
certaine collections or abridgements gathered by Francisco Marcolino out of the Letters of M. Nicolo and Antonio Zeni, two gentlemen 
of Venice which lived in those parts: out of which collections I doe adde concerning the description of Estotiland aforesaid these 
particulars following: ‘ Estotiland,’ saith he, ‘ aboundeth with all things necessary for mankinde. In the mids thereof standeth an 
exceeding high mountaine, from which issue foure rivers that moisten all the countrie.. The inhabitants are wittie and most expert in all 
mechanicall arts. They have a kinde of peculiar language and letters: howbeit, in this king’s librarie are preserved certaine Latine 
bookes which they understand not, being perhaps left there not many yeeres.before, by some Europeans which traffiqued thither. ‘They 
have all kinde of mettals, but especially golde, wherewith they mightily abound. ‘They trafficke with the people of Groneland, from 
whence they fetch skinnes, pitch, and brimstone. The inhabitants report, that towardes the south there are regions abounding with 
gold, and very populous. ‘They have many and huge woods, from whence they take timber for the building of ships and cities, whereof 
and of castles there are great store. The use ofthe loadstone for navigation is unknown unto them. ‘They make relation also of a certaine 
region towards the south called Drogio, which is inhabited by Canibals, unto whom mans flesh is delicate meat, whereof being destitute 
they live by fishing, which they use very much. Beyond this are large regions, and as it were a new world; but the people are 
barbarous, and goe naked; howbeit against the colde they clothe themselves in beastes skinnes. These have no kinde of metall, and 
they live by hunting. Their weapons are certaine long ‘staves with sharp points, and bowes. They wage warres ene against another. 
They have governours, and obey certaine lawes. But from hence more towards the south the climate is much more temperate, and there 
are cities, and temples of idoles unto whom they sacrifice living men, whose flesh they afterwards devoure. ‘These. nations have the use 
of silver and gold. ‘Thus much of this tract of landes out of the aforesaide collections or abridgements ; wherein this also is worthy the 
observation, that even then our European pilots sayled those seas by the helpe of the loadstone ; for concerning the use thereof in navi- 
gation I suppose there is not to be found a more ancient testimonie. And these things I have annexed the rather unto this table of Mar 
del Zur, considering that none of those authours which have written the histories of the Newe World, have in any part of their writings 
mentioned one word thereof.’ Hitherto Ortelius.”—Hakluyt’s Harly Voyages, vol. iii. page 157. 

With respect to the internal evidence which the relation of Marcolino affords of its own authenticity, it is sufficient to point out here 
a singular agreement between the description which Nicolo Zeno gives, in his second letter, of the monastery of Saint Thomas in Greenland, 
and the account which Blefkens, who made a voyage from Hamburgh to Iceland and Greenland im the year fifteen hundred and sixty- 
three, received from a monk who had formerly belonged to that monastery. He says: ‘There was in a certaine monasterie in Iseland 
called Helgafiel, a certayne blinde monke left (for the abbot of the monasterie had converted the revenues to the king’s use) who lived 
miserably there. Hee was borne in Groneland, of a darke complexion and broad face. ‘The governour commanded him to be brought 
unto him, that hee might know some certaintie of the state of Groneland. Hee sayd there was a monasterie of Saint Thomas 
in Groneland, into the which his parents thrast him when he was but young; and after that hee was taken out by the bishop of Grone- 
land, when hee was thirtie yeeres of age, to saile with him into Norway to the archbishop, to Nidrosia or Dronten, to whom the Iseland 
bishops are subject. In his returne hee was left in a monasterie by the bishop whose countrey Groneland was. ‘This was done, as hee 
sayd, in fifteen hundred and forty-six. Hee sayd that island was called Groneland antiphrastically, for that it seldome or never waxeth 
greene, and that there is so great cold there throughout the whole yeere, except Iune, Iuly, and August, that being clothed and covered 
with furres, they could scarse bee warme; and that they had at home certayne round peeces of wood, which being continually mooved 
with the feete, kept their feet warme. He sayd it aboundeth as Iseland doth with fishes, and that they had beares and white foxes, 
nay pigmies and unicornes, and that day did not appeare till the sunne had runne through Pisces. This monke told us marvellous 
strange things: that there was in the monasterie of Saint Thomas where hee lived, a fountayne which sent forth burning and flaming 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 195 

they had a place whence to escape from the deluge if it should again happen*, and from whence 
they might ascend into heaven,—a chalcuitl, which is a precious stone, fell from thence and struck 

* This account nearly resembles that which is given by Josephus, in the fifth chapter of the first book of his Jewish Antiquities, of 
the building of the Tower of Babel. Nabrodes, the great grandson of Noah, is there said to have been the chief who dissuaded the 
people from proceeding in tribes to colonize the earth, and who advised them to build a tower so high that it might afford them 
the means of escaping in the event of another deluge: the words of Josephus are these—“‘ Ilupyov yap éixodomnosiv dWndrorepoy 4 To Udwe 

ayaEyves Suvyfern.” 

water; that this water was conveyed through pipes of stone to the severall cells of the monkes, and that it made them warme as stoaves 
doe with us; and that all kinde of meates might bee boyled in this fountayne and fierie water, no otherwise then if it had beene fire indeed. 
He added moreover, that the walls of the monasterie were made of pumice stones out of a certayne mountaine, not far from the monasterie, 
like to Hecla; for if yee powre these burning waters upon the pumice stones, there will followaslimie matter, which instead of lime they 
use for morter. After the governour’s conference with the monke, 1 came privately unto him, to demand certayne particular things 
touching the pigmies and other things. Hee had little skill in the Latine tongue ; hee understood meé speaking Latine, but answered by 
an interpreter. Hee sayd, the pigmies represent the most perfect shape of man, that they are hairy to the uttermost joynts of the fingers, 
and that the males have beards downe to the knees. But although they have the shape of men, yet'they have little sense or understanding, 
nor distinct speech, but make shew of a kinde of hissing, after the manner of geese; that his abbot kept two of them in his monasterie, 
male and female, but they lived not long, and that they were unreasonable creatures, and live in perpetuall darknesse. ‘That some say, 
they have warre with the cranes, that hee knew not. He affirmed, that the same maner of food was in Groneland as in Island, to wit, of 
fish but not of cattle, because they have no cattle, and that the country is not populous. Forthwith from Island begins the Hyperborean 
Sea, which beats upon Groneland and the country of the pigmies, which at this day is called Nova Zembla, and there the frozen sea hath 
a bay which is.called the White Sea.”—Purchas’s Pilgrims, vol. iii. page 651. 

It is evident that the pigmies here described were Esquimaux Indians clothed in seal skins. ‘The monk’s account of the two which 
his abbot kept in the monastery may be compared with the following Indian tradition, (which can only refer to the Esquimaux,) which 
Peter Martyr recounts in the second chapter of his Seventh Decade of the Ocean: ‘ There is another country called Inzignanin. The 
inhabitants, by report of their ancestors, say that a people as tall as the length of a man’s arm, with tails of a span long, sometimes arrived 
there, brought thither by sea, which tail was not moveable or wavering, but solid, broad above, and sharp beneath, as we see in fishes 
and crocodiles, and extended into a bony harduess. Wherefore, when they desired to sit, they used seats with holes through them, or 
wanting them, digged up the earth a span deep or little more; they must convey their tail into the hole when they rest them. They 
fabulously report that that nation had fingers as broad as they were long, and that their skin was rough and almost scaly, and that they 
were accustomed only to eat raw fish, which failing, they say, all died ; and that they left no posterity of them behind them. They report 
these and many such idle vain things were left them by tradition from their grandfathers and parents.” 

The Esquimaux are a race of people totally distinct from the other tribes of Indians, and appear to be of Tartar origin. It is highly 
probable (if it cannot be easily shown how many species of animals* could have migrated from the Old continent to the New) that 
America has been colonized by man from all quarters of the globe; and this was the conclusion at which Ceres arrived, after long 
researches into the origin of the Indians. 

_ | Man is a creature whose constitution can be inured by habit to every climate; but nevertheless, opposite and remote regions of the 
globe seem to be inhabited by distinct races of mankind. If the laws of nature, the power and influence of climate, and the vital and 
organic functions of the human frame are not very different from what they were during the first two thousand years of the earth’s 
alleged existence after the deluge, how does it happen that the experience of the last two thousand years tends fully to prove that 
climate can effect no material change either in the colour of the skin or in the human physiognomy? The long residence of the Spaniards 
in the New World has not yet given a shade of copper-colour to their skin; nor have the negroes, by being transplanted to America and 
the West Indian islands, lost a particle of their original blackness ; neither have any people of the earth a tradition that their ancestors 
_were of a different colour from themselves, or that a change had been wrought in their personal appearance by their establishing themselves 
in some new settlement. Mixture of blood is that alone which affects a change in colour and in feature. The marble busts of classical 
antiquity show how nearly the countenances of the Greek and Roman heroes, who flourished before the Christian ara, resembled: those of 
the modern Greeks and Italians, and plainly prove that the slow action of time and of revolving ages can of itself produce no change in the 
physiognomy of man, although his stature may be affected by various natural causes. The problem, however, most difficult to resolve is, How, 
supposing that the time existed when the vast American continent was absolutely without animals, those species which are not sufficiently. 
hardy to bear cold, (and which therefore cannot be supposed to have crossed from Asia to America by Bherings Straits, supposing 
_ that the two continents in the early ages of the world joined thereabouts, and which would have found it equally impossible to pass 

196 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

it to the ground. Others say that the chalcuitl was in the shape of a toad; and that whilst destroying 

the tower it reprimanded them, inquiring of them their reason for wishing to ascend into heaven, 

since it was sufficient for them to see what was on the earth. ‘The base of this tower is at the present 
day still remaining, and its circumference is eighteen hundred feet*. 

1. The Tower. 

For the better understanding of this painting and that which follows, ‘itis requisite to observe, that 
these gentiles divided their year in our manner, into three hundred and sixty-five days, which they 
distributed into eighteen portions resembling months; and the five days which exceeded this distri- 
bution of twenty days to each of the months, they left till the fourth year; for in the same way as 
we have our bissextile every four years, in which we add a day to the three hundred and sixty- 
five days of the year, so they added a month composed of the quadruple of these five superfluous 
days : and to show what sign reigned over each of the twenty days, they had an equal number of signs, 
which shall presently be explained, in which was founded all their superstition and sorcery ; and each 
of these twenty signs had the number thirteen allotted to it, because they had the same number of days 
in their week. Thus they commenced reckoning from the sign of One Cane: for example, One Cane, 
two, three, &c. proceeding to thirteen; for in the same way as we have calculations in our reper- 
tories, by which to find what sign rules over each of the seven days of the week, so the natives of that 
country had thirteen signs for the thirteen days of their week : and this will be better understood by an 
example. To signify the first day of the world, they painted a figure like the moon, surrounded with 
splendour, which is emblematical of the deliberation which they say their god held respecting the 
creation, because the first day after the commencement of time began with the second figure, which 
was One Cane: accordingly completing their reckoning of a cycle at the sign of Two Canes, they 
counted an Age, which is a period of fifty-two years, because on account of the bissextile years which 
necessarily fell in this sign of the Cane, it occurred at the expiration of every period of fifty-two 
years. ‘Their third sign was a certain figure, which we shall presently see, resembling a serpent or 
viper, by which they intended to signify the poverty and labours which men suffer in this life. Their 
fourth sign represented an earthquake, which they called N ahuolin, because they say that in that 
sign the sun was created}. Their fifth sign was Water, for according to their account abundance 
was given to them in that sion. These five signs they placed in the upper part, which they called 
Tlacpac, that is to say the east.—They placed five other signs at the south, which they named Uitzlan, 

* Mexican mythology has transferred the site of the tower of Babel as well as that of the lakes of Taguatagua from the Old continent 
to the New. 

+ The sun in the sign of Four Earthquakes might have signified amongst the Mexicans, the present age, in allusion to the fate which 
they imagined awaited their last sun, which was doomed like the preceding ones to destruction. This sign, surrounded with the other 
signs of the days of the year, is sculptured on the great block of granite which was dug up some years ago in the Plaza Mayor of 

Mexico. 

the ocean) could have arrived there? and how the insect tribes, the sloth, and the crocodile could ever have accomplished the journey 2 
And finally, why other species of animals, such as the lama, should only be discovered in the New World; and geologists have been 
unable hitherto to find even their bones in the Old continent; at the same time that those of the megatherion and of other extinct species 
have been found in the American soil, which instinct perhaps, immediately after their creation, (for how else can we account for their 
presence there?) induced to abandon the fertile plains of Asia. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 197 

which means a place of thorns. The first of which was a flower, emblematical of the shortness of 
life, which passes away quickly like a blossom or flower. ‘The second was a certain very green herb, 
in like manner denoting the shortness of life, which is as grass. The third sign was a lizard, to show 
that the life of man, besides being brief, is destitute and replete with the ills of nakedness and cold, 
and with other miseries. The fourth was a certain very cruel species of bird which inhabits that 
country. The fifth sign was a rabbit, because they say that in this sign their food was created, and 
accordingly they believed that it presided over drunken revels*.—They placed five other signs at 
the west, which region they called Tetziuatlan. The first was a deer, by which they indicated the 
diligence of mankind in seeking the necessaries of life for their sustenance. The second sign was a 
shower of rain falling from the skies, by which they signified pleasure and worldly content. The 
third sign was an ape, denoting leisure time. The fourth was a house, meaning repose and tran- 
quillity. ‘The fifth was an eagle, the symbol of freedom and dexterity.—At the north, which they 
call 'Teutletlapan +, which signifies the place of the gods, they placed the other five signs which were 
wanting to complete the twenty. The first was a tiger, which is a very ferocious animal, and 
accordingly they considered the echo of the voice as a bad omen, and the most unlucky of any, 
because they say that it has reference to that sign. The second was a skull or death, by which they 
signified that death commenced with the first existence of mankind. The third sign was a razor, or 
stone knife, by which are meant the wars and dissensions of the world; they call it 'Tequepatl. The 
fourth sign is the head of a cane, which signifies the Devil, who takes souls to hell§. The fifth and 
last of all the twenty signs was a winged head, by which they represented the wind, indicative of 
the variety of worldly affairs. These were the twenty figures of their superstition and sorcery, 
respecting which something else remains to be observed ; which is, that on the commencement of the 
year, which was always on the twenty-first of February||, as they considered that day their first,— 
if by chance the sign of the Cane ruled on that day, they were bound to fast during the thirteen days 
antecedent to the arrival of the new year, in memory of the various times in which the world had 
been destroyed, because a destruction of the world had taken place on that sign; and since they 
likewise expected that the world was again to be destroyed, they fasted during these thirteen days, to 
escape from death. And when the year commenced with the sign of the Rabbit, they fasted the eight 
preceding days, in memory of the ruin of the first man, as the Devil had given them knowledge of 
him, although obscured with the same errors in this instance as in others, till in time they arrived 
at the knowledge of our Catholic truth, which he had before revealed to them, mixing it up with 
lies. It must also be observed, that their intercalary year was always in the four letters or signs 
which follow, viz. the Cane, the Flint, the House, and the Rabbit; because in like manner as they 

* Ometochtli, a Mexican god so named from the sign which was dedicated to him, was, according to Sahagun, the same as Bacchus. 

+ The north was also named Mictlan, or Miquitlan, where they supposed hell to be situated and Miquitlamtecutle to reside. 

{ The Mexicans believed that some connection existed between the echo of the voice and the sign of the tiger; because the tiger was 
the sign of the earth, and they had an ancient tradition that the earth escaped total destruction from the deluge by the echo of the voi 
reverberating from the heart of the mountain. i 

ce 

& The sign of Quecalcoatle was the head of a cane. 
|| This appears to be a mistake, as it is elsewhere said that the new year commenced on the twenty-fourth of February, 
first of the dead days occurred on the nineteenth of that month. 

and that the 

4] Some attempt has been made in a preceding note to explain the Mexican system of intercalation. 

(Sn) 

198 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

had an intercalation every four years of the month composed of the five dead days, which were 
superfluous in the reckoning of each year, so also they had an intercalation of years; for at the 
expiration of every period of fifty-two years, which they reckon an Age, they added a year, which 
always fell in one of these letters or signs; because as each of the twenty signs had thirteen similar 
signs which obeyed it;—for example, one Rabbit, two, three, four, reckoning to thirteen; and 
one Cane, two, three, four, to thirteen, and the quadruple of thirteen is fifty-two,—there remains. 
the exact sum of fifty-two years, constituting an Age; and accordingly the intercalary year always 
fell in one of these four letters; because since by their account the world began in the sign of One 
Cane, for this reason the intercalary year could not fall but in these four letters. 

PLATE XVII. 
TONACATECOTLE. 

This is the representation of Tonacatecotle, which name signifies the Lord of our Bodies; others 
say that it means the First Man, or perhaps it means that the first man was so called. 

These are the figures which have been mentioned; and the first is that of their greatest god, 
Tonacatecotle. It represents the first god under whom, as they affirm, was the dominion of the world 2 
who, when it appeared good to him, breathed and divided the waters of the heaven and the 
earth, which at first were all confused together, and disposed them as they now are ; and accordingly 
they called him the Lord of our Bodies, and also of Abundance, who bestowed every thing upon ~ 
them, and on this account they paint him alone with a crown. They call him besides, Seven 
Flowers, for they say that he disposes of the principalities of the earth. He had no temple, nor 
did they offer sacrifices to him; for they say that he did not require them, as if on account of his 
superior majesty: so that even here we see how the pride of those who despised Gon, long ago from 
the beginning, has displayed itself, since the Devil has chosen to apply to himself what Saint John 
says of Gop,—that on account of his greatness no temple which our gratitude could erect would 
content him. ‘They say that Tonacatecotle presided over the thirteen signs which are here marked. 
Those above denote the thirteen causes* or influences of the sky which are under subjection to him, 
and the others below are the thirteen signs of their superstition and sorcery. 

This man and woman represent the first pair who existed in the world; their names are Huehue+-. 
Between them is placed a knife or razor, and an arrow above each of their heads, typifying death, 
as in them death originated. | 
They called this god Tonacatecotli, and by another name Citallatonalli; and they said that he was 

* These causes are really only nine, corresponding in number with the heavens. But since four of them are reckoned twice in 
every series of thirteen days, in order that each day might be placed under some peculiar influence, they are here said to be 
thirteen: their names, enumerated in their proper order, are as follows; Xiututl, Ytzli, Piltzintzinteotl, Tzinteotl, Mitlanteotl, 
Chalchiuitlicue, Tlazolteotl, Tepeyolotl, Tlaloc. The influence which they were supposed to exercise over each day, whether 
good, bad, or indifferent, is marked by the letters 0, c, and zn, standing for buono, cattivo, and indifferente. 

+ Hue signifies old, and its reduplication forms the superlative of the adjective; the coincidence. between Eva the name of 

Eve in the Septuagint, and hue, seems purely accidental. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS.: 199 

the constellation which appears by night in the sky, named Saint James’s or the Milky Way. They 
paint these figures, and all the others which follow, each of them in its own manner; because as 
they considered them their deities, each had its peculiar festival. It was necessary to wear in these 
festivals the habit of the god. 

1. Xiututl, good. 2. Ytzli, bad. 3. Piltzintzinteotl, good. 4. Tzinteotl, indifferent. 5. Mit- 
lanteotl, bad. 6. Izpatli*, the symbol of the first day, or of the first deliberation which their god 
held when he commenced the creation, ‘‘ quasi fiat lux,” pronouncing as it were the words “ Let 
there be light.” 7. Air or wind. 8. House. 9. Lizard. 10. Serpent. 11. Crown. 12. Tona- 
catlecotle, which name signifies the Lord of our Bodies. Others say that it means the First Man : 
or perhaps it signifies that the first man was so called. 13. Arrow. 14. Flint or Knife. 15. Arrow 

or lance. 

PLATE XVIII. 

This figure has no name; for it only shows how, after the disappearance of Topiltzin Quetzalcoatle, 
men invented sacrifices of children, with the intention of honouring his festival, which was on the 
day of Seven Canes (Pexis)}-. They say that he was born on that sign; and accordingly a very 
great festival was celebrated on that sign in Chululan, to which they came from all parts of the 
country, and brought offerings and presents to the lords, Papas, and priests of the temples. And they 
celebrated a similar festival and solemnity on the sign in which he disappeared, which was that 

of One Cane}. These solemnities or festivals occurred at the expiration of every fifty-two years. 

PLATE XIX. 
QUEQUECOYOTL. 

They say that the Otomies worshipped Quequecoyotl as their god§. He was the Lord of these 
thirteen signs, in which they celebrated his festival, during the four last of which they fasted, in 

* The meaning of this symbol, which is here otherwise explained than in the writings of Torquemada and Boturini, has, as 
Gama observes, much perplexed those who have most diligently studied the ancient mythology of the Mexicans. “‘ Father 
Torquemada and Gomara (he says) call it a sword-fish, and Boturini a serpent armed with hooks. Father Diego Valades repre- 
sents it in the form of a fish in the calendar which he caused to be engraved in his Christian Rhetoric; and others accordingly have 
so represented it: but the Indians paint it in a different manner ; and the figures which are found of it in their ancient paintings 
do not exactly resemble that which is sculptured on the stone.”—Descripcion de las Dos Piedras, page 27. It may here be 
remarked, that the engraving of one of these stones,—that representing the Mexican calendar which Gama has annexed to his 
Treatise,—does not appear accurate; and it differs materially from a model in plaster of Paris of the same stone which has 
been recently brought to England, which together with a cast of the sacrificial stone suffered some injuries in the carriage: 

+ The meaning of Pexis is not obvious, although it would appear from the context that it was the name of the festival. 

{ Three different signs of the Cane, viz. One Cane, Two Canes, and Seven Canes, were dedicated to Quecalcoatle ; the two 
first of which seem to be signs of years, and the last alone to designate a day. Although it is elsewhere said that Quecalcoatle 
disappeared or died on the day of One Cane, which must have proceeded from inadvertence, since it is stated in another part, 
that he disappeared on the day of Four Earthquakes in the year of One Cane. The sign of Two Canes was dedicated to him 
because his festival was celebrated every fifty-two years in Cholula, on the year of Two Canes; perhaps in commemoration 
of the number of years which he lived. 

§ The Otomies worshipped Quequecoyot! under the name of Tatacoada. 

200 °EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

honour of the other Quetzalcoatle of ‘Tula. ‘They called them the festival of Discord. He who was 
born on the sign of One Rose they believed would be a musician, a physician, a weaver, or a 
principal person. When the sign of the Rabbit arrived, they fasted on account of the fall of the 
first man. 

1. Gueguecouiotl *. 

PLATE XX. 
ISNEXTLI, BLIND WITH ASHES. 

We certainly ought to deplore the blindness of this people and the cunning of Satan, who in this 
manner has persevered in counterfeiting the Holy Scriptures; since he communicated to these 
poor people the knowledge of the temptation of our mother Evx, and of the inconstancy of our 
father Apam, under the fiction of this woman, who is turned towards her husband, as God declared 
to our mother Eve, “et ad virum conversio ejus,” (and she shall turn towards her husband) ;—whom 
they call Isnextli, who is the same as Eve, who is always weeping, with her eyes dim with ashes, 
with a rose in her hand emblematical of her grief, being in consequence of having gathered it. 
And accordingly they say that she cannot behold heaven: wherefore in recollection of the happiness 
which, on that account, she lost, they celebrate a fast every eight years on account of this calamitous 
event; the fast was on bread and water. They fasted during the eight signs preceding the entrance 
of the Rose, and when that sign arrived they prepared themselves for the celebration of the festival. 
They affirm that every series of five days comprised in this calendar was dedicated to this fall, 
because on such a day Eve sinned; they were accordingly enjoined to bathe themselves on this 
night, in order to escape disease. 

1. Isnextli, blind with ashes. 

PLATE XXII. 
CHALCHIUIGIICUE 

Chalchiuitlicue ;- is the Woman whose dress is adorned with precious stones. They painted her with 
a spinning-wheel in one hand, and in the other a kind of weaver’s comb, which is a wooden instru- 
ment with which the Indians of that country weave : intending thereby to show that, of the sons which 
women bring forth, some are slaves, some are merchants, some die in war, others are rich, and others 
poor. And to show that finally all perish, they paint a stream carrying them away. She presided 
over these thirteen signs; and when the year commenced on the sign of One Cane } they cele- 
brated a great festival in Chululan to Quetzalcoatle, for they say that he was their first Papa or priest. 

1. Chalchiuitlicue. 

* Guegue is frequently written for huehue. 

+ She was also named Tutzin and Huixtutzin, and was invoked by the Mexicans at a kind of baptismal ceremony, which took 
place four days after the birth of infants. Vide Clavigero’s History of Mewico, vol. i. page 315. 

{ The Mexican year always commenced on the day of Ce Cipactli; so that the beginning of the year here alluded to, can only 
refer to one of the four signs which the Mexicans employed in the computation of their cycles of years and ages. It is possible 
that the people of Cholula might have beeun their year on the day of Ce Acatl or One Cane, but then their year would always 
have commenced on that same day.. The exact period of fifty-two years intervenes in the Mexican calendar between any one 
year and the arrival of another bearing the same sign; so that the festival of Quecalcoatle, which was celebrated every fifty-two 
years in Cholula, might have fallen on the sign of One Cane. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 201 

PLATE XXII.* 

This figure signifies that Quetzalcoatle was the first imventor of sacrifices of human blood, 
amongst the various other things which they offered to the gods; and this was the manner in which 
they pierced their tongues, that blood might flow from thence--, and their ears and penis ; till at last, 
as we shall presently mention, the custom of human sacrifices was introduced, when they tore out 
the hearts of the victims, to present them to the face of the idol which they considered the image of 

their wretched god. 

PLATE XXIII. 

TEPEYOLOTLI. 

They considered Tepeyolotli the lord of these thirteen signs, in which they celebrated his festival ; 
during the four last of which they fasted, out of reverence, on account of the earth’s having remained 

' 

* Netzahualpilli, the celebrated king of Tezcuco, Montezuma’s contemporary, wished to abolish human sacrifices; but the people 
insisted on their continuance, and the humane intentions of the king were frustrated. Netzahualcoyotl, the father of that monarch and 
no less famous than his son for wisdom and prudence, was also desirous of doing away with those cruel rites; but the people refused to 
give their consent, xiveiv tx dxivyre, to introduce innovations into religion, or to depart from the established usages of their ancestors. 
We all know from experience, where reason only is concerned, how great is the force of habit and of education ; but where the passions 
are in question, where maternal affection is called upon to make severe sacrifices,—there it might be expected that prejudice would be 
unable to maintain its ground. But this was not the case with the Mexicans; for the Mexican mothers who, as Torquemada observes, 
were those “de las que mas aman y quieren a sus hijos de todas las del mundo,” who of all mothers most affectionately loved their 
children, voluntarily offered those children to be sacrificed on the altars of their gods, in the full belief that by dying in their honour 
eternal happiness would be their certain lot, and that the innocence of the victims would render them more grateful. The strange 
notion which the Mexicans entertained, that all who were sacrificed, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, went to heaven ; at the same 
time that it diminished the cruelty of their custom of sacrificing prisoners taken in war, explains the motive that induced many 
illustrious persons to acts of self-devotioa, by dying of their own accord by the hand of the Topilcin, requesting that their hearts might 
be taken from their breasts still living, and presented to their gods as a proof of their pious zeal, and an acceptable offering. History 
records that Chimalpopoca, the third king of Mexico, considered it cruel envy in the king of Azcaputzalco, that he was prevented 
from fulfilling his intention of offering up himself as a sacrifice on some solemn festival, but was on the contrary detained a prisoner. 
The office of Topiltzin, or religious executioner, belonged exclusively to two high priests, named Teoteuctli (which title signifies divine 
Lord) and Hueiteopixqui, the great high priest, who, as Clavigero observes, were always persons distinguished for their birth, their 
probity, and their great knowledge of every thing connected with the ceremonies of their religion. With respect to the custom which 
prevailed amongst the Mexicans of sacrificing their children, Torquemada says: ‘ Dos cosas son aqui mucho de notar, la una que los 
padres de estos nifios los vendiesen, y diesen voluntariamente para que muriesen; la segunda, es que esta venta sea hecha al segundo 
dia de este mes, en el qual nosotros los Christianos celebramos fiesta de la Presentacion de la Virgen sin mancilla, en el templo de 
Jerusalem, levando a su nifio benditisimo Hijo de Dios, en sus bragos, cuia vida fue vendida por la culpa de la primera madre 
del mundo, y lo lleva a presentar y hacer ofrenda de el, como manifestando a Dios aquel sacrificio que despues avia de ser exe- 
cutado en el arbol de la cruz.”—Monarquia Indiana, vol. ii. p. 251. 

“ Two things are here very remarkable: the first is, that the parents of the children should have sold them, and have given them 
voluntarily for sacrifice; the second, that the sale itself should have taken place on the second day of this month (February) at the very 
time that we, who are Christians, celebrate the festival of the Presentation of the Virgin without spot, in the temple of Jerusalem, 
holding in her arms her most blessed child, the Son of God, whose life was sold for the sin of the first woman who existed in the world, 
carrying him to present and make an offering of him, manifesting as it were to God, the sacrifice which was afterwards to be 
accomplished on the tree of the cross.’—Wee shall refrain from noticing many other extraordinary coincidencies which might here be 
pointed out. 

+ Gomara says that the Mexicans inflicted a portion of these austerities on themselves, as a remedy against the sin of lying and 
of listening to lies. It is singular that the Mexicans should have considered lying to be as great a sin as they believed tempe- 

rance to be a virtue. 

(35) 

202 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

after the deluge. But as its condition was disordered and filthy, they did not consider the sacrifices 
of these signs as good or clean, but on the contrary as unclean; and they applied to them an 
appellation which in common phraseology we might explain by the term of “sacrifices of filth.” 
These last four signs in which they fasted, were likewise out of reverence and in honour of Suguiquezal 
the wife of Tonacatecotl, whose name signifies the Lifting or Raising up of Roses, for they say that 
that goddess caused the earth to flourish*. This proper name might be written Tesciulutli, which is 
the Heart of the Mountain, which means that echo or reverberation of the voice which resounds in a 
mountain. 

1. Tepeiolotli, which is the same as the echo}. 

PLATE XXIV. 

They say that this representation of a head signifies the commencement of sin, which began with 
time, and that such is the termination of its commencement which is allotted to sin *. 
1. Tlatzolteutl. 

PLATE XXvV. 
NAOLIN. 

Naolin they say is the Sun in its tremulent action and motions, to which they attribute the pro- 
duction of all ordinary things§. When this figure entered in the sign of One Skull, they esteemed 
that sign as very unlucky; and they believed that whoever was born on it would be a sorcerer |, and 
devoted to the study of a certain sort of magic in great repute amongst them, whereby they trans- 
formed themselves into the figures of various animals. This figure presided over these thirteen signs, 
and they believed that whoever was born on any one of them, would be a person of ereat consideration. 

1. Naolin, that is to say, the tremulous action and motions of the Sun caused by the reflection of 
its rays. 

* Suchiquecal was the mother of Quecalcoatle ; and as the Mexicans dated the commencement of a new age from his birth, she 
might have been said to have been the cause of the Age of Roses (Iztapal Nanazcaya) which followed. 

+ Tepeiolotli signifies the Heart of the Mountain, from which the echo was supposed to proceed ; it is synonymous with 
Tesciulutli, since tepetl is the generic name and fescatl was the particular name of a mountain; and yolofle, a heart, though 
differently spelt, enters into the composition of each proper name. ~ 

{ The head which is represented is that of the goddess Tlatzolteutl, the Mexican Venus ; it is without either body or eyes, 
which perhaps may be emblematical of the blindness of lust, and the punishment which was awarded by the Mexican laws to 
adultery. 

§ The Mexicans attributed all unusual productions to Xolotle, who was the god of twins. 

|| The following passage is taken from Moses Maimonides’s treatise concerning idolatry, which is annexed to the fifth volume 
of Gerard Vossius’s Works: ‘ Similiter est, qui cranio mortui arrepto illud suffitu imbuat et incantet’ donee preeuntem audiat 
vocem, que exeat maxillis, et respondeatur ei. Hujusmodi omnia sunt Pythonica, quique aliquid eorum facit lapidetur.” How 
many traces of Jewish notions and superstitions are discovered in the New World! The Talmudical and other writings of the 
Jews would serve as a good commentary to the Mexican and Peruvian mythology!. Traces of divination by means of the 

crooked staff, and of the “‘ suffitus ex ore avis cui nomen Jaduah,” seem likewise discoverable in the Mexican paintings. 
5) > ‘ 2 

' In a subsequent note will be found some account of a proposal by the Abbé Chiarini, professor at Warsaw, to publish a 
translation of the entire Talmud in French. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 203 

PLATE XXVI. 
MEZTLI. 

They believed that the Moon presided over human generation*, and accordingly they always put 
it by the side of the sun. They placed on its head a sea snail, to denote that in the same way as this 
marine animal creeps from its integument or shell, so man comes from his mother’s womb. 

1. Meztli, or the Moon. 

PLATE XXVILI. 
NAHUIHEHECATLI. 

Nahuihehecatli they believed to be the god of the four winds ; his name likewise bears this signi- 
fication. ‘The merchants celebrated a great festival in his honour; but when he entered in the fifth 
sign they neither danced or ventured to leave their houses, for they believed that any illness which 
might befall them on that sign would be of so dangerous a nature that none would recover from:it ; 
and therefore, although they chanced to be on a journey, they shut themselves up in the house en 
that day. This deity presided over these thirteen signs. 

1. Nauihehecatili. 

PLATE XXVIII. 
TLALO QUE. 

I cannot assign a different etymology for the name of Tlaloque, but can only say, that as the com- 
panion of the four winds or four seasons of the year, it signifies fine weather; and accordingly, 
although the serpent is an unlucky sign, when in this month Tlaloque was in the sign of Seven 
Serpents, they considered it fortunate for every thing, but especially for marriages. 

1. Tlaloque. 

PLATE XXIX. 

MAYAGUIL. 

They feign that Mayaguil was a woman with four hundred breasts, and that the gods, on account 
of her fruitfulness, changed her into the Maguei, which is the vine of that country, from which they 
make wine. She presided over these thirteen signs ; but whoever chanced to be born on the first 
sign of the Herb, it proved unlucky to him; for they say that it was applied to the Tlamatzatzguex, 
who were a race of demons dwelling amongst them, who according to their account wandered through 
the air, from whom the ministers of their temples took their denomination. When this sign arrived, 
parents enjoined their children not to leave the house, lest any misfortune or unlucky accident should 
befall them. They believed that those who were born in Two Canes, which is the second sign, would 
be long-lived, for they say that that sign was applied to Heaven. They manufacture so many things 
from this plant called the Maguei, and it is so very useful in that country, that the Devil took occasion 
to induce them to believe that it was a god, and to worship and offer sacrifices to it. 

1. Mayaguil. | 

* Isis, or the moon, was invoked by the Egyptian women in child-birth. 

204. EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

PLATE XXX. 

TZINTEOTL. 

The Holy Scripture well observes that “ wine changes the heart,” since it caused these people to 
believe that from this woman (Mayaguil) Cinteotl sprung, whose name signifies the origin of the 
gods; giving us to understand, that from the vine which bears the grape the gods derived their origin. 
It properly signifies abundance, satiety, or the intoxication caused by wine. 

1. Tzinteotl. 

PLATE XXXI. 

TLAVIZCALPANTECUTLI. 

Tilavizcalpantecutli was the god of morning or of the light, when the sign of the morning twilight 
or the crepusculum arrives, which they say was created before the sun. Here it is apparent how 
allusion is made to the Scriptures ; for our holy doctors say that light was created on the first day, 
and that it was distinct and separate from the sun. This deity presided over these thirteen signs ; 
they believed that those who became lame or suffered in any limb, although but Soe in this first 
sign of the Serpent would lose that limb. 

I cannot omit to remark, that one of the arguments which persuades me to believe that this nation 
descends from the Hebrews, is to see what knowledge they have of the Book of Genesis ; for although 
the Devil has succeeded in mixing up so many errors, his lies are still in such a course of conformity 
with Catholic truth, that there is reason to believe that they have had acquaintance with this book. 
Since this, and the other four books which follow, which are the Pentateuch*, were written by Moses, 
and were only found amongst the Hebrew people, there are very strong grounds for supposing that this 
nation proceeds from them :—the manner in which they came to this country is unknown. Further 
proofs of this fact may be found in their frequent sacrifices and ceremonies: one amongst others 
was that which took place on one of the following signs of this month, called Seven Apes. -'The 
second sign was much celebrated amongst them, on account of its being applied to nativities ; and 
they celebrated a very great festival on it, which touches and alludes to the ceremonies of the old law: 
on which occasion certain old men attended in the temples like priests, whose business it was, 
performing some ceremonies, to baptize children. They took some Picotle +; and having a large 
vessel of water near them, they made the leaves of the Picotle into a bunch, and dipped it into the 
water, with which they sprinkled the child; and after fumigating it with incense they gave it a name, 
taken from the sign on which it was born; and they put into its hand a shield and an arrow, if it was 

* On reading this passage we are very naturally disposed to inquire what was the Teoamoxtli?—the name of the divine book 
which contained the history, mythology, calendar, and laws of the Tultecas. This name appears to be compounded of feo 
divine, ametl paper or a book, (which is itself a word compounded of atl water and metl the maguey plant, indicative of the 
process by which paper was manufactured in that country,) and moxtli: moxtli is the same as mostli, for in the Mexican language 
zand w frequently supply the place of s; tH is a syllable devoid of meaning, but common as a termination to Mexican proper 
names, as in Acamapichtli, the name of the first king of Mexico; Moxtli then would appear to be Moses; and the interpretation 
of the entire word teoamoxtli, to be, the divine book of Moses, the Pentateuch. — It is necessary further to observe, that in the | 
Mexican language, in compounding words terminating in ¢/ with other words, an elision of those two final letters frequently 

takes place, as in the word acalli, which signifies a boat, which is compounded of atl water, and calli a house. 
++ Picotle was the herb named Tobacco. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 205 

a boy, which is what the figure of Xiuatlatl denotes, who here represents the god of war: they also 
uttered over the child certain prayers in the manner of deprecations, that he might become a brave, 
intrepid, and courageous man. ‘The offering which his parents carried to the temple the elder priests 
took and divided with the other children who were in the temple, who ran with it through the whole 
city. They say that this offering resembled the purification of the mother and her son mentioned in 
Leviticus. This ceremony took place four signs after the birth of the child, if the sign was fortunate ; 
for if this was not the case, or if any other unlucky sign ruled in this sign, they waited till it had 
passed by, and performed the ceremony on the next sign. At the time in which this offering or 
purification was made, one of the old men held the child in his arms; whence it is plain, that either 
these people descend from the Hebrews, or that the Devil gave them these rites and ceremonies, to 
imitate those with which Gop was honoured by his people. Certain however it is, that greater would 
have been the triumph of the accursed demon, if he had selected out of the same people a chosen 
people to sacrifice to him.—This is a short digression from our narration for which the occasion was 
furnished by this figure, respecting which nothing more remains to be observed. 
1. Tlauizcalpantecutli. 

AU OXOxeXc: 
‘1. Xiuatlatl. 

PLATE XXXITI. 
TONATIUH. 

They paint in this manner the substance of the Sun, after having before painted its motions. A 
figure is represented with the earth beneath its feet, which it illuminates with this image of its rays. 
It was Tonatiuh, as they affirm, who conducted to heaven with acclamations the souls of those alone 
who died in war; and on this account they paint him with these arms in his hands. He sits asa 
conqueror exactly opposite to the other who is near him, who is the god of hell. They alledge that 
the cause of winter being so disagreeable is the absence of the Sun, and that summer is so delightful 
on account of its presence; and that the return of the Sun from our zenith is nothing more than the 
approach of their god to confer his favours on them. He presided over these thirteen signs. They 
‘believed that those who were born on the first sign of the Flint would be expert huntsmen and very 
illustrious persons, and that he who was born on the fifth sign of Air would be an excellent jester. 

1. Tonatiuh, 2. A certain sort of arms, as abow. 3. Arrows. 

PLATE XXXIV. 
MIQUITLANTECOTLL 

Miquitlantecotli signifies The great lord of the dead below in hell, who alone after Tonacatecotle 
was painted with a crown, which kind of crown was used in war even after-the arrival of the 
Christians in those countries, and was seen in the war of Coatlan, as the person who copied these 
paintings relates, who was a brother of the Order of Saint Dominic, named: Prrnr pz ios Rios. 

(Se) ; 

206 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

They painted this demon near the sun: for in the same way as they believed that the one conducted 
souls to heaven, so they supposed that the other carried them to hell. He is here represented with 
- his hands open and stretched towards the sun, to seize on any soul which might escape from him *. 
1. Miquitlantecotli. , 

PLATE XXXV. 
IP BA A 18, © AN IU YL) 1B, 

Patecatle, who was the husband of Mayaguil, the woman with four hundred breasts, who was 
metamorphosed into the maguei plant or vine, was properly the root which they put into the water 
or wine which distils from the maguei in order to make it ferment: and the unhappy man to whose 
industry the invention of the art of making wine by causing fermentation by means of this root was 
due, was afterwards worshipped as a god, and became the lord of these thirteen signs ; all of which 
they considered fortunate, because the god of wine ruled over them. 

1. Patecatle. 

PLATE XXXVI. 
THE BEAGLE AND TIGER. 

‘These figures represent their sons, on whom they conferred these insignia of the Eagle and Tiger, 

which are the fiercest of all animals and birds, because drunken persons possess a certain degree of 
ferocity and courage: and accordingly, whoever received these insignia for his arms, it was a. sign 
that he was el valiant in war, and a captain and chief of great reputation. 

1. Eagle. 2. 'Tiger. 

PLATE XXXVI. 
YZTLACOLIUH QUI. 

Yztlacoliuhqui signifies The lord of sin or of blindness, and for this reason they paint him with his 
eyes bandaged. ‘They say that he committed sin-in a place of the highest enjoyment and delight, and 
that he remained naked ; on which account his first sign was a lizard, which is an animal of the 
ground, naked and miserable. Hence it is apparent that the same Devil who tempted our first father 
Apam with the Woman, and the woman Eve with the Serpent, wished to counterfeit our first father, 
who was the origin of our blindness and misery. He presided over these thirteen signs, which were 
all unlucky. They said likewise that if false evidence should be adduced ‘on any one of these signs, 
it would be impossible to make the truth manifest. They put to death those who were taken in 
adultery before his image, if the parties were married; as this not being the case, it was lawful for 
them to keep as many women or concubines as they pleased. Yaztlacoliuhqui is a star in heaven 
which as they pretend proceeds in a reverse course ; they considered it a most portentous sign, both 
as connected with nativities and with war. This star is situated at the south. 

1. Yztlacoliuhqui. 

* The following very curious passage occurs in Saint Jude: “ Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the Devil he disputed 
about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee!” _ Jude’s Epist. ver. 9. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 207 

PLATE XXXVIII. 

This painting explains what we have mentioned above,—that all those who committed adultery were 
stoned. The women were first strangled ; they were afterwards thrown into some public place before 
the image of this god or demon, where they stoned their naked bodies *. 

PLATE XXXIX. 

YXCUINA. 

They say that Yxcuina, who was the goddess of Shame, protected adulterers. She was the goddess 
of salt, of dirt, and of immodesty: they painted her with two faces, or with two different colours 
on the face. She was the wife of Miquitlantecotli, the god of hell: she was also the goddess of 
‘prostitutes ; and she presided over these thirteen signs, which were all unlucky, and accordingly they 
believed that those who were born in these signs would be rogues or prostitutes. 

1. Yxcuina. 

PLATE XL. 
FONACACIGUA. 

Tonacacigua.was the wife of Tonacatecotle : for, as we have observed above, although their gods 
were not as they affirm united together for matrimonial purposes, still they assigned to each of them 
a goddess as a companion: they called her by another name Suchiquetzal and Chicomecoual, 
which means Seven Serpents, because they say that she was the cause of sterility, famine, and the 
miseries of this life. 

1. Chalchiuitlicue, indifferent. 2. Tlazolteotl, bad. 3. Tepeyolotl, good. 4. Tlaloc, indifferent. 
5. Xyuhteoctli, good. 6. Ytztli, bad. 7. Piltzinteoctli, good. 8. Tzinteotl, indifferent. 9. Tona- 
cacigua, the supreme wife of the god of heaven. 

PLATE XLI. 
QUECALCOATLE}#. 

_ They declare that their supreme deity, or, more properly speaking, demon Tonacatecotle, whom we 
have just mentioned, who by another name*was called Citinatonali, when it appeared good to him, 

breathed and begot Quetzalcoatle, not by connection with a woman, but by his breath alone, as we 

* Probably that the letter of the law might be fulfilled. 
+ The Jews considered the brazen serpent which Moses lifted up in the wilderness as a famous type of the coming of their future 
Messiah; and since the Mexicans were so well acquainted with the early history of the Pentateuch, and with the signs and wonders 

208 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

have observed above, when he sent his ambassador as they say to the virgin of Tula. They believed 

him to be the god of the air, and he was the first to whom they built temples and churches, which 

they formed perfectly round, without any angles. They say that it was he who effected the 

reformation of the world by penance, as we have already said ; since as, according to their account, 

his father had created the world, and men had given themselves up to vice, on which account it had 
been so frequently destroyed, Citinatonali sent his son into the world to reform it. We certainly 
must deplore the blindness of these miserable people, on whom Saint Paul says the wrath of Gop has 
to be revealed, inasmuch as his eternal truth was so long kept back by the injustice of attributing 
to this demon that which belonged to Him; for He being the sole Creator of the universe, and He 
who made the division of the waters, which these poor people just now attributed to the Devil, when 
it appeared good to Him, dispatched the heavenly ambassador to announce to the Virgin that she 
should be the Mother of his Eternal Word; who, when He found the world corrupt, reformed it by 
doing penance and by dying upon the cross for our sins ; and not the wretched Quetzalcoatle, to 
whom these miserable people attributed this work. They assigned to him the dominion over the 
other thirteen signs, which are here represented, in the same manner as they had assigned the pre- 
ceding thirteen to his father. They celebrated a great festival on the arrival of his sign, as we shall 
see in the sign of Four Earthquakes, which is the fourth in order here, because they feared that the 
world would be destroyed in that sign, as he had foretold to them when he disappeared in the Red 
Sea; which event occurred on the same sign. As they considered him their advocate, they celebrated 
a solemn festival, and fasted during four signs. 
1. Quecalcoatle. 

which Moses performed in Egypt by lifting up his rod, which became a serpent, it is probable that they were not ignorant of the history 
of the brazen serpent, and that Quecalcoatle (which proper name signifies the precious feathered serpent) was so named after the 
memorable prodigy of the serpent in the wilderness, the feathers perhaps alluding to the rabbinical tradition, that the fiery serpents 
which bit the children of Israel, and which God sent suddenly against them, were of a winged species. Representations of the lifting 
up of serpents frequently occur in Mexican paintings : and the plagues which Moses called down upon the Egyptians by lifting up his 
rod, which became a serpent, are evidently referréd to in the eleventh and twelfth pages of the Borgian Manuscript. An allusion to the 
passage of the Red Sea, the waters of which rolled back to allow the children of Israel to pass, and “ were a wall unto them on their 
right hand and on their left,” as it is said in the twenty-second verse of the fourteenth chapter of Exodus, seems also to be contained in 
the seventy-first page of the Lesser Vatican MS.; and the destruction of Pharaoh and his host, and the thanksgiving of Moses, may 
perhaps be signified by the figure on the left, in the same page, of a man falling into a pit or gulf, and by the hand on the right 
stretched out to receive an offering. The Mexican sign of Atl, or water, occupies the centre of the page, in order perhaps to show that 
the festival commemorative of the event which it records occurred on that signa. It may be observed, with respect to the construction 
which the Jews put on certain passages of Scripture, declaring them to be types of the Messiah, that Christians have too blindly fol- 
lowed the absurd reveries of their rabbis, even in understanding in a metaphorical sense what they interpret literally. Thus the Song 
of Solomon, which breathes the soul of the voluptuous monarch who composed it, was considered by the Jews to refer throughout to 
the Messiah, and to his future nuptials when he should appear in the character of a potent king of the Jews: and this is the meaning 
which they assign to the ninth verse of the forty-fifth Psalm, ‘ Kings’ daughters were among thy honourable women; upon thy right 
hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.” They even believed that the Messiah would have children; so explaining a passage in 
the tenth verse of the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah: “He shall see his seed ; he shall prolong his days; and the pleasure of the Lord 
shall prosper in his hand.” It is unnecessary to remark that Christians believe equally that the Song of Solomon refers to the nuptials 
of the Messiah; but these nuptials they explain to be merely allegorical and with the church, and Solomon’s expressions of love to be 
symbolical of the Church’s love unto Christ. The early Christians, notwithstanding their hatred of the Jews, knew that they were much 
better acquainted with the books of the Old Testament than themselves ; and since types had been long a favourite study and cultivated 
science amongst the latter, though held in no esteem by other nations, he generally followed them as their guide, in eeranning the 
precise texts of Scripture which they might consider to be typical and figurative of the Messiah. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 209 

PLATE XLII. 

i EyZ, CA ey OFC ZAG 

They paint Tezcatlipoca with the feet of a man and of a cock, as they say his name bears allusion 
to this circumstance. He is clothed with a fowl, which seems to cry in laughing accents; and when it 
crows OA, OA, OA, they say that it deceived the first woman who committed sin*; and accordingly 
they paint him near the goddess of pollution, to signify that in the same way as Satan is in expectation 
of all sinners, so pollution is the cause of them. 

1. Tezcatlipoca. 

* The Jews have a great many superstitious notions respecting the cock, which they formerly used to offer as a sacrifice of atonement for 
their sins. The reason of this absurd custom was derived from the Hebrew word Gebher, which signifies a man, and in the Talmud 
a cock. That Gebher should suffer for their transgressions they could not doubt, because the Talmud declared it: but as it appeared to 
some of their Rabbis unreasonable to suppose that the anger of God could be appeased by a human sacrifice, they took this word in its 
other signification of a cock, and accordingly made expiation for their sins by the blood of that bird. If the ingenuity of the Rabbis had 
ever suggested to them the expedient of taking the word Gebher in its double sensé, and of forming an imaginary being of both its 
significations, the figure of a man with the head of a cock, which sometimes occurs in Mexican paintings, might allude to this Jewish 
notion of a sacrifice of atonement. 

The Mexican mythology is so totally unlike the Egyptian, that although this figure bears some resemblance to the hawk-headed 
deity of the Egyptians, nothing can be inferred from this accidental analogy. Antonius Margarita, in his book of the Jewish Faith, 
writes, that some assert from tradition that an ape is to be used in this oblation, as being most like a man. It is singular that the figure of 
an ape on a cross should occur in the eleventh page of the Mexican painting preserved in the Bodleian Library, which forms a roll. 
This figure rests, or is supported, on a pot of earthenware, in the centre of which is represented a footstep, which probably denotes 
descent. ‘The plate which contains this curious combination of figures may receive some elucidation from the following story, taken 
from a book called The Tribe of Judah, written first in Hebrew, afterwards by the Jews themselves translated into German, 
and printed at Cracow in 1644, in which is contained a dispute between a Christian and a Jew, held before Alphonsus king of Por- 
tugal : “ When the Christian had brought many places relating to Christ the true Messias, and amongst the rest those words of the 
twenty-second Psalm, first verse, ‘ My God, my God! why hast thou forsaken me? at last the Jew answered, that the Scripture had 
that property as to bear several expositions, but that that was the truest and best which could be illustrated and confirmed by other 
places of it: but that there were many which would not suffer those words to be interpreted of Christ. Yet first, said he, give me leave 
to tell you what a wise and learned Rabbi some time answered a king of Spain: Yesterday, said he, I was angry with my cock, 
because he disturbed me with his noise, so I struck him with my staffe and drove him into a dark place, where he left crowing : but I did 
beat him every day so long till at last I did break his bones, and then put him into my pot, and covered it. But here happened a 
miracle; for his soul returned into him, and he began to crow again. And this is the sense of the twenty-second Psalm: to which 
also that of the Prophet Jeremiah in the Lamentations is to be referred, I am the man that hath seen affliction ; that is, the cock, which 

‘in the Talmudical dialect is Gebher : by the rod of thine anger; that is, the staffe with which he did strike the cock. He hath led me 
and brought me, that is, he did drive me away, into darknesse, but not into light, that is, into the dark closet: he turneth his hand 
against me; this relates to his beating him in the closet and putting him into the pot. My flesh and my skin he hath made old; he 
hath pulled it off; he hath broken my bones ; he hath cut me in pieces; he hath builded against me ; he hath put me in the pot; he hath 
set me in dark places, in the covered pot. Also, when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my. prayer; this shows, said he, that he crowed 
after he was dead. Hence it is plain what a mockery the Jews make of the Scripture, and that they are really possest with that mad- 
nesse, blindnesse, and dulnesse of heart, with which God did by Moses threaten them.” Who was the author of The Tribe of Judah 
from which the above story was taken is uncertain, or whether he was the same person as the writer of The View of the Jewish Religion 
styles that wicked and naughty Rabbi Lipmaunus, who composed a cursed and filthy book, which he wrote on the history of the Four 
Evangelists, under the title of The Triumph or Victory, in the year of Christ 1459. 

(3:H ) 

210 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

PLATE XLII. 

OU VoL it 12 15, 10 ©) M18; Ce 

+ 

Thipetotec is he whom we have mentioned above as performing penance, like another Quetzal- 
coatle, on the mountain of thorns. They named him The Mournful Combatant: they celebrated 
a great festival in his honour, which they called Tlaxipehualiztli. He was one of the gods of the 
Tzapotecas. ‘They dressed themselves on his festival in human skins taken from those whom they 
had slain in war; because they say that he was the first who clothed himself in this manner. They 
fasted on the three first signs of his festival, during which they only ate at noon. The priests, on 
the signs in which they celebrated the fast, proceeded begging alms through the city, and ate nothing 
more than that which they received, whether it was little or much. On every sign dedicated to 
fasting the men separated themselves from their wives. On this sign of Four Canes they conferred 
dignities on the princes of the people ; but they esteemed the three preceding signs, which are One 
Cane, 'T'wo Apes, and Three Herbs, as unlucky omens. The remainder of the thirteen signs were 
all good. 7 

1. Thipetotec. 

PLATE XLIV. 
QUETZALCOATLE, 

This is the figure of Quecalcoatle, the companion of Totec. They paint him in this manner to 
signify that this was a festival of great fear, which is the reason why they paint this serpent in the 
act of devouring a man alive. 

1. Quetzalcoatle. 

PLATE XLV. 

MOO IP AIP A i, © WW Th, 

Yxpapalotl signifies A knife of butterflies *. He was one of those gods who, as they affirm, were 
expelled from heaven; and on this account they paint him surrounded with knives, and wings of 
butterflies. They represent him with the feet of an eagle; because they say that he occasionally 
appears to them, and that they only see the feet of an eagle. They further add,. that being in a 
garden of great delight he pulled some roses, but that suddenly the tree broke, and blood streamed 
from it; and that in consequence of this they were deprived of that place of enjoyment, and were 
cast into this world, because Tonacateutli and his wife became incensed; and accordingly they came 
some of them to the earth, and others went to hell. He presided over these thirteen signs; the 
first of which, the House, they considered unfortunate, because they said that demons came through 

* The stone knives or flints might, from their weight, have been emblematical of his fall; and the wings of the butterflies, of the feeble 
resistance which Yxpapalotl could oppose to the will of Tonacateutli. The Mexican paintings are full of enigmatical meanings. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 2g 

the air* on that sign, in the figure of women such as we designate witches, who usually went to 
the highways where they met in the form of a cross, and to solitary places; and accordingly, that 
when any bad woman wished to absolve herself of her sins and to do penance, she went alone by 
night to these places, and took off her garments, and sacrificed there with her tongue, and left the 
clothes which she had carried, and returned home naked, as a sign of the confession of her sins. 
He was called before he sinned Xomunco, and afterwards Yxpapalotl, which signifies A knife of 
razors. 

1. Yxpapalotl. 
PLATE XLVI. 
SU UI GAS WW A IN, 

This is the rose-tree called Xuitlicastan. As they intended to show that this was a feast rather of 
fear than of love, they painted this tree distilling blood. The gods who were cast from that place 

were those alone, as they declare, who inspired them with fear. 

PLATE XLVII. 

XOLOTLE, 

They believed Xolotle to be the god of monstrous productions and of twins, which are such things 
as grow double. He was one of the seven who remained after the deluge; and he presided over 
these thirteen signs, which they usually considered unlucky : but they said that he who was born on 
the seventh sign of Air would be rich, but that those who were born on the other signs would be 
spies and impostors. 

1. Xolotle. 

* In the 323rd page of a little work entitled 4 View of the Jewish Religion, printed in London in the year 1656, the following passage 
occurs: “ They write farther, that certain peculiar angels fly through the air, which are set over the world and over men, and that come 
down upon this inferiour world; and so by the impure and corrupt aire that breaketh out of the earth, contract some filthinesse; and 
that these must be cleansed in a fiery torrent called Dinor, which is spoken of by Daniel, cap. vil.; and that they must consume all the 
filth and uncleannesse they have gathered in this fire, before they dare attempt to praise God. If therefore the angels are bound to wash 
and purge themselves, by how the greater reason are men bound to do it.” We are not informed whether the Indians attached’ as 
much merit to these modes of purification as the Jews ; but perhaps Gomara’s acquaintance with the Jewish superstitions made him add 
the concluding paragraph to that chapter in his History of the Indies in which he treats of the customs of Nicaragua. The Jews, it 
cannot be doubted, introduced many inventions amongst the Indians, It may be observed, with respect to aérial spirits or demons, that 
those mentioned in the New Testament as having entered into the swine which ran violently down a steep place into the sea, resembled, 
both in name and the control which they exercised over men and animals in depriving them of reason, the Mexican Centzontotochtin,— 
since this proper name is compounded of Centzontli, four hundred or a legion, and Tochtli, a rabbit, of which Totochtin is the plural ; 
in allusion to the effects of drunkenness over which this animal or sign presided, and which these spirits caused. The Italian interpreter, 
in describing the Mexican goddess Maiaguil, takes occasion to observe that the Mexican priests were named Tlamatzatzquex, after these 
aérial spirits: but Torquemada affirms that that name simply signifies, a doer of penance ; and that the priests dedicated to Quecalcoatle 
were more particularly so designated. 

212 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

PLATE XLVIII. 
TLACLITONATIO. 

The signification of this name is, Fiat lux Let there be light, and darkness, which we call the 
crepusculum: and accordingly they represent the rotundity * of the earth by the symbol of a man, 
with the sun over his shoulders and darkness and death beneath his feet ; denoting that when the 
sun sets, it goes to warm and give light to the dead. | 

1. Tlaclitonatio, or light. 2. The Sun. 3. The Earth. 4. Night, or Darkness. 

PA AWEY SX Xe 

CHALCHIUHTOTTOLI+, WHO IS THE SAME AS TEZCATLIPOCA. 

This picture represents 'T'ezcatlipoca, the meaning of whose name is the Mirror which casts forth 
smoke. ‘They paint him in this manner ; but whenever the Devil appears to them, they only see the 
feet of an eagle or of a cock}. He presided over these thirteen signs. They believed that he who 
was born on the sign of Five Canes would be a man of business; but that those who were born 
on Seven Eagles would be afflicted with pains in the heart, which would be incurable. This sign was 
applied to the moon §, and women in certain indispositions sacrificed on this sign to it. 

1. Chalchiuhtottoli, the same as Tezcatlipoca. 

PLATE L. 

This painting represents the sacrifice which they performed to the Devil with human blood; and 
the bag of incense, and the other things requisite for the sacrifice. 

* By the rotundity of the earth may be meant the creation, since a round figure requires a perfection of parts. 

+ The bird of the precious stone of penance, which might sometimes have been painted with the feet of a man and of a cock. ; 

+ A curious analogy is here found between the superstitious notions of the Indians and those of the European populace in the middle 
ages. 
§ See a discourse in the Talmud, between God and the Moon, which being made less, some of the Jewish Rabbis impiously pretend 
that God desired that a propitiatory oblation should be made for himself, for having diminished the size of the moon. Fortunate would it _ 
have been for the human race if the Jews had only carried their notions of propitiation and sacrifices of atonement to the length of 
absurdity: but never should it be forgotten, that in Mexico and Peru children were immolated to appease the wrath of an inexorable 
divinity ; and that the blood-stained Ingas actually believed in the efficacy of that vicarial sacrifice. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 213 

PLATE LI. 
CANTICO. 

Cantico they say was the first who offered sacrifice after having eaten a fried fish; and that in 
consequence of the presumption of offering sacrifice without having fasted, Tonacateutli became 
incensed, and pronounced a curse against him, that he should be changed into a dog, which is an 
animal of a very voracious nature ; and accordingly they named him Nine Dogs. He presided over 
these thirteen signs. They said that he who was born on the first sign of Air would be healthy by 
his nativity; but that if he grew ill of pains in the side or cancer, that his disease would be 
incurable. He who was born on the ninth sign they believed would be unfortunate, because that 
sign was dedicated to sorcerers and necromancers, who transformed themselves into the shapes of 
various animals. 

1. Cantico. 

PLATE LII. 

QUETZALCOATL. 

Opposite to Cantico they placed Quetzalcoatl, in a golden house, arrayed in precious gems, and 
seated as a pontiff*, with a bag of incense in his hand; intending to show that as the other + had 
been punished for his gluttony, so he was honoured for his abstinence and sacrifices. 

PLATE LIII. 
SUCHIQUECAL. 

Suchiquecal was the wife of Tzinteutl She was the goddess of pregnant women, and of those 
who knew how to work and weave, for they say that she invented those two occupations. Women 
in a state of pregnancy offered sacrifices to her, in order not to give birth to girls; because they 
believed that those who were born on the first sign of the Eagle would be bad, but that if they bore 
sons on that sign they would be very brave and valiant in war, and would animate others with 
courage to die in battle, which was that which they desired above all other things: since we have 
already said that those alone who died in war went to heaven,—from whence many eagles came and 
changed themselves into the figures of boys. She presided over these thirteen signs; on the seventh 
of which, named the First Day}, they celebrated a special festival. his was a greater festival, 
because they celebrated on this sign the coming of the eagles. | 

1. Suchiquecal. 

* The Mexicans believed that Quecalcoatle united in his own person the character of a king, a priest, and a prophet. 

+ Cantico. 

{ Primo giorno is the name which the sign Cipactli always bears in the Vatican MS. It should be observed, that the name of each 
sign is written under it in this MS., and this is repeated all through the calendar. ‘This repetition of the same names has been here 

(31) 

214 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

PLATE LIV. 

TEZCATLIPOCA. 

‘They paint the Devil Tezcatlipoca opposite to this woman, as if tempting her to sin; intending 
perhaps to signify by this, that all women who chanced to be born on the first sign (the Eagle) 
would be liable to temptation, since they believed that all who were born on that sign would be 
bad. 

1. Tezcatlipoca. 

PLATE LV. 

IZTAPALTOTEC. 

Iztapaltotec properly signifies, a large stone, or the surface of the earth, or the bloody stone of 
the afflicted, or placed within a razor *, which is the same as a sword or fear. They represent in this 
manner this god with his mouth open, “ad deglutiendum homines.” He presided over these thirteen 
signs. They considered it fortunate to be born on the first sign of the Rabbit, and that those who 
were born on that sign would enjoy long life, and that he who was born on Five Herbs would be 
a rich merchant. | 

1. Iztapaltotec. 

PLATE LVI. 

The corresponding figure represents the God of Fire, who purifies the earth and renovates things ; 
and accordingly they place him last of all. They here kept a fast commemorative of the ruin of 
the first of the human race. I have already mentioned the reason why they painted all these figures 
and images here presented to us, which are twenty, each in its peculiar style; which proceeded from 
the necessity which they were under of appearing habited in the same dress as the idol, on every. 
occasion of celebrating with dances and other festivals the sign dedicated to it. 

PLATE LVII. 

The eighteen figures which follow are those of the gods of their eighteen months, the names of 
which months are as here stated. Atlcaualo is the same as our February, because the Mexicans 

omitted. The letters 6, c, and 2n, in the squares surrounding the figures of the principal Mexican idols, denote the character of the sign, 
and the fortune of the day over which it presided, whether it would be good, bad, or indifferent; being the initials of bwono,. cattivo, and 

indifferente. 
* Peter de los Rios calls flints formed into knives, razors, from the extreme sharpness of their edge. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. Q15 

commenced their year on the twenty-fourth of February; but amongst the Capotecas and the 
Mixtecas it began on the sixteenth of March. They varied likewise in the twenty signs distinguishing 
the days of the month, although they had the same year of three hundred and sixty-five days, and 
eighteen months, and the same twenty letters or signs appropriated to them*. ‘Tlaloc signifies, 
seasonable weather, or the verdure of the earth ; for the trees generally in this sign, as in the month 
of April, begin to bud: they therefore paint this deity encompassed with green boughs, and seated 
upon the water, for he properly was the god of that element. Tlaloc likewise means the wine of the 
earth : by which metaphor they intended to show, that in the same way as man rises from wine glad 
and contented, so the earth when satiated with rain is glad and refreshed, and produces fruit 
and herbage. They sacrificed boys during these twenty signs to this god, in high places and in 
mountains ; and in order to know whether the year would be favourable +, they took out the entrails 
of some of these sacrificed boys, and put meal of maize and beans into them, and placed them ina 
stone box; and at the expiration of four days they came and removed them, examining the 
meal whether it had become putrid; and if this was the case, it was the sign of a good year; if 
otherwise, of a bad one. 

1, Atlcaualo, which month commenced on the twenty-fourth of February. 

PLATE LVIII. 

The lords who managed the public accounts and the soldiers celebrated a great festival to this 
idol ; on which occasion they clothed themselves in the skins of those whom they had slain in war, to 
which ceremony the name Tlacaxipeualiztli alludes. The person whose office it was to celebrate the 
festival clothed himself in a human skin, and went to the houses of the citizens asking alms in the 
name of Gop, and begging certain round loaves, which were made for this festival, with honey, 

which they called Uologopale, and Ochule, which are ears of maize ; which having been given, the 

* The Mexicans, Tecpanecas, Tlaxcaltecas, and Cholultecas, only varied from each other by beginning their years with different signs 
taken from the same series; but other nations of New Spain used a distinct order of signs in their calendars: their variations in the 
twenty signs distinguishing the days of the month, was the necessary consequence of their beginning the year with different signs. 

+ Acosta says that the Peruvians had a method of divining whether the year would be fruitful, by maize: “Ex chacra seu rure 
optimum et solidissimum Maiis legunt, additisque nonnullis ritibus, in fasciculum Peruadictum, id colligant ; quem cum tribus continuis 
noctibus dispositis excubiis custodiverunt, panno pretioso exquisite et operose texto Maiis tandem excipiunt involvuntque ; et ante Perua 
procidentes adorant, dicuntque id Maiis sui et chacra suorum matrem existere, ex qua Maiis tum progeneretur, tum nutriatur et 
vegetetur. Hoc ipso mense peculiari alio instituto sacrificio, ex Perua sciscitantur, an futuro foecundum futurum sit.’— Historia Indie 
Occidentahs, lib. v. cap. xxviii. pag. 260. The same writer mentions another custom in the same chapter,—that of boring their sons’ 
ears,—in which the Peruvians resembled the Mexicans: “ Hoc mense qui nobis November est, pro pueris istis, quibus postero mense 
aures pertundendz erant necessaria omnia parabantur, et alia queedam similia peragebantur.” This was perhaps some religious memorial. 
The reason for the Jews wearing religious memorials on their faces was, as the Rabbis say, to show that they were not ashamed of their 
Law. Since the Peruvian paintings have been all destroyed, it is impossible to do more than to infer, from the following passage of the 
fourth chapter of the fifth book of Acosta’s Indian History, that the hand of Justice, resembling that which is carved’ on the seal of 
Hugh Capet, as Baron de Humboldt observes, would have been found in the Peruvian paintings, as well as in those of Mexico and 
Yucatan: “ Adoraturi rem quampiam chirothece similem, manibus tenentes, in altum porrigebant.” That the Mexican and Peruvian 
languages possessed some religious terms in common may be inferred from huaca or guaca being a name for a shrine or holy place in both 
idioms. We may further remark, that Raymi and Ramadan, the former a Peruvian and the latter a Turkish name for a festival, are 
somewhat similar to each other. 

216 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

master of the house came out and took some green boughs *, with which he punctured his body ; 
signifying by this act that he cleansed it ; which was a kind of sanctification or purification, the per- 
formance of which gave him great satisfaction: and whatsoever was demanded in the way of alms 
was given, which the other handed to some old men who accompanied him, who carried it to the 
temple, and there divided and ate it. 

This festival commenced on the sixteenth of March, and, including twenty days, terminated on the 
fifth of April. 

1. Tlacaxipeualiztli, which commenced on the sixteenth of March. 

PLATE LIX. 

They celebrated on the fifth of April the festival of the Goddess of Abundance, or of Maize ; 
and on this sign, they adorned, according to their fashion, all the images of the gods, and afterwards 
placed around them meat and drink in great abundance, and danced and celebrated other great 
rejoicings, ornamenting the temples with branches interwoven with flowers and roses. 

1. Tocozintli +, which commenced on the fifth of April. 

PLATE LX. 

In this month they again adorned the temples and images as in the preceding; and at the end of the 
twenty days they sacrificed a boy to the God of Water ¢, and put him in the maize, in order that none 
of the provision of the entire year might be spoiled. They paid also in this month all the first 
fruits to the gods §, offering them at the temples, which served to support the ministers of religion, 
because they say that he was the god who bestowed provision upon them. 

1. Veitozcoztli, which commenced on the twenty-fifth of April. 

* Perhaps the leaves of the aloe, with the thorns of which the Mexicans were accustomed to do penance for their sins. 

+ Boturini says that the symbol of this month was represented in some Mexican paintings by a leg with the head of a bird upon it. 
«* Pintase este symbolo en unos mapas con una pierna de donde ordinariamente se sangraban, y.con una cabecita de paxaro encima de 
ella, porque de el nombre de dicho paxaro se deriba el del mes.” This serves to explain a curious symbol occurring in the 129th page of 
the Vatican MS. which contains a representation of the inundation that occurred in Mexico in the days of Ahuitzotl. 

t Tlaloc was the God of Water. He is represented in the fifty-seventh plate of the Codex Vaticanus as seated upon that element, 
encompassed with green boughs. ‘This deity, unlike the other Mexican gods, is painted with a sort of ghostly visage, which seems to 
involve some hidden mystery. ’ 

§ The chapter in Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy, which he has entitled “ De las Rentas Decimales, y Primiciarias, y de como han 
sido en todo tiempo usadas, y se usaron entre los Indios de esta Nueva Espafia, y de presente,” is exceedingly curious. It would even 
at first appear that tithes were an old-established thing in America before the arrival of the Spaniards. ‘The enormous revenues of the 
temples of Mexico rendered their maintenance a source of great national taxation: but the fact cannot be proved that the Indians 
payed tythes, or that those revenues proceeding from lands were given to the temples in lieu of them; neither, on the other hand, can it 

be disproved. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 2a 

PLATE LXI. 

On the fifteenth of May they celebrated the festival of Toxcatl, and adorned the temples with 
various kinds of roses and flowers, for it usually happens that at this period rain falls in that 
country. They represented him surrounded with many different kinds of flowers and roses of various 
colours : they painted him also holding in one hand a certain weapon which they name Xiuatlatli, and 
in the other a shield and quiver of arrows ; and since a stream of water issues from his foot, and out 
of it a serpent, they signified by this metaphor, that in the same way as they feared him lest he 
should cause droughts, so likewise they feared lest he should send inundations. They attributed to 
him dissensions and wars, and on this account they placed in his hands these insignia. They burned 
incense in this month before the image of 'Texcatlipocatl. 

- 1. Toxcatl, which commenced on the fifteenth of May. 

PLATE LXII. 

They celebrated in this month, which commenced on the fourth of June, the festival of the God of 
Water, whom they called Tlaloc. The name of the festival was Hetzalqualiztli: on which occasion 
they took boiled maize, mixed only with water, and presented it in the temples with certain 
ceremonies, in order that all the people might eat of it; and this they called the festival of Hetzali, 
in which they made some sacrifices of men, and offered them to their miserable god, entreating 
a good year, because at that time the heavy rains began to set in: they accordingly paint him 
surrounded with drops of water, holding in one hand an esculent plant, and in the other some stalks 
of maize, as a symbol of abundance. They also allege that they performed these human sacrifices, 
and celebrated this festival to this god, in recollection of the period when he destroyed the world by 
water. 

1. Hetzalqualiztl commenced on the fourth of June. 2. Tlaloque. 

PLATE LXIII. 

The Mexican lords were those who celebrated this festival, and accordingly on the twenty-fourth of 
June they made sumptuous donations of food and drink to all the people. They dressed themselves 
in this manner for the celebration of the festival, which they termed the lesser, to distinguish it from 
the other, which was general or greater ; which is the following: 

1. Tecuilvitontl, which commenced on the twenty-fourth of June. 

PLATE LXIV. 

This was the greatest festival and the most frequented of all that occurred in the year: it 
commenced on the twenty-fourth of July; and this the name Veitecuilvitl implies. They celebrated 
(BK) 

218 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

in this festival the fast called Atamatl, which means bread and water, when the whole people were 
bound to fast. They attached so much importance to this festival, that the old men say, that after 
the arrival of our Spaniards in the country, when the Indians of Mexico were employed in the 
celebration of it, in their accustomed dresses and dances, our countrymen turning it into jest, they 
planned the massacre of them all, and that that was the cause of the great slaughter which happened 
on that day. 

1. Veitecuilvitl commenced on the twenty-fourth of July. 

PLATE LXV. 

On the third of August they celebrated the festival of the dead, and accordingly placed offerings 
of food and drink upon their tombs, as is the custom in Spain on the second of November. They 
celebrated this festival of the dead during the first four years after their decease; for they believed 
that whilst the period of four years remained incomplete, their abode was in a place of much 
trouble, but that at the expiration of this period they were conducted to another place, where they 
enjoyed a certain degree of repose, but not that which awaited those who died in war, for they 
_ enjoyed the great repose of the celestial gods: they therefore buried the deceased in his clothes 
and shoes, imagining that he would stand in need of them, on account of the hardships of the 
journey ; and if he was a principal person, they also killed a slave on the sign in which he died, that 
he might serve him. 

The Mixtecas, Capotecas, and Mixes, celebrated their funeral rites almost in the manner in which 
we honour the dead. They erected a monument, which they covered with black cloth, and placed 
around it a quantity of food. Since we are here speaking of the dead, it may be right to mention 
their mode of burial. They deposited the body of the deceased in a spacious grave, with his feet 
turned towards the east: after it had decayed, they removed the bones and put them into another 
place, resembling the charnel-houses belonging to churches and the cemeteries in our Spain, which 
building was constructed with much art. These three nations the Mixtecas, Capotecas, and Mixes, 
made use of cemeteries in their chapels; but the Mexicans burned the bones, as did the Ottomies, 
from whom the Mexican nation borrowed that custom. 

1. Miccailhuitl, which commenced on the third of August. 

PLATE LXVI. 

On the twenty-third of August they again celebrated the festival of the dead, which was much 
greater than the preceding, as the name Veymiccailhuitl signifies. This was the great festival of 
the dead, during the three last signs of which month they all fasted in honour of the dead, at the 
expiration of which period they went out, for the purpose of rejoicing, into the plain, as if performing 
a festive ceremony ; and in the intermediate time, whilst the priests were in the temple celebrating 
the festival, the people were all obliged to stand upon the terraces of their houses, looking towards 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 219 

the north*, and offering sacrifices during these three entire nights, repeating their prayers for the 
dead, and exclaiming at short intervals in a very loud tone—Come quickly, for we expect you! 

1. Veymiccailhuitl, which commenced on the twenty-third of August. 

PLATE LXVII, 

They celebrated on the twelfth of September the festival of the goddess Ochpaniztl, which name 
signifies Purification ; and accordingly when this month arrived, they swept and cleansed all their 
houses, streets, and temples. During the four first signs of this month all fasted, and during the 
entire twenty they performed sacrifices, because they considered this goddess the protectress of 
vegetation, and they therefore carried plants, during these signs, to the temples. 

This nation had many fasts; but the greatest, which were on bread and water, were kept by the 
priests ; not however by all at the same time, but three or four fasted first, and afterwards all the rest 
in rotation; and in order that it might be more acceptable, they made a vow before commencing 
the fast that they would complete it. Hence the perverse Lutherans ought to be confounded, who 
scoff at our holy religion, and wish to do away with fasts and penance, seeing that even these poor 
people amidst their blindness knew, by the light of nature, that such works as proceed from. greater 
obligation possess greater merit. 

1. Ochpaniztl, which commenced on the twelfth of September. 

PLATE LXVIII. 

On the second of October floods generally occur in that country; they therefore represented this 
month with the same symbols as that of May; and since it never froze but at this season, they feared 
this month exceedingly, and on this account the natives view with some distrust the festival of the 
glorious Father Sarnwr Frawcts, which falls on the fourth of this month, and hence they celebrated a 
festival during these twenty signs to this god of Fear. 

1. Pachtontl, which commenced on the second of October. 

PLATE LXIX. 

They celebrated on the twenty-second of October the great festival of Reverence or of Humiliation, 
which was dedicated to all the gods, in the same way as we celebrate the festival of All the Saints; 

* The Mexicans believed that hell or Mictlan, the place of the dead, was situated towards the north. Torquemada says, that 
Mictlan signifies in the Mexican language, both Hell and the North. Hell, the place of punishment, which the Mexicans seem to 
have considered distinct from Mictlan, was designated by them Tlalxicco, which name Torquemada says, signifies “en el ombligo de 
la tierra,” “in the centre of the earth,” and which was given to it with great propriety, because, “es cosa averiguada, segun doctrina 
Catolica, que el infierno esta en las entrafias de la tierra, y que alli diputd Dios lugar para los condenados.” It is probable that 
Zontemoqui presided over Tlalxicco, and Mictlantecutli over Mictlan, though these gods are reckoned by many authors as the same. 

220 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

but with this difference, that they celebrated it for the service of Devils, we for the glory of God 
and the honour of all his Saints. 
1. Veipachtli, which commenced on the twenty-second of October. 

PLATE LXxX. 

The festival of Quecholi was dedicated to the four gods of Hell, who are represented at the 
commencement of this book, who they say fell from Heaven, and accordingly they celebrated their 
festival in these twenty signs. 

1. Quecholi, which commenced on the eleventh of November. 

PLATE LXXI. 

Panquetzaliztli* is interpreted the Elevation of Banners--, for on the first of December every 
individual spread over his house a small paper banner in honour of this god of battle, and the captains 
and soldiers sacrificed those whom they had taken prisoners in war, who before they were sacrificed 
were set at liberty, and presented with arms equal to their adversaries, with which once again to defend 
themselves; and in this manner they fought with them until they were either vanquished or killed, 
and thus they sacrificed them. ‘The Mexicans celebrated in this month the festival of their first 
Captain Vichilopuchitl, and the inhabitants of the province of Calco, that of Catlipocatl, as that 
was the name of their first captain. They celebrated in this month the festival of the Wafer or 
Cake, which was in this manner: They made a cake of the seed of bledos, which they called Tzoali, 
and having made it, they blessed it in their manner, and broke it into pieces, which the high priest 
put into certain very clean vessels, and took a thorn of maguey, which resembles a thick needle, with 
which he took up with the utmost reverence single morsels, which he put into the mouth of each 
individual, in the manner of a communion; and I am disposed to believe that these poor people 

have had the knowledge of our mode of communion, or of the annunciation of the Gospel}; or 

* The name of this month refers to the religious ceremonies which were celebrated in the course of it in honour of Huitzilopuchtli. 
It is compounded of pan a banner, and of quetzalli a plume of green feathers. 

+ Isaiah, whose Prophecies the Mexicans were acquainted with by paintings and tradition at least, says in the tenth verse of his 
sixty-second chapter, addressing the Jews, ‘‘ Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up 
the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.” The famous prophecy of the same prophet relating to the 
Lord’s slaying the leviathan, which the Jews understand to refer to the Messiah, “ In that day the Lord with his sore and great and 
strong sword, shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in 
the sea,” seems to be alluded to in the ninety-sixth page of the lesser Vatican MS. 

Since the discovery of crosses and of traces of many Christian doctrines and traditions in various parts of America, is a fact of which 
there can exist no doubt; Doctor Siguenza and other learned Spaniards have endeavoured to account for this mystery by supposing 
that Saint Thomas had preached the Gospel in the New World, and was known to the Indians by the name of Topilcin Quecalcoatle ; 
in support of which opinion they alledge that the proper name Topilcin Quecalcoatle closely resembles both in sound and signification, 
that of Thomas Didymus, for that ¢o in the Mexican name is the abbreviation of Thomas, to which pilcin, meaning son or disciple, is 
added; and that Quecalcoatle corresponds exactly in signification with the Greek name Didymus, a twin, being compounded of 
quetzallt a plume of green feathers, metaphorically signifying any thing precious, and coatle a serpent, metaphorically likewise meaning 
one of two twins, the reason for which metaphor Torquemada assigns, in the following passage of the forty-eighth chapter of the sixth 
book of his Indian Monarchy, “ Tenian asimismo, que quando la muger paria dos criaturas de un vientre (lo qual en esta tierra 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 221 

perhaps the Devil most envious of the honour of God, may have led them into this superstition, in 
order that by this ceremony he might be adored and served as Christ our Lord. 
1. Panquetzaliztli, which commenced on the first of December. 

PLATE LXXII. 

On the twenty-first of December they celebrated the festival of this god, through whose instru- 

acontece muchas veces) avia de morir el padre, 0 la madre. Y el remedio que el demonio les daba era, que matasen al uno de los 
melligos, alos quales en su lengua llamaban Cocohua, que quiere decir culebras ; porque dicen, que la primera muger que parid dos, 
llamaban Cohuatl, que significa culebra. Y de aqui es, que nombraban Culebras 4 los melligos; y decian, que avian de comer 2 su 
padre, 0 madre, sino matasen al uno de los dos.” “ ‘They also believed when a woman gave birth to twins (which frequently happens 
in this country), that either the father or the mother would die, and the remedy which the Devil suggested to them was, that they should 
kill one of the twins, which they named in their language Cocohua, which signifies serpents, for they say that the first woman,who had 
twins was named Cohuatl, which means a serpent; and this is the reason why they bestowed the appellation of serpents on twins, who 
they said would eat either their father or their mother if they did not kill one of them.” It may be proper to observe that cocohua is 
the plural of cohuatl, as totochtin is that of tochtli, a rabbit; the Mexican language in certain plurals making use, like the Greek in 
the preterite of the verb, of a reduplication. The reason assigned by Torquemada for Mexican parents naming twins cocohua after 
Cihuacohuatl, the first woman who bore twins, is sufficient to account for the name; but it does not explain why they should have 
believed that if those children both grew up, one of them would turn out a murderer, unless we suppose that they knew also that one of 
the twin sons which the first woman bore, committed murder. The Jews might have been disposed to consider twins unlucky, on 
account of Cain and Abel, and Jacob and Esau, having been twins; from the former of whom proceeded murder, and from the latter, 
strife. If it cannot be denied that fanaticism in Europe has converted many passages both of the Old and the New Testament to a deadly 
use, employing Christians as its instruments,—where is the improbability in supposing that the Jews may have wrested some portions of the 
history of the Pentateuch, and many of the Levitical institutions, to the accomplishment of the most depraved ends? Even still the dark 
spirit of Judaism inculcates the doctrine that the Deity delights in blood,—but How? Asa sacrifice upon his altars, as a token of gratitude 
from man to his Creator, whose heart exults in this easy mode of getting rid of sin, and of appeasing the wrath of God, by offering him 
innocent instead of guilty blood. From this one source alone what dreadful enormities seem to have originated in the New World! 
As regards the belief of the Mexicans,—that if they allowed twins both to live, one of them would become a murderer,—it is more probable 
that they entertained the notion that one of them would kill the other, than that they would devour their parents, either their father or 
their mother; the latter, however, might have been an alternative which Torquemada only felt himself at liberty to notice, lest he should 
‘too clearly prove that the Mexicans were acquainted with the history of Adam and Eve. To the fourth chapter of the Book of Genesis, 
which records the murder of Abel by Cain, may perhaps also be referred another singular notion of the Mexicans, that the earth and 
the sun drank up the blood of the slain, since God there addressing Cain, says, ‘And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath 
opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from thy hand.” That the Mexicans really entertained that belief, may be proved 
from the following passage of the tenth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, where a Mexican lord, making 
a congratulatory speech to the king of Mexico recently elected, takes occasion to caution him not to draw down upon himself the 
anger of God, who, he says, “ will perhaps in the beginning of your reign and before you are well master of the kingdom, destroy and 
cut you off, and cast you beneath his feet, or perhaps will suddenly bring against you hosts of enemies from the deserts or from the sea, 
_ or from the pastures, or from the wilderness where armies are accustomed to be marshalled, and blood to flow, which is the beverage of 

the sun and the earth.” It may here be remarked, that most of the speeches in the above-mentioned book have a strong tincture of 
Jewish rhetoric, the same complacent mode of speaking of themselves as God’s peculiar people, the same familiar converse with the Deity, 
beginning frequently as in Abraham’s dialogue with God, with the word ¢ Peradventure’ (por ventura); the same unceasing solicitude 
after dreams, visions, and inspirations; the same manner of addressing each other by the appellation of Brethren ; and finally the same 
choice of metaphors distinguish the compositions of the Jews and the Mexicans, which may serve in some measure to. explain why the 
specimens of Mexican eloquence contained in the sixth book of Sahagun’s History, and judged by the author to be worthy of a monarch’s 
perusal, have been consigned to an oblivion of nearly three hundred years, from which we have had the good fortune to rescue them, 
The following passage, taken from the tenth chapter, reminds us of what David says in the Psalms: “ He that sitteth in heaven shall 
laugh them to scorn; the Lord shall-bold them in derision.” «* Nuestro Seftor Dios est) mirando lo que hacen los que rigen sus reinos, 
y quando yerran en sus oficios, danle ocasion de reirse de ellos, y él se rie de ellos y calla, porque es Dios y hace lo que quiere, y hace 

C31) 

222 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

mentality they say the earth became again visible after it had been covered with the waters of the 
deluge ; they therefore kept his festival during the twenty following signs, in which they performed 
sacrifices to him. 

1. Atemoztli, which commenced on the twenty-first of December. 

PLATE LXXIII. 

On the tenth of January the women celebrated the festival of the goddess Mixcoatl, which name 
signifies the Serpent of the Clouds, because they say that she was the inventress of weaving and 
working; they therefore paint her with this wooden instrument in her hand, which resembles a 
weavers comb. The women celebrated a great festival to her after their fashion. 

1. Tititl, which commenced on the tenth of January. 

PLATE LXXIV. - 

They called this month Izcalli, which means the vivific principle or power; and accordingly 
mothers in this month took hold of their sons by the head, and lifting them up in the air, addressed 
them frequently with the word Itzcalli, as if wishing them joy, congratulating them on the revival 
of vegetable life which now commences, since plants in appearance remain dead during the whole 
winter season. ‘They celebrated a great festival in this month to the god of Fire, whom they called 
Xiuteutli, which was in the following manner : four priests took each of them a handful of ocotl, and 
descended from the upper area of the temple, and performed certain ceremonies ; first towards the 
east, and then towards the north, afterwards towards the west, and lastly towards the south *, and put 
the ocotl into a cauldron which they kept in the temple, where it burned, and served them with light, 
since it never was extinguished. 

1. Izcalli, which commenced on the thirtieth of January. 

PLATE LXXV.+ 

These are the twenty letters or figures which they employed in all their calculations, which they 

burla de quien quiere.’ “ The Lord our God beholds the actions of those who govern his kingdoms, and when they trespass in their 
duties they give him occasion to laugh at them, and he laughs, and has done, because he is God and does whatsoever he pleases, and 
turns into derision whom he will.’ Agreeing in opinion with the interpreter of the Vatican MS. that the Mexicans had some knowledge 
of our mode of communion, we must remark that Tzoali, the name of the bread which was eaten at theirs, resembles Zwy (life) in Greek. 

* The Jews, by way of typifying the omnipresence of Jehovah, turn themselves at their festivals to the four corners of the earth. 

‘+ The paintings to which the following explanations refer are in a different style from the preceding. The explanations likewise are 
written by another hand : and as the number of the pages begin here with No. 1, it is evident that the Vatican MS. consists of two 
MSS. bound up together. It may even be’said to comprise three ; as the latter paintings, which are unaccompanied with any explanations, 
except an introductory paragraph on the origin of the Mexicans, the hand-writing of which is also different, appear to form an appendix 
to the volume. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 220 

supposed ruled over men, as the figure shows, and they cured in a corresponding manner those who 
became ill or suffered pains in any part of the body. The sign of the Wind* was assigned to the 
liver, the Rose to the breast, the Earthquake to the tongue, the Eagle to the right arm, the Vulture to 
the right ear, the Rabbit to the left ear, the Flint to the teeth, the Air to the breath, the Monkey to 
the left arm, the Cane to the heart}, the Herb to the bowels, the Lizard to the womb of women, the 
Tiger to the left foot, the Serpent to the male organ of generation, as that from which their diseases 
proceeded in their commencement, for in this manner they considered the serpent wherever it occurred, 
as the most ominous of all their signs. Even still physicians continue to use this figure when they 
perform cures; and according to the sign and hour in which the patient became ill, they examined 
whether the disease corresponded with the ruling sign; from which it is plain that this nation is not 
as brutal as some persons pretend, since they observed: so much method and. order in their affairs, 
and employed the same means as our astrologers and physicians use, as this figure still obtains 
amongst them, and may be found in their repertories{. 

1. Deer, or Stag. 2.Wind. 3. Rose. 4. Earthquake. 5. Kagle. 6. Eagle of a different species. 
7. Water. 8. House. 9. Skull, or Death. 10. Rain. 11. Dog. 12. Rabbit. 13. Flint. 14. Air. 
15. Monkey. 16. Cane. 17. Grass, or Herb. 18. Lizard. 19. Tiger. 20. Serpent. 

PLATE LXXVI. 

When a human sacrifice was to be performed, the captains brought those whom they had made 
prisoners in war, and placed them upon a very large stone in the portico of the temple, and put into 
their hands a small shield and a short club, which they were to employ in their defence if they 
were able; and the captain who presented the prisoner, took his large shield and a two-edged weapon 
resembling a mace, pointed with knives, and thus armed, fought with the prisoner until he mortally 
wounded him, when the papas carried him bathed in blood to the upper area of the temple, 
where they sacrificed him. Before the celebration of the sacrifice they made him fast forty days, 
during which period they clothed him in the costume of the Devil, to whom they dedicated the 
festival ; during the last days they painted his face black, and pierced his body with razor points, 
and on the last sign of the festival they adorned his head with white feathers§. ‘This was the mode 
of sacrificing men: those who are represented on the ground as fallen, are such as have been 
sacrificed ; those who were dancing are the same persons as those who are there lying dead, for 
before they were sacrificed they danced and sang; the figures above, painted black, represent the 

papas who performed the sacrifice. It is necessary also to remark, that none of those whom they 

* This sign is named Bufeo by the interpreter, and was perhaps dedicated to Y oaliehecatl. 

+ The Heart was the symbol of Votan in Chiapa, and the Cane of Quecalcoatle, in Mexico. 

{ Prefixed to a missal in our possession, entitled Heures a lusaige de Rome, is the figure of a man with the principal viscera exposed 
to view, from each of which, viz. the heart, the liver, &c. a line is drawn to the figures of the ruling constellations above: 1498 is the 
date ofthis missal. It would hence appear that astrology in the 15th century had the sanction of religion. 

§ This passage may explain the sixty-seventh plate in the Collection of Mendoza, in which are represented the executioners sent by 

the king of Mexico to announce to the rebel Cacique the sentence of death which had been passed upon him, who are ornamenting his 
head with feathers, which were the symbols of sacrifice. 

QI4, EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

sacrificed on the cues or the upper steps or area of the temple, were voluntary victims, but they 
were kept for this purpose ; the papas, before the stated period of sacrifice arrived, were bound to 

_ sacrifice them in that place. 

PLATE LXXVII. 

‘This was the manner of sacrificing with their tongues, ears, thighs, legs, and penis*: the papas 
alone offered this kind of sacrifice. ‘They were accustomed to dye their bodies black with gum, and 
ocotl or tincture, as they call itin Spain. Since the sacrifices were performed by night, they required 
light, which was never extinguished, but was obliged to be always burning in the temples, where 
they kept a constant supply of razor-points, trumpets}, and shells, in which they held the incense 
and potziutl, and every thing else necessary for sacrifice, and likewise the banner of war. Although 
boys were sacrificed in their temples, all were not allowed indiscriminately to be present at 
sacrifices, but only persons of the highest rank. The priests robed themselves in a certain part 
of the temple destined for sacrifices, in a vestment resembling ours of scarlet leather. From 
all these circumstances the fact is plain and probable, that this nation descends from the Jews, 
since all the ceremonies of this chapter are as it were according to the text of Leviticus, such as 
that the people should not touch the holy things; and again as in Exodus, that light should be 
always in the temple, and incense, and the trumpets, and the sacred vestments; but one of the 
differences which distinguished the one order of priests from the other, was, agreeably to the 
different nature of the Gods whom they served, these were black, and dirty, and filthy, and 

abominable, for after the same manner was their god; but the priests of the true God were to be 

* Herrera, describing in the sixteenth chapter of the second book of his third Decad the great austerities practised by some of the 
Mexican priests, says, “ muchos de ellos por no caer en alguna flaquega, se hendian por medio los miembros viriles, i hacian cosas para 
hacerse impotentes.” The New Testament mentions in no terms of disapprobation a somewhat analogous custom, as practised by some 
of the early Christians, who thought thereby to attain the kingdom of Heaven. 

+ The Jews believe that the shrill sound of the horn or the trumpet stirs the soul to repentance, and they have a prayer of thanksgiving 
to God for having taught them the use of the trumpet. It is singular that the Mexicans should have entertained the same notion. Acosta 
thus describes the effect which blowing the trumpet, a ceremony which was performed by the high priest a few days before the great 
festival of Tetzcatlipoca, produced on that superstitious people: “ Eo ita condecorato et expolito, pretensa vela removebantur ut ab 
omnibus id spectari posset. His peractis princeps templi, simili cum idolo habitu indutus prodibat, manibus flosculos aliquot, et 
fistulam acutissimi soni proferens. Hanc continenter intlabat dum jam versus ortum, jam versus occasum, ac meridiem et septentrionem 
sese verteret. Sonitu ergo ad quatuor mundi cardines facto, et absentibus signo dato, manus in templi pavimentum exporrigens, 
pulvisculi momentum arripiebat, quod ori indens vorabat. Hunc eodem ritu in omnibus presentes ceteri universi emulabantur, et in 
vultus provoluti noctem, ventum, et tenebras adorabant, devote instantes ut ab illis nunquam desererentur aut perderentur, sed potentem 
suam, quam haberent vim, pro bono publico moderarentur et lenirent. Fistule isto sonitu quoquo versum late perstrepente, furibus, 
meechis, homicidis, ac facinorosis, sopite conscientie in tantum evigilabant, et suscitabantur, ut se non amplius continentes ad deum 
vociferarentur contritissime, ne is patrata ipsorum in publicum proferret, et hc ipsa copiosis usque lachrymis et largissimis thuris 
accensionibus expiabant. Bellorum vero duces, et milites alii peritiores, ad fistule strepitum auditum, Deum, a quo vitam et vigorem 
haberent ut et solem deosque alios potentiores adorabant precabanturque, ut ipsis contra hostes fortem animum, et felicem victoriam 
impertire vellent, ut in sacrificiorum augendam religionem quam plurimos hostes captare possent. Hujusmodi ceremonie decem diebus 
ante, quam festum ipsum incoharetur obibantur, quorum omni decursu sacerdotes fistulis inflatis homines excitabant, ut precarentur, et 
terram ederent, et simulachro suas angustias et patrata confiterentur. Dum vero precarentur cum gemitibus subinde iteratis oculos in 
coelum attollebant non alio gestu, ac si profundissim& suorum peccatorum pcenitudine contererentur. Hec vero universa ab ipsis fiebant 
metu, non eterna damnationis sed poene saltem corporalis. Nam de poend post hance vitam facinorosos manente, nihil quicquam 

sciebant.” Indie Ocerdentalis Historia, lib. y. cap, xxix. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 225 

pure and holy, without spot or stain, such moreover as Hezekiah calls the Scripture whiter than 
milk, red like old coral, more beautiful by far than sapphire. And in another part it is said, the 
priests of the Lord the more incense they offer, the purer and the holier let them be, that from their 
purity may be known the greater purity of the god whom they serve; which thing, that is to say the 
cleanliness which his priests were bound to observe, was a type; although the exterior was of such 
moment, that the church where we wash and purify ourselves before going to offer the sacrifice of the 
Altar, did not content him; neither did our going habited in the sacred vestments: but before we 
enter the secret place of the sanctuary, he advises us to return to wash our hands,—which was all for 
this end, that we might know from our own purity how pure was the god to whom we offered 
sacrifice. It is not, however, surprising that these miserable priests of the Devil should have been 
filthy, detestable and abominable, like him. They also sacrificed their arms in two places, the one 
below the elbow, and the other above it, on the muscular part of the arm. ‘They performed this 
sacrifice every five days; and I have seen the marks upon one of these priests *. 

PLATE LXXVIII. 

This was the method which they adopted in requesting rain of their god Cozio. When his festival 
arrived, or when they stood in need of rain, they fixed some very high poles in the court-yard 
before the Cu, ina row; and a Papa ascended each of them, and danced there, and sung, and 
performed certain ceremonies in supplication for rain. A thinner pole was fixed on the top of the 
highest pole, that by means of it the person above might keep himself steady, to whose feet a rope 
was tied, which reached from the bottom to the top of the pole, and which was knotted together in 
such a manner as to leave openings as if it were a ladder, as is seen in the representation of the 
figure with wings, so that when the Papa leaped down from the pole, he might come to the ground, 
letting himself down by means of it; and when he wished to leap down, he pushed the thinner pole, 
by which he held steady, and threw himself down from the pole: and the other Papas who were 
present proceeded in their proper order, dancing and singing, and playing musical instruments in 
the court, inflicting lashes { the one on the other§. And this was their manner of scourging themselves, 

* It is evident from this assertion, that the writer of these explanatory notes had been in Mexico a short time after the conquest 
of that city by the Spaniards. The opinion that the Mexicans were descended from the Jews, and that their religious rites were 
strongly tinctured with Judaism, is here advocated by two eye-witnesses, whose sincerity cannot be doubted, because they could have 
had no motive for practising deception, or for wilfully misrepresenting facts. 

+ The feast of Purim, or of lots, was instituted by the Jews as a memorial of the deliverance of Mordecai and the Jewish nation 
from Haman, whose gallows on which he intended to hang Mordecai became the instrument of his own execution. The lofty beams 
of wood which the Mexicans erected in the court-yard of their temple, on the top of which they danced, and from which persons called 
flyers threw themselves down, suggest the idea of some new memorial instituted by the Jews in the New World to record their 
preservation in the days of Ahasuerus. At the feast of Purim the Jews were accustomed to drink to excess; and shortly after the 
conquest of Mexico a law was passed by the Spaniards, prohibiting the Indians from dancing on the beam, from their sometimes falling 
from it and being killed when in a state of intoxication. 

{| Herrera says of the Mexicans, “ Todo el pueblo hacia disciplina con la procesion i fiesta que se hacia al idolo dios de la penitencia, 
porque entonces llevaban todos estas sogas de hilo de maguei nuevas, de una braca, con nudos al cabo; iban dandose grandes golpes 
en las espaldas.” Lib. ii. cap. xvi. dec. iii. 

§ The Jews scourge themselves in order to afflict their souls; in compliance, as they pretend, with an injunction in Leviticus, 

(3M ) 

296 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

and of entreating rain. Men were sacrificed on every one of these festivals. They also sacrificed 
dogs, which they said it was necessary should be entirely red *. They presented to their captains on 
this festival and sign, crowns made of the skins of large tigers, which they wore in battle on every 
occasion of going into the field. This festival was celebrated when the sign of Cozioqchalla arrived, 
who was reckoned the first of the four Cozoi. His festival was always celebrated; but the other 

festivals of the remaining Cozoi were omitted when they were not in want of rain. 

PLATE LXXIX. 

They burned in this manner the bodies of the dead, with the exception of those who had died of 
the leprosy +, the venereal disease, or any other incurable disorder, and those of boys who had not 
attained the age of seventeen years ; for such bodies were not burned, but buried. All other dead 
bodies were thrown into a large cauldron which they kept in the court of the temple, made of lime 
and stone, and there they burned them. This custom prevailed amongst the Mexicans; and those 
who performed the office of burning the dead were priests or Papas, on whom the relations of the 
deceased conferred on such occasions a splendid banquet. They called the priests on whom this 
office devolved Coacuiles. They esteemed this a ceremony so sacred, that in consideration of the 
duty which they were about to perform, the papas confessed themselves before they burned the bodies, 
as we who are priests now confess ourselves previously to the celebration of mass. The old men say 
that the Mexicans borrowed this custom of burning the dead from the Otomies, which nation they 

found in this country when they came to inhabit it, as will presently be seen. 

* The Egyptians devoted animals of this colour to death, from hatred to the memory of Typhon the brother and the murderer of 
Osiris, whose hair was red. And the Jews were commanded, in the second verse of the nineteenth chapter of Numbers, to sacrifice a red 
heifer without spot, the flesh of which was to be burned, and the ashes mixed with water, to be a purification for sin. 

‘+ Torquemada says, in the eighth book of his Indian Monarchy, that there was a building in the great temple of Mexico called 
Netlatiloyan, appropriated to lepers, who were under the protection of a god named Nanahuatl. Amongst the Jews, Lazarus would 
probably have been the patron of persons afflicted with that distemper. No less than two chapters of Leviticus, containing together one 
hundred and sixteen verses, treat of this disease ; its diagnosis, (as physicians express themselves,) its cure, and the subsequent mode of 
purification. Since the first of these chapters begins with the words “ And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying,”—and it 
says in the third verse, “And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of the flesh,”—it is plain that, as far as the leprosy was 
concerned, the Jewish priests were physicians, and they might have practised more extensively that art. Amongst the American 
Indians the priests were generally physicians. It is singular, when we reflect on the history of Lazarus, who is said in the New Testa- 
ment to have been received into Abraham’s bosom,—which could only mean that he went to Paradise after his death, when the Rich Man 
went to Hell,—to find that the Indians believed that “los leprosos y bubosos” went after their death to Tlalocan, or the terrestrial Para- 
dise. Torquemada says, in the forty-eighth chapter of the thirteenth book of his Indian Monarchy, “ Muriendo de estas enfermedades 
He then says that a wand was placed in their hands, which they believed would sprout on their arrival in 

incurables no los quemaban.” 
Torquemada likewise observes, in the fortieth 

Paradise, “como el lugar era fresco y ameno, alli havia de reverdecer y hechar hoja.” 
chapter of the same book, that the Indians, imitating the Jews, whose example Nicodemus also followed, anointed the bodies of the 
deceased : “ Si consideramos la costumbre de estos Indios Occidentales, veremos por todo lo que queda dicho de ellos, como ungian 4 
sus difuntos para enterrarlos, y como quemaban los cuerpos de unos, y enterraban otros, conforme les parecia, o segun lo acostum- 
braban.” Peter Martyr mentions in the ninth chapter of his Eighth Decade, a singular custom of the Chiribichenses, who, believing the 
souls of their deceased relations to be immortal, burned their bones, only preserving the hinder part of the head: “ They burne the bones, 
keepinge the hinder parte of the heade; and this the noblest and best of the women bringeth home with her, to be kept for a sacred 
relique.” The Jews had an ancient superstitious notion about a small bone, which they believed to be the seed of the resurrection, 

which was situated according to their notions between the upper vertebree of the neck and the back of the head. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. O27 

PLATE LXXxX. 

This is the place where they deposited all the skulls, the Calvary of the saints who perished in war. 
It consisted of two pieces of timber, such as are here represented ; and was held in such great vene- 
ration that they named it in their language Tlatzolli Tzonpantli, which signifies precious or desired 
death. Since the Devil was also ambitious of having his martyrs, of whom the Psalmist speaks, and 
had persuaded them that only those who died in war went to heaven, and that the souls of all the 
rest were doomed to be unhappy and miserable, since they had no remedy to escape going to hell, 
and on this account they were all desirous of dying by such a death ;—they therefore deposited here 
the skulls of their countrymen who had been slain, as relics, in the same manner as we preserve those 
of the saints in shrines and churches * ; which if it were yet duly comprehended by the natives, 
ought to be a great inducement to them to give thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left them the 
Holy Gospel, in order that whosoever shall believe and shall be baptized, endeavouring to obey its 
precepts, may go to heaven, whether they be the aged Indian woman who never went to war, or the 
lame or the blind, or the weary, the child, or any other. And not a miserable law, which although 
they followed it strictly to the letter, all were doomed to condemnation except those who died in war. 
We, on the contrary, wage war all the days of our lives, not only with the flesh and blood, but also 
against the powers of darkness, who were the cause of the blindness of this people, that we may 
overcome the great malice of those who for such a length of time have deceived them, lest they 
should gain possession of the seats in heaven, from which themselves had been expelled. And hence 
they affirmed that none went to heaven except those who died in war: because it is written that none 
shall be crowned except those who legitimately shall combat ; and that the kingdom of heaven must 
be taken by force; and those alone who exercise force over their own evil inclinations will 
take it. 

1. Tzonpantli. 
PLATE LXXXI. 

Their captains went to war in the costume represented by the following figures. ‘The weapon in 
their right hand is a kind of wooden sling, with which they throw a dart with great force. The 
armour for the body consisted of a cotton vest quilted, called an escaupile, of great avail in their 
manner of fighting; since after the arrival of the Spaniards, not only the natives used it, but the 
Spaniards also employed it against the Indians ; for it repels arrows which pass through the strongest 

coats of mail, and even cuirasses, but cannot pass through these escaupiles. 

PLATE LXXXII. 

This was the second description of dress worn by the captains. ‘The left hand of the figure holds 
a certain kind of shield in common use amongst them, so light that they sheltered themselves with 

* Torquemada expresses himself in nearly similar terms, calling the place where these bones were kept ‘ Osario sacro, como entre 
nosotros los de los martires,” 

298 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

great expedition under it, and repelled the stroke of their adversary, and with much dexterity 
warded off arrows. 'That which is above is the banner, which each carried distinguished by his own 

arms. 

PLATE LXXXIII. 

This was a particular kind of weapon resembling a two-edged club, which was armed with razor 
points of very sharp stone, with which they fought very bravely in their manner, holding it in both 
their hands. 

PLATE LXXXIV. 

This was the dress worn by those who reputed themselves valiant in war ; who when they entered 
the field to fight chose to carry no arms of any kind*; as they judged it sufficient, in order to 
make prisoners and to slaughter the enemy, to enter the field naked, since in this way they came off 
with rich spoils ; and as a mark of distinction from the rest, they wore a very thin mantle of net-work, 
and cut their hair short, with the exception of a lock on the neck, in the fashion of a collar. 

PLATE LXXXV. 

This is the costume of the common soldiers; and their ordinary method of fighting was with a 
club or cudgel. The others fought with bows, arrows, and shields. 

PLATE LXXXVI. 

This was the dress of the lords; and as Moteqzumacin the king of Mexico + was the greatest 
in that country, he is represented first. ‘That which he holds in his hand is a cane, which they com- 

* David, when about to encounter Goliah, did not put on armour; and the Jews might sometimes have supposed that, the God of 
Israel fighting their battles, it was unnecessary to take any such idle precautions ; although they generally acted like Cromwell, who desired 
his soldiers to pray on the eve of a battle, but to be sure to sleep upon their matchlocks, that the priming of their pieces might be dry, 
and readily take fire. f 

+ It has already been observed, that many analogies might be pointed out in the usages of the Mexicans and the Jews, in reference to 
their treatment of their kings. But omitting in the present place to notice the oath which was administered to the kings of Mexico at 
their coronation by the high priest, (which is described by Gomara in page 122 of his History of the Conquest of Mexico ; in which 
the king made a covenant with his people to protect the established religion of the state, to preserve the laws, and to maintain justice ; 
reminding us of what David did on a similar occasion, as recorded by Samuel: « So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron: 
and King David made a league with them in Hebron before the Lord ; and they anointed David king over Israel.”)—and the great burning 
of spices and other odoriferous substances, which took place at the funeral of the kings of Mechuacan, which was also customary at 
funerals of the Jewish kings,—we shall remark, that the regalia worn by the kings of both nations were nearly the same. Amongst the 
Jews they consisted of a crown and bracelets, as is evident from the tenth verse of the first chapter of the Second Book of Samuel, 

' where the Amalekite announces to David the death of Saul, informing him that he had brought him not his sword or armour, but what 
he thought would be a more agreeable present to an aspirant to the throne, the royal insignia: “So I stood upon him, and slew him, 
because I was sure that he could not live after he was fallen; and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was upon 
his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.” A sceptre was also a part of the Jewish regalia; and it is to be presumed, a 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 229 

posed of a certain sort of perfume which they called pogtl. In his other hand is a nosegay of roses, 
or other flowers, which they form with great art, and which they prize so highly, that they have them 

mantle. The crown of the Jewish kings, it is probable, more nearly resembled a mitre than the crowns worn by European monarchs, 
as well on account of the pattern of Aaron’s mitre having been given by God himself to Moses, and the reverence which the Jews would 
in consequence have been disposed to feel for a crown of such a shape; as because the kings of Persia, at once the objects of their 
admiration and their fear, wore a kind of linen tiara. This tiara was called a cydaris ; and representations of it exist on some of the 
ancient sculptured monuments of Persia, engravings of which are found in Sir Robert Ker Porter’s Travels. A crown and bracelets, 
sceptre and mantle, constituted, although not the entire, the principal part of the royal costume of the Mexican kings. The crown was 
named tecuéli, and the bracelets cozcatl; and they are both represented in the fifty-seventh plate of the Collection of Mendoza, as forming 
united the symbol of the Mexican city Cozcatecutlan. The ninth plate of the same Collection of Mexican Paintings affords likewise a 
specimen of the dress worn by the Mexican kings; since the regal apparel of Montezuma, it is probable, differed but slightly from that of 
Moquihuix. The icpalli, or chair on which those sovereigns sat, and which was emphatically styled by the Mexicans the seat of judica- 
ture, appertained equally, as did the throne amongst the Jews, to the regal office. It is true, as a general remark, that both nations, in 
their costume and in the external decorations of their persons and buildings, nearly resembled each other. The Mexicans were very fond 
of painting their faces, and of ornamenting the walls of their finest edifices with vermilion : and if it cannot be absolutely proved,—though it 
may be inferred from several passages of the Old Testament, such as that in which mention is made of Jezebel painting her face,—that the 
former custom existed amongst the Jews, the prophet Ezekiel has removed all doubt about the latter. Amongst the Jews likewise, 
who were so fond of reproaching other nations with effeminacy in dress, the custom of men’s wearing bracelets, ear-rings, and every 
other kind of female ornament, was very general. It says, in the thirty-eighth chapter of Genesis, that the patriarch Judah gave his 
bracelets as a pledge to Tamar: and in the thirty-second chapter of Exodus, that Aaron desired the men and women of the children of 
Israel to break off the golden ear-rings which were in their ears, and to give them to him, that he might make them the golden calf. The 
same custom prevailed amongst the Mexicans; on whose persons, as represented in their ancient paintings, we recognize all the 
ornaments mentioned in the Old Testament as worn by the Jews: such as bracelets, ear-rings, chains for the neck, jewels for the 
nose, (which appear sometimes to have been simple rings attached to the nostrils, as in the figure of a human head carved on the Mexican 
druin or teponaztli, which occurs in the fifty-fifth plate of the Second Part of M. Dupaix’s Monuments of New Spain,) armlets, and 
corresponding golden ornaments for the legs and ankles. The Jews were likewise accustomed to carry signets about them; since we 
are informed, in the twenty-first verse of the thirty-eighth chapter of Genesis, that Judah gave his signet also to Tamar, the after 
recognition of which by himself saved her from the cruel punishment of being burnt alive. What would Aristotle have said of the 
recognition, or dyayyweicss, with which this chapter of Genesis terminates, after the judgment which he has pronounced in the 
seventeenth chapter of his Poetics on that of C&dipus in the play of Sophocles? From the sixth verse of the eighth chapter of the 
Song of Solomon, “ Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm,” it appears that the Jews wore their seals fastened 
to their arms. And it is very singular, since there was something peculiar in the Hebrew fashion, that this should have been a 
Mexican custom likewise; as we learn from Cortes, Torquemada, and Bernal Diaz, that it was. The former, writing to the Emperor 
Charles the Fifth, and giving him an account of the manner in which he got possession of the person of one of the bravest Mexican 
generals, who had put some Spaniards whom he had left in Veracruz to death, by obtaining an order from Montezuma for his arrest, 
says: “ Y luego 4 la hora mand6 llamar ciertas personas de los suyos, 4 los quales did una figura de piedra, a manera de sello, que 

él tenia atado en el brazo, y les mandé, que fuessen 4 la dicha ciudad de Almeria, que esta sesenta, 6 setenta leguas de 

lade Muxtitan, y que traxessen al dicho Qualpopoca, y se informassen en los demas que habian sido en la muerte de aquellos 
Espafioles, y que assimismo los truxessen; y si por su voluntad no quisiessen venir, los truxessen presos; é si se pusiessen en 
resistir la prision, que requiriessen 4 ciertas comunidades comarcanas 4 aquella ciudad, que alli les sefialé, para que fuessen con mano 
armada para los prender; por manera, que no viniessen sin ellos”’—Carta de Relacion de Don Fernando Cortes. “ He immediately 
commanded certain of his officers to appear before him, to whom he gave a figure formed out of a small stone, resembling a seal, which 
he wore tied to his arm, and ordered them to proceed to the said city of Almeria, which is sixty or seventy leagues distant from 
Musxtitan, and to bring back with them the said Qualpopoca, and to ascertain who the others were who had a share in the death of 
those Spaniards, and to bring them likewise; and if they refused to come voluntarily, to bring them as prisoners: and if they 
resisted being made prisoners, to require the aid of certain towns situated in the vicinity of that city, the names of which he 
specified, that they might assist with an armed force in making prisoners of them; but on no account to return without them.” 
Bernal Diaz, describing the same event, says: “Y luego en aquel instante quito de su brago y mufieca el sello y sefial de 
Huichilobos, que aquello era quando mandava alguna cosa grave, € de peso, para que se cumpliesse, é luego se cumplia.” “ He 
immediately took from his arm and wrist the seal and engraving of Huichilobos; and he did that when he issued any command of 

consequence, which it was important should be fulfilled, when it was instantly obeyed.” © Mention is made, in the thirtieth verse of the 

thirty-ninth chapter of Exodus, of engravings like those of a signet, which were consecrated by the Jews to Jehovah: “ And they made 
the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, Holiness to the Lord. And 

(3 Nn) 

230 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

during the entire year, of many various sorts. They esteem them so much, that all the lords had, 
and still have, vassals who on appointed days pay them tribute of such kinds of flowers. Those, 
I say, still have them, who have not been entirely deprived of the inheritances from which they have 
been ejected, Gop knows by what right. The ornament of the hair* was confined to the 
lords and valiant men : it was accordingly granted as a great privilege to warriors who had killed a 
certain number of the enemy in battle. They were accustomed, for greater state, to go without 
shoes j; as they observed that it was for the lower orders of the people, such as the tameines and 
couriers, to wear shoes. They all wore for a covering to the lower part of the body a kind of 
breeches, which consisted of a cloth of cotton, of a yard or rather more in length and very 
narrow, about a span in breadth, nearly resembling the tocas di cammino used on journeys in 
Castile, girded to the body; and with this, which they called a mashle, decency was consulted in 
their dress. It is said that this king never in his life wore twice the same mantle, or mashle, but 

that every day he put on new ones. 

PLATES LXXXVII. LXXXVIII. & LXXXIX. 

This was the dress of a lord amongst the Capotecas, which is another very ancient nation of that 
country, who ornamented their heads with a paper bandage, and wore their hair very long, which 
they never cut, but tied in the manner in which our Spanish women were accustomed to tie their 
hair before the Devil introduced the present lascivious fashion of wearing curled locks and 
ringlets, so contrary to the doctrine and commandment of the princes of the Apostles, Saint Peter 
and Saint Paul. 

The women of those countries dressed in this manner. They wore a cotton mantle called a 
nagua, rolled round the body next to the skin, which was fastened below with a girdle. They 
covered the upper part of their persons with another more delicately wrought mantle of cotton, of 
various colours, sewed in the manner of a sack, with three apertures, one for the head at the 
bottom of the mantle, and the other two for the arms. This dress was called in their language a 
guapil. I do not know whether the costume of the other figure, which is placed first, is at present 
in use, nor have I to the present time ever seen it; but it resembles the apparel of the Mexican, 
Capotecan, and Mextechan women, which I have seen. 'The old people say that the costume of the 
first female figure is the same as that of the Guaxtecas, which is a nation of that country situated to 

the north of Mexico. 

they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the mitre; as the Lord commanded Moses.” It may be remarked, that in the 
passage cited of the letter of Cortes, Mexico is named Mustitan; which the editor says is a corruption or abbreviation of Tenuchtitlan, 
but which may possibly have been a name for Mexico, signifying the city of Moses, which quickly after the Spanish conquest fell into 
disuse.—We shall conclude this note by observing, that the palaces of mourning, or of grief, which Spanish historians say that the 
Mexican kings had attached to the palaces in which they usually resided, to which they occasionally retired to do penance and for pur- 
poses of humiliation, were somewhat analogous, in the purposes for which they were destined, to the chambers in which the Jewish kings 
shut themselves up to humiliate themselves before Jehovah, for the sins and offences which they had committed. 

* This ornament was a red ribbon, with which the hair was tied in a knot behind. 

‘+ Montezuma in the interior of his palace, (as several Spaniards, who saw him and describe his person and dress very minutely, relate,) 
wore sandals embroidered with gold. The Mexican paintings show that the use of sandals amongst the Mexicans was very general, 

Their heroes and gods are always represented with them. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 231 

PLATE XC. 

This entire nation was and is so fond of metaphor, as well in words as in actions, that to 
convey the idea of the different periods of human life, they paint a mountain such as is here repre- 
sented, and place a boy at the foot of it, as if commencing to climb it: for they say, so it is with 
man; that he resembles, till he attains the age of twenty, one who climbs a high hill, and proceeds 
onward gathering flowers, and taking pleasure in his vices and sins ; and that from the age of twenty 
to forty he may be compared to a person ina state of repose already standing on the top of a 
mountain, and at such an age skilful in combating, and able to go where he pleases, to defend or 
to attack ; but from forty to sixty he begins to descend the mountain, and his person inclines to 
stoop, till at last he is obliged to lean upon a stick, with which he supports himself, returning 
like a child to the first stage of existence ; but since he still retains intellectual vigour, which they 
name in the Sciapotechan tongue Capagehe, which signifies the guardian or corrector of the people, 
they treat him in that country with great reverence * ; which custom might cause Spain to blush, that 
in countries where the old men are barbarians they should be held in such esteem, whilst the old 
amongst Christians are so much despised, that they say that even persons of sixty no longer retain 
their perfect faculties, and that on that account they may be excused from associating with persons 
of that age. Those who speak in this manner ought to fear that which is threatened through the 
wise man: Alas for the people where there are no old men; for amongst the old, says Job, wisdom 
resides, and prudence in the multitude of years. 

PLATE XCI. 

This is the origin of the Indians who are called Mexicans. It ought to be known that the 
dominion over that country was first established in Culhuacan, Tenayca, and Xalcotan, and 
afterwards in Azcaputzalco +, Guatlincha, and Giaculma; and that thence it was transferred to 
Mexico, Tlacuba, and Tezcuco, where the Spaniards found it on their arrival in those parts. It 
should also be observed that this proper name Mexico, from whence the term Mexican is derived, 
is corrupt ; for the right name is Mecitlij, which means a vest of hare skins: and this is the 

* The Jews were commanded, in the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, to honour the old,—an injunction which they always 
“scrupulously obeyed: “Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man.” The prophet Elisha is said 
in the following verses of the second chapter of the Second Book of Kings to have cursed the little children who mocked his bald head: 
« And he went up from thence unto Bethel: and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and 
mocked him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; Go up, thou bald head. And he turned back, and looked on them, and 
cursed them in the name of the Lord: and there came forth two she-bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them.” 
The sin of these children must have been their disrespect to old age; for they were too young to know what a prophet was, and it 
is probable that they had never seen Elisha before. 
_ + The founders of the city of Azcaputzalco, which name signifies the ant-hill, probably bestowed that name upon it, in the expectation 
that their seed would be as the dust of the earth in multitude. 
{ There can be no doubt that the Mexicans were so named from their god Mecitli or Mexitli, whose name Torquemada says was 
analogous in its signification to that of Tlaloc,—the latter meaning the “ wine of the earth,” and the former “a vine:” Los mismos 

232 EXPLANATION OF THE CODEX VATICANUS. 

origin of this city, and of all those people who are represented below. They also affirm that they 
were a nation who came out of seven caves, where they say that all of that race had been shut up 
previously to their arrival in this country, from a region situated at their western side, when they 
subjected it, as will be seen. Their arrival was in the year of Two Canes, which according to their 
calculation occurred in the year 1194; and they came, according to their own account, clothed in 
hare skins, as their name signifies, and, as the painting shows, with bows and arrows in their hands. 

1. The Olmecas and Xicalangas. 2. The Cuextecas. 3. The Totonacas. 4. The Couixcas. 
5. The Michiuaccans. 6. The Nonoalcas. 7. The Chichimecas. 8. Matepetl. 9. Cactepetl. 
10. Tezuactepetl. 11. This symbol signifies a cycle of fifty-two years, which was an age. 

PLATE XCII. 

1. Vichilupuchitl, the first captain of the Mexican nation. 2. Tonanicaca. 3. Ayauolulco. 
4. Culhuacan. 5. Puchutla. 6. Tototepetl. 

naturales afirman que este nombre tomaron de el dios principal que ellos traxeron, el qual tenia dos nombres, el uno Huitzilopuchtli, ¥ 
el otro Mexitli, y este segundo quiere decir ombligo de maguey ; y asi dicen que los primeros Mexicanos lo tomaron de su dios, y asi en 
sus principios se llamaron Mexiti, y despues se llamaron Mexica, y de este nombre se nombro la ciudad, siendo el primero que tuvo 
Tenuchtitlan, por ragon de el Nopal que hallaron sobre la piedra, quando llegaron 4 esta parte de la laguna quando en ella fundaron.”— 

Monarquia Indiana, lib. iii. cap. xxiii. 

ARGUMENTS TO SHOW THAT THE JEWS IN EARLY AGES COLONIZED AMERICA *. 

Iv nothing did the Mexicans more resemble the Jews than in the multitude of their sacrifices. Those who may 
have never read the eighth chapter of the First Book of Kings, containing an account of the dedication of the temple, 
can have no idea of the numbers of victims which the Jews immolated on solemn festivals. It says in the sixty- 
third verse of that chapter, “And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace-offerings, which he offered unto the Lord, 
two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of 
Israel dedicated the house of the Lord.” And in the fifth verse of the same chapter; “And king Solomon and 
all the congregation of Isracl that were assembled unto him were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and 
oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.” A reason is assigned in the verses which follow out 
of the thirteenth chapter of Exodus, for the frequent celebration of sacrifices amongst the Jews. “And it shall be 
when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and 
shall give it thee, that thou shalt set apart unto the Lord all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that 
cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males shall be the Lord’s: and every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem 
with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the first-born of man among 
thy children shalt thou redeem: and it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? 
that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage. 

* Neither these Arguments, nor the reasons for supposing that Christians in early ages colonized America which follow, were originally 
intended to be printed in a separate form, but to serve as notes to accompany the Translations in detached portions, which may excuse 
in some measure the want of connexion between some of the passages. 

NOTES. 933 

And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the first-born in the land of Egypt, 
both the first-born of man, and the first-born of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all that openeth the matrix, 
being males*; but all the first-born of my children I redeem. And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for 
frontlets between thine eyes ; for by strength of hand the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt.” It was customary 
amongst the Jews to eat a portion of the flesh of sacrifices, and to burn the rest; and Peter Martyr in allusion to that 
custom says in the fourth chapter of his fifth Decad, that, “ As the Jews sometimes eate the lambs which were sacri- 
ficed by the old law, so do they eat mans flesh, casting only away the hands, feet, and bowels.” He had before observed 
that the Mexicans burned the hearts of the victims. The Jews it is well known never tasted blood; and Gomara 

* Itis probable that the Jews, immediately on their arrival in the New World, revived the sacrifices which the old law ordained as 
a perpetual memorial of their flight from Egypt, and committed to paintings the principal events recorded by Moses to have preceded and 
followed that flight. We may here remark, that the Egyptians, as Josephus is obliged to admit in his Treatise against Apion, gave a very 
different account from Moses of the Hebrew migration : since Manetho, an Egyptian priest (whose authority Josephus evidentlyconsiders 
high, and seems glad to refer to on another occasion;) declares that the ancestors of the Jews were a band of insurgents and lepers, 
amounting in number to eighty thousand persons, who were driven from Egypt by king Amenoph; and that Osarsyphus a leprous 
priest of Heliopolis headed the rebels, who afterwards took the name of Moses, and instituted many rites among the fugitives in hatred 
to the Egyptians. That this was the belief of the Egyptians in later ages cannot be doubted, because Josephus asserts it on the 
authority of an historian of that nation: but whether it contradicted ancient monuments, the scientific expeditions which are so frequent 
in the present day to Egypt will soon enable the world to decide. ‘The fact is generally admitted, that the most remarkable events of 
the Egyptian monarchy are sculptured on monuments which still render the soil of Egypt famous; and it may be possible to 
discover in the ruins of the Memnonium and of the other palaces and temples of Egypt, relievos and inscriptions which may serve 
to confirm the account given by Moses in the Pentateuch of the departure of the Children of Israel from Egypt. But if it be 
contended, in the absence of all such relievos, that they are not to be found only because the Egyptians were ashamed to record their 
country’s shame amidst the monuments of her glory,—this objection would imply great ignorance of one remarkable feature in the 
policy of the ancient Egyptians; who, though they highly revered their monarchs during their lifetime, devised means of compelling 
them to be just, by subjecting them to a kind of state-trial after their death; in which the actions of their reign were scrutinized by 
judges from whose decision there was no appeal: who either awarded them funeral honours, or by denying them that mark of public 
esteem, affixed a stain and reproach on their memory. So great was the aversion which the Egyptians entertained towards their wicked 
rulers, that for a number of ages after the death of Osiris, the name of the usurper Typhon was held in execration by them ; whose hair 
being according to tradition red, foreigners with hair of that colour were scarcely suffered to enter Egypt, and animals with red skins 
were yearly sacrificed. It is not therefore at all likely that the Egyptians would have hesitated to have recorded, not merely on the 
papyrus but on imperishable pages of granite, the name of that Pharaoh who had brought upon them the ten plagues recorded in 
Scripture; as well to deter their future kings from pursuing a similar obstinate course in politics, as to caution them never to 
let the Children of Israel, who had brought such curses upon Egypt, return to that country, if they felt so inclined. That such 
a wish might have been formed by the latter, and such a hope entertained of oblivion of the past, was possible, from the regret which 
they are said, in the second and third verses of the sixteenth chapter of Exodus, to have felt at having left Egypt: “And the whole 
congregation of the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness. And the Children of Israel said unto 
them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, and when we did 
eat bread to the full! for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.” The following is 
an extract from the first book of Josephus’s Treatise against Apion, in which he takes occasion to enter into a long confutation of 
Manetho’s account of the migration of the Israelites from Egypt, who at least seems to have known something of the ancient history of 
the Jews, and that they were a nation from the earliest times afflicted with the leprosy’. “‘O yap Mavebow otros, 6 tyv Aiyumtianyy ioropsay 
ax Tov ispoy ypopuaroy pelepmevevsiy UmeryMevos, mpoElmoy TOUS HyueTEpoVs Mpoyovous moAAIS puplacw ex Tyy Alyumroy eAboyTAs xpaTyTcs TwY 
evoinouvray, sit’ adtos Smoroyuy ypovw mari Dorepoy exmerovras THY "Iovdasay xaTaoElV, Ho uTICavTes ‘IeporoAupLc TOY vew xaTaoxevaTucbas. Lepr 
pey Touray jxoroubyoe Tous avaypadbcais. emerra be Sous eovoiay adtw, die Tov Haver yparbey tra pubevowever nat Azyouevee meps Toy ‘ovdaiuy, 
Aoyous amibavous magebarey, dyemiEas Bovropevos tui Alyumriay wAybog Aempav, xo ems ArAS bpacrynariv, os Pryor, Guys ex THs AiyumTov 
narayvocterray, “Apevadi yap Barsrcce mpoobers Weudes dyopn, xa Sie Touro xepovoy catrov tys Baoirsias Spioas wy TOAMNT AS, Kos TOKE ems THY 

+ The Mexicans probably, derived the superstitious dread which they entertained of that disease from the Jews. Hernandez, 
describing the Copalli Quauhxiotl, or Arbor leprosa of the Mexicans, says it is “arbor excelsa et levis que facile membranam exteriorem 
exuat, unde nomen.” Rerum Medicarum Nove Hispania lib, iii. p. 47. He alludes to.the etymology of Quauhxiotl, which name is 
derived from guahuztl wood or a tree, and wiuhtl heaven, resembling no doubt the name which the Mexicans assigned to the leprosy, 
showing that they entertained the notion which was prevalent amongst the Hebrews, that it was vocos SeyAuros, a divine judgment. 
Having observed in the 233rd page which follows, that amovtli signifies reeds, it may be proper to refer to the authority of Torquemada, 
who says, describing the wretched state in which the Mexicans were when they arrived at the Mexican lake, that they were reduced to 
the necessity of covering themselves with the amoxtli, “yerva que se cria en la laguna.” ‘This account agrees with an historical 
painting of the same event which occurs towards the conclusion of the MS. of Boturini. 

(So) 

Q34 NOTES. 

remarks, that although the Mexicans devoured the flesh of human victims, they were never seen to taste the blood; 
neither did they strangle those of smaller size, such as quails, but twisting the head from the body allowed the blood 
copiously to flow. The Jews abstained from blood on account of the prohibition in the fourth verse of the ninth 
chapter of Genesis: “ But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.” Aristotle has 
observed in the following curious passage in the first book of his Treatise concerning the Soul, that some entertained 
the opinion that blood was really the life or anima: ‘Erepor & aipa (nv puyny arepnvayro) kalarep Kpurtac, ro aicba- 
veoOa TNG duyne olKetoraTov dTohapPavovrec, TOUTO S Urapyew Sta THVY TOU dipatoc vow. TAVTA yae Ta OTOLY ELA KplTny 
etdnge, TAN 716 yn. ravrny 3d ovdere, amomepayrat, wAnY ElTig avTny elpnkev ek TavTwY elval TwY. OTOLYELWY, n wavra.” ~ But 

others, like Critias, believe the soul to be the blood, supposing that perception is a property peculiar to the soul, 

dArwv Baoirswy cupibws ta ery MEOTTIVELS, TOUTW MpoTUmTEr TIVES pulorory iets, emrAclomevos THEdOY OTI MeVTAKOTIOIS eTETI Hor DexxonTo, mpoTepov 
iovopyxs yeverbau yy tov mommevoy eLodoy cig “Iepocoduua. Tebuwois yep nv Bucireus ore éfnsoav. ems Oe rouTwy mereku tov Bacircwv xa adroy 
eos TplenovTa evevyxovra Tpia ery, mexps Twv Buo ddeAgwy Sebo nou “Epuciou, ov rov ev Sebeov Aiyumtoy, toy de “Epucuioy Accvaoy puerovopcecbyyets 
dye. by exCurwy 6 Seles Racircucev ery vO. neces per adroy 6 mpeoburepos Twv viov abrov “Paumdns Es. tooouross oby mpotepoy éreoiy dmenbery e& 
Aiyumrou Tous marepus hwy uimoroyynme, sire Tov "Awevodry slomomoas u6orseoy Bacirse, yor rovroy emibupnoc Sewy yeveorbes Searyy, domep “Op 
alg ray mpo adrov BsCariAcuxorwy. dveveyuew de roy emibumiey Sprcovupen juev abrm Awevenes, merrpos Se Taemsos évri, Secs Oe Soxouvrs Patera nxevoes 
PUTEws, Kara TE TOPIUY KH MOYYUTIY Tov Eoomevmy. slmely ody adTw ToUTOY Tov du.wyujov, bri SuYyoETa TOUS Sous iDery, Ef nabepay amo Te Asmpwy 
rots Toy purcepory cvOpeomreny THY xupay dmacay moimosiev. Hobevree Se rov Bucrrec, mavras Tous TH owpcra AcAwonwevous ex Tys Aiyunrou cuvayaryetv, 
yeverias Os Tov mAnfous pupiadus durw. nee TouToUs els Tas AidoTopIes ev Tw mpos dvaTOAyY Epes TOV vElAoU eubaAsi airov, Sms epyatowro xe Toy 
dAAwy Aiyunriay of eyxexopsousvos, elves Oe tives 2v abrorg no TwY Aoyimy lepewy Gyo, Amp cuyxexumevous. Toy de “Amevngiy excivoy Tov ToDo wes 
peaytinoy avdpa tmodeobes mpos airoy te xa Toy Bacirea yoroy Toy Sewy ef Biacbevres ddbyoovres, xe mpobenevoy elev, Ors cuppucynooucs TIVES 
TOls pictposs, xour THs Arryumrov xpatycouTW em ery OexaTpIA. BY TOAUHTO jEY aTOY elrely TaUTE Tw Bacirsi. ypadyy S= xcercAsmovre TEs MAVT OY 
éauToy avergw. ey aduusc Oe ives Toy Bacirca. xdmeira nore Ak odrw yeypupev. Tov Oe Tes Acromscers ws xpovos inavos SinAde TUAKITMPOUYT UY, 
azrobers 6 BaorAcus, ive moos xaradrvow atrois nab oxEmny dmomEplon, THY TOTE THY TosLEVOY eonpabsioay Abapw cuvexwpyoev. sors 9 h mors xeeree 
THY Soroyiay cvobey Tupwvios. of be eig rauryy eiceAfovres, xcr Tov Tomov TouToy el¢ dmooTaoly EXOYTES, Hysmovee aUTwWY AsyoLEvoY TIVE Toy 
“Hisomoairey iepswy “Ocapoudoy toryoayro, xo rourw meiapynoovres ey macw dpxomornsay.” It cannot be denied that there was almost as 
much reason for the Egyptians to retain a perpetual remembrance of the migration of the Children of Israel from Egypt, as the Jews 
themselves: and if in the age of Josephus and of Apion they had quite forgotten every circumstance connected with it, we can only express 
our wonder, and attribute the recollection of it, which was ever present in the minds of the Jews, to the unceasing sacrifices which 
were instituted by Moses in commemoration of that event: which sacrifices, although calculated to attain the object proposed, never- 
theless inspired the ancient philosophers with a detestation for Judaism; and, as the Abbé Dubois asserts in the following passage 
extracted from his Letters on the State of Christianity in India, greatly retard even now the progress of Christianity amongst the natives 
of Hindostan. 

“To you who have some acquaintance with the education and customs of the Hindoos, I will put the following simple questions : 

“ What will a well-bred native think, when, in reading over this holy book, he sees that Abraham, after receiving the visit of three 
angels under a human shape, entertains his guests by causing a calf to be killed, and served to them for their fare? The prejudiced 
Hindoo will at once judge that both Abraham and his heavenly guests were nothing but vile pariahs; and, without further reading, he 
will forthwith throw away the book, containing (in his opinion,) such sacrilegious accounts. 

“What will a Brahmin say, when he peruses the details of the bloody sacrifices prescribed in the Mosaical law in the worship of the 
true God? He will assuredly declare, that the God who could be pleased with the shedding of the blood of so many victims immolated 
to his honour, must undoubtedly be a deity of the same kind (far be from me the blasphemy) as the mischievous Hindoo deities, Cohly, 
Mahry, Darma-rajah, and other infernal gods, whose wrath cannot be appeased but by the shedding of blood, and the immolating of 
living victims. 

«But, above all, what will a Brahmin or any other well-bred. Hindoo think, when he peruses in our holy books the account of the 
immolating of creatures held most sacred by him? What will be his feelings, when he sees that the immolating of oxen and bulls 
constituted a leading feature in the religious ordinances of the Israelites, and that the blood of those most sacred animals was almost 
daily shed-at the shrine of the God they adored? What will be his feelings when he sees, that after Solomon had at immense expense 
and labour built a magnificent temple in honour of the true God, he made the pratista or consecration of it, by causing twenty-two 
thousand oxen to be slaughtered, and overflowing his new temple with the blood of these sacred victims? He will certainly in perusing 
accounts (in his opinion so horribly sacrilegious,) shudder, and be seized with the liveliest horror, look on the book containing such 
shocking details as an abominable work, (far be from me, once more, the blasphemy, I am expressing the feelings of a prejudiced Pagan,) 
throw it away with indignation, consider himself as polluted for having touched it, go immediately to the river for the purpose of 

purifying himself by ablutions from the defilement he thinks he has contracted; and before he again enters his house, he will send for a © 

Poorchita Brahmin to perform the requisite ceremonies for purifying it from the defilement it has contracted, by ignarantly keeping 
within its walls so polluted a thing as the Bible. 

‘In the mean while he will become more and more confirmed in the idea, that a religion which derives its tenets from so impure a 
scource. is altogether detestable; and that those who profess it, must be the basest and vilest of men.”—Letters on the State of 
Christianity in India, by the Abbé J. A. Dubois, Missionary in Mysore, p. 30. 

4 

NOTES. 935 

and that perception exists by reason of the blood: for each of the elements has authority in its favour, except earth ; 
and no one has been of opinion that the soul was that element, unless some may have said that it was a combination 
of all the elements, or all the elements themselves.” It may here be remarked, that those authors who have most 
minutely described the sacrificial rites of the Mexicans, all agree that to sprinkle the blood of the victim “rociar 
le sangre,” to smear it upon the walls of the temple *, and to anoint the face of the idol, and altar with it, were 
ceremonies performed by the officiating priests. Cortes tells Charles the Fifth, that on his first visit to the 
greater temple of Mexico, his companions discovered with horror that the interior walls of its chapels were 
encrusted with blood. Blood was also employed in the consecration of the high priest of the Totonacas. And 
Torquemada says that his head was anointed with it, as Moses anointed with blood the heads of Aaron and of his 
sons.—Monarquia Indiana, vol.ii. p. 180. The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus is of opinion that the ceremonies 
of the Mexicans, as well as their sacrifices, may be urged as a proof of their being descended from the Jews. 
Garcia, in his famous Treatise on the Origin of the Indians, adopts in part that opinion: in part, it is necessary to 
add; for the conclusion to which his deep researches led him was, that the Indians of America, whether Mexicans, 
Peruvians, or others, were a mixed race descended from many different nations. He says in the Introduction to 
the third book of the Origin of the Indians, “Many have supposed, and the Spaniards generally who reside in the 
Indies believe, that the Indians proceed from the ten Jewish tribes who were lost in the captivity of Salmanazar 
king of Assyria, of whom Rabbi Schimon Luzati, who is named Sincha by Bartolocio, says, nothing is certain, nor is 
it known where they dwell. This opinion is grounded on the disposition, nature, and customs of the Indians, which 
they have found to be very similar to those of the Hebrews: and although learned men condemn, and are 
uninclined to assent to such a belief, I nevertheless have bestowed great diligence upon the verification of this truth 
(en averiguar esta verdad); and I can affirm that I have laboured in this more than in any other part of my work: 
and from what I have found thereto relating, I shall lay such foundations for the edifice and structure of this 
opinion and hypothesis, as will be well able to sustain its weight.” The entire of Garcia’s third book of the Origin 
of the Indians treats accordingly of the likeness which, in their laws, their customs, their moral qualities and habits, 
their ceremonies, their sacrifices, their mutual inclination to idolatry, and even in their early history,—the two 
nations bore to each other. In the first chapter he criticizes the passage of the apocryphal Book of Esdras, 
which induced the Jews themselves to think that they had colonized America; and others to treat with grave 
attention that singular history: the manner in which they might have crossed from the one continent to the other 
is also a subject of discussion. In the sixth chapter, which is the most curious of all, (a translation of which 
will be found in the Supplement+,) he institutes a comparison between the Jewish moral and ceremonial laws 
and those of the Mexicans, and shows how nearly in many respects they agreed. In the seventh he compares 
the Hebrew language with some of the American idioms: and in the eighth he replies, to some objections of 
Acosta. 

It is sufficient in this place, in order more fully to corroborate the opinion of the interpreter of the Vatican 

* The blood of the paschal lamb smeared on the door-posts was the sign which, when the destroying angel beheld, he was commanded to 
pass over the houses of the Israelites, when he slew the first-born of the Egyptians: and hence the origin of the Feast of the Passover, the 
most solemn of all the Jewish festivals, and of an institution commemorative of that signal act of Divine vengeance when the innocent died 
in the room of the guilty. No wonder that the Jews should ever afterwards have retained the recollection of this wonderful interposition 
of Heaven in their favour; and that in revolving ages, when the American soil was fated to be polluted with their accursed rites, they 
should have recorded in paintings the thick darkness that overspread Egypt, the sad prelude to maternal woe, and that the “mighty 
hand and stretched-out arm” should frequently be represented in their superstitious calendars. Boturini remarks, in the 52nd page of 
his Idea of a New General History of America, that the Mexicans were accustomed in the month of Hueytozoztli to sprinkle blood on 
the door-posts of their houses. And Sahagun makes mention of the same ceremony: “ La fiesta se hacia al Dios Cinteotl, Dios del maiz, 
enramando lo exterior de los templos, casas, y puertas de juncos; pero los de las puertas era preciso fuessen ensangrentados de aquella 
sangre que se sacaban de las orejas y espinillas.” “The festival was celebrated in honour of the god Cinteotl, who was the God of maize, 
on which occasion they strewed rushes on the outside of their temples, houses, and doors; but they were obliged to smear the outsides 
of their doors with blood which they had drawn from their ears and ankles.” Cinteotle, it may be observed, was the god of harvest or of 
first-fruits, who was probably the same as Tonacatecutli, who is elsewhere named the God of abundance. The Mexicans, as Clavigero 
remarks, were fond of bestowing many epithets on the same deity, thereby denoting his various attributes. Hueytozoztli signifies, accord- 
ing to Boturini, “ Sangria grande,” (The great festival of the shedding of blood.) 

‘+ The original chapter is inserted in the Supplement. 

236 NOTES. 

Codex, to notice some few analogies which Garcia has pointed out ; to which we shall add some others which have 
been mentioned by other writers. And first, with respect to the famous migration of the Mexicans from Aztlan 
to the country of Anahuac, which Garcia says was so like the pilgrimage of the Children of Israel from Egypt, 
that there were not wanting those who affirmed that the Indians had feigned the one after having heard of the 
other, “que no falta quien diga haverle fingido los Indios haviendo oido este;”—he observes, “From the Mexican 
history, and that which is related by Father Acosta, and Brother Augustin Davila the archbishop of Saint Domingo, 
it is evident that that people performed a pilgrimage and migration similar to that of the Children of Israel; so 
much so, that there have not been wanting those who have affirmed that the Indians feigned the one, after 
having heard of the other: for they say that the Mexican nation, which was that which arrived in New Spain from 
the Seventh Cave or lineage, departed from the provinces of Aztlan and Theuculhuacan by command of the idol 
named Vitzilopuztli, or rather of the Devil, who was in the idol whom they adored as God. He therefore 
commanded them to leave their country, promising them that he would make them princes and lords of all the 
provinces which the other six nations, whose departure had preceded theirs, had peopled; that he would give 
them a very abundant land, with gold, silver, precious stones, feathers, and rich mantles in profusion. They 
accordingly set out carrying their idol with them in an ark made of rushes, which was borne by four priests, with 
whom he communicated privately; informing them of the events of the journey, advising them of what was to 
happen, giving them laws, and teaching them rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices, causing the heaven to rain bread, and 
drawing from the rock water to quench their thirst,—with other marvels resembling those which God wrought in 
favour of the Children of Israel. They never proceeded a step without the approbation and command of this 
idol as to when they should journey on and where they should halt; and what he told them, they punctually 
obeyed. The first thing that they did wheresoever they stopped, was to prepare a habitation for their false god; 
and they always placed him in the middle of a tabernacle which they pitched, the ark being placed always upon an 
altar of the same form as that used in the Christian church. This having been done, they sowed the ground with corn 
and the other leguminous plants in use amongst them: but so implicitly did they obey their god, that if it seemed 
good to him that they should gather it, they gathered it; if not, on his commanding them to raise the camp, they 
left it all there for seed, and for the support of the old and of the infirm and weary, whom they intentionally 
left behind wherever they settled, pretending that thus the whole land would remain peopled by their nation — 
Who will not own that this departure and migration of the Mexicans resembles the departure and pilgrimage of the 
Children of Israel from Egypt? since these, like those, were admonished to go forth and to seek a land of promise ; 
and both the one and the other took with them their god as their guide, and consulted him in an ark, and built 
him a tabernacle : and accordingly he advised them and gave them laws and ceremonies, and they each in the same 
manner spent many years before they arrived at the promised land ;—and that in this and in many other things 
there is a resemblance in what the Mexican histories relate to that which Holy Scripture informs us of the 
Israelites ? And without doubt this is the case.”— Origen de los Indios, lib. iii. cap. iii. sec. 5. 

Acosta gives the following nearly similar account of the migration and pilgrimage of the ancestors of the 
Mexicans: “ Annis ab exodo sex harum familiarum 320 elapsis, postquam Novam Hispaniam condidissent et 
habitassent, populosque certis statutis legibus coegissent: septima quoque familia natio Mexicana postmodum facta, 
ex antro suo egressa, per provincias Aztlan et Teculhuacan tetendit. Populus hic politicus, agilis, amabilis ac 
bellicosus erat. Hic simulachrum Vitzliputzli, de quo in prioribus multoties diximus, precipue adorabat. Diabolus 
vero, qui per hoc idolum gentes istas regebat et moderabatur, mandatum ipsis dederat, ut sedes patrias deserentes, 
oras alias quererent; et promiserat simul, quod eos principes ac dominos facturus esset omnium illarum pro- 
vinciarum, quas sex priores familiz coluissent. Terram enim se daturum iis perfoecundam, et tum auro ac argento, 
gemmisque, et rebus similibus nimiopere diffluentem. Pollicitis ergo his capti populi isti, solum avitum reliquerunt, 
et indagandis peregrinis terris sese accinxerunt, simulachrum suum quoquo versum secum proferentes, quod quatuor 
primarii sacerdotes in arcé quidam ex scirpis context4 jugiter portabant. His vero sacerdotibus idolum omnia, 
que in peregrinatione eventura erant, secreto revelabat et simul, qua arte singula declinanda essent, docebat. Sed 
et leges singulares, ac cultus ceremoniasque et sacrificia, quovis tempore prestanda, iis proponebat. Sine hujus 
consensu suasuque ne latum quidem pedem promovere audebant. Nam et qua procederent, et ubi residerent, 
simulachrum subinde quasi digito ipsis designabat. Cujus quidem consilium in universis precise sequi illos oportehbat. 
Si quo loco habitandi gratia desiderent, primum omnium, quod aggrederentur, opus erat, ut idolo suo tabernaculum 

NOTES. 2a, 

conderent. Hoc in castrorum medio locabatur. Ara vero, cui simulachrum imponebatur, ad papisticarum ararum 
similitudinem extructa erat. Sacris constitutis, agrorum quoque curam habebant, quos frumento, pisisque, ac simi- 
libus conserebant. - Idoli sui nutum tam serio attendebant, ut inconsulto ipso nihil agerent. Messem ipso suadente, 
metebant, discessionem imperante, castra nulla mora, frugibus universis in agris relictis, promovebant. Quas tamen, 
qui vel xgri, vel grandevi, vel timidiores in illis locis relinquerentur, in suos postea usus colligebant. Horum 
siquidem plurimos certo consilio post se subinde restites linquebant ut de gente sua ac natione terre quevis imple- 
rentur. Heec Mexicanorum peregrinatio, filiorum Israél ex Aigypto egressui quadam tenus similis videtur ; quibus et 
ipsismet injunctum erat, ut terram. benedictam occupatum egrederentur, deum suum in nube ducem, et in arca foederis 
suasorem attente observantes. Idem quoque populus, priusquam in promissam terram veniret, multis annis vagatus 
est. Sic ergo non in hoc saltem, verum et in plerisque aliis, quorum in historia Mexicana mentio fit, queedam cum tis, 
que in Sacra Scriptura de filiis Israél narrantur, similitudo et convenientia reperiebatur. Ex quibus manifestum est, 
Sathanam omnis fastus ac superbize principem execranda cacozelid Deum Creatorem semper in omnibus eemulari 
studuisse. Diabolus vero nullus usquam repertus aut cognitus fuit, qui miseros homines aut crudelius habuerit, ac 
ad cultus ac sacrificia immaniora et sccleratiora compulerit unquam, ac unus hic Mexicanorum Vitzliputzli. Qui 
populos hos ducebat, Mexi, summus quasi princeps vocabatur, unde postea et Mexico, et Mexicanorum nomen 
enatum est; coeterum hic quoque populus priorum exemplo lento gradu et velut interpolato itinere processit. 
Discretis enim aliquot locis sese dimisit, et agros coluit, sevitque et messuit, et habitacula condidit, sicuti vestigia 
horum in multis locis conspicua sunt. Tandem vero multis exantlatis laboribus ac periculis, in provinciam 
Mechoacam, id est, piscosam, delati, cum loci conditio et fertilitas omnibus arriderct, ibi castra metari decreverunt. 
At vero, cum quid facerent idolum consuluissent, hinc pergere jussi sunt. Devotis tamen obtestationibus ac 
supplicationibus id ab eo tandem impetrarunt ut aliquos de populo suo saltem ibi relinquere liceret, qui terram illam 
foecundam ararent ac excolerent. Quibus annuens, qua id industria facerent, instructionem simul necessariam 
idolum dabat. Ibidem ergo, cum populi insignis pars tam viri quam foeminz in lacum Pazcuaro lavatum abiissent, 
ceteris idolum hoc consilium dedit, ut lavantibus clam vestes surriperent, et sine strepitu tumultuque motis castris 
inde abscederent. Hoc facto, cum ceteri balneo suaviter refecti, ex lacu rursus ascenderent, surreptas vestes simul 
et se lusos animadvertentes, non solum zrumnas suas ingenti dolore et ploratu luxerunt, sed erga profugos- tam 
acerbo, et internecino odio exarserunt, ut et habitum simul et sermonem patrium mutarent. Ita enim factum esse 
historia testatur. Hoc tamen ad minimum est certissimum, Mechoacanos Mexicanorum hostes acerrimos semper 
vextitisse. Unde Marchioni quoque de Valle, cum Mexicanos domuisset et fudisset, singulariter gratulati sunt.” _ 
Indie Occidentahs Mistoria. Lib. vii. cap. iv. 

The following more detailed description of the Mexican migration is taken from the second book of Torquemada’s 
Indian Monarchy : “ According to the paintings which the most curious of these Indians possessed, and which at 
present I have, it appears that in order to come from the former country which they forsook, to that which they 
now inhabit, they crossed some great river or small streight and arm of the sea, the picture of which seems to 
represent an island situated midway in the channel which it intersects. Deferring to another opportunity the 
expression of my own sentiments, and the opinion which I have formed as to who these nations may have been who 
have peopled this province of New Spain, which is the reason why I treat of that site ; I now say that the principal 
cause of their undertaking this long journey and encountering the difficulties of the road, was, as they fabulously 
relate,—a bird which frequently appeared to them singing upon a tree, and repeating a note which they chose 
fancifully to construe into the word ¢#huz, which means Now let us go; and as this note was repeated for many 
days and very frequently, a person, who was the weses¢ of their race and lineage, named Huitziton, turned the 
matter in his mind; and meditating on it, thought fit to avail himself of this song as a pretext for his intentions, 
saying that it was an invitation which some concealed deity gave them through the song of that bird: and in order 
to have a companion and coadjutor in his designs, he communicated the circumstance to another person named 
Tecpatzin, and’said to him, Perhaps you are not aware of what the bird says to us. Tecpatzin replied that he was 
not. On which Huitziton said, What that bird commands us is, that we should go with it: it is therefore fit that we 
should. obey and follow it. Tecpatzin, who had listened as well as Huitziton to the song of the bird, came over to 
his opinion ;' and the two together acquainted the people with the matter, who, persuaded of the great good fortune 
which awaited them, from the over exaggerations which these two knew how to employ, quitted their habitations, 
and followed the fortune which futurity had in store for them. Although all were of the same race and lineage, 

(3P) 

238 NOTES. 

still they did not all compose a single family, but were divided into four tribes: the first of which was called the 
Mexicans; the second, the Tlacochcalcas ; the third, the Chalmecas; and the fourth, the Calpilcas. Others say 
that these familics were nine; namely, the Chalcese, the Matlatzincas, the Tepanecas, the Malinalcese, the 
Xochmilcas, the Cuitlahuacs, the Chichimecas, the Mizquics, and the Mexicans. It is affirmed also by others, 
that the note éhaz was only heard by Huitziton and Tecpatzin, but that that which uttered it was invisible. But 
however that may have been, since it is all fabulous, that which may hence be reasonably inferred and concluded is, 
that all agree as to their departure at the persuasion of something that instigated them. The Aztecas therefore 
quitted their country under the guidance of Tecpatzin and Huitziton, in the first year of their first cycle, for they 
commenced the computation of their years from that period; and proceeded some stages on their journey, in which 
they employed the space of a year, at the end of which they arrived at a place called Hueyculhuacan, where they 
remained three years. In this place and site they say that the Devil appeared to them in the form of an idol, 
declaring to them that it was he who had brought them out of the land of Aztlan, and that they should carry him 
along with them, as he would be their god and would favour them in every thing; and that they should know that 
his name was Huitzilopuchtli, who, as we have said in another part, is he whom the Gentiles named Mars the 
god of battles. He desired them to make him a chair and seat, in which they might carry him; which they 
immediately formed out of reeds: and ordered that four should be chosen from amongst themselves to be his 
servants ; for which office Quauhcohuatl, Apanecatl, Tezcacohuatl, and Chimalman, were named: and the supreme 
chiefs who directed the troop were Huitziton and Tecpatzin, who were the heads of these families, All these 
arrangements afforded great satisfaction to the Aztecas, who perceived that now they should not pursue their 
journey blindfold, but should carry with them their god who would guide them, whose servants they named 
Theotlamacaztin, and the seat on which he was placed Teoycpalli, and the act of carrying him on their shoulders 
Theomama. This being the beginning of the Devil’s proceedings amongst this people, they marched from that 
place to another, where they relate that there was a very large and thick tree where he caused them to stop, at 
the trunk of which they made a small altar upon which they placed the idol, for so the Devil commanded, and they sat 
down under its shade to eat: but whilst occupied in eating, a loud sound proceeded from the tree, and it cracked in the 
middle. The Aztecas, terrified at this sudden accident, considered it a bad omen ; and surrendering themselves up to 
affliction, terminated their repast. And the chiefs of the families, doubtful as to the event, consulted their god, who 
taking aside those whom they now name Mexicans, said to them, Dismiss the eight families, and tell them that 
they may proceed on their journey, for that you wish to remain here and not to pass on further at present. The 
Mexicans did so: and although they felt regret at forsaking the others, inasmuch as they were all brothers and 
friends, and at rejecting their entreaties praying that they might all proceed together, they left them, and they 
prosecuted their journey. 

“The one party being now separated from the other, the Mexicans, with whom the idol and god Huitzilopuchtli 
had remained, went to him, and asked him what he intended to do with them. On this, the Devil, who they say 
spoke by the mouth of the idol, replied, You are now apart and separated from the rest; and accordingly I wish, 
that as my chosen people you should no longer call yourselves Aztecas but Mexicans. And here it was that they first 
took the name of Mexicans. And at the same time that he changed their name, he put as a sign on their faces and on 
their ears a plaster of turpentine covered with feathers, stopping their ears by means of it; and he likewise presented 
them with a bow and arrows, and a Chitatli, which is a net in which they put Tecomates and Xicaras, telling them — 
that these were the instruments which should prevail among them,—which was the case ; for a bow and arrows are 
emblematical of wars. And they judged that he desired to typify to them, that with the bow, arrows, and warlike 
weapons, they should conquer many enemies, and make themselves lords of great provinces and kingdoms: and by 
the net they say that he signified the place and goal where they had to stop, which was the Lake of Mexico, where 
as soon as they arrived they became fishermen. With these insignia they proceeded on their way; the other eight 
families having gone before them, journeying on themselves by slow degrees. ‘The place where the event which has 
been mentioned in the preceding chapter occurred, was called Chicomoztoc, which signifies The site and place of the 
Seven Caves ; in which place they remained nine years. And hence it remains proved that the Mexicans, and all the 
other nations and families who came to people New Spain, do not derive their origin and beginning from these Seven 
Caves: since we have seen, by what has been said, that it was merely a place in which they dwelt in huts for the 
space and period of nine years. Wherefore Father Acosta, not possessing a complete account of the due succession of 

NOTES. : 239 

these years, says, in the seventh book of his Moral Philosophy, that they derive their origin from these Seven Caves. 
Neither do the Indians absolutely affirm that by a cave they mean their origin and descent; whom Antonio de 
Herrera, the principal historiographer of the Indies, follows, in the second book, third decad, and tenth chapter, of 
his History. And I repeat the same of the historian Gomara, in his work entitled The Conquest of Mexico ; where 
he says that the Mexicans proceeded from a country called Chicomoztoc, and that all the Mexicans and Nahuatlacas 
were sprung from a common father of the name of Iztacmixcohuatl; since, as we shall presently see, what 
that author there states is not verified. Leaving therefore these three writers in this place until we meet them in 
some other, let us pass on with the Mexicans from these Seven Caves to another place named Cohuatlycamac, 
where they stayed three years. In this place they say that the Devil practised a device upon them, which, although 
in itself insignificant, was the cause of great contention between them all.—There appeared in the middle of their 
tents and encampments two Quimillis, (which are two little bundles); and being desirous of knowing what was 
wrapped up within them, they proceeded to untie one of them, and found in the inside a very rich and precious 
stone, which shone with the brilliant lustre of the emerald. On seeing it so rich they were all amazed at beholding 
it; and each being covetous to possess it, the entire people were divided into two factions. Huitziton, who chanced 
to be present and was their principal leader, perceiving that they contended together on the subject of to which 
party the stone should belong, said to them, I am surprised, Mexicans, that you should set up such strong and 
violent opposition to each other on such slight and trivial grounds, without knowing the end that by so doing you 
propose to yourselves; but since there is another bundle before you, untie and open it, and you will see what it 
contains; and it is possible that it may be something more valuable, so that esteeming that more, you will value this 
less. Both the contending parties approved of the reasoning of Huitziton ; they untied the Quimilli, and found in it 
two pieces of wood only: but as they did not sparkle as the stone sparkled, they set no value upon them, and returned to 
their former subject of contention. But Huitziton, who was the person who practised these frauds on the people and 
then explained their meaning, perceiving that that party which was afterwards called the Tlatelulcas were so obstinate. 
in wishing to have the stone, told the others, with whom the appellation of Mexicans henceforward remained, to put 
away the cause of difference and to relinquish the stone to the Tlatelulcas, and to take themselves the two pieces 
of wood, since they would be much more necessary and of much greater value in the course of their journey, as they 
would presently perceive. They believing the words of Huitziton, took the pieces of wood, and gave the stone to 
the others; and thus they became reconciled. The Mexicans, anxious to know the secret of these pieces of wood, 
requested Huitziton to discover it to them. He, desirous of pacifying them, took them, and applying the one to 
the other, kindled fire with them; at which all present remained greatly astonished, for they never had seen any 
similar thing; and from that time the art of procuring fire in that way was known. It even further happened 
from this incident, that those who had obtained the stone repented of their choice, and wished to exchange 
bundles ; but as the secret was discovered, the Mexicans would not consent, and each remained in possession of his 
own. From this time, although all these Aztecas continued their journey in one body, there no longer existed the 
same feelings of fraternity and friendship as before; for after this cause of dissension they retained sentiments of 
rancour and hatred the one against the other, and were split into parties, and without unanimity. Having left this 
place by the command of the Devil, they arrived at another, where they remained three years: from thence they 
passed on to Matlahuacallan, where they remained three other years ; and thence to Apanco, where they rested five. 
They found in this place a numerous people, who chose to oppose the entrance of the new-comers as of men 
who were strangers to them; but Huitzilopuchtli, (who on every occasion favoured the Mexicans,) they say, 
protected and aided them until he rendered them masters of the place; dispossessing the former inhabitants of it, 
causing the waters of a brook that ran in the neighbourhood to overflow so violently, that if they had not made 
their escape with all possible speed, those who dwelt thereabouts would certainly have been drowned; who 
perceiving themselves deprived of their land and city in this manner, passed onwards and came to this district near 
the lake, instigated perhaps by some diabolical oracle. After the departure of those who had before inhabited the 
place, Huitzilopochtli told his people that he had performed that deed in order that the tribes who were dispossessed 
of their lands might proceed to cultivate those of the lake. It so happened likewise about this time, that a 
woman named Quilaztli, who accompanied them and who was a great sorceress, who by devilish art, they say, 
could transform herself into any form she pleased, wished to practise a jest upon the two captains and leaders, one 
of whom was named Mixcohuatl, and the other Xiuhnel, to whom, when engaged in hunting in the plain, she 

240 NOTES. 

appeared in the shape of a very beautiful and large eagle perched upon a Hueynochtli, which is a tree which we 
Spaniards call a Cimborio: and when the captains saw her they wished to shoot their arrows at her, thinking that 
she was in reality a natural eagle; and being on the point of discharging them, the witch, perceiving the danger and 
risk to which she was exposed, addressed them, saying, Captains, my object, as far as it was to turn you into 
ridicule, has been sufficiently attained; do not shoot me, since I am your sister Quilaztli, and of your people. 
The captains were indignant at her having turned them into ridicule, and told her that she deserved death for the 
jest she had practised upon them. She answered them, that if they wished to kill her they might try what they 
could do, but that she some day or other would be revenged. ‘They made her no reply and departed, and she 
remained sitting on the tree, each retaining mutual bitter feelings. The time having now arrived for their departure 
from this place, by the command of the oracle they proceeded to another called Chimalco, where they remained six 
years; and on the fourth year after their arrival there the sorceress Quilaztli, recollecting the animosity which 
existed between her and the two captains before mentioned in their former place of residence, reflected on the 
grievance which she had received in the tunal tree when they wished to kill her; and dressing herself in warlike 
attire, went to them, and thinking to intimidate them, said to them, Now, you know me that I am Quilaztli, and 
you may think that your quarrel with me is such as you might have had with any other vile and mean-spirited 
woman; and if this is your opinion, you are deceived; forI am courageous and of a manly mind, and by my names 
you shall know who Iam and my great force: for if you know me by the name of Quilaztli, which is the common 
name by which you call me, I have four other names by which I know myself. The first of which is Cohuaci- 
huatl, which signifies the serpent-woman ; the second, Quauhcihuatl, the eagle-woman ; the third, Yaocihuatl, the 
warlike woman ; and the fourth, Tzitzimicihuatl, which means the infernal woman: and according to the properties 
contained in these four names you shall see who I am, and the power which I possess and the evil which I can 
do to you: and if you wish to submit this truth to a trial by hands, I here challenge you to the combat. The 
two courageous captains, without fearing the arrogant words with which Quilaztli sought to intimidate them, 
replied: If you are as courageous as you represent yourself, we are not less so; but you are a woman, and there 
is no reason why it should be said of us that we take up arms against women. And without saying more to her 
they left her, displeased at seeing that a woman defied them: and they kept the matter a secret, that the people 
might not know it. 

“ At the expiration of the two following years, during which they resided there sowing and reaping and consuming 
the produce of their labours, they set out for another place, named Pipioleomic, where they remained three years ; 
and from thence they came to the place which they call Tulla. In this place they spent nine years, where they 
arrived much diminished in numbers, on account of having left behind them in the various places in which they 
sojourned on their journey many persons, old as well as young, whom they thus left behind as they proceeded, 
for prudential causes. Many traces exist in all these countries towards the North of this migration ; of which I have 
seen, seven leagues to the south of Cacatecas, edifices and ruins of ancient habitations the greatest and most superb 
that can be imagined, of which we shall make mention in another place. I only notice them here as a proof of the 
edifices which they built, and of the people whom they left behind in the course of their long travels. Having 
arrived therefore at Tulla, and being desirous of making a considerable stay in that place, since it appeared to 
them that they had now made a very long pilgrimage, fly chose a site close to a mountain named Cohuatepec, 
which signifies The Mountain of Serpents. Having there settled, the idol commanded the priests zm a dream to 
dam up the water of a very large river that ran in the neighbourhood, in order that it might overflow the whole 
plain and encompass on every side the mountain where they dwelt, for that he desired to give them a sample of 
the country and habitation which he had promised to them. The dam having been made, the water spread and over- 
flowed the whole plain, forming a very beautiful lake, surrounded with willows, poplars, and osiers which very 
shortly afterwards sprung up. It produced likewise rushes and reeds, and began to have great abundance of fish 
and water-fowl, such as ducks, herons, and widgeons, with which the whole lake was covered; and with many 
other sorts of birds, which at the present day the lake of Mexico plentifully supplies. The site likewise became 
covered with sedges and aquatic flowers, to which different kinds of thrushes resorted, some of scarlet plumage and 
others orange, whose melody, together with the songs of the birds scattered through the groves, which was no less 
sweet, rendered the place extremely delightful and agreeable. The Mexicans being in possession of so delicious a 
habitation, and forgetful of what the idol had told them,—that that site was only a sample and specimen of the 

NOTES. DAA 

land which he intended to give them, began to think in concert with some amongst them who said that they 
ought always to dwell there, and that that was the place chosen by their god Huitzilopochtli, who from thence 
‘would put all his intentions into execution, being the lord of the four quarters of the earth. They relate that 
the idol was so angry at this, that he said to his servants, Why do they thus wish to transgress and oppose my 
will and commands? Are they perchance greater than me? Tell them, that I will take vengeance upon them 
before the morning, in order that they may not be so presumptuous as to give their opinion on any thing which I 
have determined, and that all may know that me alone they have to obey. These words having been pronounced, 
they affirm that they beheld the countenance of the idol so frightful and terrible that it struck great fear and 
terror into them all. They relate that on that night, whilst all were reposing, they heard in a quarter of the camp 
a great noise; and going to the spot in the morning, they found all those who had proposed the expediency of 
remaining in that place dead, with their breasts opened, and their hearts alone taken out: and he then taught them 
that most cruel kind of sacrifice which they have always used, of opening men’s breasts and taking out the heart, 
which they presented to their idols, declaring that their god ate no other part of the sacrifice but the heart, as 
we have said elsewhere. Huitzilopuchtli having inflicted this chastisement upon them, commanded his false priests 
- to break down the dam and mounds of the piece of water which formed the lake, and to allow the river, the course 
of which they had stopped, to run into its old channel, which they immediately did; and the whole lake emptying 
itself in that way, dry ground remained in its stead. After the lapse of some time, considering that the anger of 
their god would now have passed away, they consulted him, and he commanded them to raise the camp: and 
accordingly they departed from the boundaries of Tulla, and marched in the direction of the Great Lake of Mexico, 
in the same order and manner as has been described.” 

It is unnecessary to transcribe at greater length Torquemada’s account of the Mexican migration. But as the 
authority of Herrera, the royal historiographer of the Indies, will have considerable weight with those who consider 
that his office must have given him access to a variety of curious documents relative to America, it may be proper 
to add what he says in the tenth and eleventh chapters of the second book of his Third Decad of the same 
migration: “ Three hundred and two years had elapsed since the six lineages which have been mentioned quitted 
their country and peopled New Spain, where they had already greatly increased in number,—when those of the 
seventh lineage, who were the Mexicans, a civilized and warlike nation, arrived there; and as they worshipped the 
god Vitzilipuztli, he commanded them to leave their country, promising them dominion over the other tribes in a 
fertile and very rich land. They carried this idol in an ark of reeds (en una arca de juncia) on the shoulders of 
four priests, who taught them rites and sacrifices and gave them laws; and without his approbation they did not 
proceed a step. When they halted, they made an altar like that in use in the Catholic church, and placed the ark of 
the idol upon it in the middle of the camp: and they observed his directions respecting the cultivation of the 
ground, habitations, and other matters; for never did Devil hold such familiar converse with men as he: and 
accordingly he thought proper in all things to copy the departure from Egypt and the pilgrimage performed by 
the Children of Israel. The name of the chief who conducted this people was Mexi, from whence the proper name 
Mexico is derived. Wandering therefore about as long a time as the other tribes had done, cultivating the 
ground and making settlements, and encountering many dangers, they arrived at the province of Mechoacan, 
which name signifies The Place of Fish, on account of the many and beautiful lakes which it contains; and the 
land contenting them, they wished to remain in it: but as the idol would not allow them, although he gave his 
consent that they should leave there some of their nation, they passed on; who, as it appeared to them that 
they had been left behind deserted by the others, were always enemies of the Mexicans. This tribe having 
departed from Mechoacan, complained to the idol of a woman in the camp who was so great a sorceress that she 
wished to cause herself to be worshipped as a goddess. The idol commanded one of the priests who carried the 
ark to comfort the people, and to tell them to leave that woman and her family behind. Travelling on, therefore, 
without leaving any traces of their road, the sorceress, perceiving that she had been abandoned by them, settled 
in a place called Malinalco; and henceforward the inhabitants of that city were considered great sorcerers. 

«The Mexicans having considerably diminished in numbers, stopped in order to recruit their strength in Tula, 
which name signifies The Place of the Tuna; and the idol commanded them to cause a river to overflow a large 
plain: and by the industry which he infused into them they surrounded the mountain called Coatepec with water, 
and made a vast lake, which they encircled with plantations and trees; and with the fish and the birds with which 

(3 Q) 

QAI Ne Ori nes: 

it abounded the place became very delightful: on which account they wished to fix their abode in it. At which 
the Devil being incensed, commanded the priests to let the river flow in its former bed: and choosing to chastise 
the disobedient, they heard at midnight a noise in a certain part of the camp; and in the morning they found 
those dead who had discussed the question of remaining there, with their breasts opened and their- hearts taken out: 
which they say was the occasion of their being taught to perform ever afterwards a similar kind of sacrifice. 
This punishment having been inflicted on them, and perceiving the plain converted into dry land on account of the 
water of the lake having been drained off, they proceeded with the consent of their god to Capultepec, an 
agreeable and verdant place situated about the distance of a league and a half from Mexico, where they fortified 
themselves. The other nations, instigated by the descendants of the sorceress of Malinalco, wished by force of 
arms to drive them from thence; but behaving with valour they passed on to Atlacuyabaca, a town belonging to 
the Culuas, and there entrenched themselves.” __ 

It will be perceived that this account of the Mexican migration by Herrera, though very brief, corresponds 
nearly in all its circumstances with the others. It is much to be regretted that an important chapter in Torque- 
mada’s Indian Monarchy, which would have thrown much more light on this subject, should never have been 
allowed to be printed. This chapter, forming the first of the second book of the Indian Monarchy, the place 
of which is supplied in the printed editions by the second chapter, was inscribed “De como el Demonio quiso 
remedar 4 Dios, escogiendo pueblo, el qual fundo en los Mexicanos.” “ How it has been the wish of the Devil to 
substitute himself in the place of God, by taking a chosen people, which he constituted in the Mexicans.” The 
editor of the second edition of the Indian Monarchy calls this chapter “el fundamento 6 clave de la idea de esta 

> 

obra,” “ the foundation or key to the work:” and says in his Preface, that he extremely regretted being 
obliged to omit it; but that he did not think it convenient to request license to publish it. But he shortly 
afterwards adds, that his regret had diminished on finding the same conception delineated with greater brevity and 
clearness by the learned Garcia, of the order of Friar Preachers, in his exquisite treatise concerning the Origin of 
the Indians. He then inserts in the Preface the passage from the fifth section of the third chapter of the third 
book of the Origin of the Indians, which contains an account of the Mexican migration, omitting the sentence, 
“i tanto que no falta quien diga haverle fingido los Indios, haviendo oido este ;” alledging as his reason for inserting 
this passage, that “ he wished to cite to the letter the authority of so learned a man ; not only in order to supply the 
deficient chapter, although Father Augustin de Betancur follows more closely in his Theatro Mexicano the author ; 
but that this work may more easily be understood, which treats of this subject as a proposed matter of discussion, 
and in order that no one may judge that to have been neglect which was obedience.’ We learn from these 
expressions of the editor, that he had perused the first chapter of the second book of the Indian Monarchy, and 
that on comparing the accounts given by Garcia and Betancur of the same migration of the Mexicans, he found 
that they nearly corresponded with Torquemada’s; but that although Betancur’s was more conformable to that 
contained in the omitted chapter, he preferred, on account of its conciseness and the greater celebrity of its 
author, to insert that taken from Garcia. 

Of Betancur’s relation we can say nothing, not having had the opportunity of consulting the Theatro Mexicano ; 
but it may be found in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh chapters of the second part of that work ; and it probably 
points out other features of analogy between the Mexican migration and the pilgrimage of the Israelites from 
Egypt. Torquemada’s account is singularly confirmed by an original Mexican painting, which once formed a 
portion of the historical museum of Boturini, and which is mentioned in the Catalogue annexed to his Jdea of 
a New History of North America, pagex. No.1. This painting consists of twenty-three pages, folded in the 
usual manner of Mexican paintings, and corresponds so exactly with the description given by Torquemada of the 
Mexican migration, that it is not improbable that it was one of those paintings representing that subject to which 
he alludes as being actually in his possession. The first page contains a picture of the island of Aztlan, and the 
passage of the Mexicans across a river or arm of the sea, and likewise their arrival at Hueyculhuacan in the first year 
of one of their lesser cycles *, as also the image of their god Huitzilopochtli speaking to them through the mouth 

* Their larger cycle consisted of fifty-two years, which was divided into four lesser cycles of thirteen years each. It was at the 
commencement of one of these lesser cycles, in the year Ce Tecpatl, or One Flint, that the Mexicans set out on their migration from 
Aztlan. . In pointing out a supposed connection between the sign of the Flint in the Mexican calendar and the Jewish rite of circum- 

NOTES. JAS 

of the bird. The second page represents the eight Aztec tribes, and the four priests appointed to carry the chair of 
the god. In the third is the tree at the foot of which they made the small altar on which they placed his image, the 
trunk of which cracked suddenly whilst they were cating. The affliction with which they were overwhelmed in 
consequence, and their consultation with their god, who took the Mexicans aside and told them through his 
priest to separate themselves from the other tribes, is also represented in this page. The act of separation is 
marked by the six footsteps, placed near the figure, denoting the Mexicans, three of which occur in the following 
page; and the time, by the symbol of night painted above. Perhaps the festival which the Aztecas are here cele- 
brating was that of Atamal, or of unleavened bread, which took place on the sign of One Flint. The fourth page 
represents the Mexicans prosecuting their journey alone under the guidance of Huitzilipochtli. The symbol of 
sound proceeding from the mouth of the idol, denotes that he went before and pointed out the way. The plaster 
of turpentine and feathers which he put as a sign upon their faces on changing their names from Aztecas into 
Mexicans, seems also discernible on the faces of the recumbent figures; but whether they are about to be sacri- 
ficed, or some other ceremony to be performed upon them, the painting itself does not clearly indicate. The bow 
and arrows, and Chitatli or net, which Huitzilopochtli bestowed on his people as a type that he would make them 
lords of great provinces and kingdoms, occur likewise in this page; and by the figure of the eagle transfixed with 
an arrow might be meant the strength of the enemy whom the Mexican arms were fated to subdue. This figure 
might at first be supposed to refer to the story of the sorceress Quilaztli, who changed herself into an eagle in order 
to turn the two captains of the Mexicans into jest: but that event happened in Apanco some years afterwards, and 
the Mexicans were at this time only just about to leave Chicomoztoc: besides, although ready to discharge their 
arrows at the eagle, when their sister discovered herself to them they merely retired in displeasure without shooting 
ather. The Chitatli or net, in which Torquemada says they put Tecomates and Xicaras, which are a kind of cups, 
occurs likewise in the figure of the Mexican month Quecholi, in the eighth page of the First Part of the Codex 
Telleriano-Remensis, and is there marked with the letter c, and explained to be “ Talega de comida para la guerra,” 
“a bag of provision for war.” Torquemada ‘takes occasion, in pointing out Chicomoztoc (where Huitzilopochtli 
commanded the Mexicans to separate themselves from the other tribes, and changed their name from Aztecas into 
Mexicans) as the second place at which the Mexicans arrived after their departure from Aztlan, to confute the sup- 
posed error of Acosta, Herrera, and Gomara, who had said that that nation proceeded originally from Chicomoztoc, 
or the Seven Caves, by adducing the historical paintings themselves of the Mexicans; and, as he adds, “ neither do 
the Indians absolutely affirm that by a cave they mean their origin and descent,” he seems also to refer to their 
traditions. He further remarks, that what Gomara says of the Mexicans and Nahuatlacas (which latter appellation 
according to Peter Martyr was peculiarly bestowed on the Acolhuacans, because four principal cities, the largest of 

cision, we only repeat a remark made by some of the old Spanish writers; but in referring the particular sign of the Flint, now under 
consideration, to the command delivered by God to Moses to circumcise his son previously to the departure of the Israelitesfrom Egypt, 
it must be admitted that their opinion acquires fresh weight. Indeed, the whole passage in the fourth chapter of Exodus in which men- 
tion is made of Zipporah’s taking a stone and circumcising her son,—which event immediately preceded Aaron’s conference with Moses 
in the Mount of God,—(the literal meaning of Teocolhuacan or Hueycolhuacan ; for Colhuacan is a crooked mountain, and Teocolhuacan 
the crooked mountain of God: and the mountain represented in the first page of the MS. of Boturini was distinguished by both these 
appellations, which are not to be confounded with those of Culhuacan and Aculhuacan, which signify, the former simply “ the bone of 
the arm which reaches from the shoulder to the elbow;” and the latter, “ water upon that bone;’’ which places, as well as Colhuacan 
and 'Teocolhuacan, are represented in the Collection of Mendoza by their appropriate symbols),—in which mountain he had appeared to 
the latter, and spoken to him from the burning bush,—deserves to be compared with Torquemada’s account of the Mexican migration, 
undertaken under the auspices of the two leaders, Mexi or Huitziton and Tecpatzin, the former of whom pretended that a bird out of a 
bush or a tree had invited him to conduct the Mexicans from Aztlan, or that it was their god Huitzilopuchtli who had spoken to him 
through the mouth of the bird. The following is the passage of Exodus alluded to, which is a rock upon which many a Scripture com- 
mentator has foundered: “ And it came to pass by the way, in the inn, that the Lord met him (Moses), and sought to kill him. Then 
Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art- thou 
tome. So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision. And the Lord said to Aaron, Go 
into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went and met him in the Mount of God (Mount Horeb), and kissed him. And Moses 
told Aaron all the words of the Lord, who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him. And Moses and Aaron went, 
and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel. And Aaron spake all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Moses, and 
did the signs in the sight of the people. And the people believed: and when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel, 
and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.” 

DAA, NOTES. 

which was Tezcuco, were under the dominion of their monarch,) being sprung from a common father of the name 
of Iztacmixcoatl, is not verified. The apparent contradiction which exists between these writers, has undoubtedly 
proceeded from the double sense in which the Mexicans were said to have proceeded from Seven Caves or 
Chicomoztoc, and from the eight Aztec tribes having been confounded with the eight different nations which 
peopled New Spain. These nations were, the Chichimecas, the Nonoalcas, the Michiuacans, the Couixcas, the 
Totonacas, the Cuextecas, the Olmecas, and the Xicalangas ; under the first denomination all the Aztec tribes were 
included: and as the Mexicans, like the Hebrews, were great genealogists, they pretended that they were all 
sprung from a common father named Iztacmixcoatl, and fancifully represented in their paintings each nation 
proceeding from a separate cave, except the Olmecas and Xicalangas, who came out of the same cave. It should 
here be observed, that the symbol which has been supposed to mean night, in the third page of the painting of 
Boturini, representing a cave and seven units, signifies undoubtedly Chicomoztoc. The eighteen pages which 
follow, contain little more than the names of the places at which the Mexicans arrived in the course of their 
migration, and the number of years which they stayed in these several places. In the thirteenth page, the two 
bundles, the one containing a gem and the other two pieces of wood, which separated the Mexicans into two 
parties, appear to be represented. As fire was obtained from the cane, the figure of a cane shooting forth seems to 
have been substituted for the pieces of wood. It must not be supposed, because the painting of Boturini, which 
is in simple outline, uncoloured, and on thick pasteboard of Metl, does not record the various marvels which 
Garcia, Torquemada, Acosta, and Herrera testify that the Mexicans believed to have occurred in the course of their 
pilgrimage, from Aztlan,—such as heaven raining bread ; water flowing at the command of their god from a dry rock ; 
a small brook suddenly overflowing its banks, and causing the enemy to flee before them; the punishment of | 
those who murmured against the will of Huitzilopochtli, and wished to remain in Tulan instead of proceeding 
onwards to the promised land; the frequent consultations which the priests held with their god, and the answers 
which they received ;—that if more detailed paintings of this migration had been saved from the overwhelming 
destruction in which the annals of the New World were involved (for in Tezcuco alone, according to Clavigero, 
Zumarraga the first bishop of Mexico caused a little mountain of paintings to be collected in the square of the 
market-place, and burnt), we should not have been acquainted with the history of this pretended migration in its 
minutest circumstances ; since the national vanity of the Mexicans must have been so highly flattered at believing 
themselves to be the chosen people of God, who had wrought the most extraordinary miracles in their favour 
on their quitting Aztlan, himself forsaking heaven to be present in their camp as their legislator and the guide of 
their way, and assuming the titles of Yaoteotle * and Tetzauhteotl, (the god of armies, and the terrible god to strike 
fear and dismay into the breasts of their enemies) : and it is probable that they would have made this the subject of 
their finest paintings +. It would appear, from a passage in Boturini’s Idea of a New History of North America, 

* Sahagun says that Tezcatlipoca was also called Yaotl, which name scarcely differs from Yaoteotle. 

+ It cannot be doubted, from what Boturini says of the Mexicans singing in the court of their temple the great exploits of 
Huitzilopuchth, « las grandezas de Huitzilopuchtli,” that they, like the Jews, recorded in hymns the miraculous events of their own 
history. And that they represented likewise in paintings their famous migration from Aztlan, and the signs and wonders wrought in their 
favour by their tutelary deity, is asserted by Torquemada, in the following passage of the sixteenth chapter of the tenth book of his 
Indian Monarchy, wherein he describes the ceremony of making, adorning, and carrying the image of Huitzilopuchtli in the Mexican 
month Toxcatl: “ Delante de estas Andas llevaban una manera de liengc, hecho de papel, que tenia veinte bragas de largo, una de 
ancho, y un dedo de grueso. Este liengo, hecho de papel, llevaban muchos Mancebos, asidos con unas saetas, con mucho recato 3 
porque no se quebrase, ni lastimase, todo pintado, en cuias pinturas debian de ir escritas todas las hacafias, que en. su favor entendian 
aver hecho, y todos los Blasones, y epitetos, que le daban, en recompensa de las Victorias, que les concedia. Iban cantando delante 
de este falso Dios sus hagafias, y proegas, acto 4 solo Dios debido, 4 quien los de su Pueblo cantaron, diciendo, Dios de venganeas, que 
obra libremente ; y otros (en otra parte) cantemos 4 Dios, que gloriosamente se ha mostrado, hecho un Marte Divino, y un castigador de 
maldades, anegando al Rei Faraon, y matando toda su cavalleria. Pero no ai que marayillar, pues. vamos probando, en toda esta 
obra, ser este maldito engafiador, un remedador de Dios, y de todas las cosas a que se le puede asimilar, lo qual el mismo Dios.le ha 
permitido, y disimulado por sus ocultos secretos, y juicios, y por las cosas que su Divina Magestad se sabe. Llegado 4 lo alto del 
‘Templo cogian, y arrollaban este papel, y sentadas las Andas en su lugar, le ponian asi arrollado 4 los pies del. Idolo, y se bajaban todos, 
quedando solos aquellos Satrapas, y Sacerdotes, que eran de vela, y guarda aquella noche, hasta la maiiana siguiente, que era el 
Dia de la Fiesta. Esta Procesion, y Baile venia 4 concluirse, con la puesta del Sol, y a aquella misma hora hacian ofrenda de 
Tamales, y otras comidas la imagen, y lo mismo hacian al amanecer de el Dia siguiente todos los de el Pueblo,’ en sus Casas & 

NOTES. Q45 

that he possessed several ancient Mexican paintings representing the migrations of the Aztecas and the Tultecas ; 
and it may not be impossible that the painting which he was bringing over to Spain to present to the king, which 
he says was taken from him by the English, together with many papers of importance besides wearing apparel and 
jewels, on board the Spanish ship named the Concord, in which he had embarked for Spain in the year 1744, 
might have been that which had belonged to Don Ferdinand de Alba Yxtlilxochitl, who had received it from the 
kings of Tezcuco, his ancestors; the subject of which was the migration of the Tultecas and the Chichimecas, and 
which Boturini believed was taken from the Teoamoxtli, or divine book of the Tultecas—The passage alluded to 
in the Idea de una Nueva Historia is the following : 

“ On this supposition in so obscure a night, in a sea of such literary storms, amidst so many difficult rocks, I 
have found no other light, no other calm, no other haven, but in the histories of the Indians themselves, amongst 
which I have chiefly sought out the most ancient Tultec accounts. I have already mentioned in the fourteenth 
section, No. 2, the proficiency which that nation had attained in the mechanical arts; and I here add their easy 
method of refining metals, the secret of which I have long investigated from motives of public utility. The ex- 
cellence which they had attained in the science of astronomy, and in the intercalation of their calendar, remains yet to 
be noticed in the twentieth section, No.2, and in the twenty-seventh section, No. 2; and that which relates to their 
history, in the twenty-first section, No. 1, where it will be seen how careful they were to preserve to posterity the 
memory of ancient events by means of maps painted with figures, symbols, characters and hieroglyphics. One of 
these, which was probably taken from the Teoamoxtli, was in the possession of Don Ferdinand de Alba Yxtlilxochitl, 
with many others of the Chichimecan nation, as is evident from testimony which J have seen, and which originally 
belonged to the Caciques of his family: and the said author acknowledges that by their assistance he could write 

los Idolos, que tenian de este mismo Dios Huitzilopuchtli.” “¢ They carried before this litter a kind of painted roll of paper, ninety feet 
in length, one in breadth, and as thick as the finger. A number of young men carried this roll of paper, supporting it with arrows very 
carefully, that it might not be torn or injured, its surface being entirely covered with paintings; in which paintings it was necessary that 
all the mighty acts which he (Huitzilopuchtli) was believed to have performed in their favour, and all his titles, and the epithets which 
-they had bestowed upon him, in return for the victories which he had granted them, should be recorded. They walked in procession 
before this false god, singing his prowess and glorious deeds,—an act which was due to God alone,—before whom those who were his 
chosen people sung, saying, ‘God of vengeance, who freely workest;’ and on other occasions, ¢ Let us sing unto God, who has 
gloriously manifested himself, assuming the character of the divine god of battles! and of the chastizer of iniquities, who swallowed up 
king Pharaoh in the waves, and slew all his cavalry.’ But this need cause no surprise; since we prove in the whole course of this 
work, that that cursed deceiver seeks to substitute himself for God in every thing in which he can liken himself to Him; which God 
himself has permitted and overlooked by his own secret counsels and decrees, and for reasons which His Divine Majesty himself 
knows. When they had ascended the upper platform of the temple, they folded up this roll of paper; and the litter having been laid 
down in its proper place, they put the paper so folded up at the feet of the idol, and all retired, those priests and satraps alone remaining, 
who watched and kept guard that night until the following morning, which was the day of the festival. ‘The procession and dance 
terminated at sunset, at which hour precisely they made an offering of tamales and of other provisions to the image; and all the people 
on the morning of the following day made a similar offering in their respective houses to the idols which they had of this same god 
Huitzilopuchtli.’ The offermg of tamales here noticed was a bread-offering, which the Mexicans, like the Jews, presented at their 
temple, and which perhaps it was only lawful for their priests to eat. It is probable that Torquemada, in comparing the songs of the 
Mexicans in honour of Huitzilopuchtli with those which the children of Israel sang in commemoration of their escape from Egypt, 
wished the readers of his Indian Monarchy to revert to that omiéted chapter in his work in which he likens the migration of the Mexicans 
from Aztlan to that of the children of Israel from Egypt; all the circumstances attending which were, it is to be presumed, recorded in 
the painted roll which was carried in procession and afterwards laid at the feet of Huitzilopuchtli. How much is it to be regretted that 
not a single Mexican painting of this description has been preserved, which would have thrown so much light on a mysterious page 
of history, and made superstition yield one of her strongest holds. 

1 The epithet of Teoyaotlatohuehuitzilopuchth was also bestowed on Huitzilopuchtli, which is in fact the same proper name with 
other titles added:to it, the literal meaning of which is, The divine god of battles, or The god Yao, (for from his other name Yaotl, by 
which, according to Sahagun, he was sometimes known, it is probable that the religious wars of the Mexicans received their 
appellation ; and hence perhaps the tradition that he introduced wars into the world,) The Lord Huehuitzilopuchtli; the compound term 
being formed out of the Mexican words teo divine, or teotl god, yao war, or yuo or yaotl,—an epithet of the supreme deity of the 
Mexicans ; ¢lato lord, and Huitzilopuchth with hue, great, prefixed to it. Itis singular that Huitzilopuchtli should also have been 
called the ineffable ; but since that epithet seems to relate to the pronunciation of some one of his names, it would be interesting to know 
precisely what that name was. 

(Sx) 

246 NOTES. 

both the Tultec and Chichimecan histories, which paintings I possess in my archives. He afterwards states, that 
the above-mentioned original Tultec map recorded events of the greatest antiquity, especially the confusion of 
tongues which took place at the time of the Tower of Babel, which happened, according to the Tultec calendar, in 
the year Ce Tecpatl, One Flint, on which occasion seven Tultecas, who assisted at the building of the said tower, 
perceiving that they could not understand the others, separated themselves, together with their wives and sons; and 
after having travelled in Asia during a certain number of ages, which they called Huchuetiliztles, arrived at last in 
the country of New Spain, which was then named Anahuac, and proceeding in an inland direction till they reached 
Tula, established there the court and metropolis of their empire. A more capital or clearer account than this could 
not in my opinion be desired, especially since it is accompanied with their successive travels and arrival in New 
Spain, with the events which befell them on their journey, duly recorded in the years in which they happened, 
according to the order of the characters of their calendar, which I will compare in the General History with our 
European years. But as some who are not skilled in the use of Indian paintings may be embarrassed by the con- 
sideration that the Tultec Indians who separated themselves from the other nations in the plain of Sennaar were 
only seven, whilst the colonies that proceeded from them, as well in Asia as in America, were innumerable, we 
anticipate their objection by saying, that it was the custom of the Indians to introduce but few figures in their 
paintings, under which were reckoned numerous tribes and nations; and accordingly the said seven Tultecas, whose 
names the above-mentioned Don Ferdinand specifies, must be understood to have been seven principal heads of 
extensive lineages, which were hidden under the names of their leaders. What is here alledged is' confirmed by another 
map of the Chichimecan empire, in which we see painted the arrival of the foreign kings who entreated the 
Emperor Xolotl to give them lands to settle in, without finding the representation of any of the captains or vassals 
who accompanied them; and the same thing is observed in many paintings of the Mexicans, in which the nine 
tribes or nine nations which entered with them into the continent of New Spain are represented only by nine 
captains, each of whom bears on his shield the arms of his nation.” Idea de una Nueva Historia General, page 110. 

Torquemada’s account of the Mexican migration having been verified by the concurrent testimonies of three such 
eminent historians as Garcia, Acosta, and Herrera, and likewise by an original Mexican painting, we shall now 
proceed to point out some of the analogies which exist between the early history of the Mexicans and that of the 
Jews, having first inserted here the explanation of the names of several places which occur in Boturini’s painting, 
which are written under them in old and faded characters, and to which the figures in the plates refer :—1. _ .... ilhuitl- 
cacan Chicomoztoc. 2.Panhualaque. 3.Colhuacan. 4.Chimalman. 5. Quetzalatl. 6. Cuauhcohuatl. 7. Cohuatl. 
8. Oncan quitlamamlique Mixtcoal. 9. Oncan quinnotz Mixtcoal. 10. Cuextecatl Chocayan. 11. Cohuatlcamac. 
12. Azcapotzaleo. 13. Acalhuacan. 14. Ecatepec. 15. Cohuatitlan. 16. Tecpaiocan. 17. Pantitlan. 18. Pan- 
titlan. 19. Atlacuihuaan. 20. Chapoltepec. 21. Chimalaxocl. 22. Huitzilihuitl. 23. Coxcoxth. 24. Colhuacan. 
It is certainly very remarkable that the first page of that painting, the subject of which is the commencement of 
the Aztec migration, or their departure from the land of Aztlan, should present many such analogies. The 
Mexicans, like the children of Israel, began their journey by crossing an arm of the sea on the sign Ce Tecpatl, 
the first sign of one of their lesser cycles; and it is said in the twelfth chapter of Exodus, in the second verse, 
“This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.” 

As the Israelites were conducted from Egypt by Moses and Aaron, who were accompanied by their sister Miriam *, 
so the Aztecas departed from Aztlan under the guidance of Huitziton and Tecpatzin, the former of whom is 
named by Acosta and Herrera, Mexi, attended likewise by their sister Quilaztli, or, as she is otherwise named, 
Chimalman or Malinalli, both which latter names have some resemblance to Miriam, as Mexi has to Moses; in 
reference to which Hebrew proper name it may be observed, that Josephus, in the fifth chapter of the second book 
of his Jewish Antiquities, derives it from the Egyptian words mo and yses, the one signifying water, and the other 
those that had been saved from the water, “ ro yap vdowo Mw ot Avyrrit KaXovet, Yong de rove c& iSatoc cwlevrac;” and 
in the Mexican language, Amoxtli signifies flags or bulrushes, the derivation of which name, from ad! water 
and mowth, might allude to the flags in which Moses had been preserved. This coincidence is merely noticed 
here because the reasons of names are not always accidental; and since acatl and amoxtli are both Mexican 

* 

* From the laudatory manner in which Moses, Aaron, and Miriam are together made mention of in the fourth verse of the sixth 
chapter of Micah, it would appear that the Jews considered Miriam in the light of a leader of the pilgrimage of their forefathers from Egypt, 

NOTES. Q47 

names for reeds and rushes, and Egypt is designated in Scripture the country of the river, hence it may be 
imagined why the symbol of a reed surrounded with water signifies in the first page of the painting of Boturini 
the country called Agatlan, corrupted by the Spaniards into Aztlan, from which the Mexicans proceeded; and in 
the third and fourth pages may be the hieroglyphic of a proper name, which may be pronounced Amoxtli, meaning 
in the same way, the person who had been saved from the water, or in the flags*. It should also be remarked, that 
neither of the male figures in the first page have any symbol attached to their heads distinguishing their names ; 
but as the four priests who are represented in the following page as carrying the ark of Huitzilopochtli, one of 
whom is Chimalman (and Miriam, it will be recollected, was of the tribe of Levi), have their respective names 
painted above them, and the symbol of the reed does not occur among them, although in the third page that symbol 
designates the name of the person through whose mouth their god is reproving his people, and commanding the 
Mexicans to separate themselves from the other tribes,—it may hence be ferred that the reed was the symbol of 
the name of one of the two leaders of the Mexicans represented in the first page, of him we should suppose who 
conducted the Aztecas across the streights of the sea, which is symbolically expressed by the act of rowing a canoe. 
It deserves also to be noticed, that the figure of a pyramid is painted in the island of Aztlan; it is needless to 
observe, that that portion of Egypt which the ancients called the Delta, was an island. ‘With respect to the proper 
name Tecpatzin, by which the other leader of the Mexicans was designated, since ¢ecwél, a crown or mitre, enters 
into the composition of it, from whence comes ¢ecpan, a palace, it might signify the person who wore the mitre ; 
and the two proper names Mexi and Tecpatzin would seem extremely applicable to Moses and Aaron. The 
Israelites are said in the twelfth chapter of Exodus to have sojourned four hundred and thirty years in Egypt; 
and although the fortieth verse of that chapter, wherein it is so stated, has greatly perplexed commentators, since 
from the call of Abraham to the period of the departure of the children of Israel from Egypt, a period no longer 
than that had elapsed, still Acosta’s account of the Mexican migration from the provinces of Aztlan and Teculhuacan 
having taken place three hundred and twenty years after that of the six other tribes, has something analogous in 
it to what is said in the Pentateuch of the first departure of the Hebrews under Abraham and Lot out of Egypt, 
and their second departure in the third century afterwards under Moses and Aaron. The account of Acosta does 
not however agree with Boturini’s painting of the Mexican migration, in which the tribes are all represented as 
leaving Aztlan at the same time, and they do not separate till after their arrival at Chicomoztoc. The circum- 
stances under which the Israelites and the Mexicans commenced their pilgrimage are very analogous. It says in 
the third and following chapters of Exodus, that Moses being employed in keeping sheep in Mount Horeb, God 
appeared to him in a burning bush, commanding him to go to Pharaoh and to desire him to let the children of 
Israel depart from Egypt, promising that he would bring them into a land flowing with milk and honey, and 
renewing his covenant with them at the institution of the passover, again enjoining the rite of circumcision, “that - 
his covenant might be in their flesh for an everlasting covenant,” informing Moses that his name was Jehovah, 
by which name he was till then unknown to them, and that he would perform great signs and wonders, 
and would compel Pharaoh to let the Israelites depart from Egypt. Plagues were accordingly sent on Egypt, the 
two last of which were darkness over all the land of Egypt, except in the habitations of the Israelites, for three 
days; and the death of the first-born, both of man and beast. Moses in the tenth and twelfth chapters of Exodus 
thus describes these two last plagues: “ And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick 

2 Sahagun gives the following account of Mecitl, the leader of the Aztec migration, in the fourteenth section of the twenty-ninth chapter 
of the tenth book of his History of New Spain, from which it would appear that the Mexicans believed that their leader had been 
nourished in a cradle formed of the leaf of the aloe, which is not unlike the Hebrew tradition of Moses having been preserved in an ark 
made of bulrushes. “ This name Mexicatl was formerly pronounced Mecitli, being compounded of me, which is the abbreviation of 
metl, the name of the maguey (the American aloe), and of cit, which signifies a hare; it should therefore properly be pronounced 
Mecicatl, but c having been changed into x, it has been corrupted into Mexicatl. This name originated, as the old Indians affirm, 
from the leader or chief of the Mexicans, who conducted them to these parts when they arrived hither, having been named Mecitl, who 
immediately after his birth received the name of cifli, which means a hare, and who having been nourished in the large leaf of an aloe 
instead of a cradle, was thenceforward called Mecitli, which name may be interpreted the man who was nourished in the leaf of the 
aloe, who when he grew up became a priest to idols, and held personal converse with the Devil, on which account he was much esteemed 
and respected by his vassals, who paid ready obedience to his commands, and assuming the name of their priest, called themselves 
Mexicas or Mexicac, as the ancients relate.” 

QA8 NOTES. 

darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: they saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for 
three days: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings. And it came to pass, that at midnight the 
Lord smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharoah that sat on his throne unto the 
first-born of the captive that was in the dungeon ; and all the first-born of cattle.” The children of Israel are 
afterwards conducted from Egypt by God himself, who proceeds before them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead 
them on the way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light to go by day and night. It should also be 
observed, that the name of Jacob having been before changed by God into Israel, the Hebrews took the name of 
Israelites. Reference to Torquemada’s description of the ‘migration of the Mexicans from Aztlan, and of the 
appearance of their god to them in Chicomoztoc, will show how many analogous circumstances the Mexican history 
presents at its very commencement to that of the Jews; but the painting of Boturini seems actually to represent 
Huitzilopochtli appearing ina burning bush in the mountain of Teoculhuacan to the Aztecas; for the symbol 
of a mountain and their god in the middle of a bush, from whence proceeds smoke, occurs in the first page. 
The reasons for supposing that smoke and not sound is here signified (for the symbols of smoke and sound 
are similar in uncoloured Mexican paintings), are that they are not painted as coming from the mouth of their 
God, though no near or intervening object prevents the symbol of the voice being painted in its proper 
place, as is the case in the fourth page, where the head of the priest bearing the god on his shoulders 
interposes, so that the symbol of sound is necessarily distant from the mouth of the idol; and secondly, that 
‘they are so numerous: whereas sound is generally represented by only one or two of those little symbols, and 
smoke by many, as may be seen in the symbol of the proper name Chimalpopoca, which means a smoking shield, 
and was the name of the third king of Mexico. This rule is, however, by no means invariable. Mention has 
already been made of Chimalman or Quilaztli as accompanying the Aztecas from Aztlan; and Torquemada and 
Herrera both agree that when the Mexicans had proceeded as far as Apanco, a quarrel originated in the camp 
between the two Mexican captains and Quilaztli, which Herrera says was caused by the presumption of the latter, 
who wished to be worshipped by the people as a goddess. They accordingly punished their sister by putting her 
out of the camp and leaving her behind on the road, who seeing that she had been deserted by her tribe, founded 
the city of Malinalco, which was inhabited by her descendants, who were accounted famous for their skill in 
sorcery. Moses informs us in the twelfth chapter of Numbers, that the sedition of Miriam and Aaron at Hazeroth, 
and the presumption of the former, caused a quarrel between them, and that Miriam, who in the fifteenth 
chapter of Exodus is called a prophetess, was punished with the leprosy*, and shut out from the camp for 
seven days. Acosta says, that when the Mexicans arrived in the province of Mechoacan, being charmed with its 
fertility, the people all wished to remain there, which their god refusing to consent to, they next entreated that a 
portion of their tribe might be permitted to settle in that place; to which he assented, and suggested to them the 

* Two diseases to which the Jews were very subject have much perplexed modern physicians ; one of which was the leprosy, and the 
other the being possessed with Devils,—a malady peculiar to themselves, and which Galen and Hippocrates would certainly have noticed 
if ever they had visited the Holy Land. Itis very remarkable that the Mexicans, as we learn from the following passages of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain, should have been acquainted ‘with both these diseases: “‘ Decian que el dicho dios que se llamaba Titlacaoan, 
daba 4 los vivos pobreza y miseria, y enfermedades incurables y contagiosas de lepra, y bubas, y sarna, y hidropesia; las quales 
enfermedades daba quando estaba enojado con los que no cumplian, y quebrantaban el voto y penitencia que.se obligaban a ayunar, 6 
si dormian con sus mugeres, 6 las mugeres con sus maridos, 6 amigos en el tiempo del ayuno.”” Historia Universal delas Cosas de Nueva 
Espafia. Lib. iii. cap. ii. This god Titlacaoan, as Sahagun observes elsewhere, was Tezcatlipoca, whom the Mexicans believed to be 
“‘ Dios delos Dioses,” (the god of gods,) and he it was who sent upon them the plagues of the scab and the leprosy, with both which Moses 
frequently threatens the Jews. Itis in the twenty-first chapter of the first book of the same History that mention is made of the 
superstitious fear which the Mexicans entertained of Devils entering into them. “ Decian tambien que si 4 alguno se le secaba la mano 
6 el pie, 6 le temblaba la cara, 6 le temblaba la boca 6 los labios, 6 si entraba en él algun demonio, todo esto decian que acontescia 
porque estos dioses de que aqui se trata, se habian enojado con él.” The evil spirit which entered Saul we must suppose entered 
by the permission of God, but not by his command; although the Jews probably understood in the latter sense the tenth verse of the 
eighteenth chapter of the First Book of Samuel: “ And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, 
and he prophesied in the midst of the house; and David played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in Saul’s hand. 
And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I willsmite David even to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.” 
In the thirty-seventh page of the lesser Vatican MS. the representation of a person afflicted with the scab or leprosy seems to occur. 
Since the small-pox was a complaint certainly unknown to the Indians before the arrival of the Spaniards amongst them, and perhaps 
likewise the measles, this painting cannot possibly refer to the former, nor probably to the latter. 

NOTES. Q49 

stratagem of stealing away the clothes from a considerable number of their companions whilst they were bathing 
in the lake of Pazcuaro: and hence Acosta asserts, that the party who had been robbed of their clothes, and who 
were thereby necessarily compelled to remain behind and to people the province of Mechoacan, entertained ever 
afterwards, though originally of the same tribe, the greatest enmity against the Mexicans. This account seems to 
contain a confused allusion to the hatred which always existed between the Samaritans and the Jews, and to the 
Israelites spoiling the Egyptians of their jewels at the time of their departure from Egypt, as is recorded in the 
thirty-fifth and thirty-sixth verses of the twelfth chapter of Exodus: “And the children of Israel did according to 
the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: And 
the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as 
they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.” The appearance of Tezcatlipoca to the Mexicans in their 
migration, on the top of the mountain called Tezcatepec, amidst fire, smoke, and darkness, (to the circumstances 
attending which apparition the composition of the proper name refers*,) has something in it analogous to 

* This name is compounded of ¢ezcatl, which means a mirror, referring to the proper name Tezcatepec, which signifies The Mount 
of Mirrors, ¢lid dark, and poca smoke; and its signification is The god who appeared in smoke and darkness on the mountain of 
mirrors. The Mexicans formed their mirrors out of blocks or tables of the stone yztli; but a table of stone of opaque substance might 
still be metaphorically named a mirror, if the laws of God were therein engraved. ‘The Jews call the Talmud the mirror of God. 

The Abbé Chiarini, Professor at the University of Warsaw, has proposed to publish a translation of the entire Talmud in French; a 
work which would greatly advance the cause of knowledge and of truth, by exposing error, superstition, and imposture in all their native 
deformity. It is to be hoped that the following critical remarks, extracted from the 112th Number of the Revue Encyclopedique, will 
not deter the learned Abbé from prosecuting his laudable design : 

«¢ Nous avons eu déja occasion d’entretenir nos lecteurs du projet formé par quelques hébraisans de Pologne, de donner au public une 
traduction francaise du Talmud. (Voy. Rev. Enc., t. xxx. Mai 1826, p. 565.) On appréciera facilement l’importance d’une semblable 
entreprise, sil’on veut se rappeler que ce code sacré des juifs modernes n’a jamais été traduit dans une langue européenne’, Aujourd’hui, 
comme M. l’abbé Chiarini, professeur de langues et d’antiquités orientales 4 l'Université de Varsovie, vient de nous adresser divers 
mémoires sur ce projet dont l’idée premiére lui appartient, nous croyons devoir le faire connaitre plus complétement, sans toutefois entrer 
dans des développemens que ne comporte point la nature de notre recueil. 

“ La religion juive est assise sur deux bases: l’une est la loi écrite, autre la loi orale. La loi écrite est contenue dans la Bible; la 
loi orale se trouve dans la vaste compilation, nommée Talmud. Si nous croyons tes rabbins, Moise recut les deux lois sur le mont Sinai, 
La premiére devait étre mise par écrit et livrée aux idiots comme aux savans; la seconde devait étre communiquée de vive voix aux 
seuls savans, pour qu’ils se la transmissent les uns les autres. On congoit que cette prétendue loi orale, dont jamais Diew n’avatt parlé 
& Moise, n’était qu'une pure invention des doctewrs, qui, se trouvant génés par la Bible, ouvraient ainsi un champ indéfini a leurs 
systémes bizarres, comme 2 leur ambition. Le caractére de cette loi était de rester traditionnelle, de ne jamais étre fixée ; cependant, 
elle finit par s’élever au rang de loi écrite. ‘Les événemens expliquent cette contradiction singuliére. Le christianisme avait jeté ’alarme 
parmi les juifs; il tournait contre eux des armes qui leur appartenaient, et marquait chaque jour par un triomphe nouveau ; le judaisme 
semblait n’avoir plus qu’é mourir sous les coups d’un ennemi si puissant. Aucun lien n’unissait les docteurs de la loi dispersés dans 
l'Europe et dans l’Asie; les traditions colportées de lorient 4 Yoccident n’étaient plus soumises au contréle de la synagogue. C’est alors 
que des rabbins congurent l’idée de raffermir leur religion, en écrivant les traditions. Par ce moyen, le judaisme retrouvait des dogmes 
que le christianisme ne pouvait pas lui ravir; ces dogmes étaient appropriés 4 son état misérable; ils se montraient néanmoins pleins 
de jeunesse et d’énergie, tels enfin qu’il les fallait 4 un peuple dévoué au malheur et animé des sentimens les plus hostiles contre les 
nations étrangéres 4 son culte. Le Talmud opéra donc la reconstruction du judaisme. Cette reconstruction fut éminemment vicieuse, 
elle s’appuya sur des principes absurdes et immoraux ; mais elle fut si solide qu’aujourd’hui encore elle passe pour inébranlable. 

«« Le signal de ce grand changement fut donné par Jehuda le saint, qui, vers la fin du 2° siécle de notre ére, entreprit d’écrire les 
traditions dans le livre intitulé Misna. Un siécle aprés parut la Gemara. Ces deux ouvrages réunis forment le Talmud; ils parurent 
a Jérusalem. ‘Trois siécles plus tard, on sentit la nécessité d’écrire un nouveau recueil de traditions; car les décisions des rabbins 
continuaient a se succéder et & usurper chacune & leur tour l’autorité de la loi écrite. On rédigea donc 4 Babylone un second Talmud. 
Si Pon examine avec quelque soin ces deux compilations, on trouve que l’esprit de haine contre les non-juifs et le délire d'imagination 
des rabbins ont augmenté a proportion que le christianisme faisait plus de progrés. Ainsi, le judaisme paraft plus outré dans la Gemara 
de Jérusalem que dans la Misna, et l’on n’apercoit plus aucune modération, aucune trace de bon sens dans la Gemara de 
Babylone. Cependant le Talmud babylonien est le plus répandu parmi les juifs, ou plutdt c’est le seul qui soit étudié et cité par eux. 
Ils cherchent 4 justifier cette préférence, en accusant Wobscurité le Talmud de Jérusalem; mais la véritable raison, c’est que les 
traditions se renouvelant sans interruption, les derniéres devaient étre réputées les meilleures. Le crédit du Talmud babylonien est donc 
naturel, quoique trés-funeste. 

1 Les califes de Cordove l’ont fait traduire en arabe par un Juif espagnol, nommé R. Joseph. On peut voir quelques détails sur ce 
rabbin, dans l’ouvrage intitulé Les Jucfs d’Occident, 3° partie, p. 17. 

(3s ) 

250 NOTES. | = 

the appearance of God on Mount Sinai to the Israelites. Tezcatlipoca, as Torquemada asserts, was the Jupiter 
of the ancients, and the god whom the Mexicans considered supreme over all; he therefore was probably the 

“ Cette compilation immense est divisée en six ordres et en soixante-sept livres ou traités; accrue par des additions postérieures & sa 
rédaction, elle remplit douze énormes volumes in-folio, Tel est au moins le nombre des volumes de I’édition publiée & Venise, en 1520, 
par Daniel Bomberg. C’est sur cette édition non censurée, et sur celle de Cracovie (1602-5, 7 vol. in-fol.), ot les passages retranchés 
par ordre des papes ont été rétablis, que M. abbé Chiarini se propose de travailler. 

“« Expliquons le plan arrété par cet orientaliste aussi savant que courageux. : 

“ Traduire le Talmud, c’est-a-dire Youvrage le plus obscur, le plus diffus, le plus incohérent que l'on puisse imaginer, ouvrage qui 
n’est pas écrit en hébreu, mais dans une langue faite exprés, et qui est composée d’hébreu, de chaldéen, de syriaque, de persan, d’arabe, 
de grec, de latin...; traduire, dis-je, le Talmud me paraissait une tAche suffisante pour remplir la vie d’un homme. Aussi ai-je été 
grandement surpris, lorsque j’ai appris que M. Chiarini, au lieu de borner ses efforts & l’achévement de sa version, entreprenait une foule » 
@écrits qu’il me paraft bien difficile qu’il puisse terminer, méme en tenant compte du travail des deux coopérateurs qu’avec beaucoup 
de raison il a cru devoir se donner. 

“ La traduction du Talmud doit étre précédée par la publication @’un livre intitulé: Théorie du judaisme, appliquée 4 la réforme des 
juifs de tous les pays de l'Europe, et qui paraitra a la fois en frangais, en allemand et en polonais. Dans cet écrit seront exposés les 
motifs qui ont porté les traducteurs & entreprendre leur version du Talmud. 

“ Le premier traducteur, queje suppose étre M. Chiarini, dans un des mémoires manuscrits qu’il nous a envoyés, rend compte des 
études par lesquelles il a fait précéder la traduction du premier volume. I] nous apprend que cette partie de V’entreprise étant achevée, 
au lieu de poursuivre la traduction des onze autres volumes, il s’est tout & coup arrété pour composer une Théorie du judaisme, 
appliquée a la réforme des israélites du royaume de Pologne; ouvrage trés-considérable, et qui semble rentrer tellement dans le plan de 
celui que j’ai cité plus haut, que je suis porté & croire que ces deux écrits, malgré la diversité de leurs titres, n’en forment qu’un seul. 
La solution de ce doute ne se trouve pas dans les mémoires que j’ai sous les yeux. 

“ Le second traducteur ne s’est pas non plus exclusivement occupé de la version entreprise. Je le vois travailler 4 un extrait de tous 
les proverbes, sentences et maximes morales qui se trouvent dans le Talmud, afin de composer un catéchisme destiné & Vinstruction de la 
jeunesse israélite. Ce méme traducteur prépare, en outre, un écrit dans lequel il discutera les diverses opinions émises sur le Talmud, 
et appréciera le mérite ou le danger des doctrines talmudiques, d’aprés la tendance et l’influence de ces doctrines. 

« Enfin, le troisitme traducteur, chargé de consulter les commentaires et les différens extraits du Talmud, pour en tirer les matériaux 
qui doivent entrer dans les notes de la version, vient d’achever un rituel de pratiques et de coutumes religieuses des juifs d’aujourd’hui. 

*« Si tous ces €crits sont conformes @ l’analyse que M. Chiarini en présente, il faut reconnaitre qu’ils sont enfantés par un esprit 
vraiment philosophique, et qu’une profonde science resplendit en eux; mais peut-on néanmoins ne pas étre surpris de voir trois personnes 
réunies pour traduire le Talmud, s’occuper de travaux qui ne sont pas précisément nécessaires & une version de ce recueil immense? A 
peine entrés dans la carriére, leur faut-il déja des délassemens? Je redoute cette disposition de Vesprit qui porte & reculer sans cesse les 
bornes d’un sujet, parce qu’elle me semble exclusive des qualités nécessaires pour mener a son terme une vaste entreprise. ‘ 

“« Je m’arréte peu sur ces doutes, qui ne sont peut-étre que des préventions, et je pose la question suivante: Quels sont les avantages 
qui peuvent résulter d’une traduction francaise du Talmud? 

“ Faciliter 4 un peuple la lecture et l’étude de ses livres sacrés est généralement une chose si féconde en bons résultats, qu’on doit la 
regarder comme une obligation imposée soit aux ministres du culte, soit aux gouvernemens, soit aux simples particuliers que leurs lumiéres 
élévent au-dessus de leurs concitoyens. Mais si ces livres sacrés, au lieu de n’offtir qu’un heureux développement des principes de la 
morale, altéraient au contraire ces principes ; s’ils bouleversaient les dogmes fondamentaux de la religion; s’ils étaient de nature 4 troubler 
les consciences, & aigrir les esprits, a affaiblir méme le sentiment religieux; si, enfin, ils n’avaient acquis le caractére sacré qu’A’aide d’une 
coupable usurpation, devrait-on travailler 4 les répandre? Devrait-on renverser les obstacles qui peuvent contrarier leurs succes? Je ne 
le pense pas. Choisissez dans ces livres ce qu’il y a de moins mauvais, jetez un voile épais sur le reste, et vous aurez fait ce que la 
raison me semble conseiller. 

« M. Chiarini veut traduire le Talmud dans la langue la plus répandue de l'Europe; or, voici ce qu’il pense du Talmud: Son génie 
malfaisant, dit-il, porte des coups funestes et invisibles au genre humain du milieu des ténébres épaisses qui l’environnent. Qui pourrait 
calculer combien il a contribué et contribue encore 4 multiplier les malheurs qui affligent la terre? etc.... Voila le livre qu’il veut faire 
passer dans la langue universelle. Disons mieux: voila le poison qu’il veut faire circuler. Je croyais qu’il était reconnu depuis bien 
des siécles qu’on ne pouvait réformer le judaisme qu’en ruinant le Talmud et en élevant sur ses débris la Bible aujourd’hui si dédaignée. 
Telle fut au moins la pensée du grand Maimonides’, et de cette école des rabbins anti-traditionnaires, qui chercha avec une si louable 
persévérance 4 épurer le judaisme en simplifiant le Talmud; elle ne put réussir, mais nous n’en devons pas moins reconnaitre la sagesse 
des idées qui l’animaient. Je suis loin de penser que ce soit une chose facile que de ravir aux juifs le livre qui les a faits ce qu’ils sont, 
qui les a réunis quand la Providence les dispersait, et dont le tems a consolidé le pouvoir; mais, ce qui est trés-aisé, c’est de ne point 
lui donner un surcroit de publicité, de ne pas le rendre plus clair, plus usuel, de ne pas le livrer aux idiots comme aux savans. On ne 
peut rien arracher par la force 4 un peuple aussi obstiné que le peuple juif. Si donc on veut le dégotiter du Talmud, il faut laisser dans 

» The great Maimonides (as he is surely here named in derision) was as prejudiced a Jew as ever lived, but less ignorant than the 
generality of his countrymen. 

N@ ff ES: 251 

same as Huitzilopuchtli: and as Garcia affirms that that deity taught the Mexicans rites, ceremonies and sacrifices, 
causing the heaven to rain bread, and drawing from the flint water to quench their thirst, the occasion of his 
doing so, it may be presumed, was when he appeared to them on the top of the mountain of Tezcatepec. It is 

Vobscurité ce livre dangereux, se garder de l’offrir a la discussion et 4 la critique des chrétiens, et attendre sans impatience le moment ou 
un philosophe sage et prudent comme Mendelsohn viendra décider ses coreligionnaires 4 reporter leurs études sur les livres de Moise. Si 
Von commence la réforme du judaisme par la discussion du Talmud, on n’aura fait qu’ouvrir une carriére illimitée 4 toutes les divagations 
de Vesprit judaique. En citant Mendelsohn, j’ai rappelé le nom du plus beau génie qu’ait produit Israél depuis Maimonides; eh bien! 
parcourez tous les écrits de ce sage, et dites si jamais il a recommandeé je ne dis pas la traduction du Talmud, mais seulement l’étude de 
celivre. L’auteur du Phedon connaissait trop bien sa nation, il respectait trop la raison humaine, pour commettre une telle faute. 

« Je dois, au reste, rendre justice 4 M. Chiarini, et reconnaitre que, quand il a congu le‘projet de traduire le Talmud, il songeait 
moins 2 le répandre parmi les juifs, qu’A le faire connaitre aux chrétiens, espérant que ces derniers acquerraient par cette traduction les 
moyens de confondre la mauvaise foi des rabbins, de faire sentir a tous les juifs Pénormité de leurs erreurs, et par conséquent d’écraser le 
talmudisme. Cette idée me paraft si extraordinaire que je crois devoir rapporter les propres paroles du professeur: ‘Que lon 
rapproche, dit-il, par une version du Talmud les lois et les rites barbares, les maximes haineuses et fanatiques, les contradictions 
palpables, les propos fabuleux, les ergotismes et les jeux de mots et de lettres qui constituent le canevas et la broderie de ce méme livre ; 
qwon le rapproche, dis-je, de nos lois, de nos moeurs et de nos lumiéres, et V’état de notre civilisation et nos discussions produiront 
insensiblement la réforme désirée; car la-raison des juifs, quelque limitée qu’on veuille la supposer sous ce point de vue, ne pourra point 
manquer de désavouer des principes et des préjugés dont elle sera contrainte de rougir aux yeux du monde entier. La synagogue ne 
pourra plus crier 4 Pimposture et a la calomnie, lorsqu’une version du Talmud aura démontré enfin que la tendance de ses doctrines est 
plus pernicieuse encore que nous ne pouvons le faire voir ici’ 

“ Ainsi donc les juifs respecteront le Talmud, tant qu’il sera écrit en mauvais hébreu: si demain on le traduit en bon frangais, ils 
Pabandonneront. Comment peut-on se préter & de semblables illusions’? Les chrétiens ont écrit et répété contre le Talmud tout ce 
qu'il était possible de dire. Les juifs ne s’en sont pas émus; il fut un tems ot il était de mode d’établir des controverses publiques 
entre les chrétiens et les juifs. IM]. Chiarini se rappelle sans doute la célébre conférence qui eut lieu devant Vanti-pape Benoit XIII. 
Tout fut dit, de part et @autre, pour et contre le Talmud. Qu’en est-il résulté? rien que quelques apostasies préparées et payées en 
secret. Les sectateurs consciencieux du Talmud sentaient leur passion pour ce livre croitre 4 mesure qu’il était exposé aux attaques 
des chrétiens; ils se montraient plus obstinés, plus intraitables qu’auparavant, et les hommes sages des deux religions s’accordaient 4 
blAmer ces combats qui ne résolvaient aucune difficulté*. Side tels moyens n’ont pu conduire au succés dans des siécles ot la passion 
des controverses religieuses était universelle, comment admettre qu’ils auraient plus effet aujourd’hui que les questions de théologie 
nexcitent plus d’intérét? 

“Tl faut se faire de justes idées sur la force des opinions religieuses, et ne pas croire qu’un peuple abandonnera sa religion, parce que 
des argumentateurs lui auront démontré que cette religion est mauvaise. Les changemens en une matiére aussi grave trouvent leur 
principe moins dans la volonté et la conscience des individus, que dans les révolutions morales et politiques qu’éprouvent les sociétés. 
Les efforts isolés disparaissent au sein de ces grands mouvemens, et ils n’ont pas le droit de se vanter du succés?, 

“Une traduction du Talmud n’aura pas les glorieux résultats qu’annonce M. Chiarini. Les juifs se garderont de descendre dans 
Varéne: s’ils y descendent, ce ne sera pas pour combattre sur une traduction que toutes les synagogues auront anathématisée, comme 
fille de la haine et de erreur; ils demanderont que la controverse soit reportée sur le texte méme; et alors, & quoi aura servi cette longue 
et fastidieuse version*? 

« Pénétré de respect pour le caractére et les talens de M. l’abbé Chiarini, j’ai cru devoir rechercher la source des illusions qui se sont 
emparées de son esprit, afin de la lui indiquer avec franchise, J’ai relu tous ses mémoires, et je suis resté convaincu que son erreur 
provient uniquement de la persuasion ot il est que,- pour réformer les juifs, il faut commencer par réformer le judaisme. Pour moi, je 
pense absolument le contraire, et voici mes motifs: Avant d’ensemencer un champ, il faut le défricher. Avant d’entreprendre une tache 
aussi rude que la réforme d’un systéme religieux, il faut préparer la nation qui doit recevoir cette réforme. Si cette nation est plongée 
dans Vignorance, avilie par la mistre, abrutie par une longue proscription, pourra-t-elle se montrer accessible aux séductions d’une 
philosophie épurée, et se réveiller de sa torpeur pour s’élever 4 la connaissance des véritables principes religieux? Non assurément: 
améliorez l’état social de cette nation, donnez-lui les idées d’ordre, de sagesse et de patience qui lui manquent; instruisez-la, détachez-la 

1 This is a very false argument; since it is not the language or the style of composition of the Talmud that has caused it to be 
respected, but its doctrines and traditions believed by the Jews to be divine; and the Abbé Chiarini proposes, by exposing the 
absurdity of those traditions and the immorality of those doctrines, to make the Talmud contemptible even in the eyes of the Jews. 

2 The religious controversy which took place two years ago in Dublin between Mr. Pope and Mr. Macguire, on the truth and merits 
of their respective creeds, was attended with exactly the same results. ‘The account of this controversy, which has been printed and is 
attested by the signatures of the disputants, is curious and interesting. : 

3 The attempt is nevertheless laudable, because the end proposed is useful. 

* They will probably be silent, or they will at last pay a debt which they have long owed to mankind, by abandoning the entire of 
their vicious system. ; 

952 NOTES. 

also very remarkable that the Mexicans should have solemnized his festival exactly three times in the year, as the 
Israelites were also commanded, in the thirty-fourth chapter of Exodus, to appear thrice in the year before the 

de ses habitudes haineuses, de ses vices héréditaires, de son avilissante cupidité ; quand vous aurez opéré ces heureux changemens, vous 
pourrez diriger ses regards vers ses livres sacrés; elle comprendra la nécessité de les soumettre au jugement de la raison! et de les purger 
de ce qu’ils peuvent offrir de mauvais: son esprit, dégagé des impressions du malheur et de V’ignorance, s’ élévera sans efforts aux plus 
hautes considérations morales*; et la réforme, appelée par tous les voeux, accueillie avec applaudissement, s’opérera d’elle-méme. 
Supposons M. Chiarini distribuant ses écrits aux rabbins et aux juifs de la Pologne, de Allemagne, et de ? Alsace. Combien en 
sera-t-il parmi eux qui comprendront tout ce qu’ils renferment de sage et de vraiment philantropique? Admettons, au contraire, qu’ils 
ont été mis dans les mains des juifs portugais, rien alors ne s’oppose 4 ce que nous croyions que de tels ouvrages ont trouvé de dignes 
appréciateurs, et qu’ils pourront étre vraiment utiles. D’ou vient cette différence? Elle vient de ce que les juifs portugais, comme les 
juifs de Hollande, sont dans un état moral satisfaisant, tandis que les juifs d’Alsace, ainsi que ceux de Pologne, restent en général 
étrangers a la civilisation des contrées qu’ils habitent, et que, tout entiers aux soins de leur commerce, il serait impossible de leur faire 
comprendre seulement ce qu’est une réforme religieuse. Je le répéte, on ne doit songer 4 reconstruire le judaisme qu’aprés que l’état 
moral et civil des juifs aura été amélioré. 

«Yelle fut la pensée de Napoléon, lorsqu’il convoqua son grand sanhedrin, en 1807. Cette assemblée, jugée si sévérement par 
M. Chiarini, avait pour mandat de mettre autant que possible la population israélite de la France en harmonie avec le reste des 
Frangais®. Elle ne régla que l’état relatif de la société juive; elle ne s’occupa ni dela Misna, ni de la Gemara; elle ne fit point 
traduire le Talmud; elle ne précha pas la réforme ; elle fit mieux, elle donna aux juifs francais une organisation civile, préférable a celle 
des juifs de quelque époque et de quelque pays que se soit. Grace a sa sagesse, une restauration du judaisme en France pourra s’opérer 
un jour. Ni nous ni nos enfans ne le verrons luire ce jour; mais enfin il arrivera, si, comme je l’espére, nos concitoyens israélites ne 
se lassent pas de marchier dans les voies d’améliorations ouvertes par le grand sanhedrin. 

«« Aprés avoir considéré la traduction du Talmud comme élément d’une réforme religieuse, M. Chiarini examine les services qu’elle 
pourrait rendre 4 histoire, a la chronologie et a la littérature; en ramenant la question 4 des termes plus simples, en renoncant a un 
vain espoir, M. Chiarini obtiendrait les suffrages de tous les amis des lettres. Le Talmud est un monument des écarts de l’esprit 
humain ; sous ce raport, il a droit 4 une mention dans histoire des religions et dans celle de la philosophie. Mais faudra-t-il traduire 
intégralement un ouvrage en 12 volumes in-folio, qui de l’aveu commun ne se recommande que par l’excés de sa bizarrerie et de son 
absurdité*? Songez au tems, au savoir, aux frais qu’exigera la publication d’une version du Talmud, et au mince profit qu’en tirerait 
la littérature. Quels sont les écrivains qui la liront dans un but historique ou littéraire? Quelques consciencieux érudits, ou quelques 
curieux. Mais les premiers savent l’hébreu, et ne sont pas gens a s’en rapporter 4 la parole d’autrui. Quant aux seconds, les écrits 
des deux Buxtorff, de Bartolocci, de Wolff, d’Einsenmenger, de Basnage, de Rossi et de tant d’autres, satisferont leur curiosité 
passagére. Je ne vois donc point, méme dans ce cas, des motifs suffisans pour entreprendre l’immense travail dont il est question. 

“ Je ne veux pas prétendre toutefois qu’il soit impossible de composer aujourd’hui un ouvrage curieux sur le Talmud. Le savant, 
versé dans la connaissance de |’hébreu rabbinique et de la philosophie juive, qui ferait un extrait simple et méthodique du Talmud, qui 
choisirait tout ce que ce code contient de relatif 4 histoire, qui mettrait en lumiére et expliquerait quelques-uns des symboles intéressans 
que lon y trouve, pourrait offrir au public un volume digne d’étre recu avec faveur, et qui compléterait les notions déja acquises sur l’état 
des écoles philosophiques de l’Asie dans les premiers tems de notre ére. L’Operis Talmudici brevis recensio de Jean Buxtorff est un 
ouvrage concu dans cette idée, mais qui ne peut passer que pour une esquisse : le refaire sur une base plus large serait une chose utile. 
Voila, 4 mon’avis, tout ce que la littérature demande 4 Vorientaliste qui veut rendre ses travaux sur le Talmud profitables au 
monde savant. 

«Si je n’avais pas attaqué l’entreprise de M. Chiarini dans son principe, je me serais permis de critiquer le parti qu’il a pris de 
traduire le Talmud en Francais, la langue latine me paraissant sous tous les rapports plus convenable*. Je lui aurais fait observer que la 

1 The Jews will never, as long as they continue to he Jews, submit to try the Talmud by the test of reason, nor is it likely that they 
will ever acknowledge the old law to be abolished; or in other words, become converts to Christianity. We do not fear that we shall 
strengthen prejudices which can receive no accession to their native force by observing that it is a very remarkable fact, that the last 
ordinance in the Old Testament is an injunction to the Jews to preserve inviolate the laws of Moses; nor do we recollect any passage 
in the course of it which seems to contemplate the abolition of the old law, although to many of the Levitical institutions the words 
‘everlasting’ and ‘throughout your generations,’ in reference to the particular law promulgated, are frequently added. 

2 Eutopian expectation. 

3 The grant of a perfect equalization of civil rights to the Jews from the respective governments of every country which they at present 
inhabit, would display an enlightened spirit of legislation, and be the means most likely of making them good citizens, and believers no 
longer in the Talmud; since it is a principle inherent in human nature, to listen to the arguments and to attend to the advice of those 
whom we know to be benevolently disposed towards us, and really to desire our welfare. 

* They have other equally absurd books. 

5 Because only a few learned men and some curious persons would read a Latin translation of the Talmud, which is a language 
much less generally understood in Europe now than it was in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 

NOTES. om 953 

Lord. Torquemada says in the twentieth chapter of the tenth book of his Indian Monarchy, that the Mexicans 
celebrated the festival of Huitzilopochtli in the fifth, the ninth, and the fifteenth month of their calendar, which last 
month was named Panquetzalliztli: and Peter de los Rios says that the festival of Tetzcatlipoca was kept three 
times in the year. The same writer also relates, that when the Mexicans in the course of their migration had arrived 
at Apanco, the people of that province were inclined to oppose their further progress, but that Huitzilopochtli 
aided the Mexicans by causing a brook that ran in the neighbourhood to overflow its banks. This reminds us of 
what is said in the third chapter of Joshua, of the Jordan overflowing its banks and dividing to let the priests who 
bore the ark pass through. Torquemada and Herrera both record the arrival of the Mexicans at Tulan, and describe 
how highly they were enchanted with the situation of the mountain Cohuatepec; and that consequently, being 
unwilling to proceed further in search of the promised land, they wished to fix there their permanent residence, 
murmuring against the will of Huitzilopochtli; who inflicted a dreadful vengeance that night upon them in the 
camp, slaying all those that had spoken of remaining in that place. Moses in the sixteenth chapter of Numbers 
thus describes the rebellion of Korah against himself, and his own conduct on that occasion: “ Now Korah, the son 
of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi; and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, 
sons of Reuben, took men; and they rose up before Moses with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and 
fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown. And they gathered themselves together 
against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them; Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation 
are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congrega- 
tion of the Lord? And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face: and he spake unto Korah, and unto all his 
company, saying, Even to-morrow the Lord will show who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near 
unto him; even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto him.” And in the twenty-eighth and 
following verses of the same chapter Moses adds, “ And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent 
me to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind. If these men die the common death of all 
men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; then the Lord hath not sent me: but if the Lord make a 
new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down 
quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the Lord. And it came to pass, as he 
had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them ; and the earth 
opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all 
their goods. They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them ; 
and they perished from among the congregation. And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of 
them; for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up also. And there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed 
the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense.” Moses afterwards says, in the forty-ninth verse, that fourteen 
thousand seven hundred of the others died of the plague. The cause which led to the punishment of the Mexicans, it 
will be immediately perceived, was very different from that for which the Israelites so severely suffered ; for although 
on other occasions the children of Israel had incurred the displeasure of God, by murmuring against proceeding 
further on their journey and by wishing to return back to Egypt, Moses here expressly states that Korah and the 
Israelites were punished for sedition against himself and Aaron, as Aaron and Miriam had been before punished 
for sedition against himself alone. But it is in the dreadful nature of the vengeance inflicted, and in the new and 

langue frangaise n’est pas trés-répandue parmi les rabbins, et qu’il est douteux qu’on l’écrive correctement en Pologne, ot la version est 
censée devoir paraitre. 

« Je ne terminerai pas cet article sans m’excuser prés de M. l’abbé Chiarini du grand nombre d’objections que je viens de diriger 
contre son projet. Jai cru servir ses intéréts en lui montrant ce qui me paratt étre la vérité. Ce n’est pas sans une véritable peine - 
que lon voit un homme doué de rares connaissances, et animé de Pamour sincére de Vhumanité, se jeter dans une enterprise qui ne doit 
pas étre terminée, ou qui, si jamais elle parvenait a sa fin, n’indemniserait point par @heureux résultats les efforts d’une vie qui pourrait 
se consumer dans des traveaux moins pénibles et plus utiles. Je sais que mes doutes ne décideront pas M. Chiarini a abandonner le 
projet qu’il a congu. On ne renonce pas 4 de flatteuses illusions parce qu’une voix isolée et inconnue s’est élevée contre elles ; mais 
quwil veuille bien se rappeler ce qu’ regret je lui prédis: en admettant qu’il termine sa traduction, il ne trouvera ni dans les gouverne- 
mens, ni dans les particuliers, assez d’encouragemens pour pouvoir la mettre au jour. Puisse-t-il ne pas se préparer des reerets 
pour un tems ot ils seraient inutiles!” ARTHUR BEUGNOT.? 

* In this prediction M. Beugnot may easily be mistaken. 

(31) 

Q54, NOTES. 

uncommon kind of death by which both the Mexicans and the Israelites died, as well as its suddenness, that the two 
examples are parallel. ‘Torquemada observes that Huitzilopochtli had in the beginning informed the Mexicans 
that the mountain of Cohuatepec was to be only a specimen and sample of the promised land, and that they 
were not to consider it a permanent residence: and we are informed in Deuteronomy, that Moses, on account 
of having incurred the displeasure of God in the wilderness, was not permitted to enter the land of Canaan, but 
was commanded to ascend to the top of Mount Pisgah, in order that he might have a sample and specimen of the 
land flowing with milk and honey which the Israelites were about to possess. The same writer also says, that as 
Moses and Aaron died in the wilderness without reaching the land of Canaan, so Huitziton and Tecpatzin died 
before the Mexicans arrived in the land of Anahuac. This coincidence appears to him deserving of notice; but 
still, if the number of years which the Mexicans employed in their migration be considered, the reverse would have 
been highly improbable, even allowing for the patriarchal ages to which the early Chichimecas attained; for accord- 
ing to tradition Xolotl lived two hundred years, and his sister one hundred and fifty: neither would it have appeared 
extraordinary that Moses himself should have died without entering the promised land,—he being fourscore years 
old before he left Egypt,—if he had not informed us that God’s displeasure was the cause, and that otherwise we 
might have been predisposed to imagine that a man so highly favoured would have also been rewarded with long 
life, a blessing upon which the Jews set such high value. Further analogies might be traced between the early history 
of the Jews, as recorded in the Pentateuch, and that of the Mexicans. It is unnecessary, however, to point them 
out here, as the account which we have taken from Torquemada’s works, of the Mexican migration, terminates 
with the history of their residence in Tulan and Cohuatepec, and of their departure from those places. But since 
mention has been made of Xolotl, (whose symbol Boturini says was an eye, indicative of prudence,) who 
conducted the first colony of Chichimecas or Chichimexi from the country of Amaquemecam to that of Anahuac, 
(which name means the Valley of the Lake,) we cannot refrain from observing that his history, in some of its 
circumstances, is not unlike Joshua’s: like Joshua, before he himself enters the country of the Tultecas he sends 
spies to explore the land, and the report of his son Nopaltzin induces him to advance. He then proceeds a short 
way into the country, as far as Tenayucan, where numbering the people he finds them to be more than a million; 
and each individual of this mighty host being ordered to throw a single stone, twelve large hillocks of stones 
were formed, which Torquemada says, on the authority as it would appear of ancient paintings, existed in 
his time. This account of Xolotl numbering the people so nearly resembles what is said in the fourth chapter 
of Joshua, of the children of Israel being commanded by that chief on crossing the river Jordan to throw 
stones for a memorial, and is so curious, that we shall transcribe at full length the passage of Joshua, and 
likewise that alluded to in Torquemada. In the Book of Joshua it says; “And it came to pass when all 
the people were clean passed over Jordan, that the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying, Take you twelve men out 
of the people, out of every tribe aman; and command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of 
Jordan, out of the place where the priests’ feet stood firm, twelve stones; and ye shall carry them over with you, 
and leave them in the lodging-place where ye shall lodge this night. Then Joshua called the twelve men whom 
he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man: and Joshua said unto them, Pass over before 
the ark of. the Lord your God into the midst of Jordan, and take you up every man of youa stone upon his 
shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel; that this may be a sign among you, 
that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones? then ye shall 
answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant: of the Lord; when it passed 
over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of 
Israel for ever. And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the 
midst of Jordan, as the Lord spake unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, 
and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged and laid them down there.” ‘Torquemada thus 
describes, in the eighteenth chapter of the first book of his Indian Monarchy, the memorial, consisting of twelve 
heaps of stones, which Xolotl commanded the Chichimexi to leave to their posterity of their having taken 
possession of the country of the Tultecas: “If I should feel disposed to pass on without enumerating the people 
who arrived at this place, I should wrong History, since it is her province to mention their number; and if I should 
declare it, I fear that it will appear incredible: but since these are not speculative calculations which beget opinion, 
but facts which I find recorded, if the ancient paintings are true and not false,—I proceed to say, that, according to 

NOTES. 255 

their account, the people who were scattered through those caves and districts exceeded a million in number; for 
besides the six kings and lords who came with Xolotl, there were more than twenty thousand other chiefs and 
captains of inferior rank, who brought each of them in their train more than a thousand persons, whom Xolotl and 
the other six lords who had departed together with him from their own kingdoms and provinces commanded. 
But in order that the ears of the prudent and discreet reader may not be scandalized in consequence of this 
number appearing excessive, I affirm that in the neighbourhood of the city which is at present called Tenayucan, 
which at that time was the capital of as large a kingdom as this, there is a place where there are twelve hillocks of 
stones, which are those which were collected together when the people were numbered, each person carrying one 
and throwing it on the heap, the sight of which causes astonishment in the beholder: and if it be considered that 
every separate stone was thrown by a single individual, no difficulty will be found in believing that the number of 
the people was as great as has been said. The place accordingly received the appellation of Nepohualco, which 
signifies The place of numbering. There is another reason that induces me to believe that their number must 
have very been great, which appears highly probable ; which is, that the Chichimecan nation came in search of the 
inhabitants of the land, with the determination and resolution to make war upon them as their mortal enemies; and 
if it be necessary to prepare a sufficient force to subdue an enemy beyond their own limits, double as large a force 
will be requisite to conquer them in their own territory. It is therefore credible that they came in such vast and 
numerous squadrons, as men who meditated not only fighting, but conquest, and to remain thenceforward lords of 
the country.” Torquemada proceeds afterwards to say, that Xolotl having taken possession of the land of Anahuac, 
portioned it out amongst his followers; and that after the lapse of some time he advanced as far as Tulan, the capital 
of the ancient Tultecas. It will be recollected that the first thing Joshua did on entering the promised land was to 
divide it amongst the Israelites; but that it was not until many years afterwards that the Jews conquered Jerusalem 
from the Canaanites. As Joshua likewise found giants in the land of Canaan whose race he extirpated, who were 
called Zamzummims by the Ammonites, as Moses says in the second chapter of Deuteronomy, who were descended 
from the giants the sons of Anak, compared with whom the Israelites appeared in their own sight as grasshoppers, 
so the Chichimecas found a remnant of the Quinametin or Tzocuillicxeque, who were giants, on their arrival in 
Anahuac, who, as Acosta relates in the third chapter of the seventh book of his Indian History, were destroyed by the 
Tlaxcaltecas, one of the Chichimecan tribes, by means of the following stratagem. They made a feigned treaty with 
them and invited them to a banquet; when the giants becoming intoxicated with wine, men who had been concealed 
rushed upon them: and although on recovering from the surprise caused by the suddenness of the attack the giants 
made a vigorous resistance, tearing off branches from the trees to defend themselves, yet their arms having been pre- 
viously taken from them, whilst in a drunken state, by the Tlaxcaltecas, they were all to a man cut off. The analogies 
already pointed out in the Mexican and Jewish histories being too numerous to be merely accidental, we shall endea- 
vour in this place to account for them on grounds which we hope may appear both reasonable and probable. It will 
be recollected that Garcia says, “que no falta quien diga haverle fingido los Indios, haviendo oido este ;’—“ there 
were not wanting those who affirmed that the Indians feigned the one (their own early history) after having heard the 
other (the early history of the Jews).” This without recurring to miracles appears to be the key to the whole mystery. 
The Chichimecas are said to have been a nation whose arrival and dominion in New Spain was subsequent to that of 
the Tultecas, by whom they were civilized and instructed in various of the useful arts of life, especially in that of 
refining metals and in working in gold and silver; with whom they contracted alliances, and finally united so 
as to form but one nation ; retaining however still the appellation of Chichimecas, or merely prefixing ¢eo to the 
name, as the mass of the people were of that race and the Tultecas were comparatively but few in number. Since, 
however, the Mexican or Nahuatlacan language, which was that which was spoken by the ancient Chichimecas, 
prevailed throughout so many provinces of New Spain, each distant the one from the other, it is impossible 
to suppose that the Chichimecas were not the indigenous population of that country, forming one of the seven 
nations inhabiting that part of the continent of America, whose dominion in New Spain being later than that of 
the Tultecas, might have laid the foundation for the opinion that their arrival in that country was later also. The 
Tultecas were most probably Jews who had colonized America in very early ages, bringing along with them the 
knowledge of various mechanical arts, and instructing the Indians in them; but especially propagating amongst 
them their own religious doctrines, rites, ceremonies, and superstitions, which seem to have pervaded the New 
World from one end of that vast continent to the other; and even to have extended to some of the islands in the 

256 NOTES. 

Pacific Ocean ; for we read in Captain Cook’s Voyages of the rite of tabooing, or consecrating and putting apart, 
or making unclean for a definite period of time, both animate and inanimate things; and also that the natives of 
some of those islands, which were probably peopled from America, practised circumcision. 

It has been remarked by Lord Bacon “that knowledge is power;” but how much more powerful is super- 
stition! On the supposition therefore that a colony of Jews had in early ages arrived in America (and there 
can be no difficulty in conceiving that that which took place at a later period might have happened a thousand 
years before, that-is to say, an accidental voyage over the Atlantic), it would not have been strange that they should 
have been able to acquire an ascendancy over the barbarous Indian tribes, by employing as occasion required 
both the above-mentioned weapons ; or that they should have succeeded in establishing in the New World such an 
empire as that of the Tultecas, which probably was of a theocratic nature, resembling that of the Ingas of Peru, 
who carefully impressed on the minds of their subjects that they, were of a distinct race, of nobler origin, and 
possessing a divine right to rule over them: neither would it have been surprising that the Indian nations, becoming 
more civilized, should at last have shaken off the Tultec yoke. But as it may be objected that this supposition 
contradicts History, for that the famous empire of the Tultecas after having flourished for so many centuries was 
overthrown, not by the operation of external causes, or by the rebellion of its own subjects, but by Tetzcatlipoca, 
the supreme deity of the Mexicans, who, becoming jealous of their prosperity, destroyed Tula, banished Quecalcoatle 
their last king, and exterminated the people by pestilence and famine,—the answer is easy, that the whole account, 
as referring to Tula the capital city of the Tultec monarchy in the New World, is fabulous, and that the Tultec 
empire must have been ruined by other than miraculous causes. But since History is silent respecting them, in 
the absence of the knowledge of facts we must have recourse to conjecture ; that which appears most probable 
is, that the Tultecas having civilized the surrounding Indian nations, and established their sway over them for 
some centuries, those nations in time threw off the yoke, partly by arms and partly by treaty, producing concession 
on the one side and an admission to a participation of power on the other. Such examples of political compromise 
between contending parties are not unfrequent in history; and by a similar mutual agreement the Sabines and the 
Romans, who were distinct nations till the reigns of Romulus and of Servius Tullius, became thenceforward united 
into one people. The reason for supposing that the dominion of the Tultecas had rather merged into that of the 
Chichimecas from causes such as have been alluded to, than that a violent and successful rebellion had broken 
asunder the link between master and slave and placed the Tultecas in the condition of the latter, is the estimation 
in which they were held long after their empire had passed away ; and the pride which the Chichimecan sovereigns 
felt in being descended from them; for the Emperor Xolotl, according to Torquemada, married the prince Nopaltzin 
his eldest son, who succeeded him on the throne, to Azcatlxochitl a Tultec princess, the daughter of Huitzitzilin and 
Pochotl. It may here be remarked, that the proper name Azcatlxochitl seems to be a syncope for Aztecatlxochitl, 
which name would signify The Rose of the Aztecas; and if this name was not bestowed on that princess after her 
marriage to Nopaltzin, as a sign that she had been adopted by the Chichimecan nation, when that of Chichime- 
catlxochitl would have appeared more proper, it would afford grounds for supposing that the Tultecas were also 
called Aztecas, and that they had proceeded from Aztlan ; the whole solution of the difficulty, which, the longer 
we meditate on the history of the Mexicans and that of the other nations of New Spain, more closely presses 
upon us,—namely how to account for the extreme similarity which their history, their laws, their rites, ceremonies, and 
superstitions present to those of the Jews,—would be found in the fact that the Tultecas were Jews who had colonized 
America, and established an empire in that continent which lasted sufficiently long to leave an indelible impression of 
itself on the state of civilization and on the customs and institutions of the New World; from whom likewise 
many of the Indian tribes might with much probability have borrowed a portion of their early history, especially 
the account of their pretended migration. The following is a short account of the Tultecas, extracted from the four- 
teenth chapter of the first book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy. “The Tultecas, according to ancient histories, 
were the second race that peopled this country after the giants, of whom mention has been made in the preceding 
chapter, especially that corner and portion of it which is called New Spain. These Tultecas took possession of 
those provinces as lords, the future proprietors’ of the soil; they relate of them that they were acquainted with 
the creation of the world, and that the former race of mankind had been destroyed by the deluge; with many 
other things, the memory of which they preserved in paintings and history. They also say that they knew that » 
the world would again be destroyed by fire, which is the same as they relate of the ancients, who inscribed many 

NOTES. : 257 

things on two pillars, the one of metal and the other of brick or of stone, in order that when the conflagra- 
tion took place, the pillar of brick might be preserved. But as I do not possess as much certainty on this 
subject as the state of the case requires, I do not care to profess deep faith concerning it,—I merely affirm that 
Tulteca is a name which is employed to designate an architect,—since the people of that nation were great archi- 
tects; as may still be seen in many parts of this kingdom of New Spain, in the ruins of their principal edifices in 
the city of San Juan Teotihuacan, and especially in Tulla, Cholulla, and in many other cities and states. They 
say that these Tultecas proceeded from a region situated to the West, and that they brought seven lords or captains 
with them, named Tzacatl, Chalcatzin, Ehecatzin, Cohuatzon, Tzihuac-cohuatl, Tlapalmetzotzin, and, the seventh 
and last, Metzotzin. 

“They arrived likewise in a large body, consisting of women as well as of men, who had been banished from 
their own country and nation. They add also that they brought with them maize, cotton, and the other seeds and 
vegetables which grow in this country, and that they excelled in working in gold and precious stones, and in 
manufacturing many curious things. They left their own country, which they named Huehuetlapallan, in the year 
which they designated Ce Tecpatl, and travelled for a hundred and four years, wandering through many different 
parts of the New World, until they arrived at Tulantzinco, where they reckoned an age which had elapsed since 
they quitted their own land and country. The first city which they founded was Tulla, situated at the distance of 
twelve leagues from Mexico towards the North, and more than fourteen from the above-mentioned site of 
Tulantzino, with which they probably at that time became dissatisfied, although the soil is good: they accordingly 
left it on their East, and took up their residence in the said city of Tulla, to the West. The first king who 
governed in that capital was named Chalchiuhtlanextzin, and his reign commenced in the year Chicome Acatl, in 
the fifty-second year of which he died. He was succeeded by Ixtlilcuechahuac in the same year, who reigned for a 
similar number of years: for it was a law amongst the Tultecas, that their kings should reign no longer than 
fifty-two years, nor for a shorter period if they lived and so desired; for their Xiuhtlalpile, which they named an age, 
consisted of that number of years, at the expiration of which cycle of fifty-two years their successor entered on 
his government even in the lifetime of his father: but if the sovereign died before this number of years was 

completed, then the republic took the direction of affairs until the arrival of the said year, when the installation 
of the legitimate successor immediately took place. Huetzin succeeded Ixtlilcuechahuac in the government, 
Totepeuh Huetzin, and Nacazxoc Totepeuh. He was succeeded by another king named Mitl, who built the temple 
to the goddess called The Frog; queen Xiuhtzaltzin was his successor, who reigned four years. To her succeeded 
Tecpancaltzin, who was otherwise named Topiltzin, in whose time the Tultecas were destroyed. This king had 
two sons named Xilotzin and Pochotl, from whom the kings of Culhuacan in after times descended, who escaped 
with other lords and meaner persons into different parts of this kingdom of New Spain, especially to the shores 
of the Lake of Tezcuco and to the coasts of the North and the South Seas: for since all things in this mortal 
life have their termination, inasmuch as they are subject to corruption, as Saint Paul says, the Divine Majesty of 
God permitted these nations and tribes to end and pass away, and others to introduce themselves in their place, 
who might follow them and repeople the provinces which they had deserted, and which time had laid waste, 
since nothing is exempt from decay. The Tultecas were large in stature and well made, as the histories of the 
Aculhuas relate. They wore long white tunics, and were unwarlike in their disposition, and more addicted to the 
art of sculpturing in stone, which the name Tulteca signifies, as we have already observed, than to any other art. 
The manner of their destruction, ruin, and downfall, as it was reported by the very few who were left remaining 
in the country, was, that having been persecuted and oppressed by a certain king and kings for the space of more 
than five hundred years, it appeared to them that that persecution proceeded from the anger of their gods,—for 
they were very great idolaters; they determined therefore to hold a general assembly, composed of all the priests, 
princes, and considerable lords, in a place called Theotihuacan, which is at present distant six leagues from the 
great city of Mexico towards the North, for the purpose of celebrating festivals to their gods, in order to please 
them, and to cause them to lay aside the great anger which they believed that they had conceived against them. 
Having therefore assembled together, and already commenced the celebration of the festivals, to which, on the first 
rumour of them, a vast multitude of the people had flocked, in the midst of the solemnities a huge giant appeared, 
and began to dance with them; and although, as might be expected, they admitted the unexpected phantom into their 
company, not without some dread, which his presence was well calculated to inspire, on account of his vast stature, his 

(Su) 

58 NOT ES. 

xe 

Ke 

hideous appearance, and long and withered arms: nevertheless they confronted him; believing that the occurrence 
was inevitable, for that he had come by the orders of their false and unworthily revered gods, who at each turn 
which he took with them inthe dance clasped them in his arms, and deprived of life, (like another Hercules Actzon,) 
as many as came within his grasp. The phantom in this manner caused great destruction on that day amongst 
the dancers. On another day the Devil appeared to them in the figure of another giant, with hands and fingers 
very long and tapering, and dancing with them strangled them; and in this manner the Devil killed many of 
them on that day. On another occasion (since they continued the celebration of their festivals in order to see 
what would be their result, and to hear the desired oracle, to obtain which they kept these festivals to their false 
gods,) the same Devil appeared to them on a high hill situated in the said part facing the West, in the figure and 
form of a very fair and beautiful child, seated upon a rock, with a putrid head, the pestilental effluvia of which, 
like some deadly and venomous poison, killed many of them. Those who were present perceiving the great evil 
which the sight and presence of this object had caused them, determined to seize it, and dragging it along the 
ground, to remove it to a great and wide lake, which was within a short distance of that place, which now is 
named the Lake of Mexico; and although they strove and attempted with all their might to do so, they found it 
impossible, as the strength of the Devil was greater who resisted and opposed them. In the midst of the struggles 
and exertions of the Tultecas to stir the boy from that place, and to carry him to the lake, the Devil appeared 
to them, and told them that it was fit by all means that they should forsake the country if they wished to save 
their lives, for that remaining in their present possessions, the future only held out to them deaths, ruin, and 
calamities; and that it would be impossible for them to escape these dangers except by absenting themselves 
from them; and that it was his request that they would follow him, and that he would establish them in a place 
of security, and ‘would conduct them to a place where they might pass their lives in tranquillity and repose. 
The aflicted Tultecas perceiving that their misfortunes were incurably on the increase, and that the surest way 
of remedying them was to take his advice, approved of it; and deserting the country, departed under his guidance, 
some to the North and others to the East, according to the part which was allotted to each in a vision which 
he revealed to them; and accordingly they peopled Campech and Quauthemala, as may be collected from the 
Aculhuan histories, which are characters and figures with which the natives of that country write.” 

To this account of the Tultecas we shall subjoin the history of Quetzalcohuatl, their last king, which is taken 
from the twenty-fourth chapter of the sixth book of the same author: 

“ Quetzalcohuatl signifies The Feathers of the Serpent or The Feathered Serpent; and this kind of serpent, the 
name of which these Indians bestowed on their god, is found in the province of Xicalanco, which borders on the 
kingdom of Yucatan, on the road from that of Tabasco. This god Quetzalcohuatl was greatly celebrated by the 
inhabitants of the city of Cholulla, and esteemed in that place as the greatest of their gods. This Quetzalcohuatl, 
as true histories relate, was high priest in the city of Tulla, since: it was from thence that he went to Cholulla ; 
and not as the bishop Brother Bartholomew de las Casas says in his Apology, (which is in manuscript,) from 
Yucatan ; although he was in that peninsula, as we shall presently have occasion to mention. They record that 
he was a white man, tall in stature, with a broad forehead, long and black hair, and a large and round beard. 
The natives say that Quetzalcohuatl was a great artist and very ingenious, and that he taught them many 
mechanical arts, especially the art of cutting precious stones, which they name Chalchihuites, which are stones 
of a green colour, which they highly value; as likewise to cast silver and gold, and to manufacture other articles ; 
who, on the Indians perceiving that he possessed such great ingenuity, was held in much estimation, and 
reverenced as a king in that city: and hence it happened, that although a lord named Huemac governed them in 
temporal matters, Quetzalcohuatl in spiritual and ecclesiastical affairs was supreme, and as it were Pontifex 
Maximus. Those who are very desirous of aggrandizing this their god, pretend that he possessed palaces made of 
green stones resembling emeralds, others built of silver, and others of scarlet and white shells, others formed out 
of all kinds of timber, others of turquoise stones, others of rich and valuable feathers. They say also that he 
was very rich, and abounded with every thing that he could desire. They say that his vassals were very obe- 
dient to him and very swift footed, who were called Tlanquacemilhuique; and that when they wished to make any 
proclamation in the kingdom, and to promulgate any of the commands of Quetzalcohuatl, a crier ascended a high 
mountain in the neighbourhood of the city of Tulla named Tzatzitepec, where he proclaimed with a loud 
voice what Quetzalcohuatl had ordered and commanded, and that his voice was heard at the distance of a hundred 

NOTES. 259 

leagues and more, as far as the coast of the sea: and this they affirm asa fact. Father Bernard de Sahagun, when 
giving this account, says that, being in the city of Xuchimilco, he heard one night at an unseasonable hour such 
a voice, which appeared to him to exceed all human limits and force; and that, inquiring on the following day in 
the morning what so loud a voice could be, the Indians answered him that they were calling to the labourers from 
the Tecpan or market-place, to go and work in the maize-fields. If it be true that this voice was heard at such 
a distance, it is quite evident that it could not be human, but must have been the art and contrivance of the 
Devil, who spread it or feigned it in those places where the sounds were heard and the commands promulgated. 
And this may be credited as true and a fact which really happened; since the Deceiver could as easily have deceived 
them in: this matter as in others in which he deceived them. They say that at the time in which he was their lord 
the maize was most abundant and the gourds a yard long and very thick, and that the stalks of maize, like 
trees could be climbed, being so large and thick that one alone was a burthen sufficient for a man ; and that every 
other kind of grain was large and most abundant; that they sowed and gathered cotton of all colours,— 
white, scarlet, pink, orange, and of many and various other hues; and that there were in the same city of 
Tula many different species of birds, such as the Xiuhtototl, the Quetzaltotl, the Zaquan, and the Tlauquechol, 
with many other sorts, which sang sweetly and melodiously: that there were Cacao trees of all kinds: that 
his subjects were very rich and stood in need of nothing, nor suffered famine or scarcity of any kind: that 
Quetzalcohuatl did penance, piercing his legs and drawing forth blood from his body, with which he smeared the 
thorns of the Maguey, and bathed himself at midnight in a fountain named Xiuhpacoya ; and from him they say 
that the priests and ministers of the Mexican idols derived this custom. Quetzalcohuatl therefore being in 
_ the midst of all this pomp and majesty, and enjoying his prosperity, the Indians say that a great magician called 
Titlacahua, which is the name of another god, as we have already observed, went to Tula, and assuming the figure and 
appearance of an old man entered the city, in order to see Quetzalcohuatl; and after mutual salutations had taken 
place between them, the pretended old man said: Lord, knowing your intentions, and how desirous you are to 
depart to a kingdom far removed from hence, and likewise having been informed by your subjects that you are 
sick and ill, I have brought you a certain draught, which on drinking you will attain the fulfilment of your wishes, 
which will be to go to the kingdom which you desire, and to have health sufficient to be able to undertake 
the journey, and you will at the same time forget the fatigues and labours of life and that you are mortal. 
Quetzalcohuatl, perceiving that his intentions had heen discovered by this pretended old man, inquired of him where 
he had to go? To which Titlacahua answered, That it had already been determined by the supreme gods that he 
should go to the kingdom of Tlapalla, and that it must be so; for that another old man was waiting there in 
expectation of him. Quetzalcohuatl on hearing this replied, That he had said right, that he was very desirous 
to go; and that if the journey was to be accomplished by these means, that he was welcome; and taking the cup 
in his hand he drank the liquor which it contained. The reason that induced Quetzalcohuatl so readily to accede 
to the proposal of Titlacahua was his anxious wish to make himself immortal and to enjoy eternal life; and to 
attain that object he used all imaginable exertions. This report was generally current amongst the Mexicans, as 
Father Sahagun testifies, which was the cause of Motecuhcuma’s so easily persuading himself that it was him when 
he learned the arrival of the Spaniards on the coast, as we relate in his book. 

“It was the belief of Quetzalcohuatl on this occasion that that old man’s business was to certify the matter to him ; 
Quetzalcohuatl after having drank this beverage, lost all self-possession and began to weep copiously and 
bitterly; his heart became immediately moved within him, and he determined to go to the country called Tlapallan. 
With this resolution, which he had now formed in consequence of the art and incantations of the magicians, he 
caused whatsoever he possessed made of silver and of shells to be burned, and buried other precious things beneath 
mountains and beds of rivers; and as he was a magician he changed the Cacao trees into others of a different kind 
called Mizquitl; and he commanded every species of bird which solaced and charmed that region to fly away to the 
country of Anahuac, which is more than a hundred leagues distant from Tula: and afterwards Quetzalcohuatl 
commenced his journey, forsaking his city and persecuted by this magician and sorcerer, who had prevailed 
against him ; and arriving at a place called Quauhtitlan, where there grew a large thick and spreading tree, leaning 
against it, he desired one of his pages to give him a mirror, and looking into it he saw that his face appeared older 
than it had before been, and exclaimed, I am now old: and the place was on that account named ever afterwards 
Huchuequauhtitlan, which signifies ‘near the old tree’ or ‘near the tree of the old man ;’ and taking up stones, he 

260 NOTES. 

flung them at the tree, and lodged them all within its trunk, where they remained for many years afterwards. He 
left that place; and many of those whom he took with him accompanied him on the road along which he passed, 
playing flutes and other instruments. He came to another place, which is a mountain close to the city of 
Tlalnepantla, two leagues from the city of Mexico, where he seated himself on a stone; and laying his hands upon 
it, left there the impressions of them, the marks of which are at the present day quite visible: and those who 
dwell in the vicinity of that place believe it to be an undoubted fact that Quetzalcohuatl had left them; and I 
have taken great pains to inquire into the truth of it; and they have assured me that it was the fact: besides 
which I have found it very punctually recorded by writers highly deserving of credit. The place was accordingly 
then called, and is still called, Temacpalco, which signifies ‘in the palm of the hand.’ Quetzalcohuatl accordingly 
proceeding on his journey by the way of the sea coast to the kingdom of Tlapalla, the magician Titlacahua in 
company with two others, who had likewise been engaged in the deception practised at Tula and in many others 
undertaken with the intention of destroying that city, met him, for the sole purpose of retarding him on the way 
and impeding his journey ; and inquiring of him where he was going, he replied, To Tlapalla; when they said, To 
whom then have you entrusted the kingdom of Tula, and who will do penance there? to which he answered, That 
that was no longer his concern, for that it was fitting that he should prosecute his journey: and being further 
asked the purpose of his going to that country,—he said, That persons had come to invite him on the part of the 
king of it who was the Sun. This fable or imposture was very generally current amongst the Indians of Mexico; 
and Father Bernard de Sahagun relates, that in the city of Xuchimilco certain Indians inquired of him where 
Tlapallan was, and that his reply to them was, That he did not know; as neither did he know or understand at that 
time the drift of the question, for he had not as yet become acquainted with those things, for it was fifty years 
before he wrote his History, and consequently very few years after the conversion and entrance of the Gospel into 
those countries. He adds, that they then continued putting captious questions to him, in order to see whether we 
monks and Spaniards knew any thing of their antiquities. The magicians therefore perceiving the obstinacy and 
delusion into which Quetzalcohuatl had been persuaded, made no further effort to detain him, but compelled him 
to leave behind him the instruments of all the mechanical arts which he was taking away with him, and some 
workmen, in order that after his departure the Indian republic might not stand in need of such things. Quetzal- 
cohuatl afterwards threw into a fountain all the rich jewels which he carried with him; and from that time the 
fountain was named Cozcaapan, which signifies The water of strings of beads or of precious chains; and is at 
present called Coaapan, which means The water of the serpent, which in fact it was, for this man’s name was 
Quetzalcohuatl, which signifies The feathered serpent. In this manner he prosecuted his journey, experiencing 
some annoyances from his enemies the magicians until he arrived at Cholulla, where he was received as we have 
said elsewhere, and afterwards worshipped, as a god. Here he remained some time; and after he was driven from 
thence they entertained so lively a recollection of him that they adored him as a god: and they did so on three 
accounts: first, because he taught them the art of working in gold and silver which they had not till then either 
known or seen in that country, which all the inhabitants of the said city pride or prided themselves on throughout 
that province; secondly, because he never wished nor permitted sacrifices of the blood of slaughtered men or of 
animals, but only bread, roses, flowers, incense, and other sweet perfumes; and thirdly, because he forbade and 
prohibited with much success wars, robbery, and murder, and other injuries which are done by men to each other. 
They say that whenever they named in his presence bloodshed, or war, or any other evils calculated to afflict 
humanity, he turned aside his head and stopped his ears, in order not to see or hear them. They likewise praise 
him for his great chastity and uprightness, and his exceeding temperance in many other things. This god was 
held in such veneration and reverence, and his shrine was so frequented and honoured with vows and pilgrimages 
throughout all those kingdoms, on account of his peculiar attributes, that even the enemies themselves of the city of 
Cholulla bound themselves to make pilgrimages to it; and they went in security, and the lords of the other 
provinces and cities had their chapels and oratories with their idols and images there ; and he alone of all the other 
gods was called in that city Lord, as a term of excellence, so that when any one swore or affirmed by our Lord, 
he was understood to mean Quetzalcohuatl, and none besides, although they had many other gods whom they held 
in high esteem: and this was all on account of the great love which they felt and bore towards him for the three 
above-mentioned reasons ; which was the real fact, for in truth the dominion of Quetzalcohuatl was sweet, and he 
exacted no service from them but easy and light things, instructing them in such as were virtuous and prohibiting 

NOTES. 961 

such as were wicked, evil, and injurious, teaching them likewise to abhor them. Hence it appears, and will appear more 
clearly below, that the Indians who celebrated and celebrate human sacrifices did not do so voluntarily, but from 
the great, fear which they entertained of the Devil, on account of the threats which he held out to them, that he 
would destroy them and send bad seasons and many misfortunes upon them, except they duly performed the worship 
and service which they owed him as a tribute and a mark of vassalage, from the right which he pretended to 
have acquired over them many years before. They declare that he remained with them during the entire period 
of twenty years, at the expiration of which he departed, prosecuting his journey to the kingdom of Tlapallan, 
taking along with him four principal and virtuous youths of the same city, whom he sent back to them from 
Coatzaqualco, a province situated at the distance of one hundred and fifty leagues from this city towards the sea. 
Amongst the other doctrines which he delivered to them, he charged them to tell the inhabitants of the city 
of Cholulla that they might be certain of the arrival by sea, at some future time, from a region situated towards the 
rising sun, of white men with white beards like him, and that they would become lords of those lands, and that 
they were his brothers. These Indians accordingly always expected that that prophecy would be fulfilled; and when 
they beheld the Christians, they immediately called them gods, as we have observed in the proper place, the sons 
and brothers of Quetzalcohuatl, although after they knew them and had experienced their works, they no longer 
believed them to be divine; for in that city a signal massacre was perpetrated by the Spaniards, unequalled till that 
time in the Indies, or perhaps in most other parts of the globe. Others say that the people of Cholulla always believed 
that he would return to govern them and to console them; and that when they saw the ships of the Spaniards 
coming, they said that their god Quetzalcohuatl was now returning, and that he was bringing the temples over the 
sea in which he intended to dwell: but that when the disembarkation took place they remarked, These gods are 
many, it is not our god Quetzalcohuatl. The four disciples who had been sent back by Quetzalcohuatl were imme- 
diately received by the citizens as their lords, who divided the whole state subject to them into four tetrarchates, 
or principalities, to each of whom was given the fourth part of the government of that province, the form of the 
constitution having been till that time republican and not monarchical. He was the god of the air, and his temple 
was round and very sumptuous. The ancients constituted Juno the goddess of the air because she was the sister 
of Jupiter, on whom Cicero observes they bestowed the government of the sky, as the dialogues of Ennius and 
Euripides show; and to Juno they assigned the air, on account of its similarity and local vicinity: for as two 
brothers are persons nearly allied, inasmuch as they are united by the closest ties of affinity, without either blood 
or relationship in the ascending degree separating them, since they are both sprung from the same trunk,—so it is with 
the sky and the air, although fire be an intermediate element, and they assigned the air to the female sex, on account of 
its gentleness and delicacy. These are the words of Cicero. For the same reason the Indians dedicated the air to 
Quetzalcohuatl, on account of the softness and sweetness of his disposition in his intercourse with all men, never desiring 
the harsh and irksome things which the others esteemed and coveted. As amongst the Indians the god of the air was 
Quetzalcohuatl, so Juno with the ancients was the goddess of that element; and they who err in the essential point, 
which is the attributing divinity to created things, may well err in adventitious circumstances, making it either male 
or female; since neither the one or the other were gods, or possessed power over the air, as we acknowledge of the 
true God and his son Jesus Christ, who in a tempest which happened at sea, when he was in a bark sailing with his 
disciples on a certain occasion, commanded the storm to cease and the hurricane to be still, which accordingly fol- 
lowed and came to pass. We must also observe that Quetzalcohuatl was sincerely attached to the worship, ceremonies, 
and adoration of idols, and that he himself instituted many rites, ceremonies, and festivals to the gods; and they 
consider it as certain that he invented the calendar. He had priests who were called Quetzalcohua, which 
appellation signifies, religious persons and priests of the order of Quetzalcohuatl. He left behind him a lively 
remembrance of himself amongst those nations; and they say that women who were barren and without heirs 
made offerings and sacrifices to this god, in order that they might become pregnant. He was, as we have observed, 
the god of the winds; for they attributed to him the power of bidding the winds to blow or to be hushed. They 
likewise said that Quetzalcohuatl swept the way in order that the gods named Tlaloque might descend in showers. 
They adopted this notion, because generally a month before the rains commence violent winds prevail throughout 
the entire of New Spain. They say that this god Quetzalcohuatl, whilst in this mortal life, wore long vests 
reaching to the feet from a sense of decency, with a mantle above interspersed with red crosses. They preserved 
certain green stones which had belonged to him with great veneration, and esteemed them as reliques, one of which 

(35) 

262 NOTES. 

resembled the head of a monkey, carved nearly to the life. He had a very sumptuous and large temple in the city 
of Tula, the ascent to which was by many steps, so narrow that they did not allow room to the entire foot. His 
image had a very ugly face, a large head, anda thick beard: they placed it in a recumbent posture, and not on its 
feet, and covered up with mantles; and they say that they did so as a token that he had again to return and to 
reign over them; and that out of respect to his great majesty, it was proper that his image should be covered up; 
and that they placed it in a recumbent posture to denote his absence,—like one who reposes, who lays himself down 
on his side to sleep,—and that on awakening from that sleep of absence he would raise himself up and reign. The 
inhabitants of Yucatan venerated and reverenced this god Quetzalcohuatl, and named him Kukulcan, and said that 
he had come thither from the West, which is from this quarter with respect to which Yucatan is situated to the 
east. They add moreover, that the kings of Yucatan descend from him whom they called Cocomes, which signifies, 
judges.” Little doubt it is to be supposed can be really entertained as to who the Tultecas were. That Las Casas 
was firmly persuaded that the Indian tribes were a mixed race descended from the Jews, is evident from his own 
words : Loguela tua manifestum te facit, as recorded by Torquemada. If the work of that illustrious prelate,— 
who was intimately acquainted with Columbus, whose Life he wrote, and who was one of the first Spaniards who 
proceeded to the continent of America immediately after the conquest, where he must have had the opportunity 
of becoming acquainted with recent traditions, if not of witnessing the ancient religious rites——had ever been 
published, we should have known his reasons for coming to that conclusion: that Bishop was too rational 
to adopt the later hypothesis, embraced by such eminent historians as Acosta and Torquemada, that the Devil had 
actually counterfeited the history, laws, rites, ceremonies, and customs of the Jews, in the New World. But he 
imagined, with more probability, that the Jews had really colonized America. 

It is much to be regretted that we possess no history of the religious tenets and customs of the Mexicans 
composed by those who first had the opportunity of witnessing them and verifying them by facts before their eyes. 
The soldiers of Cortes, who were the first Spaniards who visited Mexico, were men quite unqualified for such an 
undertaking ; and whatever analogies the Mexican religion might have presented either to that of Christians or 
Jews, they would have been too ignorant to have perceived them. An ecclesiastic alone would have been a fit 
person to have taken upon himself sucha task; and, unfortunately, ecclesiastics received no encouragement to write 
histories of that nature; nor does it appear that they were allowed to publish them, since the works of Mendieta, 
of Toribio de Benavente, otherwise named Motolinia, (a copy of whose valuable history Doctor Robertson seems to 
have procured from Spain, but of which he evidently made no use *,) and of Olmos and Sahagun, have never been 
printed; and strange to say, the royal historiographer of the Indies, Herrera, attempts to discredit the relations of 
these first preachers of the Gospel in New Spain}, and speaks in disparaging terms of Torquemada; which may 
account for the work of the latter author having become so excessively rare, not more than a century after its first 
publication, that the editor of the second edition says that he despaired for a long time of being able to procure a 
copy of it in all Spain: but reasons, too long here to be recited, perfectly convince us, that the office of royal historio- 
grapher of the Indies was instituted quite as much for the purpose of veiling as of developing truth. And certainly, 
in an age and in a country where the authority with which a person wrote was so nicely scrutinized as the crite- 

* Doctor Waddilove, who was chaplain to Lord Grantham, at that time the English ambassador at the Court of Madrid, procured 
Doctor Robertson copies of some very curious Spanish MSS. relating to America, a list of which he has inserted immediately 
after the Preface to his History of America. One of these, described as consisting of more than six hundred pages, divided into 
three parts, the last of which is said to have treated of the hieroglyphics in use amongst the Indians, though mentioned there anony- 
mously, it cannot be doubted was the manuscript of Toribio de Benavente, to whose authority Dr. Robertson occasionally refers. 
This MS. is probably still in England; and if the Scottish historian’s valuable collection of Spanish books and MSS. was not 
dispersed after his death, the publication of it would throw new light on the antiquities of America. [Since writing the above, we 
have been informed on undoubted authority, that Dr. Robertson’s collection of Spanish books and MSS. was sent from Scotland to 
London about fifty years ago, and there sold, after having been first offered for sale to the University of Edinburgh, which declined 
making the purchase. ] 

+ Herrera, enumerating the works that had assisted him in the composition of his own History, speaks in the following con- 
temptuous manner of ‘Torquemada and the authors whose authority he had followed, denying that the histories of New Spain and 
Mexico, composed by the first. Spaniards and religious missionaries who had visited America, possessed authority: “los quales 
(manuscriptos) sé cierto, que no vio el autor, que ha sacado una Monarquia Indiana; i demas de anteponer 4 todos los dichos 4 

NOTES. 263 

rion of his merit, a man like Herrera, who really possessed the talents, if he had not all the candour of an historian, 
had it in his power, if he felt disposed, to depreciate by animadyersion, and to consign to oblivion by criticism, the 
works of contemporary historians who did not write with the same authority. It must however be confessed that 
the Decads of Herrera, as far as the geography and natural history of America are concerned, are at least a work of 
great merit and utility: but it will be recollected that, when treating of the religion and antiquities of America, he 
wrote in the Escurial; and hence mysteries are for the most part unnoticed, and plain facts only recorded. It may 
further be remarked that, although he owns that he was assisted in the composition of his History by the writings 
of Las Casas, he does not adopt the sentiments of that learned prelate, (whose continued residence im the 
Indies for fifty years must have afforded him the opportunity of collecting many facts on which to reason,) that the 
mixture of so many Jewish rites with Indian superstitions was to be accounted for on the supposition that 
America had been colonized by the Jews. But without stating his reasons for dissenting from him, he assumes it 
as an undoubted fact, that the Devil had taken to himself a chosen people in the New World, and counterfeited in 
them the history of the children of Israel and their pilgrimage from Egypt *. The observation which we have made 
above, that ecclesiastics were not encouraged to communicate what they knew from intercourse with the natives, 
and the perfect knowledge which they had acquired of the Indian languages and of the religion and antiquities of 
America,—which languages it must be recollected that Cortes and his companions understood nothing of,—is 
further confirmed by the fact, that two works, which would have thrown so much light on the history of America 
as The American Chronicle of Las Casas, and The Universal History of New Spain by Sahagun, should never have 
been published. The former of these works must have been of enormous magnitude, if we may judge of the size 
of the whole from only having seen that part of it which is preserved in the British Museam, which includes the 
Preface and the first eight books. Las Casas explains in the Preface, which is very long, the reasons that induced. 
him to undertake the work, which were primarily of a religious nature; although it would appear that he was also 
desirous of opposing a true history to the many false relations and misrepresentations which he complains that 
writers on the affairs of America had unblushingly published. Peter Martyr and Gomara seem to be the only 
authors whom he excepts from this sweeping condemnation ; and on their accounts he says entire dependence 
may be placed. It is extraordinary, considering the celebrity of the author, and the many years which he devoted 
to the composition of his History, and the consequently well-known fact of the existence of such a work, that it 
should have been so carefully preserved from every eye. Nicholas Antonio and Pinelo both name it. But it does 
not appear that the former saw any of it, or the latter more than a part; for neither of these learned men describe 
it by its right title, or notice its division by the author into Decads, or mention the number of books of which it 
consisted, which was fifty-eight, or the subject-matter of any of them: but Antonio imagines that the Apologetica 
Historia and the Historia General was the same; although Remesal had enumerated them as distinct works. And 
Pinelo, admitting that they were different, believes the Apologetica Historia to have been the Historia del bien y 
favor de los Indios, which Antonio cites amongst the writings of Las Casas as a work different from either of the 
former, calling it “ magne molis opus,” and by the Latin title of De Juvandis et Fovendis Indis. Pinelo says, in 
his Epitome de la Bibliotheca Occidental, page 570, that.The General History of the Indies, distinct from the 
Apologetic, comprehended a period of sixty years, beginning at the year 1492, and continued down to 1552 ; that it 

los Padres Olmos, Sahagun, i Mendieta, que no tienen autoridad, entiende que no se puede hacer historia sin haver estado en las Indias, 
como si Tacito para hacer la suia, huviera tenido necesidad de ver a Levante, Africa, i al Setentrion. Por lo qual, i por la poca 
cuenta, que los escritores de nuestros tiempos tienen de conservar la memoria de los primeros Descubridores, siendo merecedores 
de mucha gloria, me ha parecido decir aqui lo referido, i que no sabria juzgar, qual es mas en este autor, el ambicion 6 el descuido en 
guardar las reglas de la historia.” — Dec. vi. lib. iii. cap. xix. The attempt captare popularem aurem, by insinuating that 
Torquemada had not done justice to the merits of the first conquerors of America, but had praised his own order and the clergy at 
their expense, is quite unworthy of an author like Herrera. He had, beyond doubt, powerful motives, neither disagreeable to, or not 
understood by, the clergy of his own age, to induce him to disparage Torquemada as a writer; but his having done so must greatly 
lower him as an author in public esteem. — 

* He assumes this fact, but is very reserved in stating the reasons that induced him to do so, and very concise in his account of the 
Mexican migration. The same reserve actuating other Spanish writers who possessed equal means of obtaining information with 
Herrera, has nearly robbed the world of a secret, which it is to be hoped may still be brought to light. 

264. NOTES. 

existed in manuscript in the royal archives of Simancas, where he saw it in the year 1626, when by command of the 
Supreme Council of the Indies he examined the contents of that deposit ; and that it likewise existed in manuscript 
in the library of the Count de Villa Umbrosa, in three volumes, two of which the annotator to Pinelo’s Epitome 
supposes, unless they were copies made from them, had come into the possession of James Krisius, a clergyman at 
Amsterdam, from perceiving ‘The Natural History of the West Indies by Don Bartholomew de las Casas, bishop 
of Chiapa, in two volumes, mentioned in the catalogue of his library ; and the third he thinks might have been 
another work inserted in the same catalogue with the title of The History of the West Indies. These three 
volumes, formerly belonging to Krisius, are at present in the British Museum. The third volume, which is a very 
large folio, is a mere transcript of the other two, which ave likewise folios, and in hand-writing evidently much 
more ancient. They contain only eight of the fifty-eight books into which Las Casas had divided his history, and 
treat entirely of the life and voyages of Columbus, and the settlement and discovery of the different West Indian 
Islands. The religion however of the natives of Haiti, and their various superstitions and fables, Las Casas 
expressly says, that he reserves the description of for another part of his work; which portion containing an 
account, as it is to be supposed, of the ancient history of America, and of the religious rites and ceremonies of 
the Indians, was perhaps called apologetical, because he might have endeavoured to palliate in it, in some measure, 
manners and customs which were used as a plea by the greedy proprietors of encomiendas to press the crown 
to deprive the Indians of all civil mghts, and to reduce them to the condition of absolute slavery. And how 
could that learned prelate have set up a stronger defence for the Indians, than by showing that their institutions 
were partly derived from the Jews,—however time, through the perversion of traditions, might have corrupted 
them? That The Apologetical * History treated of the religion of the Indians is evident; since Torquemada says 
that Las Casas asserted, in his Apology, in manuscript, that Quecalcoatle went from Tula to Yucatan; and that 
Apology must have been The Apologetical History. 

A Spanish writer, giving a sketch of the life of Las Casas, says, speaking of his History : “ El] mismo Las Casas, 
en el afio 1556, puso de pufio propio una nota, diciendo que dejaba su Historia en confianza al Colejio de la orden 
de Predicadores de S. Gregorio de Valladolid, i rogando a los prelados que a ningun seglar, ni a los colejiales, la 
diesen 4 leer por tiempo de 40 alos, i que pasado este termino, se pudiese imprimir, si convenia al bien de los 
Indios i de Espafia.” “Las Casas himself, in the year 1556, added a note to it with his own hand, saying, that he 
bequeathed his History im confidence to the College of the Order of Friars Preachers of Saint Gregory in 
Valladolid, requesting the prelates not to allow any layman or the collegians to read it during the period of 
forty years, at the expiration of which time it might be printed, if it was for the advantage of the Indians and of 
Spain. Don Martin de Navarrete says, in the 71st page of the Introduction to his Coleccion de los Viages y 
Descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los Espaioles, the first volume of which was printed at Madrid in 1825, that 
The General History of the Indies—(it would appear from the way in which he expresses himself that he conceived 

* By Apologetical may be meant simply some after-writing of Las Casas, in which he had replied to objections, either started by 
himself in some of his foregoing books, or made by other persons, such as the famous Doctor Sepulveda. In this sense the Bishop of 
Llandaff entitled his Answer to Paine’s “ Rights of Man,’ “An Apology for Christianity;”—a title which His late Majesty did not 
much approve. 

+ We have elsewhere been guilty of a mistake in ascribing to Las Casas the words “ if it was for the good of religion ;” although 
politics and religion being in his age completely identified in Spain, the one could not be expressed without the other being implied. 
The politics however of the sixteenth century could never have caused the Academy of History at Madrid to decide against publishing 
the work of Las Casas, when the matter was referred to them at the end of the seventeenth. The Spanish government has always 
exercised a discreet judgment relative to the publication of books, and in this respect has studied as much as any government could 
the advantage of its Indian subjects: but still the sparing way in which it would appear from the following passage of the Indian 
Monarchy of Torquemada, that the first generation of the Indians who became subject, to the Spanish yoke were allowed to acquire 
an acquaintance with Scripture history, may have prevented them from being able to compare any portion of their own ancient 
mythology with that History, and from making the interesting discovery of whether the Teoamoxtli was the history of the Pentateuch 
consigned to paintings: « Este capitulo de carta quadré mucho al Emperador ; porque lo mismo le aconsejaron en Espafia las personas 
que consulto sobre este negocio, en particular dos hermanos, famosisimos letrados, los quales 4 pedimento y mandado de su magestad, 
hicieron una instruccion y doctrina, mui docta y curiosamente ordenada, de como se les avia de dar & entender & estos Indios las 
cosas de nuestra fé, y misterios de ella, por manera de historia, conforme & la relacion que tenian de su capacidad.”—Monarquia 

Indiana, lib. xv. cap. i. 

Re 
Nessie 

NOTES. 265 

it to be the entire work) are preserved in three volumes in that capital, the two first of which are in the library of the 
Royal Academy of History, and the third in the Royal Library; and that it ended in the year 1520. In this case, 
Don M. Navarrete must have mistaken the half of Las Casas’s History for the whole; as Las Casas expressly 
states in the Preface to the American Chronicle, that it consisted of six Decads, each of which comprised the 
history of ten years, except the first, which, beginning with the events of 1492, ended at 1500. It is probable 
that the general title of Las Casas’s History was The American Chronicle, which the author divided into two parts, 
each consisting of three Decads, to which he gave a separate title, calling the first The General History, and the last 
The Apologetic History. That learned prelate himself declaring that he employed thirty-two years in the composition 
of this work, which comprised the history of the West Indian Islands, and likewise that of the Continent of America, 
of Peru, and Yucatan, as well as of Nicaragua, Chiapa, Guatemala, Mexico, and the other kingdoms of New 
Spain, we need not feel surprised that it should have extended to six folio volumes; but that no portion of a 
work so interesting should have ever been published, either by the religious Order to which he bequeathed it, or by 
public authority, or by private individuals, cannot be ascribed to accidental causes*. Sahagun, in the Prologue to 
his Universal History of New Spain, expressly says that he was impeded in the progress of his work by the 
great discouragement which he met with from those who ought to have favoured it; “ el gran disfavor que hubo de 
parte de los que debieran favorecer la obra”. And he states in his second book, that “in the midst of the 
commendations bestowed upon it in the chapter of his Order, which was held in the year 1569, it appeared to some 
of the definitors that it was contrary to their vow of poverty to expend money on writing such histories: and they 
therefore obliged the author to discharge his amanuensis, and to write with his own hand whatever he thought 
proper; who, as he was then more than seventy years old, and on account of the trembling of his hand, could not 
write at all, or procure a dispensation of that order, his writings remained for more than five years without any 
thing further being done with them. In the mean time the Provincial deprived the said author of them all, and 
scattered them over the province. After the lapse of some years, Brother Miguel Navarro came as commissioner 
to those parts, and recovered by ecclesiastical censures the said books at the request of the author. Nothing 
more was done at that time respecting them, nor was there any one to favour the author's bringing to a conclusion 
his translation of them into Spanish, until the arrival of the commissioner-general Brother Rodrigo de Segura, 
who saw them, and was much pleased with them, and desired the author to translate them into Spanish, and pro- 
vided him with every thing necessary for transcribing them anew.” ‘This account is given nearly in the words of 
Sahagun, who adds, that “the encouragement which he received from the commissioner-general was owing 
to the anxious desire which Don Juan de Ovando, president of the Council of the Indies, felt to see the work.” 
Grateful for the assistance which he had received from the commissioner Rodrigo de Segura, he dedicated it 
to him, overwhelming him with eulogies for having redeemed it,—rescuing it; as he declares, from beneath the 
earth, and even from under the ashes, “sacandola debajo de tierra y aun de debajo de la ceniza.” The original 
manuscript of the Universal History of New Spain contained, according to the author’s testimony, three 
columns in each page; in the first of which was written the Spanish translation, in the second the history of New 
Spain in the Mexican language, and in the third the explanation and definition in Spanish of certain Mexican 
words and phrases. From the account which Sahagun has himself transmitted to us of the accidental manner in 
which his work was preserved after having been taken from him by the Provincial of his Order, and the various 
parts and books of which it was composed scattered and dispersed, and not recovered till some years afterwards by 
means of ecclesiastical censures, there will always remain a doubt, on account of the great age of the author when he 
set about reuniting the different parts, whether his History, as it has been handed down to us, is complete. He 
was nearly eighty years of age when he commenced that task, and his memory it is to be supposed must have 
been somewhat impaired ; so that having further to direct his attention to the completion of the translation of the 
Mexican text into Spanish, it would not have been surprising,—had some chapters, or even books, and those 
perhaps not the least curious, been wanting,—that he should not have undertaken the recomposition of them. 

* Torquemada remarks, “tuvo Las Casas muchos i poderosos enemigos, porque dijo grandes verdades.” ‘“ Las Casas had many and 
powerful enemies, because he spoke great truths.” 

+ Having, since writing the above, been so fortunate as to procure a copy of The History of Sahagun, which was transcribed 
about forty years ago by the hand of the Spanish librarian Mufioz, we are enabled at least to pronounce some opinion on 

(SAG) ot 

266 NOTES. 

Sahagun further complains, that he was forcibly deprived of a very valuable painting representing the great temple 
of Mexico, with the square or court in which it was inclosed, and the other temples and buildings surrounding 
it, which he says was sent to Spain. It is very evident that every thing in Mexico calculated to draw attention to the 
ancient history of the country, more especially if connected with religious recollections, was carefully removed from 

this copy, which appears to be mutilated, though it still consists of two folio volumes. The chapters (which are remarkably short, 
compared with those in The Indian Monarchy of Torquemada, in the Decades of Herrera, and in Garcia’s Origin of the Indians,) 
appear to be sometimes a mere epitome of the original chapters. The famous migration of the Mexicans or Aztecas from Aztlan is 
described in such a manner, that it would seem that the author either wrote under restraint or under the actual fear of being again 
forcibly deprived of his writings, or at least with no inclination to give his readers much information on the subject; for he is 
infinitely less circumstantial in his account than Betancourt, Garcia, and Torquemada; the last of whom diffusely treated of that 
migration in the omitted chapter in the first volume of his Indian Monarchy, minutely comparing the events recorded of it with 
the Mosaic account of the pilgrimage of the children of Israel from Egypt, in order to prove how exactly the Devil had coun- 
terfeited God, in first selecting a chosen people, and in afterwards leading them forth with signs and wonders on a journey for 
to take possession of a promised land, and giving them laws, rites, and ceremonies on the way. All the hymns, eighteen in number, 
which are noticed in the index to the first volume, which the Mexicans sung to their gods, are likewise wanting!; and it is probable 
that either Sahagun himself left them out when he recompiled his History, or that the person who copied his original MS. was not 
permitted to transcribe them. From the equivocal manner in which Sahagun speaks of these hymns at the conclusion of the appendix 
to his second book, (“ Es cosa muy averiguada, que la cueva, bosque, y arcabuco, donde el dia de hoy este maldito adversario se 
- absconde, son los cantares, y psalmos, que tiene compuestos, y sele cantan, sin poderse entender lo que en ellos se trata, mas de 
aquellos que son naturales, y acostumbrados a este lenguage; de manera que seguramente se canta todo lo que el quiere, sea guerra, 
6 paz, loor suyo, 0 contumelia de Christo, sin que de los demas se pueda entender,”) the latter was probably the case. But besides 
these omissions, various contradictions occur in the course of this History which Sahagun could hardly have fallen into. It also 
terminates in an abrupt and unfinished manner; and far from giving the Mexican account (as he professes in the prologue to the last 
book to do) of the events of the war between the Spaniards and the Mexicans,—such as of the death of Montezuma and of some of 
his sons; the former of whom, according to Indian tradition, was assassinated by the command of Cortes, and not killed by the blow 
of a stone on the head from the hands of his own subjects, as stated by the Spaniards ; and the latter inténtionally massacred by them, 
when they were compelled to retreat by night from Mexico,—he adheres closely to the Spanish relation of those events. Neither does 
he say a word of Quauhtemotzin, the last king of Mexico, having been put to the torture by Cortes, to compel him to reveal the secret 
of his hidden treasures, which all Spanish writers record. A very material contradiction is found between the statement made in the 
seventeenth chapter of the twelfth book of this History and that contained in the seventh chapter of the eighth book, as regards the first 
seizure of Montezuma by the Spaniards. It says in the seventeenth chapter, which describes Montezuma’s reception of Cortes 
and his entrance into Mexico, that they immediately proceeded together to the palace, and that from that moment Montezuma became 
the prisoner of the Spaniards, as they never again lost possession of his person: “* Desque los Espafioles Ilegaron &las casas reales con 
Motecuzoma, luego le detubieron consigo; nunca mas le dexaron apartar de si; y tambien detubieron consigo & Ytzquauhtzin, 
governador de Tiatilulco. A estos dos detubieron consigo, y a los demas dejaron ir.” Whilst in the seventh chapter of the eighth 
book, we read that the seizure of Montezuma did not take place till some days after the arrival of the Spaniards in Mexico: “ Quando 
llegaron cerca de las casas de Mexico, salid Motecuzuma a recibir al capitan y a todos los Espafioles de paz ; juntaronse en un lugar que 
se llama Xoloco, un poco mas aca que es cerca de donde esta agora el hospital de la concepcion, y fue &8 de Diziembre del dicho 
afio. Despues de haver recibido al capitan como ellos suelen con flores y otros presentes, y despues de haver hecho una platica el dicho 
Motecuzuma al capitan, luego se fueron todos juntos a las casas reales de Mexico, donde se aposentaron todos los Espafioles, y estuvieron 
muchos dias mui servidos, y dende @ pocos dias que llegaron, hecharon preso ad Motecuzuma.” 

Another very remarkable contradiction of real facts, as well as a manifest improbability, in the historical narration, is found in 
the fourteenth section of the twenty-ninth chapter of the tenth book of Sahagun’s History, where he says that the Amoxoaqui, or wise 
men, who came with the colony to Tamoancha, re-embarked, and carried away with them all the paintings which they had brought with 

C4 

1 Since these hymns or psalms, as Sahagun entitles them, were probably poetical compositions of a sublimer strain,—and no specimens 
even of common: Mexican poetry have been preserved by the Spanish historians, who nevertheless commend in the highest terms the 
proficiency of the Mexicans in that art, extolling at the same time their language for its softness, richness, and the beauty of its 
metaphors,—it is much to be regretted that they should all be wanting, and that the second book of the History of Sahagun should 
have been deprived of this valuable addition. It is probable, however, that of the twelve books into which his Universal History is 
divided, the third and the sixth are those which have been most mutilated: since from the former we might have expected to have 
learned more of the real history of Quecalcoatle and of the Tultecas; and in the latter we might reasonably have looked for some 
prayers addressed to that deity, whom the Mexicans honoured next to Tezcatlipoca; and since Sahagun, in his dedicatory address to 
Roderic de Segura, says of this latter book, “ Hic sextus omnium major, cum corpore tum vi grandi tripudio jubilat;” whereas in its 
present state it is scarcely as long as the eleventh, or even as the second with the omitted hymns,—it is evident that some careful hand 
must have pruned away those parts which were deemed to be superfluous. 

NOTES. 267 

sight immediately after the conquest. Stone idols and pieces of sculpture were mutilated or buried; paintings were 
burned; temples and edifices, which from their size it was impossible to destroy, were suffered to fall into local 
oblivion: and magnificent monuments of ancient art, such as the temples of Palenque and the palaces of Mictlan, 

are passed over unnoticed by Spanish authors. 

The Mexican paintings seem at a very early period to have become objects of suspicion and mistrust, even in 
Europe. The first that were sent to Spain came along with the other presents which were brought from the 
infant colony of Veracruz to Charles the Fifth in the year 1519, by Portucarrerius and Montejius. Peter Martyr 
mentions them in the eighth chapter of his fourth Decad: but although he says that they came from Coluacana, 
there is some reason to imagine that they might have been procured from the island of Acuzamil or from Yucatan, 
as his description corresponds more exactly with the painting which is preserved in the royal library of Dresden, 
which is certainly not Mexican, than with any others which we have seen; and that painting, containing characters 
resembling those surrounding the cross discovered in the temple of Palenque, which is situated on the borders 
of Yucatan, was probably a painting of that province: some of the symbols contained in it are not very unlike 
Hebrew letters. Peter Martyr gives the following description of these paintings in an epistle addressed to Leo the 
Tenth: “ We have sayde before, that these nations have bookes; and the messengers who were procurators for the 
new colony of Coluacana, together with other presentes brought many of them with them into Spayne. 

“The leaves of their bookes whereon they write, are of the thin inner rinde of a tree, growing under the upper 
barke. I thinke they call it Philyra; not such as is within the barke of willowes or elmes, but such as we may see 
in the woolly and downy partes of dates, which lyeth within the hard outward rinds, as nets interlaced with holes, and 
narrow spots. Those mashes or little nettings they stampe in a morter together with bitumen, and afterwarde being 
softened, binde and extend them to what forme they please; and being made hard again, they smeere and 
annoynt them with playster, or some matter or substance like playster. I thinke your Holinesse hath seene table 
bookes overstrewed with playster beaten and sifted into fine dust, wherein one may write whatsoever he pleaseth, 
and after with a spunge or a cloath blot: it out, and write thereon again*. Bookes also are cunningly made of 
the fig tree timber, which stewards of great houses carry with them to the market, and with a penne of mettall 

them that treated of their rites, ceremonies, and mechanical arts, “ Llevaron consigo fodas las pinturas gue havian trahido de los ritos 
y de los oficios mecanicos ;” four only of their number remaining with the colony in Tamoancha, who invented new paintings, by 
which they regulated time and the duration of the year, calculated nativities, and interpreted dreams :—since it may reasonably be 
demanded, if they were only to be taken back again, for what purpose did the Amoxoaqui bring those paintings with them to 
Tamoancha, and why were their countrymen to be put to the trouble of inventing new paintings? ‘The contradiction of real facts is 
contained in the following very curious passage: “Se sabia por las pinturas que se quemaron en tiempo del Sefior de Mexico que 
se decia Ytzcoatl, en cuyo tiempo los Sefiores y los principales que habia entonces acordaron y mandaron que se quemasen todas, por 
que no viniesen & manos del vulgo y viniesen en menos precio.” ‘ It might have been ascertained, (viz. the length of time which the 
colony remained in Tamoancha,) from the paintings which were burned in the reign of the king of Mexico who was named Ytzcoatl, in 
whose time the lords and principal men then living resolved and commanded that they should be ald burned, that they might not fall into 
the hands of the common people, and so come into disrepute.” ‘The natural inference to be drawn from this singular account of the 
burning of the Mexican paintings in the reign of Ytzcoatl, whose death occurred in the year 1440, according to the interpreter of the 
Collection of Mendoza,—only sixty-two years before the reign of Montezuma,—is, that the total destruction of the mythological paintings 
of the Mexicans was not so much owing to the zeal of Zumaraga and the Spanish missionaries, as to the Mexicans themselves; and it 
was probably framed with the view of favouring that conclusion. But the existence even still of several of these paintings in Europe 
is sufficient to confute the assertion of Sahagun, which is itself so extraordinary and difficult to reconcile with what he elsewhere 
writes of the many ancient Mexican paintings with which he was aided in the composition of his History, —that, except we can suppose 
that Ytzcoatl and the principal lords only sought out those paintings that recorded the length of time that their ancestors spent in 
Tamoancha, and caused them to be burned, sparing all the rest, without any assignable reason for making the exception, we must judge 
the passage itself containing the account to be an interpolation, or if genuine, to have been dictated to Sahagun by those whom to obey, 
he well knew, might be the means of ensuring the preservation of his History to posterity, but to reject whose warnings would be 
the certain way to consign it to oblivion. It is probable that Sahagun, when engaged in the recompilation of his History, after it 
had been taken away from him and again restored, received three cautions: first, to write nothing to prove that the Jews had colonized 
America; secondly, to be guarded in what he said of the Devil's having imitated God by taking to himself a chosen people in the 
New World, and counterfeiting the rites and ceremonies of the Jews; and thirdly, not to advance the hypothesis that Christianity had 
ever been preached to the Indians, or to treat too largely of the history of Quecalcoatle. 

* This passage has been expunged from the common edition of the three first Decads of Peter Martyr; but it is found with some 
variety in Hakluyt’s complete edition of the eight Decads, printed in Paris in the original Latin in the year 1587, octavo. 

268 NOTES. 

sette downe the wares which they have bought, and blot them out againe when they have entred them in their 
bookes of accompt. They make not their books square leafe by leafe, but extend the matter and substance 
thereof into many cubites. They reduce them into square peeces, not loose, but with binding and flexible bitumen 
so conjoyned, that being compact of wooden table bookes, they may seeme to have passed the hands of some 
curious workmen that joyned them together. Which way soever the booke bee opened, two written sides offer 
themselves to the view; two pages appeare and as many lye under, unlesse you stretch them “in length, for there 
are many leaves joyned together under one leafe. The characters are very unlike ours, written after our manner 
lyne after lyne, with characters like small dice, fishhookes, snares, files, starres, and other such like formes and 
shapes, wherein they immitate almost the Egyptian manner of writing, and between the lines they paint the 
shapes of men and beasts, especially of their kings and nobles. Wherefore it is to hee supposed that the worthy 
acts of every kings auncestors are there set downe in writing, as we see the like done in our time, that oftentimes 
the printers insert the pictures of the authors of the matter delivered, into generall histories and fabulous bookes 
also, to allure the mindes of such as are desirous to buy them. They make the former wooden table bookes also 
with art to content and delight the beholder, being shut, they seeme to differ nothing from our bookes. In these 
they set downe in writing the rites and customs of their lawes, sacrifices, ceremonies; their computations also, and 
certayne astronomicall annotations, with the manner and time of sowing and planting.” It is singular that Peter 
Martyr, after having given this accurate account of the contents as well as of the appearance, form, and manner 
of folding of the Mexican paintings, should, only two years afterwards, in the year 1521, say in the tenth chapter 
of his fifth Decad, addressing Pope Adrian the Sixth, “I have heeretofore sayde that they have books, whereof 
they brought many; but this Ribera saith, that they are not made for the use of readinge, but that those characters 
garnished and beautified with divers images and proportions, are examples and patternes of thinges, from the 
which workmen may draw out examples for the fashioning of jewels, sheets, and garments, to beautify them with 
those proportions, as I see sempsters every where in Spaine, and those who with fine needles make silken chaine 
worke, roses, and flowers in linnen cloath, and many kindes of formes, to delight the eye that beholds them ; the 
formes and proportions of all which workes they have in particular samplers of linnen cloth, by direction whereof 
they instruct younge maydens and girles. What I should thinke in this variety I knowe not. I suppose them to 
bee bookes, and that those characters and images signifie some other thinge, seeinge I have seene the like thinges 
in the obeliskes and pillers at Rome, which were accounted letters, consideringe also that we reade that the Caldeis 
used to write after that manner.” 

It does not appear that Peter Martyr had the opportunity of seeing any more of these books, or that any further 
presents of that kind were sent to the king of Spain; as among the various presents which were afterwards transmitted 
by Cortes to Charles the Fifth, which Peter Martyr describes at great length, books are no where enumerated, nor 
does he mention them again in his succeeding Decads. Ribera, from whom Peter Martyr received the information 
that the Mexican paintings were merely patterns for clothes and jewels, was the intimate friend and companion of 
Cortes ; he had been two years in New Spain, and had acquired a knowledge of the Mexican language, as Peter 
Martyr elsewhere says; he must therefore have known the real nature and use of those paintings: and what his 
motive could have been in saying that they had no signification or meaning, it would be difficult to explain. Rigid 
orders were shortly afterwards given to the bishops and clergy in New Spain to cause them all to be burned; and 
those orders were so strictly obeyed, that in a few years scarcely any paintings could be found in the possession of the 
Indians. Other causes, however, besides the two which have been mentioned,—that is to say, the original destruction 
of the Mexican paintings, and the subsequent discouragement which those who were inclined to write histories 
whilst traditions were still recent experienced,—conspired to leave the page of American history almost a blank. 
Spain passed some extraordinary laws, prohibiting lawyers, surgeons, litterati, Moors, Jews, heretics, and the de- 
scendants to the third generation of persons suspected by the Inquisition, and foreigners of all sorts who had not 
received a license at Seville, from passing over to America. 

It will be immediately perceived that in this list of proscriptions the learned professions generally, except the 
ecclesiastical, were included, and the rule applied to native Spaniards. But what, it may be inquired, could have been 
the reason for these prohibitions? Gomara simply states, that the Emperor forbade lawyers to go to America, lest 
they should promote litigations, and litterati lest they should impede conversions, (“ estos porque uviesse menos 

pleitos, y aquellos porque no estragassen la conversion.”) Boturini therefore, it is to be supposed, was banished 

NOTES. : 969 

from Mexico, and his property confiscated on the latter account. The reason for surgeons being forbidden to settle 
in America is not specified : they are generally men of superior acquirements ; but still they might have been disposed 
to study their separate interests, and not to be the first to interpose their good offices to make up the quarrels which 
the lawyers were likely to create*. From whatever causes, however, these regulations may have proceeded, it is 
evident that they were calculated, by preventing men of information from going to America, to retard and check 
the progress of knowledge, and to allow the veil of oblivion to fall over the history of the New World. It may 
perhaps be said, that if learned men were prohibited going of their own accord to America, the kings of Spain 
not unfrequently sent them there ; and that thus Hernandez the celebrated naturalist composed a History which cost 
Philip the Second sixty thousand ducats, of which Claude Clement observes,—with reference it is to be supposed to 
the designs of that monarch never having been completed, by the manuscript of Hernandez remaining in an un- 
published state in the library of the Escurial,—“ qui omnes libri et commentarii, si prout affecti sunt, ita forent 
_ perfecti et absoluti, Philippus II. et Franciscus Hernandius haud quaquam Alexandro, et Aristoteli hac in parte 
concederent.” 

It is surprising that a work of that kind, which was not confined to the natural history of New Spain, but embraced 
its political history likewise, should never have been printed. How many errors the illustrious Buffon would 
have avoided could he have availed himself of it. Only one reason can be assigned for an epitome merely of that 
part of it which related to natural history having been published by the Lyncean Academicians at Rome in the 
year 1651; namely, that there was no wish to draw the attention of Europe to the subjects of which it treated, 
which the publication of the writings of so learned a man would undoubtedly have done. But other writings, 
besides those of Hernandez, which would have been valuable to history, have mysteriously disappeared. The 
Bibliotheca of Pinelo, a work the express object of which was to illustrate the history of America by references to 
and extracts from valuable and unpublished MSS. preserved in the most famous libraries of Spain and the public 
archives, especially in those of Simancas, to which the author, through the interest of the Duke de Medina de las 
Torres, obtained access, exists only in an epitome; and of the larger work a learned writer has observed, “not a ° 
leaf has been found.” Garcia’s History of the Peruvian Monarchy, to which he frequently refers in his Origin of 
the Indians, is also unknown. Siguenza’s Mexican Cyclography is stated to have been lost through the negligence 
of his heirs; and many other interesting works are said to have perished, or been lost in a similar manner. It has 
been remarked above, that the office of Royal Historiographer of the Indies does not appear to have been instituted 
solely for the purpose of promoting the cause of truth and the increase of knowledge: and it may be further 
observed, that the Council of the Indies, which took cognizance of all works treating of America, requiring 
that they should be, previously to publication, submitted to a strict censureship, with the power of recalling or 
prohibiting, even after publication, any work they thought fit, proceeded in a diametrically opposite spirit. The 
entire system indeed of licensing and censuring works of literature exercised in Spain a baneful influence upon 
learning; and the number of licenses of this kind which the law required should be affixed to works of very 
inconsiderable extent, was really excessive, when there could be no doubt moreover that each censor would be 
sufficiently Argus-eyed. Boturini’s small work, entitled “Idea de Una Nueva Historia General de la America 
Septentrional, fundada sobre Material copioso de Figuras, Symbolos, Caracteres y Geroglificos, Cantares y 
Manuscritos de Autores Indios ultimamente descubiertos,” which was published in Madrid in the year 1746, notwith- 
standing his dedication of it to the king, and his preliminary protest, has six different licenses for publication prefixed 
to it: the first is the Censure of Pedro Fresneda of the Company of Jesus ; the second is the License of Don Miguel 
Gomez de Escobar, Ordinary Inquisitor; the third the Judgment of Doctor Joseph Borrull, Judge in the supreme 
Council of the Indies; the fourth the License of the Royal Council of the Indies ; the fifth the Approbation of the 
Reverend Juan de la Concepcion, bare-footed Carmelite and Qualificator of the Inquisition ; and the sixth the License © 
of the Royal Council of Castille, to which the signatures of the Corrector General of His Majesty, Don Manuel de 
Rivera, and of his secretary, Don Miguel Fernandez Munilla, are also added. The preliminary protest is as follows : 
« Although the occasion of writing this Historical Idea has obliged me to meditate upon the secret and scientifical 

* In the present day scientific men of this profession have incurred another imputation; but we should say “Summa scientia summa 
pietas ;” or at least that the mind of man, which naturally feels sentiments of veneration and of love towards the Great Author of its 
existence, as it becomes more enlightened and better informed has those innate sentiments heightened and increased. 

(32) 

270 NOTES. 

paintings of the Indians; nevertheless, so far am I from separating myself in the slightest degree from the purity 
of the Catholic religion, in which I was born, that I would rather readily die in its defence; and whatever I say 
here, I submit with the most humble obedience to the judgment and correction of our holy Roman Catholic and 
Apostolic mother Church.” be 

At this distance of time, when the state of the world is so different from what it was in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, it may not be readily conceived how easy it was for the Council of the Indies, through the 
power vested in it of permitting or prohibiting the general circulation of all writings relative to America, to keep the 
rest of Europe in a state of darkness as to the history of that continent. For three centuries those who composed 
successively that Council, seem to have exercised their functions of censors with the greatest vigilance. If powerful 
patronage or inadvertence on their part suffered in the first instance any obnoxious work to appear in print, 
it was sure soon to be recalled. Thus the History of the Indies, by Gomara, which was dedicated to Charles the 
Fifth, and the Conquest of Mexico, by the same author, which was dedicated to Don Martin Cortes, the son of the 
celebrated Cortes, became prohibited books soon after their first publication. But there were other works against 
which a silent war was waged in Spain. 

The Ocean Decads of Peter Martyr, and the Indian Monarchy of Torquemada, were works of this class. Those 
justly celebrated Decads, eight in number, written in an epistolary style, were addressed to the two Sforzias, dukes of 
Milan, and to the popes Leo the Tenth, Adrian the Sixth, and Clement the Seventh; and notwithstanding their 
great merit as monuments of history and the purity and elegance of the Latin in which they are composed, they 
have sunk into complete oblivion. Hakluyt published in the reign of Queen Elizabeth a complete edition of the 
Ocean Decads, which he printed in Paris and dedicated to Sir Walter Raleigh; a copy of which at the present day 
it is impossible to procure. That edition contains besides a map, a wood-cut representing two of those kind of 
crosses, which were discovered in America, called Saint Andrew’s, which exactly resemble the cross in the first 
page of the Collection of Mendoza, in which was founded the city of Mexico. Pinelo says that Vasco imputed 
in his Chronicles of Spain, some freedom of opinion in religious matters to Peter Martyr; perhaps Vasco might 
have attempted in that way to account for the scarcity of Peter Martyr's writings in Spain, and the disrepute into 
which they seemed to have fallen : if so, it was an unfounded surmise, and the accusation was one from which Pinelo, 
by referring to the eulogium bestowed upon Peter Martyr by Paul Jovius, at once exculpates him. Terminating 
the digression mto which we have been led by the consideration of the causes which have so long conspired to keep 
Europe in a state of ignorance with respect to the history of America, we shall only further remark that the history 
of Peru is enveloped in much greater obscurity than that of Mexico. Doctor Robertson supposes that this is owing 
to the circumstance of Pizarro and the conquerors of Peru having been men of inferior education to Cortes and his 
followers ; as if it were immediately on the first conquest and occupation of a country, before any knowledge of the 
language spoken by the natives can be attained, that conquerors and their soldiers usually set about writing histories. 
That learned writer in his History of America, has himself given so decided a preference to the authority of Cortes, 
from whose relation nevertheless he never feels the least scrupulous to deduct what he pleases on the score of 
exaggeration, that he seems almost to have overlooked the writings of other historians, especially those of Torque- 
mada and Acosta; and hence he has fallen into great errors. The real cause of less being known of the history 
of the Peruvian empire than of the Mexican, notwithstanding Garcilasso de la Vega, himself of the race of the 
Ingas, wrote in the latter end of the sixteenth century a History of Peru, is probably, that Peru was discovered 
many years after the conquest and discovery of Mexico; and Europe was not to be surprised a second time by the 
sudden appearance of fresh Ocean Decads and more mythological paintings. 

We do not doubt that if the writings of the licentiate Polus had ever been published, more would have been 
known of the history of Peru; since Acosta, speaking in the twenty-third chapter of the fifth book of his History 
of the Indies of those writings, says, “De his qui plura sciturit, is que Licentiatus Polus ad Archiepiscopum 
civitatis de los Reyes Don Jeronymo de Loaysa commentatus est, evolvat, ubi rerum mirarum et variarum plenum 
catalogum, magna diligentia a dicto scriptore congestum reperiet.”. Though none of the Peruvian paintings have 
been preserved, it is highly probable that the Peruvians, like the Mexicans, employed paintings to commemorate 
historical events, and to perpetuate the rites and ceremonies of their religion. If Acosta is of a different opinion, it 
must be recollected that that learned writer composed his History many years after the empire of the Ingas had been 
destroyed: and that however studious he might have been of truth, he was sometimes mistaken; as when he says, 

pen 

. 

NOTES. O71 

that circumcision was not a rite in use amongst the Indians. The Peruvian paintings might have been burned 
immediately after the conquest of Peru; and perhaps it was thought unnecessary to send any of them to Europe, 
as specimens of Mexican paintings had been already sent. Amongst the more civilized tribes of Indians dwelling 
on the banks of the Oronoco, paintings were discovered by the Spaniards; and Baron de Humboldt says, that 
father Narcissus Gilbar, a Franciscan, obtained some paintings from the Indians inhabiting the shores of the Ucayale, 
which he afterwards sent to Lima, where several persons with whom the Baron was acquainted had seen them. 
But if some uncertainty exists whether paintings were in use amongst the Peruvians, all authors agree that they 
preserved the memory of past events for several ages by means of knotted cords, called Quipus ; and as the Peruvian 
mythology was as complex as the Mexican, and their history went as far back, the names of persons being in the 
same way preserved in the recollection of distant generations, it is almost impossible to conceive the nature of 
these quipus*, except we suppose that certain sounds and syllabic associations might have been connected with 
each differently coloured and differently formed knot. Rosales says, in his History of Chili, that an army of Spaniards 
having been lost, their retreat and history was discovered some years afterwards, by mention being made of them in 
the Quipus. The possibility of an army being lost may be called in question: but when it is recollected that 
the provinces bordering on Peru were wholly unknown to the Spaniards, and their extent almost boundless, and that 
a Spanish army in America at the commencement of the fifteenth century frequently did not amount to more than 
two or three hundred men, there is nothing so improbable in the supposition. 

The Peruvians when first discovered by the Spaniards had already attained a high degree of civilization: and it 
would appear from a passage in Gomara’s History of the Indies, that the Spaniards were struck by the resemblance 
of some of the tribes of Indians in that part of America to Jews. “Son todos muy ajudiados en gesto y habla, ca 
tienen grandes narizes, y hablan de papo. Ellas andan trasquiladas y faxadas, y con anillos solamente. Ellos 
visten camisas cortas que no les cubren sus verguencas, e traen coronas como de frailes, sino que cortan todo el 
cabello por delante y por detras, e dexan crecer los lados.’”—La Jstoria de las Indias, fo. \x. “They are all very like 
Jews in appearance and voice, for they have large noses and speak through the throat. The women cut off their 
hair and wear girdles, and they alone use rings. The men dress in short shirts, scarcely studying decency in their 
apparel, making themselves bald like monks, except that they shave off the hair from the front and the back of 
their heads and allow it to grow on the sides.” Gomara elsewhere says that some of the Indians of the Andes 
wore ¢urbans, which the Spaniards imagined was to conceal some deformity of the head. Having already pointed 
out the numerous analogies which the history of the pretended migration of the Mexicans presents to that of the 
Jews as recorded in Exodus, we shall now notice the singular conformity which exists between many of the 
Hebrew laws, as contained in Leviticus, Deuteronomy, and the other books of the Pentateuch, with those of the 
Indians. It is scarcely necessary to observe that it is the legislative and not the executive power in a state that 
stamps a national character on the people; and that while that is formed and grows up under the former, it is 
merely modified by the latter accordingly as the laws are less or more duly enforced. By their Codes of Laws 
posterity has a right to judge every nation according to the immutable principles of right and wrong, the know- 
ledge of which is implanted in the breast of man, and to which it is as absurd to attribute either age or youth, as 
it would be to assign those accidents to space. The common law of every state in Europe has been confessedly 

* Some Quipus, alledged to be Peruvian, and to record the annals of the Peruvian empire, are in Lord Kingsborough’s possession ; they 
are contained in a large gilt box formed out of a solid piece of wood, curiously carved on the top with the figure ofa man seated upon a 
winged quadruped, with the representations of various animals around, and on the bottom with snakes; at the angles are four images, as it 
would appear, of four of the Ingas, and on the two principal sides the likenesses of the famous Temple of the Sun at Cusco, and of that 
of the Moon. These Quipus, which perhaps are Chilian instead of Peruvian, and modern instead of ancient, if they are a forgery, 
at least display great ingenuity on the part of the person who composed them. They consist of knotted strings of catgut, which 
are fastened in loops upon different rings, each ring forming a separate history, and the loops following in their proper order on the 
rings; the first loop being read downwards,—or in other words, the knots counted from the upper extremity which joins the ring 
to the lower extremity which meets it again: these knots are of different colours, and it is impossible not to imagine that in the 
arrangement of the knots first on loops which fasten at the ends like a necklace, and afterwards of the loops themselves on rings, they 
nearly cofresponded in outward appearance to the ancient Peruvian Quipus. The name of Registros de Ramales, which Garcia gives in 
his second book of the Origin of the Indias to the real Quipus, as well as his description of them, are singularly applicable to those 
referred to above. 

QD NGOR ReneS: 

modelled after the Mosaic law; but time has already operated the repeal of several of its parts, such as the trial 
by ordeal and the trial by combat, which modes of trial were undoubtedly suggested by the trial of jealousy, which 
is described at length in the fifth chapter of Numbers, and proceeded upon the same assumption, that an appeal being 
made to God he would decide by a miraculous interposition the guilt or the innocence of the accused party. Itisa 
self-evident truth that in proportion as laws affect society in general, they assume a character of vital importance to 
the state ; and their fitness and the wisdom with which they have been enacted, cannot be too closely examined and 
scrutinized. Laws relative to property and inheritance, to marriages and to divorce, and to slavery in countries 
where slavery is tolerated, are of this class; and it is somewhat extraordinary that precisely on these heads the affinity 
between the Mexican and Hebrew laws is greater than between the latter and those of any other nation with which we 
are acquainted. The ceremonial and ritual laws of the Jews likewise nearly resembled those of the Mexicans :—of 
some of these we shall speak first. Father Joseph Gumilla says in the fifty-ninth page of the Oronoco Ilustrado, “1 
affirm in the second place, that the nations of the Oronoco and its streams observed many Hebrew ceremonies 
during the time of their paganism, which they followed rudely and blindly without knowing why or wherefore, 
that had been transmitted by traditions handed down from father to son, without their being able to assign any 
reason for the practice of them. From which customs and usages it is inferred, that after America had been peopled 
by the descendants of Cham, a certain number of Jews passed over likewise to that continent after the dispersion 
of that ungrateful people, from whom the ceremonies, which I shall cursorily notice as I proceed (for I mean 
afterwards to treat this subject more at length), spread themselves amongst the native population.” “ La circuncision, 
sefial, y divisa dada por el mismo Dios a su escogido pueblo, aunque con la variedad que el largo curso de los 
tiempos introduce en tddos los usos y costumbres, se halla entre aquellas naciones gentiles. Los Salivas, quando 
lo eran, y los que restan en los bosques, al octavo dia circuncidaban sus parvulos, sin exceptuar a las nifias, no 
cortando, sino lastimandolos con una sangrienta transficcion, de que solian morir algunos de uno, y otro sexo. 
Las varias naciones de Cuiloto, Uru, y otros rios, que entran en Apure, antes de reducirse a la santa fé, eran mas 
crueles en dicho uso, y mas inhumanas en esta ceremonia, afiadiendo heridas considerables por todo el cuerpo, y. 
brazos, cuyas cicatrices se ven en los que viven oy, de los que nacieron en aquellas selvas: No hacian esta 
carniceria hasta los diez, u doce afios de edad, para que tuviessen fuerza para la evacuacion tan notable de sangre 
como se seguia, demas de docientas heridas, que daban a las inocentes victimas de su ignorancia. Yo encontré el 
ano de 1721, un chico moribundo en dichos bosques, cuyas heridas se havian enconado, y tenia el cuerpo Ileno de 
asquerosas materias. Para que no sintiessen la punta afilada con que atravessaban las carnes, embriagaban de 
antemano a los pacientes de ambos sexos, porque nadie se escapaba de esta sangrienta ceremonia. Entre los Indios 
Guamos, y Othomacos, son igualmente crueles las sefias de la circuncision.” It will be remarked that Gumilla says 
the Salivas circumcised their children on the eighth day after their birth; and by the covenant which God made 
with Abraham, the Jews circumcised their children on the same day, being commanded so to do in the twelfth 
verse of the seventeenth chapter of Genesis. “And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every 
man-child in your generations ; he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of 
thy seed.” Moses himself was near being killed by God for omitting to have his son circumcised, as we learn from 
the twenty-fourth and following verses of the fourth chapter of Exodus : and it seems that the important commission 
with which he was then charged, to deliver a message from God to Pharaoh, commanding him to let the Israelites 
depart out of Egypt, was considered as no excuse for his disobedience; for that is the tenour of the following passage : 
“ And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my son, even my first-born. And I say unto thee, 
Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy first- 
born. And it came to pass by the way, in the inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. Then Zipporah took 
a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou 
tome. So he let him go: then she said, a bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision.” The number 
eight seems to have been held in as much estimation by the Indians as by the Jews, by whom every thing relating to 
circumcision was held in such veneration that it was the only work which their law did not prohibit them to 
perform on the Sabbath-day ; since the Jews, according to Maimonides, were allowed to circumcise their children on 
that day: and as the ceremony was performed with a stone knife (which custom the German Jews are said to have 
retained to the present day), Garcia and other writers have supposed that the Indians venerated the Tequepatl or 
flint knife, and placed it in their temples as a sacred symbol, no less on account of its connection with sacrifice 

NOTES. De 

than because they used it as an instrument of circumcision*. Damian a Goez says that the Abyssinian Christians 
likewise circumcised their children, defending the practice by the example of Saint Paul, who himself circumcised 
a young man named Timothy, whose father was a Greek but his mother a Jewess. The Mosaic law prohibited the 
Jews to eat the flesh of swine; and the aversion which they still retain to pork is too well known to require proof. 
It is very singular that the Indians of the Oronoco should have entertained the same prejudice, in which they were 
probably imitated by the circumcised Indians of Yucatan. Gumilla says, “No se hallara Judio, que tenga tanto 
horror ala carne de lechon 6 cebon casero como tienen los dichos Gentiles ; pero despues de instruidos, y bautizados, 
se desatinan por comerla.” “There is not that Jew in existence who holds the flesh of a sucking-pig or of the 
domestic hog in such horror as the said Gentiles; but after they have been instructed and baptized, they eat it 
without scruple.” We are not ignorant that many Spanish authors, who were as little inclined to permit the 
Indians to resemble the Jews in their aversion to pork as in the rite of circumcision, have denied that the hog 
was natural to America; and have persuaded the illustrious Buffon to adopt their error, who enumerates the hog 
amongst the species of animals which were transported from the Old Continent to the New. At this distance of 
time it might even have been very difficult to have refuted those writers; for although Gomara mentions it as an 
animal discovered in the remotest parts of South America, those who might have either a theory to support or one 
to deny, would contend, from the prolific nature of the animal, that the species had multiplied and become wild 
in different parts of America, having been originally carried to that continent by the Spaniards. A convincing proof, 
however, that this was not the case, is afforded in the collection of Mexican, or we should rather say of Yucatan 
paintings-}-, which are preserved in the Royal Library of Dresden, in the sixty-second page of which the figure of 
a boar is accurately delineated, as may be seen by referring to the coloured Plates contained in the third volume. 

* Sahagun in the twenty-fourth chapter of the second book of his History describing the dress with which the Mexicans usually 
represented their principal deity Huitzilopuchtli, says, “ Del medio della salia un mastz/ tan bien labrado de pluma, y en lo alto del mastil 
estaba engirido un cuchillo de pedernal & manera de yerro de lanzon ensangrentado hasta el medio.” If they believed that that god had 
commanded them to practise circumcision, it is probable that the symbol of the stone knife upon that part of his dress was as a memorial 
of that ordinance. 

‘+ These paintings are inferred to be Yucatan, from the similarity of the hieroglyphics which they contain to those surrounding the 
cross in the temple of Palenque: that they are not Mexican is evident from the difference of their style from that of the Mexican paintings. 
But what, it may be inquired, do these mysterious paintings represent? the migration of the Aztecas, the colonization of America by the 
Tultecas, or the events which are said to have preceded and caused the deluge? which are briefly alluded to in the first and second verses 
of the sixth chapter of Genesis : “ And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born 
unto them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose ;” which 
passage the Rabbis explain in a manner very different from that in which itis usually understood ; interpreting the phrase in Hebrew “ the 
sons of God” to mean “the demons;” alleging as their reason. for so doing, that since after the deluge their Patriarchs (who could not 
have been ignorant of the real cause of the deluge,) took as many wives as they pleased, without placing themselves under any restriction 
as to the choice,—since some married their sisters, and others their sisters-in-law,—so dreadful a catastrophe as the deluge could not have 
been caused by a crime, which, on this supposition, the Patriarchs would have been guilty of the greatest presumption in repeating. This 
reasoning of the Rabbis assumes a greater degree of plausibility, when we consider that at any rate, by the expression the sons of God 
are meant. the wicked, and that a wicked man can be properly no more a son of God than a wicked spirit. Some of the paintings 
contained in the Dresden Codex are very curious, and they all present a strange mixture of civilization, barbarity, and the grossest super- 
stition. Whilst many of the figures are drawn with great regard to the proper proportions of the human body, the style of their execution 
being very delicate, others prove that the nation to which they refer had attained a certain degree of perfection in some of the arts. But 
what notion must we fornt of a people who could consign to paintings, and record as matter of history, or at least incorporate with history, 
the dreams and visions of their own deluded imaginations ; and to whom can we assimilate them, except to the Jews, who, if we under- 
stand Scripture aright, were a people who pretended to be as familiar with God by means of dreams and visions, as man can well be with 
his fellow man. Allusion is of course here made to the false prophets: but it must not be forgotten that the time was when there was 
only one true prophet in Israel, who Elijah declares was himself; while those who pretended to see visions, and who deceived the people 
by prophecies, were four hundred and fifty, as we are informed in the eighteenth chapter of the First Book of Kings. It deserves to be 
remarked, whatever may be the subject of these paintings, that no symbols of time, either of days or years, fix the date of events ; whence 
it may be inferred, that the history recorded was so ancient, that it was thought a useless task to aim at chronological exactness by intro- 
ducing amongst them any such symbols. This history may probably relate to the Tultecas; and the women of that nation are perhaps 
represented by the female figures with dark hair flowing in long tresses and adorned with jewels, since their husbands were very expert, 
as Sahagun and other authors declare, in the cutting and setting of precious stones. ‘The physiognomy of these figures is very peculiar 
and marked ; it is not European or African, nor does it recall to our recollection the features of any nation of antiquity, with which busts of 
marble, bronze, or porphyry, such as that with which the Egyptians constructed their immortal works, have made us acquainted. It 

(44) 

O74 NOTES. 

The Abyssinian Christians, according to Damian a Goez, imitated the Jews in abstaining from pork, as well as 
im circumcision; and since many learned men have supposed that the miracle which is recorded in the fifth chapter 
of Saint Mark, of Christ casting out the legion of devils from the man possessed, and sending them afterwards 
into the swine, was a punishment inflicted on the owners of those animals for keeping them, and thereby tempting 
the Jews to transgress the law; the superstitious Abyssinians might have imagined, that as God had prohibited, 

appears to be Asiatic ; but the robust stature and large noses of this tribe do not argue that they proceeded from any of the northern regions 
of Asia, such as Tartary or Kamschatka; and few would go as far as Sangalien and the islands north of Japan to discover the ancestors 
of a people who in remote ages colonized Yucatan ; neither do they resemble the Chinese or the Hindoos. Asia then, on this side of the 
Persian gulf, and perhaps the region of Palestine, was the hive from which this swarm came to inundate America with unheard-of super= 
stitions, and to interweave with the simple religious traditions of the Indians, the dark history of their own fabulous annals. Some of the 
paintings remind us of the early manners and customs of the Jews, who when they migrated from Egypt carried with them the em- 
balmed bodies and skeletons of some of their deceased ancestors; for it is not at all probable that the bones of Joseph,—which by his express 
desire were removed from the Egyptian soil, as we learn in the nineteenth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Exodus, “ And Moses took 
the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my 
bones away hence with you,”—were the only bones which the Israelites took with them on their pilgrimage; especially as we learn in a 
later book of Scripture that thase of holy persons, such as were the Patriarchs, were sometimes endowed with occult virtues: for a dead 
man, of whom nothing meritorious is recorded in his life, is said in the twenticth verse of the thirteenth chapter of the Second Book of 
Kings to have come to life by merely touching the bones of Elisha, although it does not appear from the passage of Scripture referred to, 
that the deceased came in contact with those bones except by simple accident: “ And Elisha died, and they buried him. And the bands 
of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year. And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold, they spied 
a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of Elisha, he 
revived, and stood up on his feet.” This was also the prophet to whom allusion is made in the thirteenth verse of the forty-eighth chapter 
of Ecclesiasticus: “ No word could overcome him; and after his death his body prophesied. He did wonders in his life, and at his death 
were his works marvellous.” Flow, after the relation in Scripture of these great miracles performed by relics, can Protestants assert that the 
Roman Catholic doctrine relating to them is not derived from Scripture, however absurd’ they may consider it. The Jews undoubtedly 
esteemed the bones of some of their prophets and holy persons as sacred relics; and the Mexicans probably borrowed the superstitious 
reverence which they felt for the bones of some of their reputed saints and prophets from the Jews, with whom also appears to have 
originated that species of divination called necromancy, which, as the name (compounded of vexgos a dead body, and javrixy the art of 
divination,) implies, signifies prophesying by means of a dead body, or seeking prophetical predictions from a dead body, which those did 
who consulted the bones of Elisha; although in this instance criminality and absurdity must be separated from an act which seems in after 
ages to have been the fertile source of both amongst the Jews. We may here notice some other paintings in the Dresden Codex, which 
appear to associate themselves with the Hebrew traditions of the fall of Satan, and to refer to the personage in Mexican mythology who 
was named Zontemoque, from the manner in which they believed that he was precipitated to the earth; this proper name being com- 
pounded of zon the head, and temoque falling, and signifying falling headlong. ‘These paintings occur in the thirteenth, the forty-ninth, and 
the fiftieth pages of that MS., the first of which may be presumed to refer also to the proper name Lucifer, from the starlike symbols that 
seem to accompany his fall. Milton’s celebrated description of the fall of Satan is likewise brought to mind by the recumbent figure in 
the fiftieth page : and the opening scene of the Paradise Lost is well expressed by the Indian painter, who had assuredly never heard of 
Milton’s Satan, whom even the Jews would scarcely recognize. It is not however surprising that Milton, when giving full scope to his 
poetical imagination, should have formed to himself the idea of a Satan such as the Jews had never dreamt of, since his prose compo 
sitions are replete with so many new notions upon the subject of divinity. The other recumbent figure, in the forty-ninth page, affords 
proof, from the peculiarity of the formation of the eye,—which is so often imitated in paintings confessedly Mexican, for example, in the 
fifty-eighth page of the lesser Vatican MS.,—that the natives of Mexico and of Yucatan, however they might have differed from each 
other in the style of their paintings, introduced many characteristic traits into them from a mythology which furnished them with a common 
prototype: hence in the twenty-sixth page of the Dresden MS., the image of a hand is represented on exactly the same kind of staff 
as the same hand is painted in the fifty-ninth page of the Borgian MS.; and the Chirotheca, which Acosta says that the Peruvians were 
accustomed to hold up on a certain festival, it can scarcely be doubted was a hand also resembling that engraved upon the signet of 
Hugh Capet. The figure of a boar occurring in the sixty-second page of the same MS. in association with that of a rabbit, another 
animal the flesh of which the Jews were forbidden to eat, and which the Mexicans considered in the year of One Rabbit, or Ce Tochtli, 
as a sign which was the sure harbinger of famine, induces us to refer in this place toa very curious painting of the Borgian MS. (the forty- 
fourth), in which the thirteen squares surrounding the figure of Quecalcoatle seem to contain twelve birds and one flying insect, which 
were held in abomination by the Jews, and for which the figure of an animal of a fanciful form, but not unlike a monkey, is perhaps 
making an atonement by the sacrifice of some clean bird, the head of which he has twisted off from the body, so as not to cause death by 
strangulation. A comparison of the figures in the plate alluded to, with the birds enumerated in the following passage of the eleventh 
chapter of Leviticus, will show that real and not fanciful specific identity exists between most of those there represented, and those men- 
tioned in the text of the Pentateuch: “ And these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the fowls; they shall not be eaten, 
they are an abomination: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray, and the vulture, and the kite after his kind; every raven after his 
kind; and the owl, and the night-hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind, and the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great 

NOTES. BUD 

and Christ had not enjoined, the eating the flesh of that animal, it would be meritorious at least in them to refrain 
from it. 

Gumilla further observes, “ Anointing with oil and perfumes, which was so peculiarly a Jewish custom that 
even Christ himself reproaches the Pharisees for being wanting in that mark of courtesy and love in which 
Mary Magdalene excelled, was a usage which continued in such full force on the Oronoco, that it would require 
a chapter by itself to explain it: besides which, if we consider the indispensable obligation which they were under 
to bathé themselves three times a day, or at least twice,—who will not confess'that the Indians resemble the Jews ? 
I shall note down other marks of Judaism as I proceed, accordingly as they occur to me, in their proper place; and 
in order to avoid prolixity here, I conclude by protesting that if the spirit of covetousness and self-interest which is 
predominant in Judaism was lost, it might be found entire and in full vigour amongst the nations of the Oronoco 
and its streams, whose mode of addressing each other as regards the claim of kindred (male and female relations in 
the second and third degree calling themselves brothers and sisters) is derived from the Jews.” This Jewish custom, 
which ‘has been adopted by the modern Quakers with greater latitude, is also noticed by Garcia in the following 
passage of the third chapter of his Origin of the Indians, wherein he observes that it was prevalent amongst the Peru- 
vians, a people with whom he was well acquainted and had long resided; remarking also, “ That it was a Hebrew 
custom; which lasted to the time of Christ our Lord, to call relations of the second and third degree of consanguinity, 
brothers,—Abraham, as it appears in Genesis, addressing Lot, Since we are brothers, there is no reason why there 
should be strife between our shepherds and us. And in the same book of Genesis, the Scripture calls Abraham the 
brother of Lot, saying, When Abraham heard that his brother Lot was taken prisoner. The Scripture here calls him 

owl, and the swan, and the pelican, and the gier-eagle, and the stork, the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat. All fowls 
that creep, going upon all four, shall be an abomination unto you. Yet these may ye eat, of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon 
all four, which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth; even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and 
the bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his kind, and the grasshopper after his kind. But all other flying creeping things, which 
have four feet, shall be an abomination unto you. And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcase of thein shall be 
unclean until the even.” If all the unclean animals specified in the eleventh chapter of Leviticus are not found represented in this plate, 
it must be recollected that with some, such as the camel, the Mexicans were quite unacquainted : that the number of the squares in the 
same plate is only thirteen, and that flying things, for which an atonement might be made by the sacrifice of a flying thing, seem alone to 
be intended to be there included ; for although the sign of the rabbit occurs immediately under the upper row of birds, that sign associated 
with the number two, like that of the cane before it, under which is marked a single unit, and the sign of the earthquake surrounded by 
four units, which is placed under the chair of Quecalcoatle, may only show that Ome Tochtli, as well as Ce Acatl and Nahui Ollin, was 
a sign dedicated to Quecalcoatle on account perhaps of his other appellation of Mexitli, which likewise signified a vine or the maguey 
plant, from which the Mexicans obtained wine. The unclean birds mentioned in Leviticus, and occurring in the plate, appear to be the 
following : the stork, and the heron, the great owl, and the little owl, three species of eagles, three species of hawks or kites, the vulture, 
and the cuckow : of these, that supposed to represent the cuckow, the fourth in order in the lower row of birds, is the only one the class of 
which is not clearly indicated by marks characteristic of the genus to which it belongs; for although the mouth of the cuckoo, like that 
of the night-hawk, is large and capable of great expansion to enable it more easily to catch its prey, still the bills of both these birds have 
a flat appearance when closed, and do not resemble the prominent beak of the eagle: the painter however might have substituted one 
characteristic difference for the other. With respect to the vulture, the figure of which is contained in the ninth square, and which may 
be thought to bear some resemblance to a turkey, it may here be remarked that the American vulture is in fact very like a turkey; 
and hence in the West Indies it goes by the name of the twrkey-buzzard. One flying insect, apparently a butterfly, occupies a place 
among these birds, which may be supposed to represent flying and creeping things in general, which were an abomination to the Jews. 
We are further induced to believe that the Mexicans were acquainted with the hog, as well as the Indians of Yucatan, and that, like the 
Indians of the Oronoco, they considered it an unclean animal, because an animal resembling a boar with bristles is represented flying or 
retreating from the sign of the Cross in the seventy-third page of the Borgian MS.—Mention of the Dresden MS. having furnished 
occasion for the insertion of this note, we shall conclude it by observing that this collection of paintings, although in the finest 
preservation, does not appear to be perfect; a part, and perhaps a considerable portion of the history to which it relates, may have 
followed in the same or succeeding painted volumes. From the nature of the material, whether of skin or paper, on which the 
Indians were accustomed to paint, it is evident that their paintings might have been extended to any indefinite length ; and the size 
of the volume when folded up, and the convenience of holding it or lifting it, probably limited the number of the pages of which it 
was made to consist. The position of the figures in the Dresden MS., invariably looking to the left and turned from the right, clearly 
shows that it was read like a Hebrew roll from right to left, and not in our manner from left to right. From the importance which the 
Jews attach to every thing relating to the copying out or transcribing of their sacred books, the fact here noticed is deserving of 
observation, although this attention to trifles is probably because the Rabbis are unwilling that their flocks should study the Scriptures 
in the original Hebrew, the only text which they recognize. 

276 NOTES. 

Lot’s brother; and the same Scripture informs us that Lot was the nephew of Abraham.” What Gumilla affirms of 
the frequency of ablutions amongst the Indians of the Oronoco, and their custom of anointing themselves with oil, 
corresponds with the accounts of ‘Torquemada and Clavigero. Oil was used likewise among the Mexicans at the 
consecration of their high priest and at the coronation of their kings. This oil, as the olive was unknown in that 
country, was made of ulli, or elastic gum, diluted in water, with other resinous substances and blood. It would 
appear from the following passage in the seventh book of Clavigero’s History of Mexico, that that learned writer 
believed that the preservation of their health rather than religion was the motive that induced the Mexicans to 
bathe so often in the day: “Among the means which the Mexicans employed for the preservation of health, that 
of the bath was very frequent. They bathed themselves extremely often, even many times in the same day, in the 
natural water of rivers, lakes, ditches, and ponds. Experience has taught the Spaniards the advantages of bathing 
in that climate, and particularly in the hot countries. The Mexicans and other nations of Anahuac made little less 
frequent use of the bath Temazcalli. Although in all its circumstances it is deserving of particular mention in the 
History of Mexico, none of the historians of that kingdom have described it, attending more frequently to descrip- 
tions and accounts of less importance; so much so, that if some of those baths had not been still preserved, the 
memory of them must have totally perished.” It will be observed that Clavigero, in remarking that the Spaniards 
found bathing beneficial to their health, admits the diversity of the temperature of different parts of New Spain, 
although the climate is the same. From the elevated heights of the mountains which on every side enclose the 
valley of Mexico, some of which are covered with perpetual snow, and the great extent of the Mexican lake, that 
province is not very warm; and the Temazcalli, or hot vapour baths, could not have been resorted to by the 
Mexicans to relieve themselves from the heat. As bathing likewise twice a day for four successive days formed a 
part of the ceremonies which the kings of Mexico were obliged to go through on their coronation ; and Gumilla 
expressly declares that the Indians of the Oronoco were under an indispensable obligation to bathe themselves 
three times a day, or at least twice,—we are inclined to think that bathing was quite as much a religious ceremony 
amongst the Mexicans as amongst the Jews ; and that the reason why the Spanish historians of the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries have made no particular mention of the Mexican Temazcalli,—a description as well as a repre- 
sentation of which may be found in the seventh book of Clavigero’s History of Mexico,—was, because bathing and 
ablutions formed a very essential part of the Jewish rites and ceremonies: and to. have dwelt on this analogy in the 
customs of the Mexicans and the Jews, coupled with the fact that the former people were acquainted with the use 
of the arch in building (for an arch was employed in the construction of the Temazcalli), might have led to inquiries 
disagreeable to the spirit of the age. But if the Mexicans in their dress, in the domestic economy of their houses 
(which had flat roofs or terraces like those of the Jews), in their mode of receiving guests and saluting strangers, in 
their respect for the old (rising up on their approach), and in the pains which they bestowed on the education of 
their children, sending them to the temples to be instructed, as Torquemada informs us in the thirteenth chapter 
of the ninth book of the Indian Monarchy,—strongly remind us of the Jews; much more do they resemble them 
in their religious rites and ceremonies, in their superstitions, in their proneness to idolatry, in their credulity, in 
their cruelty, and in their laws. We have already observed that the Mexican temples were formed on the model 
of the Hebrew brazen altar, except that the latter had no steps up to it, and the priests ascended by an inclined 
plane. These temples were of a very peculiar construction; they were flat on the top and shaped like a pyramid, 
and as they increased in height they were reduced in dimensions by certain contractions, generally three or four in 
number, at equal distances from each other, which left sufficient room to walk round the edifice. Reference 
to the old edition of Doctor Prideaux’s Connections between Sacred and Profane History, which contains an 
engraving of the brazen altar, will show that that altar was made on the same plan: the Levites were enabled to walk 
round it, as well as to ascend it. 

Torquemada speaking of the temples of New Spain, says, “ We do not read in Holy Scripture that any nation 
in the world has used temples and high altars of this kind built of masonry and elevated in the air; neither 
does profane history mention them: although Holy Scripture informs us in the Book of Joshua, that the two tribes 
and a half who did not cross the Jordan, but remained on the other side when the children of Israel entered the 
promised land, having accompanied the others who passed over, and conquered the enemy who opposed their 
taking possession of it, returned home and erected an altar close to the said Jordan “ infinite magnitudinis” (of 
infinite magnitude and height), signifying by these words that the height of that building was vast and excessive ; 

NOTES. | 277 

so that we are not informed nor do we know that a similar edifice has been constructed in the world in honour of the 
Devil, or so high an altar, except in this kingdom of New Spain, where on the base of mason work of these high 
buildings, altars are placed and chapels built.” Monarquia Indiana, cap. x. lib. viii. The following passage from the first 
book of the History of Herodotus will show that the famous temple of Belus in Babylon was constructed on the plan 
of the Mexican Teocalli: “’Ev 8 @apoet éxarepy Tne TodioG TeTELXIGTO Ev meow" év Tw nev va BactAnia, mepiBorw peyady 
Te Kal ioxupy’ év de tw Erepy, Atog Bndov ipov yadkorvdov, Kat é¢ gue Touro ere ov, Svo cradwy TavTn, éov TeTpAywvor. 
éy HEow Se TOU ipov TvpyoG OTEPEOG oiKodopnrat, orad.ov Kat TO pnkKOG Kat TO evpos’ Kae me TOUTW TW Tey” adXoe TuUpyoG 
émiBeBnke, Kar Erepog para em rovTy, mexptc ov oKTW TUpywr. avaPacrg Se é¢ avrove eLwbev KukAw mep TavTac TOUG 
‘TUR YOUG éyouoa TETOLNTAL. EeoovvTt be Kou TG avaBactoc, éort kaTayoyn TE Kae Owxor apravernptot, év TOLOL KatiCovTec 
dmavovrat ou avaBawovrec. éy Se TW vTedevTawp TUpyo vnoG émeortt peyac. év de Tw ynw kw peyaAn KEETaL ev eorpwpern, 
Kat ol TpameZa Tapakeerat xpusen. ayadua Se ov ey ovdev avrobe endpupevor. ovde vuKra ovderg evavrlerar avOpwrwy, ore 
(n. yun pouryyn THY eTLYwpLov, anv av 0 Veog EAnTat eK TaTEWY, WE Aeyouvor ot XadSator, eovrec ipecc wourou rou Jeov. Pact de o1 
avrou ovrot, épot prev ov TloTa Aeyovres, ov Deov avrov ora Te €G TOV YNOY, Kat apmaveoBat emt Tc KAW, karamep év OnByot 
vyou AryumrTigo. Kara TOV avrov TpoTov, we Aeyoust ot Atyurrwt. kat yap On eee koyrara ev rw tov Avocg tov OnPateos yurn. 
apporepat de avrat Aeyorrat avopwv ovdapwy €¢ opAdimy oray. Kat kaTamep év Tlarapotot ry¢ AvKing 1 mpopayric Tov Beov, éweav 
yevnrat, ov yap ov atet éort KPNoTNPLOY avro0k. érreap Se yevntTat, TOTE ov ovyKarakAnieTat TAG VUKTAG éow év TW VNW. 

“Bort Se rou év BaBuAwn ipov kat dAXog Karw vyoc. eva ayadua peya tov Atog év katnpevov xpuceor, Kat oi Tpamela peyadn 
Tapakeerar xpuoen, Kat To Balpoy ot kat 0 Opovoc ypuceos ort. Kat, we édXeyov ot Xaddaor, radavTwy OKTaKooWwY ‘ypucLoU 
TETOUNTAL TAUTA. éfw Se TOU vnOvV, Bwpoc éore KPvcEos. €or Se Kat dAdo Bepoc peyac, omov Overat Ta reXea TWY mpoPBarwv. 
én yee TOU KPuceou Bupov ovK eEeort Ovew, ort Pn yarabnva fovuva. emt Se TOU peCovoc Bopov Kat kKatayiCovot ABavwrov xtAva 
radavra éreos Exacrou 01 XadSaiou. tore emeay THv oprny aywor ty Dew TovTy. “Hy de év rw TEpever Tour ért TOV Ypovoy 
éxewvov Kat avoptac duwdeka TNXEWY, KPVoEOs, OTEPEOG. eyo bev py ovkK eloov. Ta Se Aeyerat vmro Xadsawy, TAaVUTa deyw. TOUT 
zy avSpiavre Aapews pev 6 “Yoraoreos érBovdevoac, ovk érodunoe AaBew. FepEng Se o Aapenov eae, kar Tov ipea amekrewe, 
aTayopevovra BN KLVEELY TOV avopiayra. TO fev én ipoy TOUTO ouTw KEKOOLNTO. éort de Kat toua avaOnpara moAAa.” 

‘The centre of each region of. the city was walled in: one of these enclosures contained the royal palace, sur- 
rounded with large and strong ramparts; and the other the temple of Jupiter Belus, with its gates of brass: and 
this remains to my time, being of a square form and two stadia in length on every side*. 

“In the middle of the temple a solid tower is built, in length and breadth a stadium, upon which tower another 
tower is erected, and another on that, till it reaches the height of eight towers. The ascent to these towers is con- 
structed on the outside, winding in a circle round all the towers. About half-way up there is a resting-place, and 
seats to repose upon, on which persons ascending sit down and recover from their fatigue. On the last tower there 
is a large chapel (voc) in which chapel there is a great and well covered bed, by the side of which is placed a golden 
table; but no image whatsoever is set there, nor does any man ever pass the night there ; but only a woman of the 
country, whomsoever the god chooses to select from amongst them all, as the Chaldeans affirm, who are the priests 
of that god. 

_ “They themselves say, asserting what appears to me incredible, that the god comes to the chapel and reposes on 
the bed, as the Egyptians say is in the same way the case in Egyptian Thebes; for there also a woman sleeps in the 
temple of the Theban Jupiter. Both these women are said to avoid the society of all men, as does likewise the 
priestess who delivers the oracles of the god in Patara of Lycia, when the oracle is there; for the oracle is not con- 
tinually present there, but when it is, the priestess is shut up by night with the god in the temple. 

“In the temple of Babylon there is also another chapel below in which there is a great golden statue of Jupiter in 
a sitting posture, and beside him is placed a large golden table; and the stool and the seat are of gold; and according 
to the report of the Chaldeans eight hundred golden talents were employed in making them. There is a golden altar 
on the outside of the chapel, and there is also another large altar where full-grown sheep are sacrificed ; for it is not 
lawful to sacrifice on the golden altar any other than sucking victims. The Chaldeans likewise burn on the greater 
altar a thousand talents of frankincense annually on the occasion of celebrating the festival of the god. There was 
also still preserved in the temple at that time a massy golden statue of twelve cubits. I myself did not see it, but what 
the Chaldeans told me, that I say. Darius, the son of Hystaspes, planning it, did not dare to take away that 

* Eight stadia being contained in a mile, its circumference was exactly of that extent. 

(438) 

278 NOTES. 

statue; but Xerxes, the son of Darius, took it, and put to death the priest who forbade its removal. This 
temple therefore has been adorned in the way which has been described, but it likewise contains many offerings 
from private individuals.” Diodorus Siculus, a later Greek historian by some centuries than Herodotus, also ; 
makes mention of the temple of Babylon in the following passage, which occurs in the second book of his 
Universal History : 

“Mera de ravra év peony Ty ToAEL KaTesKkevacey tepov Aroc, ov Kadovow oi BaBvdwvior, Kabamep cipneaper, Bydov. Tlept de 
TOVUTOV THY ovyypapewy Stapwvovrrwy, Kat TOU KaTaoKkevacparoG Sua TOV KPovov KaTATETTWKOTOG ovK E€OTLY amopnvacbat TaKpipec. 
opoAroyerrau S vdnAov yeyernoBat kal! dmepoAny, Kat TOUG XadSarove év avTw TAG TWY aor pwy memotnobat TAPATNPNGELC, akpi Bw 
Oewpoupevor rwv Te avatowy Kar Sucewy dia ‘TO TOU KaTacKEevacparos dpoc. Tng S OAnG oiKoSopiac e& aspadrov kav 7AwOov 
mepirorexmpernc moduTEAwe, Em akpac tH¢ avaBacews TpLa KaTeoKevacey ayadpata ypvoa osupndara, Atoc, ‘Hpac, “Pea. 
routwy de ro ev Tou Avog, Eornkos nv Kat diaeBnKoc, irapxov Todwy TEccapakovTa To pnKoc, oTaOpov 8 elye YiLwy Tadavrwv 
BaBvAwriwy. TO Se TNC “Peac, ém dippov KaOnwevoy Kpvoou, TOV toov oralwov ele TW TPOELPNMEVHW. émt Se TWY yovaTwy avrne 
elornkeicay Acovres Svo, Kat TANSLOY Oerc Vreppeyelerc apyupoL, TpLakovTa TaAavTwY ExaoTOG éywv ro Bapog. ro Se TING ‘Hpac 
Eornkos jy ayadpa, ora0poy éxov radavrwr oKrakooiwy. Kat TH mer SeEa yeELpL Karerye TG Kearns of, TydE apiorepa oKNTT pov 
ABoKorAAnTor. TovToLG 8 amace Kown TapeKerto Tpamela yxpuon ovpnraroc, To mev pNKOG TOSwY TecoapaKovra, To S evpoe 
dexaTrevre, ora0uov éxouoa radavTwy TEVTAKOOLWY. me oe TAVUTNG émuKkelvro dvo kKapxXnota, ora0pov exyovra TplakovTa vadavrwy. 
noav de Kat Oupiarnpia, TOV pEev apOuov toa, TOV Se ora0pov ékaTepov cadayrwv TPlLaKOoolwy. imnpyov Se Kae KpatTnpes XPvooe TPELG, 
wv o pev rov Avoc eitAke radavra BaBvAwna XiALa Kat Stakoota, Twy © addwy EKATEPOG éEaxoow. adda Tavra pev ol Tw Ilepowy 
Bactrere voTEpor éovAnoay. tTwv Se BactXewy Kau Tov adAwv KatacKevacpatwy 6 Xpovoc Ta jey odocy eps npavise, rad édupn- 
vaTo. Kat yap avene TG BaBuAwyvog vuV Bpayu Tt MEpOG OlKeLT al, TO Se mA€LtoT ov evr0c TELY OUG yewpyerrat.” 

“ Afterwards she (Semiramis) built in the middle of the city the temple of Jupiter, whom the Babylonians, as we 
have already observed, call Belus; but since historians do not agree in their description of it, and the structure itself 
has through age fallen to the ground, it is impossible to write any thing certain respecting it. It is allowed to have 
been excessively high, and that the Chaldeans took observations of the stars from it, the elevation of the edifice 
enabling them accurately to watch their rising and setting. The whole of the building having been sumptuously 
constructed of brick and bitumen, three images of beaten gold, of Jupiter, Juno, and Rhea, were placed at the top of 
the ascent above: that of Jupiter was in a standing attitude with one leg advanced, being forty feet high, and weighing 
a thousand Babylonian talents. The image of Rhea was seated on a golden chair, being of the same weight as that 
just mentioned; at her knees stood two lions, and not far from her were two immense silver serpents, each weighing 
thirty talents. The image of Juno was standing, and weighed eight hundred talents ; in her right hand she grasped 
a serpent by the head, and in her left was a sceptre set with precious stones. A table was placed before them all in 
common, which was formed of beaten gold, and was forty feet in length and fifteen in breadth, and weighed five 
hundred talents, upon which were placed two goblets weighing thirty talents ; there were censers likewise, in number 
the same, but each of them weighing thirty talents. There were also three golden bowls: that belonging to Jupiter 
weighed twelve hundred Babylonian talents, and each of the others six hundred; but the kings of Persia in later 
times pillaged the temple of these things. With respect to palaces and other public buildings, time has partly. de- 
stroyed all traces of them, and partly reduced them to decay; for at the present day but a small portion of Babylon 
itself is inhabited, and most of the ground contained within its walls is tilled.” Diodorus’s account of the temple of 
Belus adds little to the information which we had received from Herodotus of its shape and construction, from whose 
description we immediately perceive that it was built on the plan of the Mexican temples. Diodorus seems to have 
found it as difficult to reconcile the conflicting accounts of various authors, and to comprehend the architecture of 
the temple of Belus, as Clavigero professes that he found it to ascertain the form and proportions of the great temple 
of Mexico; and on that account perhaps that eminent historian refrains from entering into any discussion on the 
subject: he does not however scruple to contradict Herodotus in saying that images were placed in the chapel or 
sanctuary of Belus, who had affirmed that the Chaldeans placed no image whatsoever in the sanctuary of their god ; 
approximating them in that particular to the Jews, whose ancestor Abraham came from Ur of the Chaldees, and 
who placed no image of God in the temple dedicated to Jehovah. Perhaps the golden images mentioned by Diodorus 
might have been set up in the sanctuary of Belus after the Magi became incorporated with the Chaldeans, at a period 
subsequent to that in which Herodotus had visited Babylon. No blame can, however, be imputed to Diodorus Siculus 
for not following Herodotus’s description of the temple of Babylon, since his refraining from doing so when the 

NOTES. 279 

task would have been so easy, and the relation itself was calculated to please the reader, is a proof that he chiefly 
studied truth in his History, and was unwilling to insert in it doubtful matters; and certainly the Spanish author, 
Ludovicus Vives,—who it cannot be denied was a learned man, and to whom the education of Queen Mary the First 
of England was confided,—in calumniating those two famous writers of antiquity, did not so much attack the individual 
historians as History itself. Who could have imagined that a man professing a regard for learning would have called 
him whom all preceding ages had honoured with the title of the Father of History, the Father of Lies ; and Diodorus 
Siculus “ineptissimum scriptorem et vilissimum ;” of whom Henry Stephens says, “Quantum solis lumen inter 
stellas, tantum inter omnes quotquot ad nostra tempora pervenerunt historicos, si utilitatis potius, quam voluptatis 
aurium habenda sit ratio, noster hic Diodorus eminere dici potest.” But Ludovicus Vives was a Spanish author of 
the sixteenth century, whom the mythology of the New Continent might have inspired with a distaste for that of the 
Old; since his chief accusation against Diodorus is, that he commenced his Bibliotheca with an elaborate account of the 
ancient mythology of the nations whose real history he afterwards wrote. Fortunate as Ludovicus Vives might have 
considered the circumstance that many of the books of Diodorus Siculus had been lost, yet still he seems to feel in- 
dignant that Herodotus’s history should have been preserved entire; and that he should have asserted that the Scythian 
queen, having defeated the Persians in a battle in which Cyrus himself was slain, caused the head of that monarch to 
be cut off and thrown into a vessel full of blood, indicating by the act her despair for the loss of her son and the fit 
treatment which she thought the cruelty and ambition of Cyrus entitled him to receive at her hands. The account 
which Diodorus Siculus gives in the second book of his History of the duration of the Assyrian empire, and of the 
© neporn tov Mndwv tyenoria” might likewise have been displeasing to him, because it is difficult to reconcile it with 
the history of the Jews; and the difference between the chronology of the Septuagint version of the Scriptures 
and that of the original Hebrew Bible has hardly perplexed learned men more. 

. The description of the temple of Babylon in the History of Herodotus, and the omission of that description in the 
work of Diodorus, furnish arguments favourable to the character of each historian. The difficulty of comprehending 
the plan of the temple of Belus, and the improbability of a tower having ever been built with seven other towers 
heaped upon it, vanish on inspecting the plans of the Mexican temples, and on reading in Boturini’s treatise, of the 
tower which King Netzahualpilli built in Tezcuco, nine stories high, in honour of the god of heaven; and we have 
no more right to doubt that Herodotus visited Babylon, than to doubt that he had been in Egypt; but that difficulty 
and improbability justified Diodorus in studying the part of an historian rather than the gratification of his readers, 
and in omitting the description of the temple of Babylon, which the writer whose authority he chiefly followed in 
composing his history of the Assyrian, Median, and Persian empires, who was Ctesias, probably omitted also, because 
when he was in Persia and Babylon that ancient monument might have become dilapidated. It would appear that 
even in the age of Herodotus, the city of Babylon was hastening to decay; the Bao.Ania (or palace) which was the 
work of Semiramis, as well as the temple of Belus, is not described by him, undoubtedly because no vestiges remained 
of it; and the Persian kings, Darius the son of Hystaspes, and Xerxes, seem to have been little inclined to protect 
the religion of the Chaldeans (which they did not believe), or to expend the revenues of the state in keeping in 
repair the temple of Belus. Some writers and travellers seem to consider it little less than miraculous that the ruins 
of the temple of Babylon are not still visible on the banks of the Euphrates; but if they reflect that not many years 
after the conquest of Mexico, the great temple of that city, which Acosta names “ augustissimum templum,” and Peter 
Martyr says was as large as a'town of five hundred houses (reckoning of course the court-yard and all the buildings 
it contained as the temple), had wholly disappeared, they will be disposed to allow, that two thousand years may well 
change the state of cities, and even the appearance of the site on which they once stood. What contemporary city 
with Babylon, it may be asked, still exists? Egyptian Thebes, Sardis, Palmyra, Carthage, and Troy,—where are they? 
what has been the fate of those cities once so renowned? As it is the general practice of writers such as Doctor 
Warburton,—a practice which sometimes more candid authors like Doctor Prideaux have imitated,—to attempt to 
shake the basis on which profane history rests, by opposing the most eminent historians to each other, and seeking 
to discover contradictions in their relations, which pretending to have found out, they assume to themselves the 
right of making a selection of probabilities, and rejecting alternately whichever author they please, to remodel ancient 
history according to their own views, (which Doctor Prideaux has done in his history of Cyrus, in which he follows 
neither the account of Herodotus nor that of Diodorus Siculus,)—we may be allowed to remark that if Diodorus Siculus 
and Herodotus sometimes contradict each other, the veracity of neither author deserves on that account to be im- 

280 NOTES. 

peached ; but they both ought to be credited, accordingly as each had the best opportunity of ascertaining the truth 
of what he asserts. Herodotus himself visited Babylon; but the information which he received from the Chaldeans 
cannot entirely be depended upon: he expresses his own disbelief of the story which they told him of the god 
reposing himself occasionally on the bed which was placed in the sanctuary of Belus ; and he seems not to have felt 
the same respect for the Chaldeans as he did for the Egyptian priests. The situation of Greece at that time was also 
not such as to have made the subjects of the king of Persia studious to show great courtesy to the Greeks, or to 
give them information on every subject; although it cannot be doubted that Herodotus collected much of his know- 
ledge of the affairs of Assyria during his residence at Babylon, the history of which empire he either wrote or in- 
tended to write. But Diodorus Siculus composed his History under great advantages. The conquests of Alexander 
the Great had made Greece familiar with Asia, and he had the opportunity of consulting all the Greek historians 
who had written on the history of Asia from the age of Alexander to that of Julius Cesar, and especially Ctesias, 
who flourished about seventy years later than Herodotus, and resided for many years at the court of Artaxerxes, 
having been raised from the condition of a prisoner of war to the rank of physician and favourite of that monarch. 
When therefore conflicting statements occur in the histories of Herodotus and of Diodorus Siculus, it may be the 
safest course to credit the former in whatever might have come under his own observation during his residence in 
Babylon, such as the buildings of that city; and the latter, in historical facts which required deeper research, and 
which later ages might be supposed, from the causes which have been alluded to, to have been better acquainted with. 
To revert again to the temple of Belus, and to add another remark to those which have already been made respecting 
its shape and structure ;—the number of the towers (eight) of which it consisted, does not appear to have been accidental. 
Boturini informs us that the number nine, which was the number of the stories or towers of the temple built by King 
Netzahualpilli in Tezcuco, had reference to the nine heavens; the number eight therefore, we may suppose, was a 
number esteemed as well by the Chaldeans as by the Jews. The following description of the great temple of Mexico 
is taken from the eleventh chapter of the eighth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy : “ One of the most cele- 
brated and sumptuous temples that existed in these western parts and provinces of New Spain at the period of the 
arrival of the Spaniards, was the great temple of the city of Mexico, which was founded and built by the Mexican kings. 
It has been already stated who the original founder was, in the history of the lives and the reigns of those kings. I 
content myself with merely saying here, that it was built twice: the first time not with as much majesty as the second 
time ; for as the population and fame of Mexico increased, the splendour of the public buildings increased likewise.” 
The entire of the description is too long to insert here: Torquemada, after mentioning the vast size of the court 
which surrounded the temple, says that the temple itself was of a square shape, each of its four sides, from angle to 
angle, being three hundred and sixty feet in length; that it was of a pyramidal form, and contracting in dimension as 
it ascended in height, was divided into several stages ; that it had a platform above rather more than sixty feet broad, 
on which were placed two altars, over which were built two chapels, each three stories high (grandissima altura) 
and very lofty, from whence there was a magnificent view of the Mexican lake and the cities situated on its shores. 
The platform above was ascended by a staircase consisting of one hundred and thirteen steps, all of polished stone: 
around this greater temple more than forty other temples were placed, only differing from it in size and position; “ for 
the greater temple had its back to the east,,which was the position proper to be preserved in all principal temples, as 
we learn was the opinion of the ancients; and its stairs and entrance were turned towards the west, as it is now 
the custom in these Christian times to place many of our churches ; and thus they worshipped looking towards the 
rising sun. The lesser temples on the contrary faced the east and the other quarters of the sky north and south.” 
Torquemada, describing the roofs of the chapels, says, “The covering and the roofs of this most famous temple, and 
of the others contained in the court belonging to it, were of different and various forms; and although some of them 
were made of timber and others of straw, they were of beautiful workmanship, some being shaped like a pyramid, 
others square, and others round, and of many various forms. So great and beautiful was the labour employed upon 
them, that they did not appear to have been composed of the materials which have been mentioned, but resembled 
fine and delicate pencilwork. These turrets, great and small included, were, according to the most accurate ‘calcula- 
tion which has been discovered, three hundred and sixty, equalling in their excessive number the days of the year. 
At the foot of the greater temple, close to the staircases ascending to the platform above, there were two altars of 
fire which burned day and night, so that the fire was perpetual ;—the Devil wishing to imitate God, who commanded 
fire to be kept continually burning upon the altar of his temple, which was served with fuel by the priests in ordinary 

NOTES. 281 

attendance, as Holy Scripture informs us; and in the same manner as incense was offered on God's altar every 
morning, so the envious Deceiver ordered not only that one but that two altars should be erected to him, and that 
incense should be burned upon them, not only in the morning but during the whole day: and accordingly two altars 
smoked during the entire day from morning until night. The entire number of the altars and of the censers for 
incense which were in the temple, the surrounding court, and the lesser temples adjoining to it, was more than six 
hundred, equalling in height the stature of a man, and in figure and shape resembling the cup which is used in the 
celebration of mass. To see them by night, when they were all blazing, presented to the fancy the appearance of a 
clear and brilliant day. In order that those who read these things may not think that I speak at random and am 
guilty of exaggeration in numbers, I shall here insert the words of Father Bernard de Sahagun, a Brother belonging 
to my Order, and one of those who entered New Spain almost immediately after its discovery, having proceeded 
thither in the year Twenty-nine; who saw this and the other temples, and employed his life in the conversion of the 
Indians, instructing, teaching, and preaching to them for more than sixty years, and who was thoroughly acquainted 
with their antiquities, and wrote many works in their language; who, speaking of the beauty, grandeur, and 
magnificence of this most famous temple,—though wicked inasmuch as it belonged to the Devil,—uses the following 
expressions: [his temple was enclosed on every side with walls of stone, which were entirely covered with battle- 
ments, and white-washed. The pavement of the temple was completely flagged with very smooth stones, not cut but 
in their natural state, as smooth and slippery as glass. There was much to contemplate in the edifices of this temple. 
The picture itself presented much to the eye of the beholder, and I caused it to be painted in the city of Mexico; 
when they deprived me of it to send it to Spain as a thing highly deserving to be seen, and I could not obtain 
possession of it again or have another painted. Although in the picture the temple seemed of such finished 
execution, it was in reality much more so and more beautiful. The principal building, or the chapel which 
was above it, was dedicated to the god Huitzilupuchtli, and to another god his companion, whom they named 
Tlacahuepancuexcotzin, and to another god, inferior to the two former, whom they called Paynalton. These are 
the’ express words of that blessed and venerable old man, by which we may well understand the excellency and 
grandeur of that most memorable temple. And he further adds, that the circumference of its court was so extensive 
that it contained, in the space enclosed within it, all the ground on which the greater church, the house of the 
Marquis of the Valley, the palace, and the archbishop’s house are at present built, together with much of what is now 
the square; which appears incredible, on account of the great extent of ground which this measurement comprises. 
I recollect having seen, thirty-five years ago, some of those edifices on that side of the square which the greater 
church now occupies, which appeared to me mounds of stone and earth, which were employed in the foundations 
of the house of God and of his new church, which is a very sumptuous edifice; since His Most Holy Majesty 
was pleased that the Devil and his servants should collect for him in that place part of the materials which might 
serve as a foundation for his own temple, permitting him previously for the space of some years to glory in 
the crimes therein perpetrated, in order that after its total downfall and ruin he might know that God alone is the 
true Lord of all created things; and that he, as his creature, should be compelled against his will to acknowledge 
vassalage to him, casting him down from those stone heaps which he had assembled together, in order to preserve 
a pretended and imaginary glory amongst those poor blind and deluded Indians.” 

Torquemada says, in the twentieth chapter of the eighth book of his Indian Monarchy, that the priests and 
ministers who lived in the great temple of Mexico were more than five thousand, who resided by day and by night 
within its walls, occupied in the service of the temple. These priests are constantly named Levites by Acosta; and 
certainly that learned author may be excused for giving them that appellation, as the temple service of the Mexicans 
was in reality very like that of the Jews: their principal occupation was sacrificing in honour of Huitzilopuchtli, 
whose magnificent temple was reared amidst the groans of the dying and the blood of the slain*. The offerings 

* Torquemada gives an account which almost surpasses belief of the number of victims which Ahuitzotl, Montezuma’s predecessor on 
the throne, sacrificed at the dedication of the greater temple of Mexico; and he observes, instancing the example of Solomon, that it 
was a Hebrew custom to sley a profusion of victims at the dedication of a temple: 

«« Entre las cosas, que la devocion antigua de los hombres usd, para conservar con puridad su inmunidad, fue dedicar a los dioses 
los templos y casas que les edificaban. Para lo qual primero levantaban sus figuras, hechaban sus suertes, buscaban agueros (que son 
adivinancas supersticiosas) que favoreciesen su devocion, é intento. Asi lo leemos en Gelio, de sentencia de Varron, averlo hecho los 
Romanos; y tambien Tito Livio en sus Decadas, lo dice de el rei Tarquino de Roma, para que con mas seguridad se conservasen 

(4c ) 

982 NOTES. 

of the Mexicans consisted, like thosé of the Jews, in the lives of animals, blood, incense, and the first fruits of the 
field, which like the Jews they presented three times in the year, an analogy which Torquemada seeks in the 
following manner to explain: “It is certainly a thing calculated to create astonishment, to see how nearly in this 
offering of the first fruits the two republics resembled each other: but we need not feel so much surprised at it, 
since it was the Devil who persuaded and instigated them to it, who, as we have proved in the whole course of this 
History, wished to substitute himself in the place of God (remedar 4 Dios) whenever it was possible; and this being 
the case, the task being moreover so easy, inasmuch as these Indians are extremely addicted to religious worship (por 
quanto estos Indios son inclinadisimos al culto divino), he found little trouble in inducing them to tender to him this 
kind of offering and sacrifice, which, as we have observed, all paid very generally and regularly, without being either 
remiss in the offering or inexact in its proper quantity.” Monarquia Indiana, cap. xxi. lib. 8. In the tenth chapter 
of his twelfth book, Torquemada affirms, that the Devil counterfeited amongst the Indians the Feast of the Passover. 
“‘ This third month of the Mexicans commenced on the fifteenth of March, which was the solemn Passover of the 
Jews, which lasted eight days, when they offered the first fruits of the ripe grain and of the ears, which it was 
unlawful for them to taste before they had presented the said first fruits to the priests. The Indians observed the same 
custom in this third month and Passover (y Pasqua), which they celebrated in honour of the god or the gods of 
rain; and as they had no grain or ears of corn to present, since the corn was then only in the leaf, their offering 
consisted of flowers, which at the commencement of this month were in greater abundance than in the preceding 
months, as then was the beginning of spring. Before the arrival of the day appointed for carrying these first fruits 
to the temples and altars, no one dared to smell them, for they were forbidden to do so by an express law; as the 
Jews were forbidden to taste the ears of corn: and it might well provoke a hearty laugh from Christians, to see that 
the Devil wished to constitute himself the god of first fruits; and that not requiring grain and ears of corn, 
because there were none at that season of the year, he exacted from them flowers, regarding only the offering and 
service, without caring whether it consisted of the same things as God demanded of his people.” 

The Festival of New Moons was another Mexican solemnity, so analogous to the Neomenia or Jewish Festival 

los dichos templos. Esto mismo sabeinos aver hecho estos Indios Occidentales, quando los que se Ilamaron Mexicanos, se apartaron 
de los Culhuas, un poco apartados del sitio que aora tienen, levantando un altar de papel, 4 su dios Huitzilupuchtli, que les sirvio 
por entonces tambien de templo, para cuja ereccion, y dedicacion, pidieron 4 sus vecinos los Culhuas dichos, alguna cosa de aguero, 
que poner en el dicho altar, para major certificacion de su prospero suceso, como lo vimos mas fundamentalmente en el libro de su 
historia. Siendo, pues, agorado el lugar, y construido el templo, lo dedicaban, diciendo ciertas palabras, por la misma persona del 
Pontifice, y teniendo con sus manos las puertas del templo, que consagraba, y dedicaba, haciendo las casas particulares de los dioses, 4 
los quales las dedicaban, para que no pudiesen ser profanadas de los seculares, gente lega. Y asi, dixo Quintiliano, en las declamaciones, 
ser la dedicacion cosa que inducia 4 dios, y lo sentaba en su casa, como en silla propia. Y Ciceron en una de sus Oraciones dice esto, 
y otras muchas cosas concernientes, y tocantes 4 las dichas, y otros muchos. Adornaban juntamente esta consagracion, y dedicacion 
de templos, con muchos sacrificios, que hacian, de diversos, y varios animales. Y aunque la prueba de esto, para los que fueron de 
gentiles, estan los libros, de todos los historiadores antiguos, mui Ilenos; para el de Dios la Sagrada Escritura nos lo dice, y afirma, 
particularigando la mucha suma de ello, que aquel dia de su dedicacion fueron muertos. Donde murieron veinte y dos mil vacas, y 
novillos; ciento y veinte mil ovejas, y carneros. Y quando traian el arca del testamento, venian haciendo sacrificios de estos animales, 
sin numero. lLuego que pusieron el arca en su lugar, dentro del Sancta Sanctorum, dice la Sagrada Escritura, que se hinchié el templo 
de una niebla tan espesa, que no veian los sacerdotes, para poder ocuparse en el sacrificio, y ministerio de oficio. Luego higo Salomén 
oracion 4 Dios, y tuvo respuesta de él. Bendixo al pueblo con unas mui santas, y paternales palabras, y esto solo sabemos, que huvo 
en aquella fiesta, que duré por ocho dias, los quales pasados, despidio el rei 4 toda la gente, la qual se fue por familias 4 sus ciudades, 
y pueblos. Y de esta manera quedé consagrado, y dedicado 4 Dios aquel templo, sin saber que huviese otra cosa, que se afiadiese 4 
esta dedicacion. Siendo, pues, este el comun uso antiguo de todas las gentes, en la dedicacion de sus templos, no se contentdé el 
demonio en las que estos desventurados Indios Occidentales hacian, de los que !e dedicaban, con que muriesen los animales reteridos, 
los quales no leemos, ni sabemos, que por entonces los huviese, aunque de otras especies muchas, si, de los quales es creible, que seria 
la suma immensa, y sin numero. Pero aftadio el enemigo de la vida, y descanso del hombre, que en los que se dedicaron en esta 
Nueva-Espafia, fuesen las fiestas celebradas, con animales racionales, y capaces de ragon, de los quales en semejantes dias morian 
muchos. En especial se dice, que quando se dedicé el templo major de Mexico, y fue en él puesta la estatua de Huitzilupuchtli, 
murieron aquel dia mas de sesenta mil cautivos, celebrando con sangre humana las fiestas infernales, y apagando con ella la sed de. el 
demonio, que por ella bebe de ordinario los vientos. Dedicacion de templo, es ofrecerlo 4 Dios, y estrenarlo en su servicio; y estos 
Indios le dicen Teychaliliztli, y esto se hacia el primer dia, que se estrenaba con aquel intento, y devocion de el pueblo, y gastos de 
sacrificios, y ofrendas; y de alli adelante quedaba consagrado, para no poder usar de el profanamente, guardandole respeto, como 4 
casa de Dios y palacio suio, donde venia 4 dar sus oraculos, y respuestas.” Torquemada, Monarg. Ind. tom. il. lib. 8. cap. 22. 

NP OFS: 283 

of the New Moon, that Torquemada, describing the former, says: “If this custom be attentively considered, it will 
appear to have been stolen from the Hebrews; of whom Saint Thomas says, it was ordained that the Neomenia 
should be kept at the commencement of every month, in memory of the preservation and government of all things, 
which same preservation is that which our Indians pray for in their Neomenia at the commencement of each of 
their months ; with this difference, that the Hebrew months were lunar, and the Indian vicenary, that is to say, 
contained only twenty days, so as not to last as long as the moon. But my reply to this objection would be, 
that the Devil taught them that curtailed and brief computation, in order that his sacrifice might be celebrated 
sooner than God’s was celebrated formerly by his people, that he might behold himself unjustly honoured by his 
sacrifice being first; as if the truth of sacrifice consisted in its being first or last, and not in its being truly or falsely 
offered.” Torquemada might also have replied, that the annals of the Tultecas recorded a reform which was made in 
their calendar by one of their Teopixquis, or high priests, when probably the lunar months were changed into months 
of twenty days, for the express purpose of the more frequent recurrence of the Neomenia or monthly offerings. 
The Festival of New Moons, although originally God’s own institution amongst the Jews, became afterwards his 
abomination, as we are informed in Scripture, where it says, “ Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul 
hateth.”. Hence we may infer that time had introduced many great abuses into them. But if our surprise is justly 
excited at being informed by Torquemada, that the Devil had imitated among the Indians. the Jewish Feasts of the 
Passover and of the Neomenia, what shall we think of the Fast of Atamal, which the Mexicans kept every eighth 
year on the four signs of the Flint? May it not be supposed that that year, although not the seventh, was a kind of 
sabbatical year? Eight was a number highly esteemed both by Jews and Christians ; and as the latter have not scrupled 
to change the Sabbath from the seventh day (Saturday), on which day it is still kept by the Jews, to the eighth day 
(Sunday), on account of the resurrection of Christ having occurred on that day, we must not reject a striking analogy 
because it is open to an answerable objection; since the Mexicans may have had their reasons for preferring the 
number eight to seven. Torquemada says, that “ Saint Isidore, speaking of the veneration which is due to the Lord’s 
day, assigns to it the following excellencies: The Lord’s day, which is the ezghth day, which follows the preceding 
festival of the Sabbath, even the Holy Scripture points out as a very solemn day. It is the first day of ages; on it 
were formed the elements ; on it were created the angels; on it Christ rose from the dead; on it the Holy Ghost 
descended from Heaven upon the Apostles ; and finally, on it God bestowed manna upon his people.” Garcia, besides 
noticing the Mexican Neomenia, or festival of First Fruits, mentions a Peruvian festival which was celebrated by the 
command of the Inga Yupanqui on the full of the moon, which he compares to the Jewish Passover; and he seems to 
comprise in the comparison a solemn festival which was kept by the Indians of Tlascala and Cholula, in which 
provinces he says men were crucified to the three gods of rain, sometimes on high and sometimes on low crosses. 
Monstrous as it may appear, it cannot be doubted that the crucifixion of a man occurred at several of the religious 
ceremonies of the Indians ; and representations of crucifixions are sometimes found in the Mexican paintings, though 
there they seem to refer to mythological fictions. The celebrated Las Casas entertained no doubt that the continent 
of America had in early ages been colonized by the Jews; and he even goes so far as to say that the language of 
the Island of Saint Domingo was “ corrupt Hebrew.” Torquemada, who was a much later writer, denies the 
similarity between any of the Indian languages and the Hebrew, candidly acknowledging that he was not acquainted 
with Hebrew himself, and of course advancing the assertion on the authority and information of others. But it must 
also be recollected that Garcia, who had evidently adopted the sentiments of Las Casas, says in the Preface to his 
third book of the Origin of the Indians, in reference to existing prejudices, “ that learned men condemned and would 
not assent to that opinion ;” and that Torquemada himself, acknowledging that the religious rites, ceremonies, and 
even moral laws of the Indians closely resembled those of the Jews, thought it more probable that the Devil had 
instructed the Indians in them, than that the Jews had carried them over to America. Learned men of the 
present age will perhaps not consider themselves bound by the example of those of the sixteenth century; and as 
that learning is most useful, of which the only object is the attainment of truth with a regard for the best interests 
of mankind, the opinion which we take the liberty of here advancing,—that the Jews had in very early ages colonized 
America, established an empire in that continent of more than a thousand years’ duration, revived their old law in 
its full vigour, and, to show their hatred and contempt for Christianity, introduced into their religious rites and 
ceremonies many observancies calculated to turn into ridicule its most sacred rites and mysteries, and thereby, as 
they imagined, practically to demonstrate that that could not be sacred which could with such impunity be profaned,— 

Q84. NOTES. 

will probably undergo fair and unprejudiced discussion. In anticipation of an objection which may be made to 
the latter part of this hypothesis,—that it is unlikely that even if the Jews had proceeded in early ages to America, 
and succeeded in reviving their old law in that continent, they would have interwoven with the Mosaic institutions 
other institutions indicative of their bitterest hatred to Christianity, or that religious persecution on the one side 
could have ever led to such revolting retaliations on the other,—we must remark, that the hatred between Christians 
and Jews in early ages was proverbial. And if in the middle ages the Knights Templars could have been guilty of 
half the religious profanations laid to their charge (which the age in which they lived must have credited, or never 
would an illustrious religious Order which had so often defended the Cross against the Crescent have been visited with 
such an extremity of persecuting vengeance), where is the improbability of the supposition that a set of vindictive 

Jews, outraged by Christians, and brooding over vengeance,—of whom it might with justice be said that every 

man’s hand was against them, and theirs against every man,—having succeeded in establishing themselves in an 
unknown quarter of the globe, might have there founded a state, the laws and institutions of which were framed 
for the purpose of turning Christianity and its mysteries into contempt? Much has been written by the Rabbis 
respecting the kingdom of Cozar, which Basnage in his History of the Jews is inclined to consider an imaginary 
region, but which, whether a real or an ideal monarchy and wherever situated, affords proof, by having given rise to 
grave discussion amongst the Jews, that they (who ought to be the best judges) did not deem it at all improbable 
that in the eighth century after the Christian era their countrymen had succeeded in reviving the institutions of the 
Mosaic law, that is to say, their temple service and sacrifices in a territory of their own. In the seventh book of 
Basnage’s History will be found some account of this kingdom; and the rabbinical tradition, that the king of it 
“ built a tabernacle perfectly like that which Moses set up in the wilderness,” is very remarkable. The same king is 
said to have been happy and potent, to have triumphed over his enemies, and to have discovered hidden treasures in 
the bowels of the earth. That shortly after the discovery of a portion of the continent of America and of the Island of 
Saint Domingo or Hayti, (which was the island the language of which Las Casas calls “ corrupt Hebrew,”) unparalleled 
persecutions commenced against the Jews in Spain, under the regency of Cardinal Ximenes, is an historical fact*. 

* Since the famous edict of Ferdinand the Catholic, which expelled the Jews from Spain, was issued in the month of March 1492, 
and Columbus did not set out on his first voyage of discovery until the third of August of the same year, it may be contended, from a 
comparison of dates, that it was impossible that the Spanish government could have adopted any severe measures against the Jews in 
consequence of its having discovered that their ancestors had revived the old law in America, or instituted any rites in that continent in 
hatred to the Christian name and religion. This argument would be conclusive, if it could be satisfactorily proved that the Spanish 
government was really ignorant of the existence of America till after the return of Columbus from his first voyage. And if implicit 
credit ought to be attached to the improbable story of the long navigation of the unknown pilot and his companions over the Atlantic, who 
is said to have first communicated to Columbus the information which induced him to submit to: the governments of England, Portugal 
and Spain, his proposed plan of discovery, which Isabella queen of Castille, rather than her husband Ferdinand king of Arragon, seems 
greatly to have favoured, chiefly from religious motives and an ardent zeal for the proselytism of infidels to Christianity, to which 
circumstance Gomara supposes that Columbus alludes in the lines which he took for his motto— 

“ Por Castilla, y por Leon, 
Nuevo mundo hallo Colon.” 
“« De donde sospecho que la reyna favorecio mas que no el rei, el descubrimiento de las Indias.’”” The same author likewise says that 
the queen was very scrupulous during her lifetime about permitting any of the subjects of the king her husband, who were Arragonese, to 
proceed to America. Isabella’s early interference in the affairs of America was probably owing to the spiritual conquest of the New 
World having been undertaken entirely by herself and the clergy, with whom the king was too prudent to intermeddle. But it does not 
follow, because Columbus was the first person who, sailing from Seville expressly for the purpose of discovering the continent of 
America, did in fact accomplish that discovery, that the government of Spain was wholly ignorant of its existence till after his return 
from his first voyage; since the chapter in Gomara’s History of the Indies, entitled “El descubrimiento primero de las Indias,” 
which we subjoin in the original Spanish, will make it ever doubtful whether Columbus might not have proceeded on an open 
expedition to America, in order to take possession in the name of the king of Spain of some portion of the continent of America or 
of the West Indian Islands; an arrangement having been previously made between the courts of Spain and of Rome, that this necessary 
formality having been gone through, the Pope should, on the return of Columbus, vest in the king of Spain and his heirs the possession 
and sovereignty over America, which was accordingly done. ‘ Navegando una caravela por nuestro mar oceano, tuvo tan forgoso viento 
de levante, y tan continuo, que fue a parar en tierra no sabida, ni puesta en el mapa, o carta demarear. Bolvio de alla en muchos mas 
dias que fue, y quando aca llego, no traya mas de al piloto, y a otros tres o quatro marineros; que como venian enfermos de hambre 
y de trabajo, se murieron dentro de poco tiempo en el puerto. E aqui como se descubrieron las Indias por desdicha de quien primero 
las vio, pues acabo la vida sin gozar dellas, y sin dexar, a lo menos sin aver memoria de como se llamava, ni de donde era, mi que ano las 
hallo. Bien que no fue culpa suya, sino malicia de otros, o invidia de la que llaman fortuna. Y no me maravillo de las historias 

NO T‘E’S. 285 

Could the indignation of the Spanish Government have been excited by the suspicion that the Jews were the authors 
of the guilty excesses which were discovered in the religious rites of the New World, where an express law was passed 
about that time that they should not be allowed to proceed? ‘We have the authority of a Jew for believing that a 
colony of Jews had been settled in America long before the age of Columbus, who gives an account of his interview 

antiguas que cuenten hechos grandissimos por chicos 0 escuros principios, pues no subemos quien de poco aca hallo las Indias, que tan 
sefialada y nueva cosa es. Quedaranos siquiera el nombre de aquel piloto, pues todo lo al con la muerte fenece. Unos hazen Andaluz 
a este piloto, que tratava en Canaria, y en la Madera, quando le acontecio aquella larga y mortal navegacion; otros Vizcayno, que 
contratava en Inglaterra, y Francia; y otros Portugues, que yva o venia de la Mina, o India. Lo qual quadra mucho con el nombre 
que tomaron y tienen aquellas nuevas tierras. Tambien ay, quien diga que aporto la caravela a Portogal; y quien diga que a la 
Madera, o a otra delas islas de los Agores. Empero ninguno afirma nada. Solamente concuerdan todos en que fallegio aquel piloto en 
casa de Christoval Colon. En cuyo poder quedaron las escrituras de la caravela, y la relacion de todo aquel luengo viaje, con la marca 
y altura de las tierras nuevamente vistas, y halladas.’—La Istoria de las Indias, fo. x. ¢ A vessel navigating our ocean encountered so 
violent and uninterrupted a gale from the East, that it was driven on till it reached land that was neither known nor laid down in the 
map. It returned from thence in many more days than it took in going, and on completing the voyage home its entire crew consisted of 
no more than the pilot and three or four other sailors, who, being sick from fatigue and hunger, died within a short time after their arrival 
in port: and thus the Indies were discovered by the misfortune of him who first beheld them, since he ended his life without enjoying 
them, and without leaving—at least without preserving—the recollection of his name, or of the country to which he belonged, or of the 
year in which he discovered them; which was probably owing rather to the malice of others, or to the envy of her whom they name 
Fortune, than through his own fault. [am not therefore surprised that ancient history should so frequently assign obscure and insignificant 
commencements to the greatest actions; since we are not informed who it was that but lately discovered the Indies, new and remarkable 
as was that event. The name at least of that pilot should have been transmitted to posterity, since nothing else survives death. Some 
make him an Andalusian, who was trading to the Canaries and Madeira, when that long and fatal voyage befell him; others, a native 
of Biscay, who carried on traffic with England and France; and others, a Portuguese, who was going to or returning from Mina or India, 
which agrees well with the name which the newly-discovered lands received and still bear. ‘There are those likewise who contend that the 
vessel anchored in a Portuguese port; and others who say in a port of Madeira, or of some of the islands called the Azores. But no 
one ventures to affirm any thing, except that all admit that that pilot died in the house of Christopher Colon; in whose possession the 
writings of the vessel remained, and the journal of the entire of his long voyage, together with the latitude of the newly-seen and 
discovered lands.” 

It is evident from this relation of Gomara, that all knowledge of the year when, and the person by whom, America was first disco- 
vered, is involved in the greatest obscurity. ‘The only fact which is placed beyond doubt is, that Columbus was not the person to whom 
the honour of that achievement was in the first instance due, great as were the merits of that illustrious man. At the same time it must 
be confessed that many improbabilities are found in the account of the voyage of the pilot. It is improbable. that within so short a 
space of time as about fifty years after his death,—the period when it may be supposed Gomara was engaged in the composition of his 
History,—so diligent and candid an author should have been able to learn nothing of him and of his alleged voyage. It is improbable, 
supposing that the voyage was accidental as described, and caused by.a hurricane, that amidst the distress of all on board the vessel, 
the deaths of the sailors, and the danger of shipwreck, leisure should have been found for writing a journal. It is also improbable that the 
ship, having been driven on the shores of America, was able to find its way back to Europe, and that the sailors who survived the hard- 
ships of the sea should all have died, together with the pilot, the latter only living long enough to communicate his discovery to Columbus, 
who has omitted to record his name. It may however be objected, that because Columbus was a Genoese, the historians of Spain 
might have conspired to rob him of a part of the praise which was justly his due, by attributing to a native of Biscay or a Spanish 
subject the first discovery of the continent of America: thus giving to Spain beyond every other kingdom in Europe, the right of 
possession, which the first discovery of unknown lands (which, to be well founded, should also be of unoccupied lands) is supposed 
to constitute. If, however, we reflect on the rivalship which existed at that period between the House of Braganza and the Crown of 
Spain, and consider the preference which Gomara gives to the opinion of those who maintained that the pilot was a Portuguese, rather 
than an Andalusian or a native of Biscay, we shall find no reasonable grounds for believing that the story of the supposed voyage was 
invented by the Spanish historians, for the purpose of detracting from the fame of Columbus because he was not of Spanish birth 
and extraction. Gomara repeats, in the chapter which he has entitled “ Quien era Christoval Colon,” in almost the same terms, his 
assertion that Columbus received his first information respecting America from the pilot who died in his house: “ Fallecio el piloto en 
este comedio, y dexole la relacion, traga, y altura de las nuevas tierras; y assi tuvo Christoval Colon notigia de las Indias.” But with a 
little inconsistency,—which argues neither oversight on the part of the historian, nor want of candour or diligence of research, but shows 
the doubts and obscurity in which the subject itself was involved,—he says in the next chapter, that Columbus, having embarked at Lisbon 
and arrived at Palos de Moguer, had a conference with Martin Alonso Pinzon, a very experienced pilot, who volunteered his services to 
him, and who had heard it rumoured that sailing so as to steer ofter the sun, great and rich lands would be discovered, — assi se embarco en 
Lisbona, y vino a Palos de Moguer, donde hablo con Martin Alonso Pinzon, piloto mui diestro, y que se le ofregio, y que avia oido 
dezir como navegando tras el sol, por via templada, se hallarian grandes y ricas tierras.” From this it would appear either that America 
had been discovered by others besides the pilot at some former period, or that Columbus was not the only person to whom he had 
communicated the secret of the existence of that continent. The probability is, that vague rumours had been long afloat of many islands 

(4p) 

286 NOTES. 

with his Indian brethren who had forgotten Hebrew, were unacquainted with Spanish, and spoke to him by means of 
an interpreter. It is certainly remarkable that they should for so many ages have retained a lively recollection of 
Christian persecutions, and should consequently have adopted precautions to prevent the Spaniards discovering their 
retreat. ‘Their repeated utterance of the syllable Ba! accompanied with furious gesticulations and stamping with 

‘and a large continent situated in the Western Ocean, and that these rumours had not originated in what Plato says of the Atlantic 
island, but were owing to some accidental voyages made to them in the long course of the middle ages; tradition respecting which 
had been handed down to later times. Nor will it be sufficient, in order to overthrow this supposition, to maintain that had a passage 
to America been once opened, colonization and commerce with Europe would have been the necessary result, since this is reasoning 
about the past state of the world from the present: but those who, referring to the page of History, consider what the real state of 
Europe was for many ages after the Christian era,—what convulsions attended the downfall of the Roman empire,—how fierce was the 
struggle between Philosophy and Christianity 1,—how painful and slow the progress of the latter (some of the Northern nations of 

' Philosophy, learning, and religion, being by their very nature united together in the most sacred bonds of friendship, it is melan- 
choly to reflect upon a fact that neither admits denial nor requires proof, and which did not escape the quick apprehension of Saint Paul, 
that the chief stumbling-block, which opposed itself to the rapid progress of Christianity, was the hostility which those who were neither 
simple nor as little children, but whose minds on the contrary were deeply imbued with this world’s wisdom, displayed towards the early 
preachers of the Gospel; amongst the number of these are names which command the respect of all ages:—the Antonines (whose memory 
was so revered by the Romans that Nemo Cesar nisi Antoninus became au admonition from the people to their later Emperors), 
Marcus Aurelius, Pliny, and the philosopher Porphyry, between the latter of whom and the early Christian Fathers the bitterest strife 
arose. Some opinion may be formed from the perusal of the following extract, taken from the dissertation subjoined to Lucas 
Holstenius’s edition of Porphyry’s Life of Pythagoras, published at Rome in the year 1630, and dedicated to Cardinal Barberini, of the 
nature of the war which the Fathers waged against the Philosophers; a war which was maintained for several ages, till at last the very 
name of a philosopher became a term of contempt, and the jargon of the schools and Jewish morality assumed the appellations of reason 
and virtue :— 

“ Tot prestantis ingenii monumenta, et eruditissima in omni artium, ac scientiarum genere scripta uno infelicissimo opere proscripsit 
Porphyrius: edidit enim Kara Xpiotiaviiv Adyous 1 € Contra Christianos libros xv. quos nemo antiquorum non citat et detestatur. 
In Sicilia eum fcetum hunc nefandum: parturiise supra ostendi. Scriptionis causas facile est colligere ex Tertulliano, Arnobio, 
Lactantio, aliisque qui contra gentes eo seculo scripserunt: dolebant enim homines a vero Dei cultu aversi majorum suorum sacra 
ac religionem, que tot annis obtinuerat, invalescenti ubique Christianismo locum cedere: quem nullis jam legibus prohiberi, nullis 
suppliciorum exemplis extirpari posse videbant: sed pressum latius se diffindere, et civitates ac provincias omnes pervadere: jamque 
numinum suorum templa passim vel deseri, vel dirui, vel in ecclesias transmutari. Hine Christianos publicos hostes sacra profana 
omnia convellere xab ra dxivyre xivelv clamabant: his publice calamitates velut ab irato numine immisse tribuebantur: quod Christi 
adventus reliquam numinum turbam terris expulisset; neque id solum, sed omnem humanitatis cultum eorum doctrina extingui, 
et spissam quandam barbariem induci asserebant. Hinc ad sacree Scripture auctoritatem convellendam omni conatu sese accingentes, 
stili simplicitatem ridebant, elevabant oracula prophetarum, historias sacras in dubium vocabant, miracula, que fidei firmande 
edebantur, ut demonum prestigias eludebant, constantiam in oppetenda morte pro Christo, obduratam existimabant animi perti- 
naciam, vel dvesocbyoiay. eee vulgi conviciis, hec principum edictis nusquam non Christianis objiciebantur; nec moderatiores fuere 
Philosophi, qui cum sapientiam hujus mundi quererent, ut Apostolus ait, ‘Stultitia predicationis offensi, Deum per sapientiam non 
cognoverunt :’ hine Celsi, Hieroclis, Juliani, et imprimis Porphyrii, ceecus erga Christianam religionem furor et Seouayia: atque hujus 
quidem eo acrior et vehementior fuit impetus, quo majorem ingenii vim et eruditionis copiam ad infaustum hoc certamen attulit: nam 
quod preclare a Platone dictum est, ai peyddaas dtoeis peycrus éxdépovor xl rds xexlec, preesertim animus odii et impietatis furiis 
exagitatus, violentos impetus, et ut Epicteti verbis utar, javixods réyous exerit. De totius operis argumento difficile est distincte quid 
et per partes pronunciare; cum omnia SS. Patrum scripta, que calumniis hisce opposuerant, interierint: ex pauculis tamen locis, que 
hinc inde ex sacro et horribili opere proferuntur ab Eusebio, Hieronymo, et aliis, conjicere licet praccipuum Porphyrii laborem in eo 
versatum fuisse, ut sacre Scripture auctoritatem, hoc est, fundamentum cui religio Christiana innitebatur, subverteret. Id cum ex ceteris 
locis mox producendis appareat, tum ex hisce Eusebii verbis, lib. x. Prep. cap. 9: * Nunc quidem confirmande Moysis antiquitati unum 
hominis, cum Hebreis, tum etiam nobis longe inimicissimi atque infensissimi, testimonium libet adjungere: Philosophum illum equalem 
nostrum intelligo, qui eo in opere quod advergus nos ex odii vi et magnitudine vulgavit, non modo nos, sed Hebrieos etiam, et ipsum 
Moysem, ceeterosque post illum Prophetas, iisdem contumeliis oneravit.’ 

«¢ Et primo quidem libro ipsum de contrarietate sacrarum literarum egisse apparet, atque id conatum fuisse probare, non a Deo sed 
ab hominibus eas profectas: quod contradictiones et évavridoeig in iis occurrant, que scilicet a Deo summa et simplicissima veritate 
promauare non potuerint: quem in finem maxime adducebat, quod Paulus ad Galatas cap. ii. scribit, se Petro in faciem restitisse: 
unde colligebat Apostolos, et quidem principes illorum, non publicé omnium saluti, sed sue quemque glorie privatim studuisse. Id SS. 
Patres non uno loco testantur. D. Hieronymus in proomio Commentar. in dictam Epist. ‘Quod nequaquam intelligens Bataneotes, 
et sceleratus ille Porphyrius in primo operis sui adversus nos libro, Petram a Paulo objecit esse reprehensum, quod non recto pede 
incederet ad evangelizandum: volens: et illi macula eiroris inurere, et huic procacitatis, et in commune ficti dogmatis accusare 
mendacium, dum inter se ecclesiarum principes dissident. Similia ad ipsum locum capitis ii. repetit idem epistola Ixxxix, ad D. Au- 

NOTES. 987 

their feet, affords proof also of the fanaticism which still animated them. Montecinio, the Portuguese Jew from 
whose relation we have extracted these particulars, affirms, that shortly after his visit to his brethren and return to 
Carthagena, he was seized by the Inquisition and thrown into prison (probably for infringing the law which forbade 

Europe, amongst which may be reckoned Prussia, not having been converted till the twelfth and thirteenth centuries),—and how dense 
the darkness which immediately followed its establishment, the lamp of Grecian learning but faintly continuing to irradiate that country 
where it had once so brightly blazed,—will not feel much reason to be surprised, that even if it could be clearly proved that the one 
continent was not entirely ignorant of the existence of the other, no intercourse should have taken place between them. It may 
further be remarked, that the principal states of Europe were too enfeebled likewise by the pernicious operation of the feudal laws, which 
sowed perpetual dissensions between the crown and its vassals, to direct their attention to distant foreign enterprise. Neither on the 

gustinum : ¢ Hance autem explanationem, quam primus Origenes in decimo Stromateon libro, ubi epistolam Pauli ad Galatas interpretatur, 
et cateri deinceps interpretes sunt secuti, illa vel maxime causa subintroducunt, ut Porphyrio respondeant blasphemanti, qui Pauli 
arguit procacitatem, quod principem apostolorum Petrum ausus est reprehendere, et arguere in faciem, ac ratione constringere, quod 
male fecerit, id est, in eo errore fuerit, in quo fuit ipse qui alium arguit delinqguentem.’ Et ibidem paulo post: ‘Ego, imo alii ante me 
exposuerunt causam, ostendentes honestam dispensationem ut et Apostolorum prudentiam demonstrarent, et blasphemantis Porphyrii 
impudentiam coércerent, qui Petrum et Paulum puerili dicit inter se pugnasse certamine, imo exarsisse Paulum in invidiam virtutum 
Petri, &c. Similia sub finem libri xiv. Commentariorum in Esaiam apud eundem extant. 

“ Libro tertio de Scripture interpretatione agebat: et cum ipsas sacras literas convellere non posset, damnabat exponendi modum: 
presertim Origenis allegorias, quod perspicue apparet ex prolixo loco quem Eusebius Hist. Eccl. libro vi. cap. 19 inde producit, et imprimis 
ex premissis Eusebii verbis: 6 xa6’ fucds tv Sincrln xaracras Hopdiois, cuyypappara ual hudy evoryodnevos, xetl Ov adrdv Teg Salas ypades 
ia6erAsiy memeipaowévos, Tay Te elo adrads eEnyyoapévey pyypoveboas, pydsv pydupds atiroy eynanpa roig Oiypaor emibareiv Suvebels, amopla. 
Ady emi rd Aoiopeiv rpémerou, xl rods enyyras VaBAAAT. dy wadiora Tov "Apiyévyy, Ov Kore Thy vey HAimlay eyveondvon Ghoas, Owebdrrery meiparrcus. 
‘ Porphyrius, inquit, ‘nostra memoria in Sicilia libros adversus nos edens, quibus divinas Scripturas calumniis insectari conatus est, cum 
ad earum expositores venisset, nihilque in dogmatibus reprehendendum reperisset, sermonis inopia ad calumniandum et interpretes 
perstringendum convertitur. Origenem autem omnium maxime, quem in adolescentia se cognovisse ait, traducere conatur.’ Ipsa 
Porphyrii verba adscribere nimis longum foret, que indicasse sufficit: Ex eodem libro depromptum fuit testimonium illud de eruditione 
Origenis, quod Vincentius Lirinensis in commonitorio adducit, ut ex citato Eusebii loco videre est. 

“ Librum quartum de historia Mosaica et Judeorum antiquitatibus tractasse cognoscimus ex loco quem idem Eusebius libro i. Praep. 
cap.Q. adducit; ubi de Sanchuniathonis Phoenicia historia agit : idemquelibro x. cap. 9. et a Theodoreto serm. 2. Therap. repetitur. Ex 
ceteris deinde nihil nominatim citatum observavi. Duodecimus omnium celeberrimus est: quo Danielis prophetiam fortiter oppugnavit. 
Hac de re opere pretium est D. Hieronymum loquentem audire in procemio Commentariorum.in eum Prophetam: ‘ Contra Prophetam 
Danielem,’ inquit, “duodecimum librum scribit Porphyrius, nolens eum ab ipso, cujus inscriptus est nomine, esse compositum, sed a 
quodam qui, temporibus Antiochi qui appellatus est Epiphanes, fuerit in Judea, et non tam Danielem ventura dixisse, quam illum 
narrasse preterita: denique quicquid usque ad Antiochum dixerit, veram historiam continere; si quid autem ultra opinatus sit, quia 
futura nescierit, esse mentitum. Cui solertissime responderunt Eusebius Cesariensis episcopus tribus voluminibus, id est, octavodecimo, 
nonodecimo, et vicesimo. Apollinarius quoque uno grandi libro, hoc est, vicesimosexto; et ante hos ex parte Methodius.’ Multa deinde toto 
hoe commentario ex eodem libro affert, et refutat, cujus etiam in Apologia adversus Rufinum, atque alibi meminit. Sed quam varia 
eruditione hic liber refertus fuerit, haud obscure innuit sub finem ejusdem procemii; dum ex variis et reconditis auctoribus compositum 
fuisse testatur: ‘Ad intelligendas autem extremas partes Danielis multiplex Greecorum historia necessaria est: Sutorii videlicet Callicini, 
Diodori, Hieronymi, Polybii, Posidonii, Claudii Theonis, et Andronici cognomento Alypii: quos et Porphyrius esse secutum se dicit.’ 

“ Verum et decimustertius liber adversus eundem Prophetam scriptus fuit, teste Hieronymo in xxiv. cap. Matth. Commentariorum 
lib. iv. * De hoc loco,’ inquit, ‘id est de abominatione desolationis, que dicta est a Daniele propheta, stante in loco sancto, multa 
Porphyrius tertiodecimo operis sui volumine contra nos blasphemavit, cui Eusebius Cesariensis Episcopus tribus respondit voluminibus,’ 
&c. Nec magis:a sacra Evangeliorum historia sibi temperavit; nam et hanc falsitatis eum arguisse idem Hieronymus Epistola ci. ad 
Pammachium testatur, idemque libro ii, adversus Pelagianos cum dixisset Christum, postquam negarat se ad scenopegiam iturum, 
(Joannes vil.) postea tamen ascendisse, addit: ¢ Latrat Porphyrius, inconstantie ac mutationis accusat, nesciens omnia scandala ad carnem 
esse referenda :’ et libro Quest. Hebraic. in Genesin: ¢ Frustra,’ inquit, ‘ Porphyrius evangelistas ad faciendum ignorantibus miraculum, 
et quod Dominus super mare ambulaverit, pro lacu Genezareth mare appellasse calumniatur.? Ad Apostolorum Actus spectat illud in 
Epist. ad Demetriadem de virginitate servanda: ‘ Denique et Apostolus Petrus nequaquam eis imprecatur mortem, (Ananie scilicet et 
Saphyree,) ut stwltus Porphyrius calumniatur; sed Dei judicium prophetico spiritu annunciat.’? Ex eodem quoque opere haustum 
existimo, quod libro adversus Vigilantium ait, Porphyrium miracula ad SS. martyrum sepulturas edita demonum prestigias vocasse : 
ut et tres illas questiones 1D. Augustino propositas ab amico pagano, quibus sanctissimus Pater epistola xlix. respondet quam de sex 
queestionibus paganorum vulgo vocant; secundam scilicet, tertiam et quartam: querebant enim, si Christus se Salutis viam dicat, et gratiam, 
et veritatem, et in se solo ponat animis sibi credentibus reditum, quid egerint tot seeculorum homines ante Christum? deinde, cur Christus 

Veteris Testamenti sacrificia repudiarit, cum Deus illa instituerit? tum etiam, que proportio sit inter peccatum et eternum supplicium, 
cum Christus dicat, «In quacunque mensura mensi fueritis, metietur vobis ?’? Earundem libroii. Retractat. cap. 31, meminit. Verum cum 

288 NOTES. 

Jews to visit America) ; when after some time being released he returned to Europe, and communicated the discovery 
which he had made to Menasseh Ben Israel, the high priest of the Jewish faith resident at Amsterdam,—a man of 
singular learnimg and probity, who caused his relation to be published, with the title of “Spes Israel,” in English, 

other hand were the larger states of the New World so uncivilized or so unwarlike as not to know that it rested with themselves 
to allow or to forbid visits from strangers. ‘The Spaniards, it should also be recollected, to whom fire-arms and horses gave a vast 
superiority in their engagements with the Indians, were still for five-and-twenty years the colonizers of the islands in the vicinity of New 
Spain and Yucatan, without venturing, as Gomara says, although they trafficked with the natives, to settle on the continent: Acosta 
even declares, that they would never have been able to subjugate the empires of Peru and Mexico, if the former had not been torn by 
civil dissensions, through the rivalship of Huascar and Atabaliba, and if the latter had not believed Cortes to be their Messiah. We 
had almost omitted to point out what to some may appear a contradiction in the relation of Gomara, or at least a fluctuation of 
opinion not to be expected in an author who had only just informed his readers that he perceived some reasons for forming a 

D. Augustinus disertim affirmet, hec de Porphyrio contra Christianos tanquam validiora decerpta fuisse, satis apparet quo loco gentilis 
hosce Porphyrii libros habuerint: quippe quorum objectiones viz responsum admittere existimarent. Et sane davéryre ac subtilitatem 
dvoxereéavroy haud obscure fatetur D. Hieronymus hisce verbis prefatione in Danielem : ¢ Que autem ex hoc propheta, imo contra hune 
librum Porphyrius objiciat, testes sunt Methodius, Eusebius, et Apollinaris, gui multis versuum millibus ejus vesanie respondentes 
nescio an curtoso lectort satisfecerint? Et in Apologia ad Pammachium pro libris adversus Jovinianum: ‘ Origenes,’ inquit, ‘ Methodius, 
Eusebius, Apollinaris multis versuum millibus scribunt adversus Celsum et Porphyrium, considerantes quibus argumentis, et quam lubricis 
problematibus diaboli spiritu contexta subvertant, et quia interdum coguntur loqui, non quod sentiant, sed quod necesse est, dicunt 
adversus ea que dicunt Gentiles.’ Atque hinc factum existimo, ut cum ipse acriori quodam veneno tela sua tinxerit, quibus religionem 
Christianam impetebat, quam reliqui manifesti Ecclesia hostes, Celsus, Hierocles, Julianus, atque alii, vehementius quoque odium sibi 
paraverit; quod quidem satis superque colligere est ex frequentissimis SS. Patrum conviciis et 8vcgnptaic, quibus Dei et veritatis hostem 
passim proscindunt et justissime exagitant: adeo ut mihi bene longum centonem contexere liceret, preesertim ex Eusebio, Theodoreto, et 
flieronymo, quibus religio fuisse videtur nomen Porphyrii absque execratione proponere. Ab illo enim, lib. i. de Prep. cap. 9, et lib. iv. 
cap. 6, 6 rails cb? syd Aupmpuvdevos Suodyulous xc hevdyyoplass : item 6 rey Benda HlAog xe mpogyopos appellatur: libro autem x. cap. 9, 6 
novroy Suopeverraros xab morgusreros “EGpatwy re xo} yudv. Nec minori elogiorum varietate & Theodoreto ornatur: Serm. 1, 6 xard vijs 
ddrnfelas Avrrqoas: Serm. 2, 05 rig doebslas yevdmevos mpduceyos xara Seov trav Crwy thy axdracroy éxlyyocs yadrrav: Serm. 3, 6 rig dandelas 
dyrlmados : Serm. 10, 6 domovdos iyudiv moreusos, Thy mpodavh xard ris doebelas dvadekctnevos moxyy: Serm. 12, 6 ravrwy Huiv 2xbioros. Ita etiam D. 
Hieronymus, ‘Stultum, impium, blasphemum, vesanum, impudentem, sycophantem, calumniatorem Ecclesiz, rabidum adyersus 
Christum canem,’ passim vocat: ut ceteros taceam, apud quos nec pauciora, nec leviora reperias. Sed ne conviciis tantum’ Christi 
et veritatis hostem quis oppugnatum existimet, prodierunt adversus ipsum in arenam preecipui aliquot Ecclesiz doctores, et manu conserta 
calumnias veritatis gladio jugularunt. Nam ut Fl. Lucius Dexter in Chronicis ad annum Christi cccx. prodidit (si modo auctor tot 
assumentis adulteratus ad testimonium citari debeat): ‘Triginta circiter scriptores Catholici contra blasphemias Porphyrii philosophi 
scripserunt :’ et in his nonnulli Hispani si interpolatoribus credendum, istiusmodi enim affanias larga manu adsperserunt, qui sue nationis 
laudem sese aucturos hac ratione sperabant. ‘Trium tamen clarissimorum hominum opera potissimum in hoc certamine eluxit, Methodii 
Patarensis, Eusebii Cesariensis, et Apollinaris Laodiceni; sed nullius opus ad nostram etatem pervenit. Credo quod Porphyrianis libris 
extinctis, et recepto per universum orbem Christianismo, istiusmodi scriptis Ecclesia Dei non amplius indigeret. Horum sepenumero 
meminit D. Hieronymus, preefatione in Danielem, et sub finem cap. xii. in Apologia ad Pammachium, tum potissimum epistola Ixxxiv. 
ad Magnum oratorem Romanum. ‘ Scripserunt,’ inquit, ‘contra nos Celsus atque Porphyrius; priori Origenes, alteri Methodius, 
Eusebius, et Apollinaris fortissime responderunt; quorum Origenes octo scripsit libros, Methodius usque ad decem millia procedit 
versuum, Eusebius et Apollinaris vigintiquinque et triginta volumina condiderunt.’ Methodius primus omnium ad veritatis defensionem 
signum sustulit, ante Diocletiani persecutionem, ut supra ostendi: hunc nitidi compositique sermonis libros’ adversus Porphyrium 
confecisse scribit Hieronymus in Catal. Ill. Script.; et ‘disertissimum martyrem’ vocat, cap. 12. in Daniel. Nescio tamen utrum xard dda 
singulis responderit, cum eum ex parte tantum respondisse D. Hieronymus dicto loco, et alibi testetur. Sane elegantiam copiamque 
dicendi, preter Photii, hominis xpitixwreérov, testimonium, et eclogas prolixas ab eo conservatas, abunde probat opusculum de humani 
arbitrii libertate, cujus maxima pars publice extat: tum etiam convivium decem virginum, Hep) rijg dyyeAopiptrou Topbeviag liber, et 
homiliz nonnulle, quee in Vaticana bibliotheca non sine publico damno latitant. Eusebii quoque opus contra Porphyrium Rome adhuc 
servari nimis temere multi credunt: hujus tres integros libros blasphemiis contra Danielem Prophetam oppositos fuisse paulo ante ex 
D. Hieronymo vidimus ; de ceteris nihil distincte licet affirmare. Apollinaris libros xxx. contra Porphyrium idem Hieronymus, epist. 65. 
ad Pammachium ‘fortissimos’ appellat, et ‘egregia volumina:’ et in Catal. Ill. Script. * inter cetera ejus opera vel maxime probari’ ait. 
Extat de iisdem preclarum testimonium Vincentii Lirinensis: ‘ Nam quid Apollinare preestantius acumine, exercitatione, doctrina? quam 
multas ille hereses multis voluminibus oppressit, quot inimicos fidei confutavit errores, indicio est opus illud xxx. non minus librorum, 
nobilissimum et maximum, quo insanas Porphyrii calumnias magna probationum mole confudit.’ Hinc merito tantum virum in heresin 
prolapsum dolet. 

«< De Imperatorum edictis, quibus impios hosce Porphyrii libros suppresserunt, jam superius egi. Quamvis concitatis vulgi animis 
promiscue in oronia scripta sevitum que infaustum Christianis nomen praeferebant; et hec, nisi fallor, causa est, cur philosophice 
historia Malchi nomen fuerit preefixum non ab ipso quidem auctore, verum ab iis qui communi Porphyrianorum librorum cladi hoc opus 

NOTES. 289 

Latin and Hebrew, at Amsterdam and in Smyrna, dedicating it to the English parliament. It may well be supposed 
that, however convinced. the regent Cardinal Ximenes and the succeeding administrations of Spain, which were 
generally composed of ecclesiastical dignitaries, might have been of the truth of the fact, they would not have 

very different conclusion. It is where he assumes in the first instance as the greater probability that a Portuguese pilot had discovered 
America, and yet unhesitatingly calls in the next chapter the ship in which the voyage was performed a Spanish vessel. It is enough to 
remark, that as Britain is a general name for England and Scotland, so Spain or the Spains was an epithet which in that age was applied 
both to Spain and Portugal. With respect to the proper name Columbus,—since, considered asa Latin name not devoid of signification, 
it is scarcely as appropriate a term for Colon, the real name of Columbus, as Agricola,—it is not impossible that this mutation 

subtractum cupiebant: ut quasi signis commutatis inquirentium oculos animumque falleret. Sed, ut nullum tam noxium venenum est, 
unde non salubris aliqua medicina arte extrahi possit, ita ex pessimis hisce libris veritatis propugnatores scorpiacum confecere, quo non 
ipsius solum Porphyrii, sed et reliquorum omnium Ecclesiz hostium, ictus noxios et virulentas calumnias persanarent: quinimo nullus 
omnino réy 2 plura aut fortiora tela Doctoribus Ecclesie suppeditavit, quibus multiplicem Gentilium errorem facilius feliciusque 
jugularent. Cujus quidem rei argumenta abunde peti possunt ex Eusebio, lib. iii. et iv. de Preepar.; Theodoreto, Therap. Serm. iii. vii. 
et x.; D. Augustino de Civ. Dei, lib. x.; aliisque Sanctorum Patrum locis quamplurimis: ubi Porphyrii testimoniis perspicue probatur, 
universam illam fabulosam et roadézoy gentilium theologiam juydy iepdy, xc) wyd8v Seompemts continere ; deemones, quibus divinitatis honorem 
cazca mortalitas tribuebat, infestos et malignos humani generis hostes esse; oracula ab iisdem edita meras esse imposturas, et credule 
hominum simplicitati lubricis et obscuris verborum ambagibus illusisse ; sacrificia et mactationes a vera pietate abhorrere: et crassos ac 
materiales demones esse, qui hostiarum vaporem fatidumque mdorem eapetant ; aliaque hujus generis plura, quibus éAaqviny Senoxela 
4 fundamentis evertitur. Unde verissime de hoc philosopho Theodoretus, serm. iii. Grec. Aff. dixit: ‘ Videtur hoc miraculum Samsonis 
enigmati persimile: ex ore comedentis eaivit cibus, et ew forti dulcedo. Hc enim ad refellendum mendacium a mendacii patrono 
scripta sunt: et veritatis accusator, preter animi sententiam veritatis defensor evasit. Deus enim qui linguam vatis Balaam, imprecari 
paratam, benedictionem proferre coegit, is et hujus linguam, rabido furore adversus veritatem concitatam, invitam contra mendacium 
convertit.’ Neque id solum; sed nostra quoque religioni luculentum non uno in loco testimonium perhibuit, et Christi divinitatem, 
quamvis inscius et invitus, comprobavit; non secus ac demon ipse in Evangeliis Christum Dei filium confessus est: tale enim illud est 
quod Euseb., lib. v. Prep. cap. i. ex opere adversus Christianos, et Theodoretus in ipso fine Therapeuticon proferunt, Christi adventu 
demonum potestates atque operationes cessasse ; tum quod libro iii. demonstratio ex libro 3 de philosophia, ex oraculis ab eodem Eusebio, 
et D. Augustino, lib. xix. c. 23., adducitur: ubi damones ipsos de Christi pietate, passione, et immortali gloria etiuws respondisse 
testabatur, quem et ipse propterea nequaquam blasphemandum pronunciabat. Atque utinam vel demonum magistrorum suorum 
modestiam homo effrenis lingue et impotentis animi fuisset imitatus, nec blasphemiarum, conviciorum, calumniarum, et mendaciorum 
plaustra in Christum effudisset: rectius sane, si non saluti, saltem fame ac nomini suo consuluisset. Ut hic potissimum variam ac 
mutabilem animi inconstantiam et dogmatum contrarietatem ipsi exprobrare liceat, quam in reliquis scriptis jam olim animadvertit 
Eunapius; et ill, Annalium Sacrorum auctor ad palinodiam sub Constantino M. factam argute magis quam vere pertrahit. 

«« Casterum qua de opere adversus Christianos SS. Patrum testimoniis confirmata hactenus proposui, id quoque manifeste videntur 
evincere, que Lactantius, lib. v. de Just. c..2, de philosopho Christiane religionis oppugnatore scripsit, nequaquam de Porphyrio 
intelligenda esse. Nam preter rationes superius a me adductas, diversi auctoris opus fuisse apparet, non solum ex diverso librorum numero, 
sed ex materia et apparatu diverso. Cum enim Lactantius Hieroclis judicis accuratum et subtile sacree Scriptures examen miretur, quod 
‘ ejus falsitatem arguere conatus tanquam sibi esset tota contraria, adeo multa, adeo intima enumerdssat, ut aliquando ex eadem disciplina 
fuisse videretur ;’ fatetur haud obscure, alterum Philosophie antistitem nihil simile ad Christiane religionis oppugnationem attulisse. Quin 
etiam in persequendo instituto suo, ¢ineptum, vanum, ridiculum, et pro inanitate sua contemptum’ fuisse scribit: adeo quidem ut Hieroclis 
dikaanoy argumentorum robore et vehementia, sive, ut ipse ait, mordacitate, ei preeferre non dubitet. Que profecto de Porphyrii libris nullo 
modo accipere licet, nisi hominem dicendi peritissimum, et in disputando apprime exercitatum, dxpiolas manifest convincere velis. 
Nemo enim non videt, quantopere hee a reliquorum Patrum judicio discrepent. Czteri enim omnes Hieroclem vel ignorarunt omnino, 
vel pre Porphyrio adeo contemserunt, ut nec nomen ejus nunc sciretur, nisi Eusebius operis particulam, qua Apollonium Christo 
comparabat, refutasset: sed contemptum potius quam ignotum fuisse, ex Eusebiilibro apparet, qui cetera ejus scriptoris tanti fuisse 
negat, ut iis refellendis operam impenderet: quippe quz non illius propria, sed ex aliorum scriptis, non sententiis modo, verum dictionibus 
quoque iisdem, ac totidem pene syllabis impudenter sublecta erant. Quibus verbis Hieroclem ea que de sacrarum literarum repugnantia 
scripserat, cum ex allis Christianismi oppugnatoribus tum precipue ex Porphyrio suffuratum fuisse manifeste indicat; et dum alibi iis 
responsum oppositum iri scribit, ad Porphyrii refutationem, quam animo jam moliebatur, haud dubie lectorem rejicit. Hunc enim divina 
oracula assidua lectione trivisse, et in iisdem subvertendis vehementer exercuisse ingenium, ‘preter superiora SS. Patrum loca, testatur 
Theodoretus, Therap. serm. vii., ubi de sacrificiis lege divina constitutis agit: Todross dxgi6ds evrurdiv 6 Topgipios, puch: yp evdserpibe thy 
xh? judy rupebay ypadiy, addorpioy ebocGelag xab abrds dmodalye ro Sve. < Hee,’ inquit, ‘cum diligenter Porphyrius perlegisset, (plurimum 
namque temporis in iis contrivit, dum suum adversus nos opus procuderet,) ipse etiam sacrificia a pietate aliena esse pronunciavit.’ Sed 
ut simie humanos gestus imitantur, naturam tamen suam cum humana non permutant; ita Porphyrium e sacris literis quedam pro 
libitu sublegentem veritatem imitando utcunque expressisse, ipsam vero minime perdidicisse ait: AAd pewévyne wldynos, wadAoy Os xoAdIds 
BADotploss WrIAoss xaAAUIOMEVOS. 

“ Hee de Porphyrii vita et scriptis ad antiquitatis illustrationem hactenus disseruisse sufficiat.” 

(465 ) 

290 NOTES. 

promulgated to the world the secret, that the Jews had actually for many ages revived the old law in America; and 
that Spanish historians like Herrera, even if it had come to their knowledge, would have been very cautious how 
they hinted at it in their writings. But still, the account of a bearded tribe amongst the Indians inhabiting 
mountainous district of the Gapotecas, who were designated by the Spaniards Mexis or Mixes, and who, 

to their report, exceeded all other Indian tribes in cannibalism, and were cruelly exterminated by them 

a 
according 
(principally 
with the assistance of mastifls), must excite our suspicion as to whether they might not have been Jews. Herrera, 
describing in the seventh chapter of the ninth book of his fourth Decad this people, says: “In the province of the ° 
Miges, that has been already mentioned, which is twenty leagues distant from Guaxaca, the people are of a 
good stature, have long beards (which is an uncommon thing in those parts), and their language is very thick in 
pronunciation, like that of the Germans: they generally bury their dead in the plains, and every year comme- 
morate their deceased kindred, by placing food as an offering upon their sepulchres. They do this in the month of 
November, two days prior or subsequent to that on which we celebrate the memory of the dead. They are a cruel 
and warlike people, greatly addicted to cannibalism, and braver than any nation of New Spain: for although the whole 
province does not contain a greater population than two thousand men, neither Motecuma nor the Zapotecas, though 
a much more numerous people, could ever subdue them. Inhabiting likewise in a united body the same mountains 
as the Zapotecas, they never took prisoner man, woman, or child, whom they did not kill and eat; and they persisted 
in this custom until they were conquered. They viewed with satisfaction wars amongst the neighbouring Indian 
tribes, in the hope of being able to procure human flesh. They went naked with only a deer-skin girded round their 
loins, and this skin was very white and made very supple with the brains of men. As their country was full of steep 
hills, free from stones and rocks, very grassy, and wet from constant rains, it was their custom, in order to fly from 
or to surprise an enemy, to sit down upon the top of some hill wherever they chanced to be, and grasping hold 
of their feet, let themselves slide down the grass, when they soon reached the bottom, slipping over it by means 
of those skins. ‘Some Spaniards have wished to do the same, and have received severe contusions. The mountains 
of the Miges were conquered on foot with the assistance of dogs, as horses could not proceed through them. The 
town of Saint Ildefonso is founded in them: this town does not contain more than thirty habitations, and consists 
of sheds and straw-thatched houses; and the population would often have been massacred, had it not been for their 
dogs, whick pursued the Indians who came as spies, and were so accustomed to be on their guard that they never 
caught an Indian whom they did not kill and eat, since they grew very fat upon them, and distinguished with 
much sagacity the Indians with whom the Spaniards were on terms of friendship, from the foe. The captain, Gaspar 

of the name of Colon into Columbus might have been in consequence of a tradition existing before the age of Christopher Colon,—of a 
vast continent having been discovered in the ocean by Saint Columba, or some of his disciples; and that those who were unwilling to 
allow the saint the honour of the discovery of America, in order to unite the suffrages of posterity in favour of Colon, and to confuse that 
tradition in the ambiguity of the proper names, gave the latter the name of Columbus, rather than of Colonus or Agricola. It cannot 
be supposed, from the tenour of these observations, that they are intended, by the suggestion of doubts and difficulties, to. detract from 
the praise so justly due to the great man who is reported to have been the first discoverer of the New World; since here, as elsewhere, we 
should defend ourselves by recurring to the precept of Aristotle, who recommended that truth should be preferred even to Plato: neither, 
on the other hand, in pointing out the probable guilty excesses into which fanaticism led the Jews, or the too harsh treatment which they 
received from the Spanish Government, have we been guided by the slightest desire to gratify feelings of dislike towards any class of 
men. But since it is only necessary to exhibit fanaticism in its true colours to make it detestable, and that the interests of the many ought 
more to be considered than the feelings of the few, we are on the contrary persuaded it may be rendering an essential service to the Jews, 
and to Christians who are disposed to be intolerant, to address them freely in the language of reason and remonstrance. The age of 
religious persecution, fortunately for the world, has long since gone by: it originated amongst the Jews, who ought to know that the 
edifice of superstition and intolerance which their advocates are anxious to uphold, is grown antiquated; and that although it may retain 
the outward appearance and huge proportions of past times, it has lost its firmness and solidity :—repose and tranquillity are necessary 
for its existence. As regards state prosecutions on religious grounds, we can only express a feryent desire that the Wilberforces of the 
present day, and the friends of the Society for the Prosecution of Vice and Blasphemy, would profit by the following reply, which the 
Emperor Akbar made to Jahangueir, his successor on the throne of Hindostan, who inquired of him why, being a true believer, he 
permitted his Hindoo subjects to build temples and to adhere to the profession of their false religion :—“ My dear child, I find myself 
a puissant monarch, the shadow of God upon earth. I have seen that He bestows the blessings of his gracious providence upon 
all his creatures without distinction. Ill should I discharge the duties of my exalted station, were I to withhold my compassion from 
any of those entrusted to my charge. With all of the human race, witlr all of God’s creatures I am at peace: why then should I 

permit myself under any consideration to be the cause of molestation or aggression to any one?”—Jahangueii’s Memoirs of Himself, 
translated by Major Price. 

NOTES. 291 

Pachecho, conquered these mountains, throwing to the dogs the guilty who rebelled or killed Christians; and the 
Indians were more afraid of the dogs than of armed men. The lord of Magitlan, which is the chief town 
of the Miges, having revolted and killed certain Christians and Zapotecan Indians, evacuated the place, and 
proceeded to lay waste the country, when the captain, Gaspar Pachecho, pursued him with his Spaniards and 
Indian allies, and seized by chance an Indian of the Miges nation, the slave of the lord, who had sent him as 
a spy to see what the Christians were doing; and on his confession that he had been present at the death of 
certain Christians, when he accompanied his lord assisting him im spoiling the land, his accusation was drawn out, 
and he was condemned to die. The captain, Gaspar Pachecho, having brought out the dogs, offered him 
his life and to attach him to his service if he would inform him where his lord was concealed, as his only object 
was to put a stop to the injuries which the Spaniards and native Indians suffered. He answered that he would 
not tell him, and that he might do what he pleased. After many exhortations and promises, which were of 
no avail, he commanded that he should be thrown to the dogs, which flying at him and seizing him by the fleshy 
parts of the arms and of the legs, the Indian, without uttermg a complaint, began to encourage them, looking 
first at one and then at another, saying, ‘Oatecanes, (which signifies, Ye brave ones,) perform your part well, 
since they will thus paint me in the skin of a tyger, and I shall be painted as a good and brave man who would not 
betray my lord.’ Whilst addressing the dogs with noble courage, they tore him in pieces and ate him. If they hang 
them they do not care; for they say that they fall asleep, and that sleeping they pass to dances in another life. At 
last the fear of the dogs caused the inhabitants of the whole district,—ferocious, warlike, enemies of mankind, and 
greedy of human flesh as they were,—to submit.” Historia de las Indias Occidentales, dec. iv. lib. ix. cap. vii. The 
language of the Mixes “hablando mui grueso a manera de Alemanes,” as Herrera affirms: their thick beards, 
“ barbas largas cosa rara en aquellas partes,” their scanty population, the hatred which they bore to the other tribes 
of Indians; and above all, the hatred which the Spaniards bore to them, and the cruel manner in which they hunted 
and exterminated them, suggest the idea that the Mijes, Mixis, or Mexis, as they are variously called, might have 
been a colony of Jews, who, like the Jews discovered by Montecinio in the neighbourhood of Carthagena, might 
have fortified themselves in the mountains, and so have. hoped to escape servitude cither to the Indians or the 
Spaniards. It would be surprising,—if it were fair to presume from the silence of Spanish historians either want of 
information on their part or of research and curiosity on the part of others, instead of ascribing their reserve to 
other causes,—to find that scarcely any mention is made in their writings of a bearded nation, and of blacks discovered 
amongst the Indians*; although a black skin and a bearded visage afford the surest argument of a mixture of 
foreign blood with that of the smooth and copper-coloured Indian race. From a painting which occurs in the eighty- 
seventh page of the Codex Vaticanus, it would appear that the Gapotecas were a bearded people, as well as the 
Mixes. The two nations bordered on each other, and alliances might sometimes have taken place between them. 
If the Mixes were Jews, it is probable that their ancestors constructed the palaces of Mictlan, and other splendid 
monuments in the territory of the Capotecas, which M. Dupaix is not inclined to attribute to the art and industry of 
the latter people. That the Mixes were not the barbarous people that Spanish authors describe them, is evident 
from the superior knowledge which they possessed of the art of Indian warfare; for whilst the Tlaxcaltecas with an 
army of one hundred and fifty thousand men could scarcely preserve their independence against Montezuma, and had 
in fact consented to the payment of a slight tribute,—as is evident from the forty-fourth plate of the Collection of 
Mendoza, where the symbol of their state is found amongst those of the other tributary cities and nations, and is 
numbered 23,—the Mixes are said by Herrera to have resisted all the efforts of Montezuma to subdue them, 
although their entire population did not exceed two thousand men. Another proof of their possessing a certain 

* Peter Martyr says, in the first chapter of his third Decade, « There is a region not past two days journey distant from Quarequa, in 
which they found only black Moors, and those exceeding fierce and cruel. They suppose that in time past certain black Moors sailed thither 
out of Ethiopia to rob, and that by shipwreck or some other chance they were driven to those mountains. The inhabitants of Quarequa 
live in continual war and debate with these black men.” Gomara, in describing the expedition of Balboa in search of the South Sea, 
mentions these same blacks, although he knew less about them probably than Peter Martyr, who was an earlier writer: “ Entro Balboa 
en Quareca; no hallo pan ni oro, que lo avian algado antes de pelear. Empero hallo algunos negros, esclavos del Senom Pregunto de 
donde los avian, y no le supieron dezir o entender, mas de que avia ombres de aquel color cerca de alli, con quien tenian guerra muy 
ordinaria. Estos fueron los primeros negros que se vieron en Indias, y aun pienso que no se han visto mas.”—La Istoria de las Indias, 
fo. xxxiilil. Cap. * Descubrimiento de la Mar del Sur.’ 

292 NOTES. 

degree of civilization is, that they employed historical paintings, in which they recorded the brave actions of their 
countrymen. aye 

‘Returning to the consideration of other Hebrew analogies in the Indian rites and ceremonies,—having already: 
mentioned the temple of Mexico, the fire that was kept continually burning in it, the celebration of the festivals 
of new moons and the offerings of the first-fruits at stated seasons of the year; we may further observe, that 
the Mexicans in other parts of their temple service resembled the Jews. Like the Jews, besides sacrifices, they 
offered incense, flowers, and golden chains and jewels, to Huitzilopuchtli, or Tetzcatlipoca, their supreme deity, to 
whom they ascribed victory in battle, and in whose honour they clothed themselves on certain great festivals with the 
skins of those whom they had taken prisoners in war, and even with those of slaves whom they had devoted to 
sacrifice. It is unnecessary to quote Scripture to show that to offer incense in their temple was a Jewish custom, 
since no nation except the Indians ever came near the Jews in their prodigality in making this offering to the 
Deity ; but it deserves to be noticed, that the Jews were expressly commanded, in the fortieth verse of the twenty- 
third chapter of Leviticus, to carry boughs and branches of trees in their hands as a religious ceremony: “ And ye 
shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm-trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and 
willows of the brook ; and ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven days *.”. The Mexicans were accustomed 
to decorate profusely their temples with branches of trees and flowers, and to carry them in their hands in certain 
festive processions. It is said, in the thirty-fifth chapter of Exodus, of the Israelites: “ And they came, both men 
and women, as many as were willing-hearted, and brought bracelets, and ear-rings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels 
of gold: and every man that offered, offered an offering of gold unto the Lord.” The Mexican paintings show that 
the Mexicans were accustomed to present at the shrines of their gods jewels of gold, bracelets, and necklaces: and 
it would also appear that they placed loaves of bread in the sanctuaries of their temples before the idols, which must 
remind us of the Jewish shew-bread. Acosta, describing in the ninth chapter of the fifth book of his Natural and 
Moral History of the Indies, the adoration which the Mexicans paid to their three principal deities, having previously 
mentioned Vitzliputzli and Tlaloc, says: “ Preeter hac etiam tertium quoddam idolum colebatur apud Mexicanos, 
quod remittendis peccatis destinabatur. Hoc Tezcathlipuca vocabatur.” And he shortly afterwards observes : “ Auquo 
terrori Indis nullum idolum preter hoc erat, quod admodum metuebant ne facinora patrata in propatulum ferret. 
Festis illis diebus quee singulis quaternis annis instituuntur, peccatorum remissio publice denunciatur, eo modo quo 
deinceps dicturi sumus. Idem hoc idolum pro deo ac domino habebatur siccitatis, inedize ac famis, sterilitatis et pestis, 
quod ob id alia quoque specie effingebant, in solio insigni considens, et purpureo pretenso velo (Gordyn vocant) 
in quo hominum defunctorum crania et ossa depicta erant.” The purple veil here said to have been spread before the 
shrine of Tetzcatlipoca, and to have been painted with skulls and bones, recalls to our recollection the thirty-fifth verse 
of the thirty-sixth chapter of Exodus, in which mention is made of the veil of the tabernacle: “ And he made a veil 
of blue and purple and scarlet, and fine-twined linen, with cherubims made he it of cunning work.” Torquemada says 
that the skulls and bones which occupied the place of the cherubim in the veil of Tetzcatlipoca, signified that that’ 
god possessed equal power over life and death. In the same way as amongst the Jews none were permitted except 
the Levites to enter the secret place of the sanctuary, so the Mexican ritual forbade any but the priests to enter 
the sanctuary of Tetzcatlipoca. Acosta, describing the temple of that god, in the thirteenth chapter of his fifth 
book, says: “In cujus latere conclave quoddam varii coloris pannis pretiosis tectum visebatur, cujus porta humilis 
velo assiduo recingebatur, nll nist sacerdotibus accessa.” 

The Mexican priests, like the Levites, bathed and made frequent use of ablutions in their religious ceremonies : 
some of them, like the Jewish Nazarites, permitted their hair to grow without ever cutting it. The sixth 
chapter of Numbers, immediately following the chapter containing the law of the trial of jealousy, is exclusively 

* Torquemada says, that in one of the Mexican months the Mexicans celebrated a festival by going to a neighbouring mountain 
and building a kind of tabernacle of boughs for one of their principal idols. Amongst the Jews, the feast of tabernacles was a great 
solemnity. In the forty-second plate of the First Part of the Monuments of M. Dupaix, under No. 97, a stone tablet sculptured in 
relievo occurs, containing four figures seated cross-legged, having a very Jewish cast of countenance, with long beards; one of whom 
holds what appears to be a branch of palm or willow in his hand. Between them, in the centre, seems to be the plan of a temple. 
Exultation is evidently depicted in their countenances; while there is something votive in their attitude, as if they had just escaped 
some great danger, or after many toils had succeeded at length in attaining some much-desired object. 

NO@ HS 293 

dedicated to the exposition of the law relating to Nazarites *; from whence it may be inferred that persons making 
such vows were held in great estimation by the Jews. In the thirteenth chapter of Judges it is said that an angel 
appeared to the wife of Manoah the father of Samson, and expressly commanded that the child which he promised 
that she should conceive should be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his death. The vow of a 
Nazarite was generally only for a limited time, at the expiration of which he cut off his hair and made an offering 
of it, burning it in the holy fire of the altar of the tabernacle, as was enjoined in the eighteenth verse of the 
sixth chapter of Numbers; “ And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation at the door of the tabernacle 
of the congregation, and shall take the hair of the head of his separation and put it in the fire which is under the 
sacrifice of the peace-offerings.” This Jewish rite ought certainly to be considered in connexion with a Peruvian 
superstition, into which it might have degenerated, which Acosta notices in the fifth chapter of the fifth book of his 
Moral History of the Indies: “ Mirum est id sacrificium quod instituunt in superciliorum depilationibus, illa 
enim crinibus nudant. Evulsos crines nonnunquam Soli, interdum montilbus seu Apalchitis, aliquando etiam ventis, 
ac rebus aliis quas metuunt, sacrificio offerunt.” 

It is singular that in Mexican paintings the eyebrows in the human countenance seem almost always to be omitted. 
As the temple at Jerusalem contained great store of gold and silver vessels, which the king of Babylon pillaged, so 
the Peruvian temples were excessively rich in precious vases, especially that of Pachacama, near Lima; from which, 
Acosta observes, Francis Pizarro and his soldiers obtained “ ingentes et infandas divitias vasorum tum aureorum, tum 
argenteorum.” It was customary among the Jews to summon the people to the synagogue by the sounding of horns ; 
and to blow trumpets - was a religious ceremony, which Moses declares, in the twenty-third chapter of Leviticus, 
that God himself appointed: “And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, 
In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, 
an holy convocation.” And again in the twenty-ninth chapter of Numbers: “ And in the seventh month, on the 
first day of the month, ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work; it is a day of blowing the 
trumpets unto you.” It is certainly not a little curious that, according to Torquemada, the Mexicans should have 
been summoned to prayers at stated hours by the blowing of horns, in the same way as the Jews, although they 
were acquainted with bells: and that, according to Garcia, they should have approached their temple with the same 
reverential custom of pulling off their sandals when within a certain number of paces distant from itt. They 
seem likewise to have imitated the Jews in their sacerdotal costume: and Garcia, in the second chapter of the 
third book of the Origin of the Indians, treating of the resemblance of the Indian dress to that of the Jews, says : 
«Fr. Agustin Davila, Arcobispo de Santo Domingo, réfiere en su Historia Dominicana del Nuevo Mundo, como en 
un pueblo llamado Tamaculapa, que es en la Misteca, se hallaron unas vestiduras sagradas de el que ellos tenian por 
summo sacerdote, mui semejantes a las que se ponian los pontifices maximos de la lei de Moises, las quales tenian 
escondidas los Indios.” “ Brother Augustin Davila, the archbishop of Saint Domingo, relates in his Dominican 
History of the New World, that some sacred vestments were discovered in a town called Tamaculapa, in Misteca, 
which had belonged to the person whom they considered their high priest, which nearly resembled those worn by 
the high priests of the Mosaic law, which vestments the Indians kept concealed.” 

The habit of the high priest of the Jews, the several parts of which are minutely explained in the twenty- 
eighth chapter of Exodus, is more briefly described in the forty-fifth chapter of Ecclesiasticus : “ He exalted Aaron, 

* Saint Matthew, referring to some lost prophecy relating to the Messiah, (for none such occurs in any of the books of the Old Testa- 
ment,) says: “¢ It was spoken by the Prophets, he shall be called a Nazarene.” Hence some commentators have taken Samson to be a 
precursor and harbinger of Christ. But even supposing that some traits of personal resemblance existed between them, and some 
analogies in the annunciation which was made by angels to the mother of each, that she should bring forth a son,—would they not be more 
than counterbalanced by the lustful disposition of Samson, which was so opposite to the character of the future Messiah? 

+ The Jews attributed as much virtue as the Mexicans to the sound of the trumpet, in awakening by its shrill notes the heart of a 
sinner to a livelier sense of remorse for sin. They have a prayer which they use in their synagogues beginning with the words, 
** O Lord, we thank thee for having taught us the use of the trumpet.” And, extolling its use, they refer to the text in Scripture which 
says, “ God went up with a noise, the Lord with the sound of the trumpet.” Votan was emphatically styled by the Chiapanese the Lord 
of the Teponaztli, or hollow drum, which instrument of music was used conjointly in their temples with the trumpet. 

{ The Jews were always accustomed to tread barefoot on what they deemed holy ground. God is said, in the third chapter o 
Exodus, to have spoken to Moses from the burning bush, and commanded him to put off his shoes because the place whereon he 
stood was holy ground. 

(47) 

294, NOTES 

an holy man like unto him, even his brother, of the tribe of Levi. An everlasting covenant he made with him, 
and gave him the priesthood among the people; he beautified him with comely ornaments, and clothed him with 
a robe of glory. He put upon him perfect glory, and strengthened him with rich garments, with breeches, 
with a long robe, and the ephod. And he compassed him with pomegranates and with many golden bells round 
about, that as he went there might be a sound and a noise made that might be heard in the temple, for a memorial 
to the children of his people; with an holy garment with gold, and blue silk and purple, the work of the embroi- 
derer, with a breast-plate of judgment, and with Urim and Thummim; with twisted scarlet, the work of the 
cunning workman ; with precious stones graven like seals, and set in gold, the work of the jeweller, with a writing 
engraved for a memorial after the number of the tribes of Israel. He set a crown of gold upon the mitre, wherein 
was engraved ‘ Holiness, an ornament of honour, a costly work, the desire of the eyes, goodly and beautiful.” This 
is the description of the dress of the Jewish high priest, which differed from that of the other priests and Levites 
who officiated in the temple. Josephus, in applying the verses of an old Greek poet to his own countrymen, and 
contending from them that his nation had swelled the forces of the Persian army that invaded Greece, clearly indi- 
cates what he considered to have been the military costume of the Jews some ages before, and such perhaps as it was 
in his time. The verses alluded to are cited by him in the first book of his treatise against Apion; and are the 
following : 
“Tw & orev dueBawe yevoc Gavpacroy wWeobar, 

TAwooay bev Mowicoay ro OTOMATWY adueyres, 

‘Qkouy & ev LoAvporg opect, tAaTEey Tapa Aywvy, 

“Avypareor, Kopuac TpoxooupLoec, avrap wmep0ev 

; as 3 s 
Inrwv dapra mpoown edopovy, éokAnkora Kany. 

« Next came a race of men of extraordinary mien, whose dialect was Pheenician, and their habitation in the 
Solymean mountains * on the borders of a broad lake, of sun-burnt complexion, with their heads shorn in a circle ; 
whilst above they wore the skins of horses’ heads hardened in the smoke.” 

If it be objected that this nation could not have been the Jews, because the Jews were forbidden by Moses to 
round the corners of their heads or to mar the corners of their beards, it is sufficient,—without insisting on the 
different senses in which the Rabbis might have understood what rounding the corners of their heads was,—to 
observe, that Josephus, a Jew, believed these verses to be written of the Jews his countrymen. And certainly, rebel- 
lious and stiffmecked as the Jews are called in Scripture, the supposition that in this particular they disobeyed the 
Mosaic law, involves no difficulty. Many learned men, such as Doctor Prideaux-f, have doubted even whether some 
of the precepts of the Mosaic law were ever observed by the Jews, or have believed that their observance was discon- 
tinued shortly after their first institution. The Jews were forbidden usury {;—but what people ever became such 
great usurers? They were forbidden idolatry ;—but what nation was so prone to the worship of idols? It may 
be further remarked, that since amongst the paintings discovered by Belzoni on the walls in the interior of the 
tombs of the Egyptian kings at Thebes, very intelligent judges have been persuaded that they have recognized Jews 
in the figures of captives with their hands tied behind them, who have a peculiarly Jewish cast of countenance, and 
whose heads are shaven in the manner described by Josephus, the opinion of that historian would seem to acquire 
confirmation from the collateral evidence of the Egyptian monuments. The great antiquity of these paintings may 
be inferred from the representation of chariots so frequently occurring among them; for when Egypt became inter- 
sected with canals,—and history informs us under the reign of what Egyptian monarch that occurred,—it became a 
country no longer fit for cavalry, and the use of chariots in war must have ceased. One thing we learn from the 

* Homer makes honourable mention of the Solymeans as a brave race of men, which the Jews confessedly were. ‘The appellation 
which the Greeks gave to Jerusalem, ‘“IepocoAuya, was merely the Hebrew proper name, pronounced with a Greek accentuation. It is 
yery problematical whether Homer makes any allusion, under the name of the Solymeans, to the Jews. 

+ Doctor Prideaux doubted whether the Jews ever allowed to their land the stated periods of rest ordained by the Mosaic law. The 
laws of cleanness and uncleanness relating to men, other writers have supposed must, from their excessive inconvenience, have been 
quickly abandoned: and the Jews of the present day entirely disregard them. 

{ Itis right to observe that they were only forbidden to lend money on usury to their brethren; and this prohibition did not extend to 
strangers. Nihil humanum a me alienum puto, was an apothegm never uttered by Moses, and quite at variance with Jewish ethics. 

NOTES. 295 

lines quoted by Josephus,—that the Jews, like the Mexicans, dressed themselves in the skins of beasts in war, and 
wore helmets formed out of the heads of animals. But Josephus, although a Jew and a Levite, is an author not 
much to be depended upon. To aggrandize his own nation was his aim,—to flatter and deceive the Emperor, a duty 
which he proposed to himself; hoping by the former to raise himself to personal distinction, and by the latter to 
cause favour and protection to be shown to the Jews. Hence, with unblushing falsehood he asserts in his Reply to 
Apion, that the Jews, unlike other nations, were a people that lived in perpetual unanimity, unacquainted with 
sedition and intestine commotions: although the Scripture informs us, that even in the lifetime of David Absalom 
had stolen the hearts of the people; and that in the reign of Rehoboam there was a sweeping revolt of ten of the 
tribes of Israel; and he also insinuates that the Emperor was the Messiah. Framed, however, as the history of 
Josephus was to shock but as little as possible Roman prejudices and to impose upon the emperors, the Antonines 
and Marcus Aurelius were not deceived: those excellent monarchs were not inclined to take Cyrus as a pattern, 
or to give any encouragement to the Jews. That Josephus himself had powerful patrons is evident from the arro- 
gant style in which he replies to Apion. His writings pleased a party in Rome that had been increasing in numbers 
and strength from the days of Augustus, who, wishing to see the downfall of the established religion of the state, 
favoured both Christian and Jewish writers, because their works tended to bring that religion into contempt. If he 
had not been countenanced by many great men, he would scarcely have ventured to impugn the veracity of all the 
Greek historians, making it a heavy charge against them that there should be discrepancies in their relations; 
or have ridiculously boasted of that enactment amongst the Jews, which provided that none but the priests and 
Levites should compose histories or be permitted to write books. Josephus must either have imagined that the 
Hebrew annalists were inspired, or were not. If he believed they were inspired, it was absurd in him to utter his 
sarcasms against the Greeks because they had not instituted an order of inspired historians. If he did not, it was 
a silly notion to suppose that the cause of truth would be promoted by permitting one class of people to write 
what they pleased, and no others to contradict them. We may here notice another analogy in the Mexican 
and Jewish institutions. The Mexican priests, like the priests amongst the Jews, employed themselves in com- 
posing histories: those histories were paintings, the interpretation of which they reserved to themselves. In 
Yucatan when a priest died, books (that is to say paintings) were buried along with him, as Herrera affirms: and 
it is a custom with the Jews at the present day to place books on the coffin of the deceased, although not to throw 
them into the grave. A description of the dress of the Jewish high priest having been taken from Ecclesiasticns, 
and the testimony of Josephus (who, like the Mexican priests, was himself a soldier as well as a Levite) adduced 
to show what was the ancient military costume and equipments of the Jews, something remains to be said of the 
dress of the other classes of the Jewish populace. Garcia says, in the last section of the second chapter of the 
third book of his Origin of the Indians, “If the dress which the Indians wear is duly considered, particularly the 
Peruvian, it will be found very like that worn by the Jews; for they use a tunic or shift, which resembles a surplice 
without sleeves, and over it they wrap a mantle. They substitute sandals in the place of shoes; some made with 
wooden soles and tied above, others with soles made of cabuya, which is like hemp, with strings. This kind of 
shoe is much more common in New Spain, as the dress which I have mentioned is more common in Peru. The 
natives of Peru allowed their hair in ancient times to grow long, like Nazarites, with the exception of that class 
who were called Orejones: and those who are yet unconquered wear at the present day their hair in this fashion. 
That this was the dress and costume of the Hebrews is evident, as well from their histories as from ancient 
paintings, which represent them habited in this apparel; and this kind of dress and sandals was worn by the 
Apostles. These two articles of apparel, the mantle and shift, which are worn by the Indians of Peru, were what 
Samson laid a wager on, and what are named in Scripture the tunic and syndon, which are the same as what the 
Indians of Peru call cusma and pacha, and the Spaniards camiseta and manta.” 

It would appear, from what Garcia here asserts, (who speaks from observation, having been himself many years in 
Peru,) that the dress of the Peruvians was more like that of the Jews than was the Mexican, whilst the sandals of the 
people of New Spain were strictly in the Hebrew fashion *. If that learned author, as well as Acosta, had sought 

* We know, from the expression of John the Baptist, “There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes Iam 
not worthy to stoop down and unloose,” the nature of the Hebrew sandals, which probably exactly resembled those worn by the 
Mesicans. 

296 NOTES. 

out Hebrew analogies in the customs and institutions of the Indians of New Spain and Peru, before Spanish inter- 
course had rendered many of those customs obsolete, and had published their works in the beginning of the 
sixteenth instead of the beginning of the seventeenth century, perhaps they would have found that no Hebrew 
fashion was wanting in the New World. It is certainly surprising to see how nearly the Jewish costume is imitated 
in some of the Mexican paintings. In the twelfth page of that MS. of the Bodleian Library which seems to repre- 
sent the migration of the Mexicans, or some other subject connected with a descent into hell, and which is unfor- 
tunately only a fragment of a larger painting, from which a part has evidently been torn off, the figure of a Mexican 
priest occurs in a dress very like that of the high priest of the Jews: the linen ephod, the breast-plate, and the 
border of pomegranates, described in Exodus, are there in a manner represented. The golden bells are wanting; 
but those ornaments will be found, in the valuable painting preserved in the Royal Library of Dresden, attached to 
the dress of several of the figures, to which they are appended by certain hemmings or fringes, as was ordained in 
the twenty-eighth chapter of Exodus, in the case of the dress of the Jewish high priest: “And beneath upon the 
hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and 
bells of gold between them round about: a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon 
the hem of the robe round about. And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when 
he goeth in unto the holy place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that he die not.” Was it the fruit or 
the flower of the pomegranate, we may ask, that was worked on the garments of the high priest? The fruit 
appears to be imitated on the dress of the priest in the Oxford MS. ; but a flower, which may be that of the pome- 
granate, occurs as a symbol in the representations of several of the Mexican temples. It has been remarked above, 
that the dress of the Mexican priest bears only a partial resemblance to that of the Jewish high priest: for it will be 
immediately perceived, that besides the golden bells, the girdle and mitre are wanting. Gomara has observed, that a 
girdle sometimes formed a part of the Indian costume * ; and in the great variety of sacerdotal habits in use among 
the Indians, there is no difficulty in supposing that what on one occasion might have been worn, might on another have 
been omitted. The archbishop of Saint Domingo, Augustin Davila, whose testimony must have great weight in a 
question of this kind, has also affirmed that the sacred vestments discovered in Tamaculapa were very like those worn 
by the high priests of the Jews. The head of the abovementioned priest seems to be ornamented with ribbons 
interwoven with the hair: but the Mexican tecutli, or crown, which bore a much closer resemblance to the head-dress 
of Aaron than the episcopal mitre, is represented in the same page of the Oxford MS. on the head of another 
figure. It also frequently occurs amongst the paintings of the Collection of Mendoza, and is there always painted 
blue. This crown or mitre was worn by the Mexican kings and likewise by the judges: the former had it richly 
adorned with plates of gold. Those kings united, it is to be supposed, pontifical with regal dignity ; although the 
ostensible head of the Mexican religion was the high priest, who at his consecration to the office was anointed 
with oil of olli mixed with blood. Moses declares, in the sixth verse of the twenty-ninth chapter of Exodus, 
that he was commanded by God “to put the mitre on his brother’s head, and the holy crown upon the mitre ;” 
and “ to take the anointing oil, and pouring it upon his head, to anoint him:” and in the twentieth verse of the 
same chapter, “to kill the ram, and to take of his blood, and to put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, 
and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of 
their right foot, and to sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about :” and “ to take of the blood that was upon 
the altar, and of the anointing oil, and to sprinkle it upon Aaron and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon 
the garments of his sons with him: and he should be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ 
garments with him.” It is evident, from the passage of Exodus which has been quoted, that the holy crown was 
distinct from the mitre: it consisted of a plate of gold, that was tied with a blue lace over the mitre, which was 
itself merely a linen cap. Moses having been ordered, in the thirty-ninth verse of the twenty-eighth chapter of 
Exodus, to make the mitre of fine linen; it says, in the thirty-sixth and following verses of the same chapter: 
« And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave uponit, like the engravings of a signet, Holiness to the 
Lord. And thou shalt put it on @ blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the fore front of the mitre it 

* Speaking of the women of Sibola, he says, “ Andan ceflidas, trengan los cabellos.” They wear girdles and braid their hair—La 

Istoria de las Indias, fo. cxv. 

NOTES. | 207 

shall be. And it shall be upon Aaron’s forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the 
children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be 
accepted before the Lord.” Three things deserve to be noticed in the Mexican mitre. It frequently consisted of a 
plate of gold ona blue ground*; it was tied to the head dy a lace or ribbon; and it ‘was peculiarly worn on the 
forehead of the king or the priest. In Peru, a tassel hanging from the head of the Inga was the symbol of regal 
dignity; but some of the Ingas wore a crown more nearly resembling an episcopal mitre, if the portraits of those 
monarchs prefixed by Herrera to his Decads are not ideal -f. 

The breast-plate of the Jewish high priest is thus described in the twenty-eighth chapter of Exodus: “And 
thou shalt make the breast-plate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make 
it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen thou shalt make it. Four square it shall 
be being doubled; a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof. And thou 
shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: 
this shall be the first row. And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond. And the third 
row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set 
in gold in their inclosings.” Besides the precious stones, Moses was commanded in the thirtieth verse of the 
same chapter to put the Urim and the Thummim in the breast-plate of judgment: “And thou shalt put in the 
breast-plate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim ; and they shall be upon Aaron’s heart, when he goeth in 

* Torquemada says that the Mexican Copilli, or royal mitre, was of the colour of the Xiuhtilmatli; or mantle worn by the kings of 
Mexico, which was blue or purple. ‘The literal signification of Xiuhtilmatli being a purple or blue mantle. 

+ The Ingas also wore a rainbow fastened to their heads as the insignia of royalty ; which, on the supposition that they were of Jewish 
origin, might have some reference to God’s first covenant with the Jewish patriarch Noah, which is thus recorded in the ninth chapter 
of Genesis, ver. 8—17: “ And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, 
and with your seed after you; and with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth 
with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth. And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh 
be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. And God said, This is the 
token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations: I do set 
my bow inthe cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth. And it shall come to pass, when I bring a 
cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: and I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and 
every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh. And the bow shall be in the cloud ; 
and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the 
earth. And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon 
the earth.” 

It can scarcely be doubted that the Jews believed that the rainbow was not a natural phenomenon but an express sign of the cove-~ 
nant made between God and their first patriarch, who may be emphatically so styled, because they were descended from Shem, his 
eldest son. And hence it is likely that the rainbow was always an object highly revered by them; and that in later days the Ingas 
might have assumed it as aroyal emblem. The sapphire, a stone of great intrinsic value, was probably held in still greater esteem by the 
Jews on account of its azure colour assimilating it in some degree to heaven and to the rainbow. Ezekiel says that he beheld, in his 
famous vision described in the first chapter of his prophecies, the throne of God in appearance as the sapphire stone, and his glory 
like “ the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain.” The Mexicans painted the visage of their supreme deity Tetzauhteotle with three 
lines of azure blue across it. It is surprising what fanciful theories in natural philosophy the expression «I do set my bow in the cloud,” 
in the thirteenth verse of the abovementioned chapter of Genesis, has given rise to. Sir Isaac Newton accounted for the appearance of 
the rainbow on scientific principles capable of demonstration. But other philosophers, not choosing that that token in the cloud should 
have existed previously to the Deluge, have gone so far as to affirm that it never rained before the Deluge, but that the earth was only irri- 
gated by nocturnal dews. ‘These philosophers, if they had lived at the time of the Deluge, would have reasoned less absurdly if they had 
predicted that it never would rain after the Deluge. Their notions of the “ mécanique céleste” of the universe must also be very curious, 
since they imagine that to suspend or totally to derange the laws of nature is a case which may with probability be supposed, or one 
unlikely powerfully to affect the scale in which probabilities are weighed. It has been supposed by some philosophers (the Hutchin- 
sonians) that if all the sciences were lost, their first principles or elements might be found in the Pentateuch; and they have accordingly 
endeavoured to torture the system of Moses into some- resemblance to that of Sir Isaac Newton. If the likeness however really exists, 
the Jews were such wretched philosophers that they could never discover it. What correct notion, for instance, could they have 
formed of astronomy, when they believed in the existence of a solid firmament over their heads, and imagined that the heavens might fall? 
or, being misled by their own interpretation of the sixteenth verse of the first chapter of Genesis, —“ And God made two great lights ; the 
greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also,”—maintained that the sun and the moon were 
both greater than the fixed stars, because they are both termed great in reference to them, although the moon is afterwards named 
lesser in reference to the sun? 

(46) 

296 ; NOTES. 

before the Lord: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord con- 
tinually.” It would appear from the sixth verse of the twenty-eighth chapter of the First Book of Samuel, 
that the high priest of the Jews divined by the Urim and the Thummim inserted in his breast-plate: “ And 
when Saul inquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him not; neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.” 
How greatly must the veneration which the Jews were inclined to feel for the person of their high priest have 
been increased by the circumstance of his wearing this mysterious breast-plate! The Egyptian priests, some of 
whose customs the Jews seem to have imitated, notwithstanding the hatred which they bore to the Egyptian 
nation, wore also, when discharging the functions of supreme judicature, a breast-plate with the image of Truth 
engraved upon it, as Diodorus Siculus testifies. 

The figures in the Oxford MS. before referred to, are in the original paintings large and coarsely executed, with 
little apparent regard to minute details : it is impossible therefore to decide whether the breast-plate on the priest 
represented in the twelfth page, is square or round, or whether it contains one or more precious stones. The breast- 
plates worn by the Mexican priests appear to have been of different shapes and sizes, and to have been set with 
yarious numbers of precious stones. In the thirtieth page of the original Mexican painting preserved in the 
Library of the Vatican, the figure of a priest or some other personage occurs, with a round breast-plate attached by 
a chain to his neck ; and near him appear to be two other breast-plates, one of a square and the other of a round 
form. From the forty-second verse of the twenty-eighth chapter of Exodus,—“ And thou shalt make them linen 
breeches to cover their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach: and they shall be upon 
Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near 
unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not miquity, and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto 
him and his seed after him,’—it would appear that the maxtle, worn from a sense of decency by the Mexican priests 
round their loins, very much resembled the breeches which Moses made for Aaron and his sons. It is not im- 
probable, from the destitute state in which the Israelites quitted Egypt, their long wanderings in the desert, and the 
warmth of the climate of Palestine, that necessity at first, with habit superinduced, and entire freedom from the in- 
conveniences of cold, had accustomed them to be clad in very thin apparel*. This supposition is corroborated by 

* Tt is probable that the lower orders amongst the Jewish populace dressed exactly like the Mexicans, wearing simply a maxtle girded 
round their loins, which slight covering was even dispensed with by their prophets when they prophesied ; who on such occasions must have 
adopted a fashion very like that which still prevails amongst the Faquirs of the East, being thus described by Isaiah in the twentieth 
chapter of his Book of Prophecies, where speaking of himself he says, «In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the 
king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and took it; at the same time spake the Lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, 
Go, and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And the 
Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia; 
so shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives.” That Isaiah’s walking barefoot and naked 
was not merely a type of the Egyptian captivity, but also an act agreeable to the usages of the Hebrew prophets, may be inferred from 
the following passage of the nineteenth chapter of the First Book of Samuel. “And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when 
they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them, the Spirit of God was upon the 
messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied. And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they prophesied likewise. 
And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they prophesied also. Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that 
is in Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah. And he 
went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth 
in Ramah. And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day, and 
all that night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets!” Yo the Greeks this manner of prophesying would have 
appeared as extraordinary and unbecoming as the hallowed cave from which the Delphic oracles were delivered, or the tripod and the 
inspired priestess, were in the eyes of the early Fathers. The oracles had in fact sunk into contempt for some time before the Christian 
era; since, their predictions having so often failed, mankind began at last to suspect them : but that stress which some theologians lay on 
the cessation of oracles, which, like the cessation of sacrifices amongst the Jews, they say was occasioned by the coming of the Messiah ; 
appealing moreover to a treatise of Plutarch on the subject, to prove that the oracles did cease about that time,—is unnecessary, since 
what becomes of their argument, if it can be proved that oracles existed in the New World long after the establishment of Christianity, 
and that the Jews there revived their old sacrifices? With respect to oracular inspiration, considered as a long prevailing belief of some 
of the greatest and wisest nations of antiquity, it may be observed that it was not so absurd as many Christian writers have represented 
it: for the principle having been admitted, that men might occasionally receive divine warnings of events likely to compromise great 
interests, the idea which suggested itself to the ancients, of establishing oracles, that on the one hand they might not appear to neglect 

NOTES. 299 

paintings found in the Egyptian tombs, amongst which, figures, intended, as it has been presumed, to represent 
Jews, occur in the exact Mexican costume, with a mantle over their shoulders, and the maxtle (to use a Scriptural 
expression) girded round their loins.. That the Egyptian priests wore but a slight covering may be known both 
from ancient paintings and from statues, some of which may be seen in the British Museum. Before quitting the 
subject of Mexican costume, we shall point out another very remarkable agreement in the Mexican and Jewish 
dress. It says in the thirty-seventh and following verses of the fifteenth chapter of Numbers, “ And the Lord spake 
unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of 
their garments, throughout their generations ; and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue. 
And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, 
and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring; 
that ye may remember and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. Iam the Lord your God, 
which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord your God.” It was to be expected 
that so solemn an injunction to the Jews to wear fringes* on the borders of their garments, would be scrupulously 
obeyed throughout their generations: accordingly we find, in the fifth verse of the twenty-third chapter of Saint 
Matthew, allusion made to this custom, where Christ, rebuking the Scribes and Pharisees, says, “ But all their 
works they do for to be seen of men; they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments.” 
Reference to the eighth page of the Oxford MS. before mentioned, will show that it was a Mexican custom also 
to wear fringes and borders fastened to the apparel; and an examination of any of the other Mexican paintings 
contained in these volumes will fully establish that fact. The Oxford MS. which has been so often referred to, it 
has been already observed, is incomplete. This original Mexican painting is drawn in a very coarse style on paper 
of metl; and, unlike the other Mexican paintings, rolls up instead of being folded: some of the figures are 
uncoloured, and the subject is probably historical or mythological; and it has been supposed connected with the 
descent of some fabulous personage into hell, since in a Christian calendar, that is to say a Mexican painting expla- 
natory of the rites and doctrines of Christianity, which we have had the opportunity of seeing, hell is always 
represented by the symbol of the upper jaw of a serpent; and the Jewish notion of descending as it were into a pit, 

the admonitions of Heaven ; nor on the other suffer the populace to be deluded by false prophets, such as were frequent among the Jews, 
—was founded on policy and a regard for the public good. The necessity of a place, a person, and of a prescribed mode of consultation for 
the delivery of the answers of the oracle, suggested to them also the use of the cave, the priestess, and the sacred tripod. The cave was 
a temple formed by the hands of Nature; it was ordained that the priestess should be a person of the purest and most exemplary life; 
and the tripod was probably for the purpose of containing, when the sulphuric exhalations of the cave were not sufficiently strong, other 
ingredients the fumes cf which arising might affect the priestess with that mania so finely described by Virgil in the sixth book of the 
fiineid ; 
“Cui talia fanti 

Ante fores, subito non vultus, non color unus, 

Non comt mansére come, sed pectus anhelum, 

Et rabie fera corda tument; majorque videri, 

Nec mortale sonans, afflata est numine quando 

Jam propiore Dei ;’— 

the approach of which it would appear she was fully sensible of, although it was first necessary that the vapour should quite overcome 
her reason before the expressions which she uttered assumed a prophetic character. It may easily be supposed that in most cases the 
priestess merely pretended to be seized with this divine mania, and pronounced or sung certain preconcerted words; but this supposition 
does not involve the other, that those who instituted oracles intended to practise a fraud on the credulity of mankind. They were probably 
of Egyptian origin, and invented expressly for the purpose of checking fraud, and of restraining the people from going to consult those 
who pretended to divine by means of dreams and visions ; in which species of divination we know that one at least of the Jewish patriarchs 
excelled, since nothing could have tended to bring a profession of this kind, exercised by private individuals, sooner into disrepute and 
contempt, than the fame of a true and a public oracle which all might consult. The inventors of the oracles seem, by enacting that their deli- 
very should be from a tripod, to have proceeded on the principle on which the whole art of divination by dreams was founded; viz. that the 
mind when least under the influence of reason and volition, as in sleep, becomes most susceptible of divine revelations: and hence they 
thought it necessary that the priestess should first be thrown into a kind of delirium, by the exhalations that emanated from the cave and 
the cauldron, before her words could be considered prophetic, and their utterance the spontaneous effusions of the oracle. 

* We may fairly ask what Sahagun means by saying, in the eighth chapter of his eighth book, «¢ Todas estas mantas arriba dichas son 
sospechosas.” “ All the mantles mentioned above are suspicious.” Does he mean to say that they all had fringes? 

300 NOTES. 

seems also to be preserved. Mention has already been made of ablutions as common amongst the Mexicans ; but the 
confession which was customary among the Peruvians is still more surprising. Acosta in the twenty-fifth chapter of 
the fifth book of his Natural and Moral History of the Indies thus describes it: “Idem sacrilegus mendaciorum pater 
in Confessionis etiam ritu instituendo, Romanam Kcclesiam fere in omnibus apprime emulatus est. Peruanis siqui- 
dem persuasit, quod omnium quibus torquerentur erumnarum ac morborum origo, a solo peccato sit. Hine factum, 
ut pro iis expiandis, sacrificia plurima conderent et ordinarent.' Nec id satis quidem, verum etiam ore ipso peccata 
sua contrito pectore confitebantur, qui mos per universas provincias eas latissime inundaverat. Hunc in finem certi 
confessionarii creabantur, dignitatum gradibus distincti. Peculiaria queedam et definita peccata sacerdotibus pri- 
mariis reservabantur. Confessoribus vero nonnunquam poene graves irrogabantur, iis comprimis, qui pauperculi 
quod sacerdoti penderent non habebant. Sed et muleres nonnullibi confessionibus audiendis preeficiebantur. In 
provincia Collasuyo, vel dum hodie, mos est, ut pro peccato gravissimo habeatur, si quis vel levissimum quoddam 
crimen admissum sacerdotibus (hos Ychuri sive Ychuiri appellant) non revelet. Hi, et sortibus, et quorundam ani- 
malium inspectis extis, de populi peccatis divinabant. Dissimulatores suspectos, lapidibus aut saxis dorso incussis, 
tamdiu verberabant, dum plenam omnium patratorum enumerationem elicerent. Ko facto, peenitenti agende singulis 
definitus modus decernebatur. Pro his etiam, diis sacrificia peculiaria offerebantur. Hujusmodi confessiones iterabant, 
quoties vel liberi, vel parentes, vel Cacique, aut morbo, aut alio adverso quodam casu tentarentur. Quod si fieret 
aliquando ut Inga languesceret, aut morbo invaderetur, tum omnes provincie Collas simul confiteri cogebantur. Con- 
fessione manifestata peccata sacerdos minime revelare audebat, nisi fors in casibus definitis. Quze enumerari ab ipsis , 
confessoribus peccata frequentius solebant, hec erant homicidia extra bellum patrata, furta, adulteria, veneficia et fas- 
cinationes, idolorum contemptus, festorum profanationes, male de Ingis ominationes, et contra hos rebelliones facte. 
De internis animi vel cogitationis peccatis nihil angebantur, usque dum Christiani de his quoque velut nocentibus, 
eosdem instituissent. Ipse Inga non sacerdotibus, sed So tantum confitebatur, qui peccata ipsius ad Viracocham 
deferret, et llorum condonationem ab eodem impetraret. Hoc modo confessus Inga corpus abluebat, firmiter sua 
ita abstersum iri peccata persuasum habens. Id hoc modo fiebat: in fluentum proximum ingressus, hec verba 
edebat: ‘Soli mea peccata confessus sum, ea fluvius hic excipiens in vastum mare abripiat, ut in eternum non 
appareant.’ Simili modo et ceteri’confessi, abluebantur; qui mos etiam Mahumetanis solennis dicitur, quem 
Guadoi appellant, Indi vero Opacuna vocant. Si cui ex filiis quidam fato abripiretur, hunc peccatorem maximum 
arbitrabantur, dicentes propter illius peccata gravia evenire, ut jfilus loco parentis moreretur; eo quo paulo ante 
diximus modo lotus, a gibboso, aut alias a natura mutilo distortoque homine, legis jussu urticis ceedebatur. Si 
quis eger sorte magorum et ariolorum sibi omnino esse moriendum didicisset, nulld mord filium licet unigenitum, 
obtruncabat, pro se mactato filo deos placatum iri sperans. Horum rituum etsi Christiani partem suo adventu 
magnam abrogassent, nihilominus tamen Indi apud se, peculiaria quedam confitendi genera furtim diu aluerunt, ex 
quibus erant jeyunia, ablutiones, aurt argentique erogationes, montanorum visitationes*, et plagarum dorso exci- 
piendarum toleratus, Superstitiosorum hujusmodi sacerdotum qui egros visitare solebant, in provincia Chicuito 
multi adhuc superesse dicuntur. Maxima tamen Indorum pars ad confessionis Papistice normam paulatim jam 
assuefit, quam devotione religiosa amplectuntur. Quinimo singulari quadam Dei providentia ita fuisse constitutum 
videtur, ut confessionum usus ante adventum Christianorum jam dum apud eos vigeret, quo ad hunc recipiendum 
adduci possent commodius.” : 
It is not perhaps generally known that the Jews,—from whom some authors have contended that Christians 
adopted the practice,—were accustomed to use confession. The same arguments which are employed to derive the 
Christian mode of confession from that in use among the Jews, will be found equally applicable to the Peruvian ; 
since the confession of the Peruvians as nearly resembled that of the Jews as does the Christian. The Jewish 
confession was very peculiar ; the high priest was commanded in Leviticus to confess the sins of the people over 
a live goat, which bore them away into the desert: “And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the 

* The primitive Christians, bearing in mind the rebuke which the Pharisees received from Christ for praying in public places that 
they might be seen by men, considered it an act of purer devotion to retire to solitary places to pray. The word ‘hermit,’ originally pro- 
nounced ‘ eremite,’ is derived from the Greek name for a desert, 2pyuos. In the very early ages, the deserts of Egypt became the resort of 
numerous Christians, who retired thither and acquired the fame of superior sanctity; and too often did they come forth again to mix 
themselves up with the busy affairs of men, and to tread the path of spiritual ambition. 

NOTES. 301 

live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their 
sins, putting them upon the head of the goat; and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness. 
And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited; and he shall let go the goat in the 
wilderness.” It has been stated in a recent Missionary publication, that a custom prevails in Thibet of letting a 
goat annually on a certain festival escape into the desert. In Yucatan, according to Herrera, women shortly after 
childbirth were exorcised; and their sins appear to have been laid upon a vessel full of wine, which a man was 
desired to carry, without looking back, a certain distance out of the city. If it be objected that the Peruvian 
confession was very different from that ordained in the sixteenth chapter of Leviticus, it cannot be denied: but 
neither can the inference which may thence be attempted to be drawn be admitted, that the Jews were not the 
introducers of confession into the New World. There are the strongest grounds for believing that either to Jews 
or Christians the Indians of Peru and Yucatan were indebted for confession ; and the account which Acosta has 
given of the confession of the Peruvians is replete with Indian superstitions and Jewish notions mixed. The Jews 
believed that national and individual misfortunes were generally caused by sin, as many passages from Scripture might 
be adduced to show. They were accustomed to cast lots, as may be proved from the eighth verse of the chapter of 
Leviticus already referred to: “And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord, and the other 
lot for the scape-goat.” Women amongst the Jews were sometimes accustomed to exercise very high functions ; as in 
the fourth verse of the fourth chapter of Judges, it says; “And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she 
judged Israel at that time. And she dwelt under the palm-tree of Deborah, between Ramah and Beth-el in mount 
Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgement.” 

Amongst the crimes which the Indians were specially enjoined to confess, witchcraft* is enumerated; severe 
prohibitions against which may be found in various parts of the Pentateuch. Acosta says, that the Inga after con- 
fession walked into an adjoining river, bidding its waters receive his sins and carry them into the sea, that he might 
be for ever rid of them. In page 212 of the first volume of the Religious Ceremonies of all Nations, the following 
passage occurs: “The ancient Jews formerly laid all their sins upon a he-goat, which afterwards they drove into 
the desert ; but the modern Jews instead of a goat now throw them upon the fish. After dinner they repair to the 
brink of a pond, and there shake their clothes over it with all their force.” This practice is taken from the nine- 
teenth verse of the seventh chapter of the prophet Micah: “ He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us ; 
he will subdue our iniquities ; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.” 

The Jews as well as the Peruvians entertained a notion that the sins of the father were visited upon the children. 
Hence in the ninth chapter of Saint John we are informed, that when Jesus saw the man who had been blind from 
his birth, his disciples asked him, saying, “ Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind 2” 
The idea that the sacrifismg an only son would be meritorious in the eyes of God, and would atone for a father’s 
sins, seems, by a strange perversion of precedent and the blindest superstition, to have been derived from the example 
of Abraham offering up his son Isaac. The Jews were accustomed to practise great austerities : fasting, sackcloth 
and ashes, and cruel voluntary scourgings, were the means which they employed to comply with the injunction con- 
tained in the twenty-sixth and following verses of the twenty-third chapter of Leviticus, and repeated in other parts 
of Scripture: “ And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be 
a day of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall effict your souls, and offer an offering 
made by fire unto the Lord. And ye shall do no work in that same day; for it is a day of atonement, to make an 
atonement for you before the Lord your God. For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, 
he shall be cut off from among his people. And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day, 
the same soul will I destroy from among his people. Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever 
throughout your generations, in all your dwellings. It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your 

* Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live” is a Mosaic ordinance which Saul, the first king of the Jews, expressly chosen by God and 
anointed to the regal dignity by the hands of the prophet Samuel, forgot when he consulted the witch of Endor. Nothing appears more 
unaccountable in Hebrew history, than to find that persons appointed to the highest dignities amongst the Jews by the hand of God, 
so repeatedly and unhesitatingly broke his commandments. Did this, we may inquire, proceed from want of faith on their part, or from 
ignorance of their own national annals? 

(4u ) 

302 NOTES. 

souls: in the ninth day of the month, at even, from even unto even shall ye celebrate your sabbath.” The “ auri 
argentique erogationes” was a Jewish as well as a Peruvian custom. Moses himself says in the thirtieth chapter 
of Exodus: “ And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after 
their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord, when thou numberest them; 
that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them. This they shall give, every one that passeth 
among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half 
shekel shall be the offering of the Lord. Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years 
old and above, shall give an offering unto the Lord. The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less 
than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the Lord, to make an atonement for your souls. And thou shalt 
take the atonement-money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the 
congregation ; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the Lord, to make an atonement for your 
souls.” The usual atonement for the sins of the people was a bullock and two lambs of the first year, which were 
sacrifised daily on the altar of atonement, as was ordained in the thirty-sixth and following verses of the twenty- 
ninth chapter of Exodus: “ And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin-offering for atonement: and thou 
shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it. Seven days 
thou shalt make an atonement for the altar *, and sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth 
the altar shall be holy. Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar ; two lambs of the first year day by 
day continually. The one lamb thou shalt offtr in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even: And 
with.the one lamb a tenth-deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of 
an hin of wine for a drink-offering. And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to 
the meat-offering of the morning, and according to the drink-offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made 
by fire unto the Lord. This shall be a continual burnt-offering throughout your generations at the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord: where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee. And there I will 
meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. And I will sanctify the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron, and his sons, to minister to me in the 
priest's office. And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God. And they shall know that I am 
the Lord their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am the Lord 
their God.” ‘This solemn compact between the Jews and God,—the conditions of which were the performance on 
their part of continual sacrifices of atonement, and on his that he would be their God, and would dwell among them, 
—imposed upon the Jews, as long as the old law should exist, the necessity of perpetual sacrifices. But they deny that 
the old law has ever been abolished, and triumphantly refer to certain passages in the Pentateuch, where the ex- 
pressions everlasting covenant and statute for ever occur. We must not therefore suppose that the Jews, obeying the 
law of Moses where it enjoins circumcision and abstaining from the flesh of swine, would have discontinued sacri- 
fices, and the custom of one brother’s raising up seed to another, on any other account than because the former would 
not have been tolerated by other nations, and the latter would have rendered them odious in countries governed by 
different institutions. But on the supposition that they had in early ages colonized America, can it be doubted 
whether they would not have felt it a duty to revive their old law in all its vigour, and not to omit sacrifices ? Or 
admitting that they might have felt scrupulous as to the place in which these sacrifices ought to be performed,— 
when we recollect that the ten tribes who were under no curse did not go up to Jerusalem to sacrifice,—is it likely 
that those scruples would not have been easily laid aside by the posterity of those who fled from Jerusalem at the 
time of its destruction? Again, it should be remembered that the Jews considered it unlawful to consign their oral 
traditions to writing: but when they feared that those traditions if not written would sink into oblivion, they did not 
hesitate to infringe the law. We are induced, from all these considerations, to believe that the Peruvian sacrifices 
of atonement and burnt-offerings were originally mstituted amongst the Indians by the Jews ; and that time had 
corrupted them, as likewise the feast of the Passover, into a mass of superstitions. Acosta, describing the former in 

* Protestants very frequently turn into ridicule the Catholic custom of consecrating and blessing church bells ; but why should this 

practice appear less reasonable to them, than the making an atonement for an inanimate object, such as an altar, which never could 
have committed sin? 

NOTES. 303 

the twenty-eighth chapter of the fifth book of his History, says: “ Octavo mense Chahua Huarqui, centum oves, 
omnes cxsio colore et Vizcacham referente, cremabantur. Hic mensis cum nostro Julio quadrat. Nono mense 
Yapaquis, centum iterum oves spadicei coloris que prius decollate, ignibus imponebantur cum mille Cuies, ne glacies, 
aérve, ac aquee, aut sol agris damnum darent, immolabantur. Hic Augusto convenit. Decimo mense Coyaraymi, 
centum candide oves villosee cremabantur. Hoc eodem mense, Septembri nostro respondente, festum quoque Situa 
hoc ritu fiebat. Primo mensis die ante lune exortum, magnis clamoribus editis concurrebant, et facibus quas ma- 
nibus ardentes gerebant, sese invicem contundebant, dicentes, exeat malum, excat, id Panconcos appellabant. Hoc 
ludrico finito, ex fonte publico tum lavabantur, tum ex ordine potabant. Hodem hoc mense, Mamocanas superius 
dict magnum placentularam cum victimarum sanguine pistarum numerum Soli offerebant, de quibus deinde frag- 
menta peregrinis distribuebant, et in omnes totius regni Guacas ac Curacas transmittebant, in signum nimirum 
foederis cum Sole et Inga pacti, sicut superius de his fusius enarravimus. Et hodie quoque nonnullis in locis hoc 
ritu lavari et convivari solent; sed furtim id, quod a festo Situa profluxit. Undecimo mense Homaraimi, Pun- 
chaiquis rursus 2quo modo centum oves mactabantur. Quod si circa tempus illud pluviarum inopia esset saturate 
atram ovem in campis firmiter deligabant, et circa eam Chicha quoquo versum in ambitu copiose profundebant, nec 
eidem alimenti quicquam aut pabuli offerebant, prius quam pluvie decidissent. Hic mensis nostro Octobri par est. 
Mense vero novissimo Ayamara, totidem iterum oves offerebantur, et una festum Raymicantara Rayquis agebatur. 
Hoc mense qui nobis November est, pro pueris istis quibus postero mense aures pertundende erant, necessaria omnia 
parabantur, et seniores lustrabantur, et alia queedam similia peragebantur. Festum illud Isuraymi vocatum agunt, 
cum pluvie aut nimis frequentes, aut rare sunt, aut pestis populariter grassatur. Ex festis extraordinariis quorum 
innumera fere erant, nullum Ytu solennius erat. Id nullo stato ratoque tempore, sed cum necessitas aliqua postu- 
laret, celebrabatur. Hoc peracturi, biduo integro jejunant, ab uxoribus abstinent, nec ctbum ullum cum sale aut axt 
paratum gustant, nec de Chicha bibunt, et loco tali conveniunt ubi nec peregrinis, nec ulli animali accessus sit. Tum 
temporis, peculiaribus palliis, vestibus ac indumentis, in hunc usum paratis utuntur, et palliis capiti injectis, lento 
admodum gradu incedunt, ad sonitum tympanorum impulsorum pedes moderantes, nec quicquam vocis ac sermonis 
edentes *. Processionem hanc integra die ac nocte continuabant, et a sequente luce largiter edebant, potabant f, 
et tripudiabant, binis completis diebus ac noctibus jactitantes sese hoc nomine, quasi preces eorum vere exaudite 
sint. Hoc festum etsi hodie. quidem non cum tot ceremoniis et ritibus peragatur ut olim, multa tamen prioribus 
similia° vel dum Indi emulantur, sed in locis secretioribus saltem nec in propatulo. Ipso corporis Dominici die 
choreas Llamallama de Guacon dictas, et similes alias instituunt ; ritus ethnicos in nullo remittentes. Quibus abro- 
gandis etsi presules quidem operose incumbant, passim tamen clanculum hujusmodi subinde agitari solent. Hine 
ergo clare nobis effulget quodnam lucis et tenebrarum, quod veritatis Christiane et Gentilium superstitionum dis- 
crimen sit. Que tamen omnia polydedalus Sathanas promiscue confundere, et nugas suas divine veritati com- 
miscere, nunquam non laborat satagitque.” It should be observed that the animals called sheep by Acosta were 
llamas, which, though a species peculiar to South America and unknown in the other parts of the globe, were 
named sheep by the Spaniards, as well from their resemblance to that animal as from the great utility they 
were of to the Peruvians in supplying them with food and clothing. Although inhabiting the coldest heights of the 
southern range of the Andes, they have not been discovered so far north in America as New Spain and Mexico. 
It is however a very remarkable and no less mysterious fact, that the representation of a sheep or lamb, crowned as it 
were for sacrifice and pierced with a spear, should sometimes occur in the Mexican paintings: Fabrega calls it a 
crowned or sacred rabbit ; and Baron de Humboldt says that, according to traditions which have been preserved to our 
days, it is a symbol of suffering Innocence. The Baron describes it in the following passage, which is extracted from 
his American Monuments: “ Un animal inconnu, orné d'un collier et d'une espéce de harnois, mais percé de dards ; 
Fabrega le nomme lapin couronné, lapin sacré. On trouve cette figure dans plusieurs rituels des anciens Mexicains. 

* Taciturnity is sometimes enjoined to the Jews at their more solemn festivals, and they wear on their heads occasionally a cloak or 
mantle in their synagogues. ; 

+ The Jews, after fasting, often indulged immoderately, like the Corinthians of old, in eating and drinking. How sordid, after all, that 
morality must appear, which chiefly consisted in eating and in refraining from eating. This was the morality of the Pharisees, as Christ 
informs us, who reproaches them for their frequent fasting, that they might appear unto men to fast; and compares them to whitened 
sepulchres, and also taxes them with taking the chief places at feasts. 

304. NOTES. 

D’aprés les traditions qui se sont conservées jusqu’a nos jours, c'est un symbole de l'Innocence souffrante; sous ce 
rapport cette representation allégorique rappelle Pagneau des Hébreux, ou Vidée mystique d'un sacrifice expiatoire 
destiné & calmer la colére de la Divinité. Les dents incisives, la forme de la téte et de la queue, paroissent indiquer 
que le peintre a voulu representer un animal de la famille des rongeurs ; quoique les pieds 4 deux sabots munis 
@un ergot, qui ne touche pas la terre, le rapprochent des ruminans ; je doute que ce soit un cavia ou litvre Mexi- 
cain; seroit-ce quelque mammifére inconnu qui habite au nord du Rio Gila dans Vintéricur des terres vers la partie 
nord-ouest de Amérique?” M. de Humboldt’s description applies to a representation of this animal in the Codex 
Borgianus. It is also twice painted in the twentieth page of the lesser Vatican Manuscript: in the lower compart- 
ment of which it is alive and adorned for sacrifice ; in the upper, dead, with its side pierced with a spear. If the 
rabbit had been an animal known only to the Mexicans by tradition, an indistinct recollection of which had been pre- 
served by means of their ancient paintings, it would not be difficult to suppose that the figures under consideration 
were intended to represent it; but as there was no animal with which the Mexicans were better acquainted, this 
cannot be the case. In natural history likewise the teeth and the feet are very decisive of the species of animals, 
whilst the shape of the ears and of the tail is scarcely considered. And here it will be observed, that the configuration 
of the head of the upper figure is much less like a rabbit than that of the lower, whilst the shape of the nose in both 
is decidedly different. The same animal is also painted variously in different Mexican paintings, but the characteristic 
mark of a divided hoof seems generally preserved. In the second page of the painting preserved in the Royal Li- 
brary at Dresden, the style of which differs exceedingly from that of the Mexican paintings, it seems to be four times 
represented: the upper figures appear to be descending from the clouds; and the lower is recumbent, emblematical 
perhaps, like the lamb of the Hebrews, of innocence suffering under temporary persecution; whilst the figure above 
may possibly represent the genius of Evil oppressing his hapless victim: the long tail and the protruding tongue 
common to animals like sheep, cows and horses, which graze,—but which the rabbit species are without,—as well as 
the divided hoof, sufficiently mark that this animal is of another class. The heads of the three other figures, which are 
themselves a combination of real and imaginary forms, can be referred to no particular species; but nature preponderates 
in the shape of the body, legs, and feet of the animals intended to be represented, and plainly indicates the class to 
which they belong. It deserves also to be remarked, that the same figure of a lamb with its belly formed of the sun’s 
disk is painted on the pyramidal roof of a temple in the sixth page of the Borgian MS.; and in a curious representa- 
tion of Quecalcoatle, as it is to be supposed, seated on a dragon or leviathan, which occurs in the fourteenth page of 
the Mexican painting that formerly belonged to Archbishop Laud, and which is at present preserved in the Bodleian 
Library at Oxford, the figure of some other perhaps unknown species of animal occurs ; it differs from the rabbit in 
having a long tail and in the formation of its legs, although it has a somewhat similar head: the meaning of this 
symbol, it seems difficult to conjecture. That the rabbit, as Fabrega supposes, was a type amongst the ancient Mexicans 
of suffering innocence there is no reason to doubt; and the idea of generosity protecting the innocent from the 
powerful, deceitful and wicked, could not be better expressed than in the seventy-fifth page of the lesser Vatican 
painting, where an eagle is represented rescuing a rabbit from the fangs of a serpent. The bird of Jove there crushes 
the noxious progeny of the earth; and the unequal conflict of evil with good terminates in the serpent being 
compelled to surrender up his prey. It is probable that the hieroglyphic by which the Mexicans signified suffering 
innocence was originally a lamb, imperfect representations of which are found in the Mexican paintings, and which 
in process of time was changed into a rabbit, an animal with which they were better acquainted; traces of the 
former still continuing to exist in the Mexican paintings, and to be accounted for on the same principle as Baron 
de Humboldt explains the presence of the words “ Tulanian hululaez” in the song which the people of Cholula were 
accustomed to sing in dancing round their teocalli, and which he says belong to no language now in existence in 
Mexico: “ Dans toutes les parties du globe, sur le dos des Cordilléres, comme a Vile de Samothrace dans la mer. 
Egée, des fragmens de langues primitives se sont conservés dans les rites religieux.” But from whom, it may be in- 
quired, did the Mexicans borrow the original symbol? The words “Tulanian hululaez” form a metrical line, the 
measure of which is the same as that of the 4ntiphonarium Benchorense mentioned by Montfaucon and Muraton, 
which the Irish monks of that monastery were accustomed to sing in commemoration of their deceased abbots, and 
which begins, if we are not mistaken, with the words “ A solis usque cardine.” 

Diego de Rosales observes in the following passage, extracted from his inedited History of Chile, that the Indians 
on making a treaty of peace were accustomed to kill a sheep, like the Jews making use of the body of the animal, 

NOTES. | 805 

figuratively to denounce vengeance against whomsoever should violate it: “ Hn otras muchas cosas observan muchos 
ritos y ceremonias, que usaron naciones muy capazes y politicas; sea una el matar una oveja quando capitulan 
pazes. De Abram refiere la Sagrada Escritura, que celebrando la confederacion de amistad con Dios, le mando que 
partiesse una vacca, y un carnero, y assi mismo una cabra; y esplicando esta ceremonia Nicolao de Lira, dice que era 
costumbre de muchas naciones quando capitulaban pazes entresi, dividir una res por medio, y passar por alli los que 
se confederaban, para dar a entender que los que quebrantassen las pazes, merecian ser divididos como aquella res. Y 
esto mismo quiere significar estos Indios, matando la oveja de la tierra, y sacandola el corazon, que merese se haga lo 
mismo con el que faltara a la paz. Y assilo hazen quando cautivan 4 alguno que les ha hecho traicion, como 4 los de 
su propria nacion por aver les dejado por unirse con el Espafiol; y para unirse ellos con mas fuerte lazo, y en un 
mismo corazon, comen el de la oveja, y el del cautivo que assi matan.”—Historia del Chile, lib. i. cap. xxi. n. 5. 
“In many other things they observe many rites and ceremonies customary amongst acute and cultivated nations ; one 
is the killing of a sheep when they make a treaty of peace. The Holy Scripture relates of Abram, that when he 
celebrated the covenant of amity with God, he commanded him to divide a cow, and a ram, and likewise a goat ; and 
Nicholas de Lira explaining this ceremony, says that it was customary with many nations, when they made treaties 
of peace with each other, to divide something in half, and to cause those who entered into the confederacy to pass 
between the parts, in order to signify that those who should break the treaty would deserve to be divided like that 
thing. Which is precisely what these Indians mean by killing the sheep of the country and tearing out its heart; 
namely, that he would deserve the same thing to be done to him who should violate the peace. This they do, 
therefore, when they take prisoner any one who has been guilty of treason towards them, as also any of their own 
countrymen who have forsaken them to join the Spaniards; and in order to unite themselves together by a stronger 
bond and in the same heart, they eat the heart of the sheep and that of the prisoner whom they put to death in this 
manner.” The text of Scripture to which Rosales refers, relating to God’s covenant with Abram, is the following, 
which is taken from the fifteenth chapter of Genesis: “ And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, 
and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon. And he took 
unto him all these, and divided them in the mids¢, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he 

” 

not.” And in the seventeenth and eighteenth verses the same chapter adds, “ And it came to pass, that when 
the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp, that passed between those pieces. 
In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of 
Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates.” In the eighteenth and nineteenth verses of the thirty-fourth chapter 
of Jeremiah, the dividing a calf into halves and passing between the parts is expressly said to have been the ceremony 
which the Jews performed on making their covenant with God: “ And I will give the men that have transgressed 
my covenant, which have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made before me when they cut 
the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof: the princes of Judah and the princes of Jerusalem, the 
eunuchs and the priests, and all the people of the land which passed between the parts of the calf; I will even give 
them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life; and their dead bodies shall be 

cb) 

for meat unto the fowls of heaven and to the beasts of the earth.” The festival of Capacreyme, which the Peruvians 
celebrated in the month of Rayme, the first month of their year, and which Acosta describes in the twenty-third 
chapter of the fifth book of his Natural and Moral History of the Indies, and supposes to have, been instituted by 
the Devil in the New World, in imitation of the sacrament of the Eucharist which Christ had ordained in the old 
continent, was probably originally the feast of the Passover, which time, traditions and fanaticism, had grossly 
corrupted and changed. The following is the chapter of Acosta referred to, which is taken from the Latin 
translation of the original work, inserted in the third volume of the ninth part of De Bry’s Collection of Voyages. 
It may here be remarked, that Acosta’s History in Spanish, whatever may be the cause, is rare and difficult to be 
procured, and that in the translation it has been abridged. “ Sathane scelerata arrogantia, ut jam aliquoties 
diximus, et meta et modo caruit. Nam. non superstitionibus solum et sacrificiis, verum etiam ceremoniis sacra- 
mentalibus quas Salvator Christus in fidelium solatium et refectionem statuit, divinam sibi autoritatem conciliare 
ausus est. Comprimis autem sacram Eucharistiam, quem thesaurum pretiosissimum servamus, distinctis aliquot 
modis emulari coepit, ut nulla re inausa et intentaté dubias hominum mentes perditioni eterne intricaret; quod hoc 
fere modo prestitit. Peruanis mos est, ut primo annz mense, quem Rayme vocant, appellente, is cum Decembri 
nostro convenit, festum Capacreyme agitent; quo sacrificiis suis ordinariis multiplices ritus ac ceremonias aliquam 

(41) 

306 NOTES. 

multes diebus exhibent, et hoc tempore nulli peregrino in auld Cuscand morari licebat. Finito festo, advenis rursus 
accessus dabatur ut sacrificiis et ipsi interessent; quibus deinde sacramenta hoc modo conferebant. Mamaconas 
Solis, quas superius moniales diximus, ew farind maiis cum sanguine alborum arietum eodem die mactatorum, Hassan 
pinsebant et subigebant, ew qud postea placentulas, eodem die hostie vice offerri solitas, concinnabant. Voc facto, ew 
diversis provincus infiniti homines confluebant, quos in constituto loco sacerdotes ex ordine considere JSaciebant. Hi vero 
sacerdotes posteri ex generatione Iluqui Yupangi erant. Considenti unicuilibet de placentis dictis ministrantes, 
dicentesque ideo de fragmentis istis se distribuere, ut participantes, illorum medio, Inge Peruanorum regi unirentur et 
JSedere cum eo perpetuo coalescerent. Quin et adhortabantur communicantes, ne quam sinistram et disconvenientem 
Ingz mentionem ullibi facerent *, sed in rebus ipsi promiscue omnibus toto pectore faverent, vivoque eundem amore 
jugiter prosequerentur, cujus debiti hanc porrectam micam testem jam acciperent, que perjurium et violatam fidem 
quocunque tempore haud cunctanter proditura sit. Placentze vero iste magnis ex auro argentoque lancibus prefere- 
bantur, quas huic uni usui paratas habebant. Peregrini vero ubi fragmentum de placenta acceperunt, Soli de istis 
beneficiis gratias devotas fundebant, et tum verbis, tum vultibus, ingentis gaudii signum edebant, dejerantes quod omni 
vite suze tempore, nec contra Solem, nec Ingam, quicquam vel verbis vel opere inique machinaturi sint, sed quod 
utrisque in omnibus fidelem operam et obedientiam perpetuo prestare velint. Cujus in rei testimonium indubitatum 
micam oblatam quoque in corpus suum jam ingerunt.’ Diabolicas has ceremonias equa ratione mense quoque decimo 
repetebant, quem Coyaraime vocabant, in Septembrem nostrum incidentem, et hoc eorum festum quoque, preecipuorum 
unum, patria lingua Citua vocabatur. Nec vero solum viritim hoc sacramentum distribuebant, sed placentas istas etiam 
ad omnes Guacas et finitima idola per omne regnum transmittebant. Plurimi eas etiam ultro acceptum longis viis 
accedebant, qui domum ad suos reversi, praetendebant hoc a Sole sacramentum sibi traditum esse, in signum et vin- 
culum ut illum perpetuo honore et cultu venerarentur. Cacique placentas hujusmodi multas dono accipiebant. Et hic 
mos superstitione plenissimus usque ad tempora Inge Yupanguy duraverat, qui bono fine plerasque leges ritusque ac 
ceremonias abrogans, Numee Romano quadamtenus se similem prebuit.” The Mexicans celebrated a festival called 
Etzalqualiztli, in which eating a paste made of the flour of beans constituted the principal religious ceremony. It is 
not improbable that this festival had some relation with the Peruvian Capacreyme, since, infinitely numerous as were 
the nations inhabiting the vast continent of South America and the West Indian Islands, the Tultecas seem, with a 
few exceptions, to have successfully endeavoured to spread their superstitious rites and ceremonies amongst them. 
The Ingas went to war for the express purpose of bringing other Indian tribes over to their faith. Accordingly we 
find, that from New Mexico to the extreme province of Chile which resisted successfully the invasion of the Ingas, 
the same religion with different modifications of rites and ceremonies prevailed; and circumcision, though not 
universally practised, was one of its characteristics. Acosta has observed that it was a Peruvian custom to send to 
the different provinces of the kingdom a portion of the victims, or of their blood kneaded into a cake, as a sign of 
their confederacy with the Inga and the Sun, “in signum nimirum foederis cum Sole et Inga pacti.” We are 
informed in the nineteenth chapter of Judges, that when the Levite whose concubine had been abused by the 
Gibeonites, who were of the tribe of Benjamin, wished to revenge himiself by the destruction of the whole tribe of 
Benjamin, he cut the body of the woman who had died into twelve pieces and sent them into all the coasts of Israel, 
thereby to excite a confederacy of all the other tribes against the tribe of Benjamin. “ And when he was come 
into his house he took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve 
pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel.” The confederacy which was accordingly formed was so strong, 
that the entire tribe of Benjamin, men, women and children, with the exception of six hundred men who had 
sought refuge on the rock of Rimmon, were exterminated by the other tribes. The Lord is said to have fought 
against the Benjamites in the thirty-fifth verse of the twentieth chapter of the same book. Although, therefore, it is 
said in the preceding chapter, that this mode of exciting a confederacy was a new thing in Israel, still, as it did not 
meet with the Lord’s disapprobation and was attended with such success, the Jews it is to be expected would have 

* The Jews were commanded in the Pentateuch not to speak ill of the ruler of their people; which, from the ordinance which follows, 
viz. “ not to revile the gods,” seems to have been a caution to them, in case they should be reduced under a foreign yoke, to regulate their 
conduct accordingly. Saint Jude seems to allude to this commandment where he says that “ Michael the archangel, when contending 
with the Devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation.” What a latitude, notwithstanding, 
Ezekiel and all the prophets give themselves ! 

NO Oia S | 2 SOF 

long retained a grateful recollection of the assistance which God vouchsafed to that confederacy, and might in 
some after age have felt inclined to revive the memorial of it by instituting some analogous ceremony, on the 
occasion of their solemnizing confederacies, divested of such circumstances as the peculiarity of the ancient precedent 
alone warranted. It would even appear that it had been an old custom of the Israelites, when they wished to unite 
all the tribes in a confederacy, to send portions of slain animals throughout the land; since it says inthe sixth and 
following verses of the eleventh chapter of the First Book of Samuel, “ And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when 
he heard these tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly. And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, 
and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth 
after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the Lord fell on the people, and 
they came out with one consent. And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three hundred 
thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.” The following verses, taken from the twelfth chapter of Exodus, 
descriptive of the institution of the feast of the Passover, deserve to be considered in connection with the passages 
printed in italics of Acosta’s description of the Peruvian festival of Capacreyme: “This month shall be unto you 
the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.” “Seven days shall ye eat unleavened 
bread*; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from 
the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.” “ And the Lord said unto Moses and 
Aaron, This is the ordinance of the Passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof.” “ Your lamb shall be without 
blemish, a male of the first year; ye shall take it out from the sheep or from the goats.” The Jews might possibly 
have regarded spots as a blemish, and therefore have chosen alamb of a white colour for sacrifice. “And ye shall 
let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with 
fire.’ “ And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are; and when J see the blood I will 
pass over you: and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.” “ Seven 
days shall there be no leaven found in your houses, for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul 

* Sahagun says, in mentioning in the fourteenth chapter of his first book the festival of Xochilhuitl, which was dedicated to the god 
Macuilxochitl, that the Mexicans ate on one of their fasts unleavend bread: “ Otros ayunaban comiendo panes azimos, esto es, que 
el maiz de que se hacia el pan que comian, no se cocia con cal antes de molerlo, que esto es como ormenta (fermento), sino molian el 
mahiz seco, y de aquella arina hacian pan, y cocianlo en el comal, y no comian chilli, ni otra cosa con ello.” Historia Universal de las 
Cosas de Nueva Espafia. ‘ Others kept the fast eating unleavened bread, that is to say, the maize of which they made the bread in- 
tended on that occasion to be eaten was not, previously to being ground, boiled with lime, since that was as it were leaven; but they 
ground the dry maize, and made their bread out of the flour, and prepared it on the comal, and ate neither chilli nor any thing else with 
it.” Sahagun, by making use of the phrase “ panes azimos,” means distinctly, ¢ unleavened bread ;’ the Spanish word azimos being derived 
from the Greek &fyj.0s, which signifies ‘ unleavened,’ from which was derived the apellation *A¢yza, which the Greeks gave to the Jewish 
festival of unleavened bread. It is not a little extraordinary that the Mexicans should have named one of their principal fasts, that on 
which they ate unleavened bread, Azomalqualo, since this name is so very like that of *Atuze, which was applied to the Jewish 
festival immediately preceding the feast of the Passover, being compounded of azomal, the name which the Mexicans either gave 
to the fast itself, or to the unleavened bread, and qualo, which signifies in the Mexican language ‘to eat,’ as in the word teoqualo ¢ to 
eat God,’ the term which the Mexicans applied to their mode of communion. In the eighth chapter of the third book of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain mention is made of the fast of Azomalqualo. 

+ Acosta says, describing the festival which the citizens and merchants of Cholula celebrated to Quecalcoatle, that they sacrificed a 
slave to him, who it was requisite should be without spot, wound, or scar, “ omni tum macula, tum plagd, ac cicatrice carentem.” 
Indie Occidentalis Historia, lib. v. cap. xxx. And Sahagun affirms that the Mexicans sacrificed in the month of Toxcatl a slave of the 
same kind to Tezcatlipoca : “ Al quinto mes llamaban Toxcatl; el primero dia de este mes hacian gran fiesta & honra del dios que llaman 
Titlacaoa, y por otro nombre Tezcatlipuca; & este tenian por Dios de los dioses. A su honra mataban en esta fiesta un mancebo 
escogido que ninguna tacha tubiese en su cuerpo.” Historia Universal de las Cosas de Nueva Espafia, lib. ii. cap. iv. 

{ Baron de Humboldt remarks that the Muyscas, or Mozcas, a civilized nation of the kingdom of New Granada, celebrated the com- 
mencement of each of their indictions by a sacrifice; “ the cruel ceremonies of which, as far as our limited means of information permit 
us to judge, seem all to refer to astrological notions. ‘The human victim was called Guesa ‘the wanderer’ or ¢ houseless ;’ and Quihica ¢a 
door,’ because his death announced the opening, as it might be called, of anew cycle of one hundred and eighty-five moons.” “ Le 
commencement de chaque indiction étoit marqué par un sacrifice dont les cérémonies barbares, d’aprés le peu que nous en savons, 
paroissent toutes avoir eu rapport a des idées astrologiques. La victime humaine étoit appellée Guesa, errant, sans maison, et Quihica, 
porte, parceque sa mort annongoit pour ainsi dire ’ouverture d’un nouveau cycle de cent quatre-vingt-cing lunes.” 

If the word Guesa signified to wander, in the sense of ‘to pass by,’ or ‘not to enter’ a house, connected as it is with the other word 
Quihica ‘a door, this Muysca sacrifice would seem rather to refer to the Hebrew lamb than to astronomical notions. The pure essence 
of the stars can hardly be associated in the minds of the most savage nations with bloody religious rites. 

308 NOTES. 

shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger or born in the land.” From this last 
verse it appears that strangers were obliged to comply with some of the ceremonies of the feast of the Passover, 
but they were forbidden to eat the Passover. “A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof” “But 
every man’s servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.” Since the 
Ingas of Peru considered themselves the representatives of Viracocha, or the supreme Deity, the covenant with 
them was in reality with Viracocha himself. Not only in the sacrifice of the Passover but in other sacrifices, the 
eating the victim after it had been killed was strictly enjomed to the Jews; and the sacrifice would have been 
imperfect without it, as various texts of Scripture may be adduced to prove. It says in the twenty-ninth chapter of 
Exodus, “ And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and scethe his flesh in the holy place. And Aaron and 
his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, by the door of the tabernacle of the 
congregation. And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: 
but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy.” And in the sixth chapter of Leviticus, “ And the Lord 
spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin-offering: in the 
place where the burnt-offering is killed shall the sin-offering be killed before the Lord: it is most holy. The priest 
that offereth it for sin shall eat tt; in the holy place shall tt be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation.” And in the twenty-ninth verse of the same chapter, “ All the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it 

5) 

is most holy ;” and in the seventh chapter of the same book, “ And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offerings 
for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered ; he shall not leave any of it until the morning. But 
if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his 
sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten. But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice 
on the third day shall be burnt with fire. And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offerings be eaten at 
all on the third day it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be zmputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an 
abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.” It is further also ordained, in the nineteenth 
chapter of Leviticus, “ And if ye offera sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the Lord, ye shall offer it at your own will. 
It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow: and if ought remain until the third day, it shall be 
burned in the fire. And if it be eaten at all on the third day it is abominable ; it shall not be accepted. Therefore 
every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the Lord; and that 
soul shall be cut off from among his people.” And it says again in the twenty-ninth and thirtieth verses of the 
twenty-second chapter of the same book, “ And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the Lord, offer 
it at your own will. On the same day 7 shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: I am the 
Lord.” And in the eighteenth chapter of the book of Numbers, “ And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also 
have given thee the charge of my heave-offerings of all the hallowed things of the children of Israel; unto thee 
have I given them, by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever. This shall be thine of the 
most holy things reserved from the fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat-offering of theirs, and every sin- 
offering of theirs, and every trespass-offering of theirs, which they shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee, 
and for thy sons. In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat it: it shall be holy unto thee. And 
this is thine; the heave-offering of their gift, with all the wave-offerings of the children of Israel: I have given 
them unto thee, and to thy sons, and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever; every one that is clean 
in thy house shall eat of it.” “ Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.”. A further proof of the importance 
attached by the ceremonial law of Moses to the act of eating the flesh of certain kind of sacrifices is found 
in the tenth chapter of Leviticus ; “ And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons 
that were left, Take the meat-offering that remaineth of the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and eat it without 
leaven beside the altar; for it is most holy. And ye shall eat it in the holy place, because it is thy due, and thy 
sons’ due, of the sacrifices of the Lord made by fire: for so lam commanded. And the wave-breast and heave-shoulder 
shall ye eat in a clean place ; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for they be thy due, and thy sons’ due, 
which are given out of the sacrifices of peace-offerings of the children of Israel. ‘The heave-shoulder and the wave- 
breast shall they bring, with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave-offering before the Lord; 
and it shall be thine, and thy sons’ with thee, by a statute for ever; as the Lord hath commanded. And Moses 
diligently sought the goat of the sin-offering, and, behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, 
the sons of Aaron, which were left alive, saying, Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin-offering in the holy place, 

NOTES. 309 

seeing it is most holy, and God hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement 
for them before the Lord? Behold, the blood of it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have 
eaten it in the holy place, as I commanded. And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they offered their 
‘sin-offering and their burnt-offering before the Lord; and such things have befallen me: and if J had eaten the sin- 
offermg to-day, should it have been accepted in the sight of the Lord? And when Moses heard that, he was 
content.” The things to which Aaron alludes as having befallen him are mentioned in the beginning of the chapter: 
« And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense 
thereon, and offered strange fire* before the Lord, which he commanded them ‘not. And there went out fire 
from the Lord, and devoured them ; and they died before the Lord. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that 
the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. 
And Aaron held his peace.” 

How unaccountable it appears that the immediate family of Moses, his sister, his brother, and his nephews,—(his 
wife and sons are passed over in silence, and little is said of his father-in-law Jethro, who was a heathen priest,)— 
should all have rebelled against his authority, and have drawn down upon themselves the severe displeasure of 
God; and that Moses himself, who had performed so many signs and wonders, should be liable to the imputation 
of having had his faith staggered when the people complained for food in the desert! which charge is insinuated 
against him in the eleventh. chapter of Numbers. It is evident from the texts of Scripture which have been 
adduced, how incumbent was the duty on the priests and Levites to eat the flesh of certain sacrifices: it even appears 
that their own consecration and sanctification, as well as the acceptance of the atonement by God in favour of those 
who offered the sacrifice, depended on their so doing. The nature, or rather the end of the sacrifice, and not the 
species of the animal offered, determined whether or not sacrifices were to be eaten by the Hebrew priests +. The 
fanaticism of the Jews {, and their blind adherence to the letter of the law, disregarding its spirit, and corrupting it 
with their traditions, have been in all ages so great, even when they were in a state of grace and God's peculiar 
people, that when time at last draws aside the mysterious veil which has so long concealed from view the ancient 
history of America, with which the proceedings of their descendants seem to have been so completely interwoven, 
—we need feel less of surprise than horror, at finding into what itis probable that their ancient rites had degene- 
rated. We read in Scripture that the Jews were accustomed to devote to God their enemies ; and we know that they 
never spared any devoted thing. It says, in the twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth verses of the twenty-seventh 
chapter of Leviticus, “ Notwithstanding, no devoted thing that a man shall devote unto the Lord, of all that he 

* The sound of holy water hardly shocks the ears of a Protestant; but holy fire is something to which we cannot reconcile our minds. 
Nevertheless the Jews did really attribute as much holiness to the element of fire, as Christians of any sect can do to that of water: and 
being commanded, in the following verse of the thirty-fifth chapter of Exodus to kindle no fire on the Sabbath-day, (« Ye shall kindle no fire 
throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath-day,”) it necessarily followed that they must have considered it a religious duty, either to 
keep in their fires on Friday night, or to extinguish them then and to rekindle them on Sunday morning: and either way, the superstitious 
notions which the Mexicans entertained about extinguishing and kindling their fires might have been derived from the Jews. 

+ It is evident that by the Mosaic law, the perfection of the sacrifice, and the efficacy of the atonement made for the sins of the people, 
depended upon the flesh of the immolated victim being eaten. And hence the old Jewish sacrifices and the paschal lamb were considered 
by the early Christians as the type of the sacrifice of Christ, and of the real presence in the Sacrament. It has become the doctrine 
of later ages, that both prophecies and types need not in their fulfilment and manifestation be complete in all their parts: and hence 
Protestants ridicule the notion of transubstantiation, and have pronounced it to. be impossible, by an argument contained in the 

following distich— i ; ' 
«“ Hic ubi sum, non sum, sed sum ubi non sum, 

Sum nec in ambobus, sum sed utroque loco.” 

{ When we recollect the extravagancies which, in our own enlightened age and in this free country, the deluded followers of Joanna 
Southcote have been guilty of,—what fanaticism can appear to us too great for Jews to have been seized with in the dark ages? Or how 
can we tell, when, raging from persecution and fleeing to some remote corner of the earth, where they got the upper hand of their 
enemies, in what sense they might have interpreted the following passage of the forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah: * Lift up thine eyes 
round about, and behold, all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee 
with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth.”? We understand Isaiah to mean in this verse the Jewish 
children, which were to grow up ornaments to their parents. But.what, if they understood it to refer to their enemies, and accordingly 
instituted, as a fulfilment of prophecy in the New World, the custom of clothing themselves on solemn festivals in the skins of some 
of their enemies whom they had taken prisoners in war ? 

(4x ) 

310 NOTES. 

hath, both of man and heast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed, every devoted thing is 
most holy unto the Lord. None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed; but shall surely bé put to 
death.” In compliance with which injunction, Jephthah sacrificed his own daughter,—Moses caused the women of 
Midian and their children, whom the captains of thousands had spared, to be killed,—and Samuel, the high priest of 
the Lord, as he says himself in the fifteenth chapter of his First Book, “hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in 
Gilgal,’ whom Saul had taken prisoner and granted his life. The story of Jephthah, as told in the eleventh chapter 
of the Book of Judges, is in all its circumstances much more affecting and interesting than Joseph’s recognitiori 
of his brethren which is so frequently referred to, and would form a fine subject for a tragedy. A victorious 
general returns covered with glory from battle:—he has made a previous vow to Heaven, in the event of victory, to 
sacrifice the first object that shall meet him,—and that object is his daughter whom he tenderly loved,—dreads 
to behold, and cannot save! The magnanimity of the victim increases the compassion felt towards her. The 
writer of the Book of Judges thus records the fatal consequences of Jephthah’s vow: “ Then the Spirit of the Lord 
came upon Jephthah ; and he passed over Gilead and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpch of Gilead, and from 
Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon. And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and 
said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, then it shall be, that whatsoever 
cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely 
be the Lord’s, and I will offer it up fora burnt-offering. So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to 
fight against them; and the Lord delivered them into his hands. And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou 
come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the 
children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel. And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, 
behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only child: beside her 
he had neither son nor daughter. And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, 
my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my 
mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back. And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth 
unto the Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the Lord hath 
taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon. And she said unto her father, Let 
this thing be done for me; let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail 
my virginity, I and my fellows. And he said,Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her 
companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains. And it came to pass at the end of two months, that 
she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed *. And she knew no man. 
And it was a custom in Israel, that the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the 
Gileadite four days in a year.” Moses thus relates, in the thirty-first chapter of Numbers, the destruction of the 
devoted women and children of Midian: “And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them, and 
Phineas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand. 
And they warred against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded + Moses: and they slew all the males. And they 
slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and 
Reba, five kings of Midian: Balaam also, the son of Beor, they slew with the sword. And the children of Israel 
took all the women of Midian captives, and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks, 
and all their goods. And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all their goodly castles, with fire. And 
they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and of beasts. And they brought the captives, and the prey, 
and the spoil, unto Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp 
at the plains of Moab, which are by Jordan near Jericho. And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes 
of the congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp. And Moses was wroth with the officers of the 

%* That is to say, offered her up as a burnt-offering. This tragical history seems to have given rise to the Mexican tradition of the 
cruel sacrifice of the daughter of the king of Culhuacan, who was afterwards deified by them, and worshiped under the name of 
Tonantzin, which signifies, ‘our ancestor.’ They say that she was the first woman sacrificed by them; but they afterwards instituted 
sacrifices of women, accompanied with the stripping off of their skins, in commemoration of her. 

+ It is unfortunate that the “ Book of the Wars of the Lord,” which is referred to in the fourteenth verse of the twenty-first chapter 
of Numbers, should, with other- portions of Scripture, have been lost, as it would have thrown much light on the proceedings of 

those early times. 

NOTES. Jit 

host, with the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from the battle. And Moses said 
unto them, Have-ye saved all the women alive? Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel 
of Balaam, to commit trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the con- 
gregation of the Lord. Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath 
known man by lying with him. But all the women-children that have not known a man by lying with him, keep 
alive for yourselves.” 

When the Spaniards first entered Mexico, they found that it was the custom of the Mexicans to sacrifice, in the 
court of the Teocalli or temple, before the shrine of their god, allprisoners taken in war. So anxious on all occa- 
sions were the Mexicans to take prisoners alive for that purpose, that many Spaniards, whom they might easily 
have killed in the heat of the combat, owed to this chance their preservation, being rescued by their companions 
from the hands of those who were dragging them away to sacrifice. The Mexicans ate the flesh of some of 
their human sacrifices*; but, as Gomara observes, were never seen to ¢aste their blood. By which he seems to 
insinuate that, like the Jews, they were forbidden to drink blood. Their priests, after having flayed other 
human victims, clothed themselves in their skins and went about the city asking alms: and the heads of all their 
sacrificed prisoners were hung up in a building fronting the principal gate of the temple. If Jephthah sacri- 
ficed his own daughter as a burnt-offering to God, isit too much to suppose that the Jews, who proceeded in remote 
ages to America, where they perhaps at first peaceably pursued the occupations of colonists, becoming afterwards 
harassed by unprovoked wars on the part of the Indians, (as Montecinio says was the case with the Jews discovered 
by him in the neighbourhood of Carthagena, as they informed him through an interpreter,) might in their fury have 
devoted them to God, and sworn that they would devour their flesh as that of immolated victims? Or, if the infatua- 
tion of Jephthah was so great that he could not perceive that, although the letter of the law required that those who 
were devoted of men should surely be put to death, still an impious vow was not binding; or, that where a mental 
reservation could exist, in a case like his, the unfortunate victim of a rash vow ought to have the full benefit of the 
plea; (for we can scarcely imagine that Jephthah contemplated in the first instance, when he made his vow, sacri- 
ficing any other victim than an animal,—or what an example that would have been for a leader of Israel to have set 
to the people! and how dangerous might have been the precedent of victory following such a vow!)—may it not be 
supposed that the fanatical Jews of the New World might have considered it obligatory on them to eat the flesh of 
their sacrificed victims, according to the letter of the law regarding sacrifices of atonement, and that these sacrifices 
might have been viewed by the Mexicans in that light $? At least, we know that the Peruvians sacrificed annually 
two children as an offering of atonement for the sins of the Inga,—“diciendo, que el pecado que su Rey y Seftor 
ubiesse echo, lo pagaban aquellos inocentes en aquel sacrificio :” “saying, that those innocents would by that 
sacrifice atone for the sins which their king and lord had committed.” This curious fact is stated by Rosales in the 
second chapter of the third book of his inedited History of Chile. And it also deserves to be remarked, that 
Benjamin of Tudela, a Jew, declares that in his travels in Asia he found that it was a custom with some of his 
brethren (Asiatic Jews) to sacrifice children. It is not intended, by alledging such facts, to calumniate or wound the 
feelings of any class of men, but merely to elicit historic truth. Fortunately for the world, both the Jews and 

* All the Spanish authors agree, that no sufferings from famine could induce the Mexicans, when closely besieged by Cortes, to eat 
the flesh of their countrymen who had been killed: whence it must be inferred that they only ate the flesh of sacrificed and devoted 
victims. The Jews were less able to withstand the torments of hunger. 

+ Many persons have attempted to prove the humanity of the laws contained in the Pentateuch, from the fact of the Jews being 
forbidden to drink blood. But since they are forbidden in the same ordinance to eat fat; the only inference which can be justly drawn is, 
that they were a cruel people among whom it became necessary to enact such a law. The prohibition alluded to is contained in the 
seventeenth verse of the third chapter of Leviticus: ‘“ It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout all your dwellings, 
that ye eat neither fat nor blood.” 

+ Torquemada, in the twenty-sixth chapter of the fourteenth book of his Indian Monarchy, says: “ En esta Nueva Espafia no la 
comian tan de proposito, segun lo tengo averiguado, sino sola aquella que era de sacrificios, porque la tenian por cosa como sagrada, y 
mas se movian G esto por religion que por vicio.” ‘In New Spain they ate human flesh, not so much from inclination, as the fact has 
been verified by me, since they only ate the flesh of sacrifices, as because they considered it holy,—which custom they adopted rather from 
religious motives than from vice.’ Whatever might have been the cause of the Mexicans first eating the flesh of human sacrifices and 
considering it a religious thing so to do, it is probable that hence cannibalism spread itself over many provinces of America and some of 
the West Indian islands; and that the less civilized Indian tribes, following the example of the more powerful states, adopted as a 
common practice that which with them was purely a religious rite. 

319 NOTES. 

Christians of the present age are very different from those of past times; and the rage of persecution on the one 
side, and of fanaticism on the other, has long since subsided. We must further observe, that as amongst the Jews 
it was customary for the priests to flay the victims, and afterwards to take their skins,—as may be proved from the 
following texts of Scripture, (taken from the twenty-ninth chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles, and the 
seventh chapter of Leviticus,) “But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt-offerings : 
wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them, till the work was ended, and until the other priests had sancti- 
fied themselves; for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.” “And the 
priest that offereth any man’s burnt-offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt-offering 
which he hath offered,’—so the Mexican priests were accustomed, on the festival named Tlaxipehualiztli, to flay 
the victims; and not only to take, but to clothe themselves in their skins. It has already been remarked that the 
Mexicans hung up the heads of their sacrificed enemies. And this also appears to have been a Jewish practice, as 
the following quotation from the twenty-fifth chapter of Numbers will show: “ And the Lord said unto Moses, 
Take alt the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that the fierce anger of the 
Lord may be turned away from Israel. And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that 
were joined unto Baal-peor. And, behold, one of the children of Israel came, and brought unto his brethren a 
Midianitish woman, in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who 
were weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the 
son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand; and he 
went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman 
through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel. And those that died in the plague were 
twenty and four thousand. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of 
Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, (while he was zealous for my sake among 
them,) that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy. Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my cove- 
nant of peace. And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; 
because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.” From the command which 
was given to Moses, to take all the heads of the people and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, and 
there being as many as twenty-four thousand heads, it is probable that Moses constructed some wooden scaffolding 
or stone building with niches, in which to place them. Gomara thus describes the building in Mexico appropriated 
to receive the skulls of the immolated victims : “ Without the temple, and facing its principal gate, although at a 
greater distance from it than a long stone’s-throw, was a charnel-house for the heads of men taken prisoners in war, 
and sacrificed with the knife. It resembled a theatre, being of greater length than breadth, and built of lime and 
stone, with stairs. Between stone and stone, skulls were inserted, with the teeth outwards. On the top and at 
the bottom of the theatre were two towers, formed out of mortar and skulls only, with the teeth outwards; in 
which, as there was no stone or any other material, (at least visible,) the walls had a strange and striking 
appearance. On the top of the theatre there were more than sixty lofty beams, placed at the distance of four or 
five palms from each other, and full of laths from top to bottom, with a certain space between lath and lath. 
These laths formed numerous crosses on the beams, and each division of a cross or lath was inserted through five 
skulls, by a hole bored through the temples. Andrew de Tapia, who gave me this information, and Gonzalo de 
Umbria, once counted them; and found a hundred and thirty-six thousand skulls upon the beams and the stairs: 
they were unable to reckon those in the towers. A cruel custom; inasmuch as they were human heads decapitated 
in sacrifice ; although it had the semblance of humanity, from the recollection which it was calculated to convey 
of death. There were persons likewise whose business it was, when one fell, to place another in its room; so that 
that number was never deficient.’—La Conquista de Mexico, fo. xlix. 

It is remarkable, that amongst the many charges which Apion brought against the Jews, one was, that they kid- 
napped strangers and secretly sacrificed them in the temple, after first fattening the intended victims. To this charge 
Josephus replies at considerable length; as perhaps he considered that the well-known fact of the Jewish religion laying 
the greatest stress on sacrifices, and requiring that the blood of bulls and of goats should ever be flowing on their 
altars, might have given a colour of probability to the charge; especially as among the Grecks, according to doubtful 
fame, Agamemnon had been hurried away by the habit of sacrifice to offer-his daughter Iphigenia to Diana, although 
they were a nation much less addicted to sacrifices than the Jews, some of whose most famous philosophers had 

NOTES. 313 

condemned the practice as utterly impious to offer death to the God who bestowed life, or to suppose that the 
Creator of all could be pleased at receiving from one creature the blood of another. We have, however, the 
highest authority,—that of the Scriptures,—for affirming that the Jews did frequently perform human sacrifices ; 
but whether they profaned the temple with them, as they did with the worship of the brazen serpent called 
Nehushtan, which was destroyed by king Hezekiah, as it says in the fourth verse of the eighteenth chapter of the 
Second Book of Kings,—“ He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake 
in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to 
it; and he called it Nehushtan,’—is not stated. We learn, however, from the passage of Scripture which has been 
quoted, the curious fact, that the Jews worshiped a serpent in the days of Hezekiah, in remembrance of its 
miraculous agency in the age of Moses. But how many ages had elapsed from the time of Moses to the reign of 
Hezekiah? And if Judah was guilty of this idolatry, are we to suppose that the other tribes of Israel, whose 
idolatries were so much greater, did not equally and for the same reason render homage to serpents? In the twenty- 
first chapter of Numbers, Moses gives us the following account of the fiery serpent. which he made, and the 
cures which were performed through it: “And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye 
brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness ? for there is no bread, neither is there any water ; and our soul 
loatheth this light bread. And the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people ; and much people 
of Israel died. Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned; for we have spoken against the Lord, 
and against thee: pray unto the Lord, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people. And 
the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every 
one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live. And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a 
pole *; and it came to pass, that ifa serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.” 
This serpent, Christians affirm, after Saint John, to have been a type and symbol of Christ; as that Evangelist 
says in the fourteenth and fifteenth verses of the third chapter of his Gospel: “And as Moses lifted up the serpent 
in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, 
but have eternal life.” Not only in Scripture, but likewise in ancient mythology, the same symbols are often found 
to have different and even contrary significations, which occasions great difficulty to the scholar and the divine. 
With the ancient Egyptians a serpent in a ring signified equally the year, and the immortality of the soul. The 
symbols of the goat, the serpent, and the morning-star, bear in Scripture the most contrary applications; and the 
horn mentioned in the prophecies, commentators explain in a variety of different ways. 

The following chapter, which is taken from the third book of Garcia’s Origin of the Indians, we here insert in the 
original Spanish, with the translation annexed, both because it contains many Scriptural authorities to prove that 
the Jews in ancient times did frequently profane religion by the celebration of human sacrifices, and likewise because 
Garcia inclines to the opinion that their descendants introduced that shocking custom into Peru. This chapter is 
entitled “ Como los Judios i los Indios hicieron sacrificio de Niftos :’—* En los libros de los Reies, refiere la Sagrada 
Escritura que el Rei de Moab sacrificé 4 su primogenito hijo sobre el muro, 4 vista de los de Israel, 4 los quales 
parecié este hecho tan triste i lamentable, que no quisieron apretarle mas, i asi se bolvieron 4 sus casas. Pero mas en 
particular refiere la misma Escritura la costumbre que tenian los Hebreos de los diez tribus de sacrificar nifios, como 
consta del contexto del capitulo 17 de el sobredicho libro de los Reies. Este mismo genero de crueldad i sacrificio 
refiere la Divina Escritura haverse usado entre aquellas naciones barbaras de Cananeos, i Gebuseos, i los demas, de 
quien escrive el libro de la Sabiduria que sacrificaban 4 sus hijos ; i David se queja que de estos aprendicron los de 
Israel sus costumbres, i en particular sacrificar sus hijos i hijas 4 los demonios, i asi dice el mismo profeta, ‘ Y sacri- 
ficaron sus hijos i hijas 4 los demonios. Hieremias tambien hace mencion de aquesto mismo; aunque en la manera 
de matar i sacrificar 4 sus hijos variaban los Hebreos, como lo advierte Genebrardo, porque unas veces los sacrifi- 
caban matandolos con fuego, como se dice de Manases, que pasé 4 su hijo por el fuego. Otras veces los sacrificaban 
degollandolos, que eso quiere decir David en aquellas palabras, ‘Y derramaron la sangre inocente i sin culpa ;’ aunque 
parece que los quemaban despues, que como nota Genebrardo en esto ai varias opiniones entre los Hebreos, diciendo 
algunos que despues de haver muerto 4 aquellos nifios en sacrificio, los quemaban sobre las aras 4 imitacion i exemplo 

* Tn the thirty-ninth page of the Mexican painting in the possession of M. Fejérvary, at Pess in Hungary, a curious representation of 
Quecalcoatle, as it would appear, occurs in the shape of a serpent fixed to a pole. 

(41) 

314 NOTES. 

de Abraham, que asi instituié ofrecer en sacrificio 4 Dios su hijo Isaac. Otros dicen que encerrados i metidos dentro 
-de cierta concavidad i hueco del idolo los quemaban, en el mismo idolo encendido con el fuego, mientras los que 
estaban presentes al espectaculo hacian ruido, i estruendo, i tocaban los tambores 6 atabales, para que no se oiesen las 
voces del nifio. Otros, como son Rabi Salomon, i Kymhi, dicen que los pasaban por medio de las Hamas de dos 
fuegos 6 hogueras, teniendolos de una parte el padre del nifio, i de la otra los ministros del sacrificio, hasta que el 
fuego le consumia: de este parecer es Rabi Moises, hijo de Naaman, en los Comentarios del Pentateuco, aunque 
Rabi Salomon Jarchi, i Moises Maimonides, intentan disimular esta maldad, afirmando que solo los pasaban por las 
llamas ; i asi disculpa 4 Achaz Teodoreto. Pero sea como mandaren, que lo que sabemos cierto, es que los Judios 
sacrificaban sus hijos, como ja lo diximos arriba con autoridad de la Sagrada Escritura, i de lo que David, i Hieremias 
dicen 4 este proposito. Aunque el sacrificar sus hijos 4 los dioses lo usaron otras naciones de gentiles, como se ha 
dicho, pero pues havemos referido esta perversa i cruel costumbre que huvo entre los Judios, por qué no dirémos que 
de ellos, como de sus ascendientes, la tomarian los Indios del Peru que la guardaron al pie de la letra? De las histo- 
rias que tratan del Peru antes que fuese conquistado por nuestros Espafioles, he sacado que sacrificaban los Indios 
sus hijos por negocios que importaban al Inga, como en enfermedades suias, para alcanzarle salud. Tambien quando 
iba 4 la guerra, por la victoria, i quando le daban la borla al nuevo Inga, que era la insignia de rei como aca el cetro 
6 corona, en esta solemnidad sacrificaban cantidad de docientos nifios de quatro 4 diez anos*. Tambien quando 
moria Inga, sacrificaban muchos nifios; los quales dice Juan de Betancos que havian de ser mil, porque asi lo ordené i 
mandé Pachacuti Inga antes que muriese. Estos nifios havian de ser varones i hembras traidos de todo el reino, i algunos 
de ellos hijos de Caciques, i principales, para que apareados macho con hembra, bien vestidos, i con el servicio i baxilla 
de oro que como casados i gente que havia de ir 4 servir 4 su rei i sefior, havian menester, fuesen enterrados en las 
partes donde el Inga huviese estado de asiento, hechando tambien algunos de ellos en la mar. A estas partes i lugares 
los Ilevaban cada par por si, macho i hembra, con mucha veneracion en unas andas, para ser de esta suerte ofrecidos 
en sacrificio por su rei i sefior; 1 4 este sacrificio lamaban Capac Cocha, que quiere decir Sacrificio solemne. Gomara 
dice que sacrificaban nifios los Indios del nuevo reino de Granada, i los mismos sacrificios que entre los Judios, hallé 
Benjamin de Tudela entre los Indios Asiaticos de la isla de Chenaraga 6 Chingara.” “The Holy Scripture says in the 
Book of Kings, that the king of Moab sacrificed his eldest son upon the wall in the sight of the Israelites ; to whom 
this act appeared so afflicting and lamentable, that they would not besiege him any longer, but returned home sp las 
same Scripture more particularly mentions the custom prevalent amongst the ten Hebrew tribes, of sacrificing children, 
as appears from the text of the above-mentioned seventeenth chapter of the Book of Kings. Cruelty of a similar 
kind and like sacrifices are recorded in Holy Scripture to have been practised by the barbarous nations of the 
Canaanites and the Jebusites, and the rest, of whom the Book of Wisdom says, that they sacrificed their sons. And 
David complains that the Israelites had learned from them their customs, and particularly that of sacrificing their sons 
and daughters to devils; and therefore the same prophet says, ‘ And they sacrificed their sons and their daughters 
to devils.’ Jeremiah likewise relates the same thing. But, as Genebrard observes, in their manner of putting to 
death and sacrificing their sons, the practice of the Hebrews was not uniform; for sometimes they sacrificed them, 
burning them to death, as is related of Manases, who passed his son through the fire; and of Achaz, who consecrated 
and sacrificed his son, passing him likewise through the fire. And sometimes they sacrificed them, beheading them ; 
since this is what David means by the words, ‘ And they shed the blood of the innocent, and of those who were 
without blame ;’ although it appears that they burned them afterwards. But, as Genebrard remarks, there is a difference 
of opinion about this among the Jews; some saying that after the children had been killed in sacrifice they burned 
them upon the altars, in imitation and after the example of Abraham, who purposed to offer up in this manner his 
son Isaac to God; and others, that putting them within and shutting them up in a certain concavity and hollow of 
the idol, they burned them in the same idol, heating it red hot with fire, whilst those who were present at the spec- 

* This was almost re-acting Herod’s massacre, who we may here remark was a Jew by religion although not one by blood. 

+ This is a mistake; it was the son of the king of Edom, the enemy of the king of Moab, and the ally of the Jews, whom the king of 
Moab sacrificed ; on which account the Prophet Amos denounces judgment against Moab in the first verse of the second chapter of 
his Prophecies : “ Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof ; 
because he burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime.” The Moabites, whose hearts were, like Pharaoh’s, hardened, would probably, 
when they saw the Jews raise the siege of their city, and retreat after the cruel sacrifice of the son of their powerful ally, have imputed 
this conduct to cowardice caused by their own desperation, and have henceforward despised the denunciations of the Jewish prophets. 

NOTES. 315 

tacle made a noise and shouted, and beat drums and tambours, that the cries of the children might not be heard. 
Others, like Rabbi Salomon and Kymhi, say that they passed them between the flames of two fires or burning piles, 
the father of the child holding him on one side and the ministers of the sacrifice on the other, till the fire had consumed 
him. Rabbi Moises the son of Naaman, in his Commentaries on the Pentateuch, is of this opinion; although Rabbi 
Salomon, Jarchi, and Moses Maimonides try to dissemble this iniquity, affirming that they only passed them through 
the flames ; which is the way in which Theodoretus exculpates Achaz. However this may be, that which we know for 
certain is, that the Jews sacrificed their sons, as we have already said above, on the authority of the Holy Scripture, 
and of that which David and Jeremiah say to this effect. Although the custom of sacrificing their sons to the gods 
existed amongst other Gentile nations, as has been said, still, as we have referred to this perverse and cruel practice, 
found also amongst the Jews, why shall we not say that the Indians of Peru, who follow-it to the letter, borrowed it 
from them, as likewise from their ancestors? I have found in histories which treat of Peru before it was conquered 
by the Spaniards, that the Indians sacrificed their sons when the affairs of the Inga required it: for instance, when 
he was sick, for the recovery of his health ; and likewise when he went to war, for victory. And when they invested 
the new Inga with the tassel, which was the royal insignia, like the crown and sceptre with us, on this solemnity 
they sacrificed as many as two hundred children, of from four to ten years of age. They likewise, when the Inga 
died, sacrificed a number of children, which Juan de Betangos says were reckoned at a thousand; for so the Inga 
Pachacuti ordered and commanded before he died. It was proper that these children should be both males and females, 
brought from all parts of the kingdom, and some of them the offspring of Caciques and other principal persons, in 
order that, matched together in pairs, males with females, handsomely attired, with attendants and golden utensils,— 
which, like betrothed persons and. subjects about to go to serve their king and lord, they were obliged to be provided 
with,—they might be buried in such places as the Inga had been accustomed to reside in, some of them being likewise 
thrown into the sea. To these places and stations each pair, a male and a female, was carried by themselves on a 
litter, with great reverence, in order to be offered as a sacrifice in this manner for their king and lord. They called 
this sacrifice Capac Cocha, which signifies ‘the solemn sacrifice.” Gomara says that the Indians of the new kingdom 
of Granada sacrificed children ; and Benjamin of Tudela found the same kind of sacrifices as those used by the Jews 
amongst the Asiatic Indians of the island of Chenaraga or Chingara.” It cannot be doubted that human sacrifices 
were common throughout Palestine. And if the Holy Land was polluted with these abominable rites, which the Jews 
are said to have learned from their neighbours the Canaanites, where is the difficulty in supposing that in after ages 
they were transplanted to the American soil by their descendants ? What but a familiarity with such scenes of horror 
can explain the inhumanity of the Samaritan mothers, recorded in the sixth chapter of the Second Book of Kings: 
“ And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my lord, 
O king! And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the barnfloor, or out of the 
winepress? And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This woman said unto me, Give thy 
son, that we may eat him to-day, and we will eat my son to-morrow *. So we boiled my son, and did eat him: and I 
said unto her on the next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him; and she hath hid her son.” This occurrence took 
place during the famine in Samaria, caused by the besieging army of Benhadad king of Syria. Gomara, who has 
described the sufferings which the Mexicans underwent in the last siege of their capital, expressly says, that although 
they ate the dead bodies of their enemies, they did not touch those of their countrymen or friends,—an evident 
proof, not of less suffering on their part, but of greater humanity than was possessed by the Jews. It is a very 
remarkable fact, that the Indians were accustomed to pass their sons through the fire as a kind of baptism. Boturini, 
noticing this practice, says, “En la segunda crecié el culto, y al quarto dia despues del parto, passaban por el fuego 
quatro veces a los hijos recien nacidos, 4 manera de purificacion y bautismo, llamando 4 esta ceremonia Tlequiquiz- 

* These women were Samaritans ; but Jeremiah, in the twentieth verse of the second chapter of his Lamentations, informs us that the 
Jewish mothers, when Jerusalem was besieged, were equally inhuman in devouring their own offspring. ‘“ Behold, O Lord, and con- 
sider to whom thou hast done this. Shall the women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shall the priest and the prophet be slain 
in the sanctuary of the Lord?” Even Solomon’s famous judgment is less a proof of his wisdom than of the barbarity of the people over 
whom he reigned; for not knowing which of the women was the real mother of the child, he must have presumed that they were both 
capable, sooner than forgo a fictitious claim, of consenting that it should be divided in two, and that the real mother alone would stay 
the execution of the sentence; for there would have been no wisdom in his judgment except on the supposition that he believed both 
women to be equally bereft of every particle of pity and of feeling. 

316 NOTES. 

tilhiztli; costumbre antigua de sus antepassados los descendientes de Cham, segun Philon Judio en su libro Bibli- 
carum Antiquitatum, ‘'Tunc cceperunt hi qui habitabant in terra inspicere in astra, et, incohaverunt ex his imaginari 
et divinationes facere, et filios et filias trajicere per ignem.’ Mas debia ser el fuego el mas respetado y sublime de 
sus dioses; pues haviendo Thare que era idolatra del fuego, y padre de Abraham, acusado 4 su hyo delante de 
Nemrod, como no queria adorarle, y seguir la religion de su familia, le mandé echar en él, y salio intacto por obra 
de Dios; de cuyo prodigio admirado Aram confesso por verdadera la ley que professaba su hermano Abraham, como 
escribe Lyra in cap. 11. Genes et cap. 12. con la autoridad de san Geronimo: ‘ Vera est igitur Hebraorum traditio 
quod egressus sit Thare cum filiis suis de igne Chaldeorum, et quod Abram vallatus Babylonico incendio, quia 
illud adorare nolebat, liberatus sit auxilio Dei, et ex illo tempore reputetur ei tempus etatis, ex quo confessus est 
Deum, spernens idola Chaldeorum.’ Y por esto, no me admiro que los Indios como descendientes de los que inter- 
vinieron 4 fabricar la Torre de Babel, como se dir4 despues, celebrassen tanto 4 el fuego, hasta colocarlo por gero- 
glifico y principio de la chronologia, y de sus caracteres divinos en el Kalendario Tulteco, que fué mucho mas antiguo 
que el Mexicano; y le llamassen en el kalendario de el afio natural, Seftor de la yerba, que tanto suena Xiuhteuctli ; 
y por fin que 4 la decadencia del cyclo Indiano le dedicassen tantos sacrificios, y sacassen con grandes ceremonias el 
fuego nuevo, assimismo fuesse en el kalendario astronomico el primero de los nueve signos acompafiados, 6 Sefiores 
de la Noche. Subieron aun mas de punto en la tercera edad los sacrificios y ritos ; los que referiré por entero en la 
Historia. Solo advierto que en el kalendario ritual, le era dedicada la decima tercia fiesta mobible, dia en que despues 
de grandes ofrendas y bayles, se nombraban los jueces, y los que debian ser elegidos 6 seflalados por feudatorios del 
imperio, porque la devolucion de los feudos no passaba de este termino.” “In the second age the worship paid to 
fire increased ; and on the fourth day after their birth they passed four times through the fire their new-born infants ; 
as if it were a purification or baptism, naming this ceremony Tlequiquiztililiztli; an ancient custom of their ancestors 
the descendants of Cham; as Philo Judeus remarks in his book of Biblical Antiquities: ‘Then began those who 
inhabited the earth to contemplate the stars and to devise images of them, and to practise divination, and 10 pass 
their sons and daughters through the fire. But Fire must have been the most esteemed and sublimest of their 
divinities, since Thare, who was a fire worshipper, and the father of Abraham, having accused his son before Nimrod 
for not choosing to adore it and to follow the religion of his family, was commanded to throw him into it; when by 
the assistance of God he came out unhurt: and Aram, astonished at the miracle, confessed as true the law which 
his brother Abraham professed. As Lyra says in his notes to the eleventh and twelfth chapters of Genesis, with the 
authority of Sait Geronime: ‘The tradition of the Hebrews therefore is true, that Thare came out with his sons 
from the fire of the Chaldees ; and that Abram, inclosed within the Babylonian fire because he would not adore it, 
was delivered by the help of God; and the age of his life was reckoned from that time in which he confessed God, 
contemning the idols of the Chaldeans.’ On this account I am not surprised that the Indians, as being the 
descendants of those who were present at the building of the tower of Babel, as will presently be mentioned, should 
have paid such extraordinary respect to fire as to place it as a hieroglyphic at the beginning of their chronology and 
divine characters in the Tultec Calendar *, which was much more ancient than the Mexican, and should have named 
it in the calendar of the natural year the Lord of Vegetation, since that is the meaning of Xiuhteuctli; and lastly, 
that at the end of each Indian cycle they should have celebrated so many sacrifices to it, and kindled with great 
ceremony the new fire; and likewise that in the astronomical calendar it should have been the first of the nine accom- 
panying signs or lords of the night. In the third age these sacrifices and rites attained even more scrupulous exact- 
ness, of which I shall give a complete description in my History. I merely observe here that the thirteenth moveable 
festival in the ritual calendar was dedicated to it; on which day, after great offerings and dances, the judges were 
named, and those who were to be elected or appointed feudatories of the empire ; for the grant of fiefs did not extend 
beyond that term.” Whether the Indians of Peru and Mexico burned their children in the manner of the ancient 
Jews in the cavities of idols, is not mentioned by Spanish authors; but it would appear from Acosta, that it was not 

* The Flint was the first sign in the Tultec Calendar; but since fire was obtained by the Indians, not from the percussion of the flint, 
but from the friction of two pieces of wood against each other, it was not an equally appropriate symbol of that element in each hemi- 
sphere. IM. Visconti has observed in a letter to the Baron de Humboldt, that the Mexican method of procuring fire was familiar to the 
ancient Greeks; and that the accuracy of the description which the scholiast on Apollonius has left us of these sugysa, or fire machines, is 
proved by the plates in his American Monuments. 

NOTES. Sih 

as customary with the Mexicans to sacrifice their children, as it was with the Peruvians, although the former people 
were in the habit of offering up burnt-sacrifices. That the Qapotecas fabricated small idols, with hollow receptacles 
either for blood, fire, or incense, is proved from the researches of M. Dupaix, who discovered near Zachila, the 
ruined capital of the Capotecan empire, several idols of baked clay of this kind. Perhaps future researches may 
determine, by bringing to light the idols which are buried in the Plaza Mayor of Mexico, whether the Mexicans 
formed any of their large stone idols hollow; as it might then be inferred that such cavities were for the purpose of 
receiving victims, either slaves or prisoners of war, although the manner of the sacrifice, whether it was by fire or 
not, would not be exactly known. It may here be observed, that the authority which has been adduced to prove that 
human sacrifices were in ancient times common among the Jews, is the best that can possibly be recurred to,—the text 
of the Scripture itself, and the commentaries of the most respectable rabbis on it. These rabbis were either Spanish 
or Portuguese Jews, who could have felt no disposition to calumniate their countrymen; and it is not undeserving of 
remark, that whilst the Jews of other countries in Europe were formerly, as at present, excessively ignorant, those of 
Spain some centuries ago were often men of extensive learning. The chief cause of this was, that Spain in the middle 
ages was only partly under Christian rule. The Saracen caliphs, who greatly favoured the arts and sciences, maintained 
their sway during eight centuries in the Peninsula; and the Jews were often physicians, bankers, and astrologers to 
those monarchs, and highly esteemed in their court. It is a mistake to suppose, because the Koran casts some censure 
on the Jews, that in Mahometan countries people are looked down on in the same degree as among Christians. 

With respect to the Mexican ceremony of Tlequiquiztililiztli, it may be observed, that the Jews considered fire 
a great purifier. “To be purified seven times in the fire’ seems to have been a Hebrew proverb; to which there 
appears to be some allusion in the sixteenth verse of the third chapter of Saint Luke: “ John answered, saying unto 
them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not 
worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire.” Fire could here have only been 
understood in a metaphorical sense, and not, like water elsewhere, have had a literal signification. Nevertheless, 
so early was the rise of fanaticism, that we learn from history that a Christian sect appeared in Spain in the ages 
immediately following the Christian era, who burned the sign of the cross into their foreheads, instead of marking it 
with the water of baptism. ‘We shall here insert three chapters taken from the fifth book of Acosta’s History, 
which contain an interesting account of the Mexican and Peruvian sacrifices: 

“ Professus Deique ac hominis hostis in sacrificiis istis, ad que varia et diversa miseros homines institutos 
compulit, frendentis sui odii radios ubique effulgere fecit. Sicut enim ista religionis mira proprietas est, ut ad 
culturam et venerationem Dei homines adhibeantur; sic pariter mendacii pater constituit ut sibi, velut rerum 
omnium auctori ac domino, Dei creatura ipsi pro victima offerretur. Prime omnium oblationes quas exhibuere 
homines simplices rudesque, fuerunt Cain, pro sacrificio, fructus terre; Abelus verd e grege suo pecudem 
pinguem offerebat. Idem postea secuti sunt Noha, Abraham, et Patriarche; usque dum surgens Moyses pecu- 
liarem de ceremoniis librum Levitis condidit, quo multa eaque diversa sacrificia cum ceremoniis quamplurimis 
populo Israelitico destinavit. Hoc ergo exemplo illectus, cacozelus Sathanas ad quecunque sacrificia sibi 
quoque offerenda fatuas gentes illico compulit ; illisdem etiam plurimas leges ceremonias ritusque prescripsit, non 
secus ac veteris a Deo late legis fidissimus zemulus esset. Unde similes ab eo in rebus quamplurimis ceremonias 
servatas videmus. Czeterum ommia sacrificia que increduli Sathane offerebant, in tria conferri genera commodé 
possunt. Primum rerum est animé carentium. Alterum animalium est. Tertium ipsorum hominum.” 

“In Peru Cocam offerebant, herbam magni exstimatam. Sacra etiam faciebant, oblato mays, picturatis pennis, 
chaquira sive mollo alg& marina, nonnumquam et auro argentoque, ac ex his imaginibus animalium confectis, 
pannis item pulcherrimis ex cumbi, fragrantibus et ccelatis lignis, ordinarie vero adipe et sevo*. Omnium horum 
sacrificiorum finis erat, ut commoda tempestas, felix plantarum incrementum, optata sanitas, et periculorum 
vacantia impetrarentur. Secundum sacrificioram genus Cuies dicebatur, ab animalibus hoc nomine vocatis et ple- 
rumque offerri solitis, (hac bufonum facie erant,) ab Indis in cibum optari solitis. In casu viros primates con- 
cernente, Oves seu pacos, tam lanigeros, quam depiles sacrificiis offerebant ; ubi ad numerum earum et colorem, et 
oblationis tempus, admodum curiosé attendebant. Authiopes albi, Alquible vocati, pecora vel majora vel minora 
sacrificaturi, hos ritus servabant. Pecudem dextro brachio impositam soli obvertebant, et pro colore ejus mactande, 

* Fat was the ordinary Jewish offering. 

(4m ) 

318 NOTES. 

discreta verba obmurmurabant. Nam si colore vario esset, verba ad Chuquillam sive tonitru fundebantur, ut nulla 
aquarum seu pluviarum inopiaemergeret. Si vero candida et glabra existeret, aliis distinctis verbis Soli offerebatur, 
ut eo anno is serenus luceret, et rerum omnium incrementum vegetaret. Si Guanaco sive cesia esset, sacrificium 
id Viracoche in honorem fiebat. Stngulis diebus in Cusco hujusmodi cum ceremoniis, Soli ovis non admodum 
villosa offerebatur, quae cum rubea camisid cremabatur. Quibus sic und ardentibus corbes aliquot cacao pleni 
injiciebantur, quod Villacaronca appellabant. Ad hee sacrificia peragenda, tum populos *, tum pecudes 
peculiares secernebant, uni huic rei servientes. Quin imd et volucres offerebant, qui tamen mos apud Peruanos non 
zqué ac Mexicanos, qui coturnices plerumque sacrificabant, frequens erat. Porrd Peruani in Puna, id est, in locis 
desertis vastisque, sacrificabant quoties bellum meditabantur, ut deorum ibi impetratis suppetiis adjuti, hostium 
vim commodius obterere possent. Et hec sacrificia Cuscouicca, sive Conteuicca, aut Huallauicca, vel So- 
pauicca, nuncupabantur. Hec his ritibus fiebant. Ex desertis, varii generis aves captantes, spinea et aspera 
ligna plurima, Gaulli vocata, comportabant. His accensis, universas aves imponebant, quam conjunctionem 
Quico appellabant. Postea, tum rotundos tum angulares lapides + depictis tum anguibus, tum leonibus, ac bufo- 
nibus, tigribusque ornatos, arripientes, Usachum, id est, victoriam nobis largire *, et his similia alia verba edebant ; 
quibus hoc unum dicturi erant, Guacas nostre efficacia ac vis hostibus nostris nihil fortunati, sed adversa omnia 
imo ipsum interitum accieat. Finitis istis, oves nonnullas in caveis aliquot diebus fame maceratas, et exhaustas, 
quas Ureu nominabant, promebant. Has dum mactabant heec verba pronunciabant§. Non secus ac horum ani- 
malium corda deficiunt et languescunt, sic dii nostri hostium nostrorum robur et potentiam confringant, et pro- 
terant. Quod si carnis adhuc aliquid harum ovium cordibus adherescere viderent, que inedia et fame non absumpta 
esset, pro augurio non fausto, sed ominoso, habebant. Nigros quoque canes Apurucos, occisos nonnunquam 
offerebant, guos deinde in camporum plana aljiciebant. Tandem ab his demptas carnes peculiaris quidam populus 
cum singulari ritu vorabat. Aliquando etiam pro Ingé sacrificabant ut veneno nullo conficeretur. Hoc facturi, a 
summo mane ad concubiam usque noctem jejunabant. Inde tum cibo tum potu se confertim ingurgitabant; et hoc 
sacrificium quia contra dei hostes || fiebat omnium sacerrimum erat. Etsi vero tum hec, tum alia hujusmodi, 
bellorum longis continuationibus maxima ex parte abolita jam sint ; superstitionum tamen reliquie quedam vel dum 
in nonnullorum Indorum cordibus gliscunt, ita ut obortis fors inter dominos quos Caciques vocant, aut civi- 
tates pagosque, discordiis aut dissidiis, algas Mollo dictas, in rivis sacrificent dicantque eos maris filios esse, 
mare vero universorum fluminum matrem existere. Pro colorum varietate algis varia nomina imponuntur, qua causa 
etiam diversis usibus adhibentur. Alge universis fere sacrificiis inferuntur. Womines etiam reperiuntur vel hodie, 
qui tritam algam inani superstitione ducti, cum sud Chica, potus genus est, perfundant commisceantque. Fuerunt 
etiam Indi qui in hoc conducebantur, ut profluentis, rivisque et canalibus civitates pagos et oppida ac Charcas 
Sive agros permeantibus, sacrificia facerent ; que sationis tempore precipué fiebant, ne flumina deficerent aut 

* This seems a kind of Levitical institution. 

+ We are informed by Ezekiel, in the first verse of the fourth chapter of his Book of Prophecies, that he was commanded by God to 
pourtray Jerusalem upon a tile, as a type: “Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, 
even Jerusalem: and lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against it, and set 
battering rams against it round about.” The Jews might hence have attached importance to types painted on bricks or stones, as 
indicating the vicissitudes of war. And if we consider the nature of the Peruvian emblems mentioned by Acosta, we shall find that they 
each consisted of the figure of some animal, which was either formidable in itself to an adversary, or supposed to be capable of directing 
some unfortunate influence against the foe. Q 

{ This is quite a Jewish ejaculation, and it sometimes occurs in the Psalms. ‘The chosen people of God, whether their wars were 

just or unjust, always fanatically demanded victory from Heaven; absurdly informing God that his honour was compromised by their 
quarrels with their neighbours. 
_ § This reminds us of the then popular charge of witchcraft which Richard the Third brought against Jane Shore,—that she had his 
image in wax, which she gradually melted before a slow fire, pronouncing these words: “In the same way as this waxen figure melts, 
so may the king’s strength gradually ‘waste away!’ With respect to omens of success in battle taken from preconcerted signals, it is 
probable that the Jews were inclined to place much reliance upon them, ever since the period when, accordingly as Moses lifted up or 
let fall his arms, victory declared itself in favour of the Jews or the Amalekites, as recorded in the eleventh verse of the seventeenth 
chapter of Exodus. 

|| Elow impious must it be in any nation to call its own enemies the enemies of God! The arrogance of that king who drew down 

on himself the displeasure of the gods, and was punished in the regions below for attempting to counterfeit the lightning of heaven and the 
thunders of Olympus, fell far short of this presumption. 

NOTES. 319 

terram rigare desinerent. Pro sacrificiis his obeundis, harioli seu magi sortes mittebant*, quo facto, a commu- 
nione plebis omnia ea quz sacrificio offerenda erant, colligébantur, et ei qui laborem hunc prestaturus erat, 
offerebantur. Horum sacrificiorum tempus, initium hyemis erat, quo flumina alids ex se augescere et exundare 
sueverunt, quem tamen effectum cece gentes suis oblationibus assignabant. Fluminibus et rivis desertorum 
locorum nihil sacrificii offerebant. Prisca vero illa scatebris rivis et fluminibus oppida agrosque alluentibus, 
sacrificandi consuetudo, vel dum hodie apud nonnullorum animos viget. Fontes tamen et flumina desertorum 
non omnimodo aspernantur; sed si quo fors loco, duo flumina sibi aut occurrunt, aut invicem permiscentur, ibi 
singulari devotione eadem venerantur, et haustis undis se lavant, ad nonnullorum morborum sanationem im- 
petrandam; ante lotionem tamen farina ex maiis et rebus aliis se illinunt, et ritus peculiares edunt, quod ipsum 
quoque similiter in balneis prestant.” Cap. xvili. “Ex rebus omnium nocentissimis et flagitiosissimis, ad 
quarum patrationem Sathanas infelix Indorum genus illexit, crudelissima certé et immanissima fuit mactatio 
hominum, quos ad sui similitudinem rerum universarum conditor Deus initio creavit, ut ejus majestate et 
prestantia pre animalibus ceteris perfruerentur. Multis populis is mos fuit, ut quie servis dominis suis operas 
omnium fidissimas preestitissent, iisque charissimi fuissent, cum defunctis heris occiderentur, quo similes illis 
operas in seculo etiam altero prestarent, velut superius prolixius dictum est. Peruani autem, cum fidis servis 
ac ministris proprios quoque liberos a quatuor ad decem annos natos, sacrificii loco mactatos, offerebant ; quod 
Ingarum plerumque in gratiam fiebat, quoties aut pejus haberent, aut in bellum ituri essent. Si Inge novo 
nodo filamentoso, id signum regi est potestatis non secus ac apud nos sceptrum ac corona, offeretur, liberorum 
ab annis 4 ad 10 usque, ducentos circiter, una mactabant; quod spectaculum horrendissimum erat. Sacrifi- 
candi illi primo foedé jugulabantur, quorum deinde corpora truci aspectu et ritu terra obruebantur. Solebant aliis 
temporibus liberos decollare, et ipsorum cruore faciem propriam polluere. Nonnunquam et virgines sacrificabant, 
ex iis quas ex monasteriis ad Ingam deduci solitas superius recensuimus. Quorum sacrificiorum impostura nocen- 
tissima simul et crudelissima extabat. Quoties enim vel ex primoribus vel inferioribus ac privatis etiam viris, 
quis egrius habens, a mago suo intelligebat, fatum sibi ineluctabile omnino impendere, tum suos illico filios ac 
filias Viracoche immolabat, ac precabatur ut hac victima contentus, patrem cxsorum superstitem servaret. 
Hujusmodi immanitatis sacra quoque Scriptura meminit, dum ait regem Moab primogenitum filium suum super 
muros in ipso populi Israélitici conspectu immolasse ; quo facto horrendo illi eo usque incanduerint, ut deserto 
sacrilego loco, ad terras suas reversi sint. Quin et in Sacris legimus sacrificia hujusmodi quoque apud nationes 
 barbaras ut Cananeos, Jebusitas, et ceteras, solemnes fuisse; sicut de his Liber Sapientize expressé testatur, dum 
inquit : ‘ Et non suffecerat errasse eos circa Dei scientiam; sed et in magno viventes inscientie bello, tot et tam 
magna mala pacem appellant. Aut enim filios suos sacrificantes, aut obscura sacrificia facientes, aut insaniz 
plenas vigilias habentes, neque vitam neque nuptias mundas nunc custodiunt; sed et alius alium per invidiam 
occidit, aut adulterans contristat, et omnia commista sunt, sanguis, homicidium, furtum, ct fictio, corruptio et 
infidelitas, turbatio et perjurium, tumultus bonorum, Dei immemoratio, animarum inquinatio, nativitatis im- 
mutatio y, nuptiarum inconstantia, inordinatio moechia et impudicitie. Infandorum enim idolorum cultura omnis 

* The custom of casting lots was so common amongst the Jews, that it is almost impossible not to believe that they were gamesters 
at patol or dice, especially as gaming was not forbidden by the Mosaic law although it was punishable by the Mexican code. 

++ Nativitatis immutatio was the fraudulent insertion or erasion of names from the genealogical rolls in which the Jews were obliged 
to register their nativities. These kind of rolls are mentioned in the following verse of the second chapter of the Book of Ezra: 
“ These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put 
from the priesthood.” From this passage it is evident that the “ nativitatis immutatio,” which is erroneously translated in our English 
version of thé Bible “ a changing of kind,” was calculated seriously to affect the interests of the most powerful order in the Jewish com- 
monwealth,—that of the priests. And hence no doubt it is here noticed as a crime of the greatest magnitude ; although it was one not more 
known, except amongst the Jews, than forgery of bank-notes would be in a country where neither banks nor a paper currency had been 
established. It is evident, and indeed the context clearly points it out, that the Book of Wisdom is not here treating of the depraved 
manners of the Canaanites or of the Jebusites, but of those of the Jews themselves. Although Acosta skilfully dissembles the fact, 
why should remote posterity deem it to be a duty devolving upon them to palliate the atrocities of the Hebrew nation? Or may we not 
with greater reason demand a solution of the deeper mystery, How could such a people have ever become the chosen people of God? 
Their annals are merely a long tissue of crime; and the whole is wound up by the alleged commission of a deed which shocks Reason, 
although it must not stagger Faith. The Son of God comes into the world, and they crucify him: man the creature becoming in this 
manner the murderer of God the creator; and the Jews, the favourites of Heaven, the readiest instruments in the hands of Satan 
likewise ! 

320 NOTES. 

mali causa est, et initium, et finis. Hec tanta sapiens de ista gente. Sed et propheta regius David acerbé con- 
queritur, quod filii Israél a barbaris istis heec flagitia tam avidé hauserint, ut filios ac filias proprias damoni immo- 
larint; cujusmodi tamen victimas Deus nec unquam postularit, nec probarit, ut qui vitee non destructor sed 
dator sit, et in hominum usus universa alia condiderit ; unde Deo minimé res grata prestatur, si in culturam ejus 
homo hominem jugulat ac offert. Et licet Jehova quidem exquisitam illam Abraham obedientiam in unico immo- 
lando filio Isaac, apprimé collaudarit, ut tamen ipsum factum Abraham designaret non permisit. Ex quibus jam sole 
clarius execranda Sathanz prevaricatio elucet, qui Deum emulaturus, se non saltem adorari patitur verim etiam homi- 
num immolationibus et innocentis sanguinis tot profusionibus factis, in sinu suo gaudet, et his flagitiis disseminatis, 
tum animas tum hominum corpora in exitium eternum conjicit. Hee illa rabies et irreconciliabilis inimicitia est, quam 
adversus universum genus humanum impostor pessimus alit fovetque.” Cap. xix. “ Etsi Mexicani quidem non qué 
ac Peruenses liberos suos immolare sueverint, (nam de Mexicanis id a nullo historico proditum scimus,) nihilominus 
tamen propter cesorum et mactatorum aliorum hominum infinitam multitudinem, inaudita et enormi szevitid ac cru- 
delitate non Peruenses solum, sed omnes universi orbis populos ac gentes, multis parasangis, quod aiunt, antever- 
terunt. Qui quidem populus quantopere astutia et tyrannide stygii cacodemonis exceecatus et infatuatus fuerit, ex 
iis ritibus pius lector abunde colliget, quos prout servarunt jam ex ordine enarraturi sumus. Primum autem homines 
quos immolabant, zn ellis captos esse* oportebat. Quod si sclavi captivi deessent, solenne suum sacrificium suspen- 

* Who were devoted victims, as it would appear. The custom of sacrificing prisoners taken in war introduced in course of time the 
more cruel custom of sacrificing, when the former could not be procured, slaves purchased for money. The Mexican laws enacted 
under severe penalties, that no slaves should be sold for sacrifice, except their masters could prove before a competent number of 
witnesses that they had been guilty of the greatest delinquencies against them; such as running away a certain number of times, 
committing a certain number of robberies, violating the chastity of any of the female portion of their families, or certain other acts 
mentioned by Torquemada. But it would appear that the Mexican merchants and jewellers were not always so scrupulous as to the 
manner in which they obtained slaves for sacrifice, as they sometimes kidnapped them in the enemy’s country, and sacrificed them at the 
festivals which they celebrated in honour of Totec, and afterwards clothed themselves in the skins of the victims. It is probable, 
however, that the slaves which they sacrificed were generally guilty of robbery; since Torquemada observes, as a reason for this excessive 
cruelty of the Mexican merchants, that the property which they possessed consisting of gold and gems, and being of a nature so likely 
to tempt the dishonest, they sought by these bloody sacrifices to deter thieves from plundering them of any portion of it. Avarice, then, 
seems to have led to this revolting barbarity. It deserves to be remarked, that as amongst the Jews certain cities were appointed as 
cities of refuge to which criminals might fly, and escape the punishment of the laws,—so amongst the Mexicans, and amongst most of the 
other Indian states, there were appointed places of refuge to which culprits might fly, and claim the rights of sanctuary. But that 
murderers could avail themselves of this privilege, as anciently was the case in Christendom, is neither probable nor asserted by any 
Spanish historian. The places of refuge amongst the Indians were the palaces of their kings, named by the Mexicans éecpan; and 
wherever there was a palace, there it may be supposed was a city of refuge likewise. But it may also be imagined, although it is not so 
expressly stated by Spanish writers, that the Mexican teocalli, especially the greater temple of Mexico, were places of refuge; and that 
the city of Chollula was a city of refuge.—In confirmation of some of the facts above stated, we shall here annex an extract from the 
fourteenth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy, which gives an interesting description of the various kinds of slavery customary 
amongst the Indians :-— 

«‘La manera, que estos Indios tenian de hacer Esclavos, era mui diferente de las Naciones de Europa, y otras partes del Mundo, y 
fue cosa mui dificultosa 4 los principios de su conversion, acabarla de entender; pero sacada en limpio (en especial segun se acostum- 
braba, en Mexico, y Tetzcuco; porque en otras Provincias, que no estaban sujetas a estos Reinos, havia otras maneras de hacer 
Esclavos) decimos, que les faltaban muchas condiciones en esta materia, para hacerlos Esclavos propriamente ; porque estos Esclavos 
de esta Nueva-Espafta, algunos tenian Peculio, adquirian, y poseian proprios, y no podian ser vendidos, sino con las condiciones, que 
luego diremos: El Servicio, que hacian 4 sus Amos, era limitado, y no siempre, ni ordinario ; y unos, que servian por Esclavos, casan- 
dose, 6 haviendo servido algunos Anos, 6 queriendose casar, salian de la servidumbre, y entraban otros sus Hermanos, 6 Deudos, en 
su lugar. Tambien havia Esclavos habiles, y diligentes, que demas de servir 4 sus Amos, mantenian casa, con Muger, y Hijos, y com- 
praban Esclavos, y los tenian, y se servian de ellos: los Hijos de los Esclavos nacian libres. ‘Todas estas condiciones, 6 las mas, faltan 
dlos que las Letes dan por Siervos, y Esclavos. Estas maneras de hacerse Esclavos pasaban delante de Testigos, Personas de anciana 
edad, los quales se ponian de la una, y otra parte, para que fuesen como terceros, y entendiesen en el precio, y fuesen Testigos del 
conchavo, y estos havian de ser no menos, que quatro, y de aqui arriba, y siempre se juntaban muchos 4 este concierto, como a cosa, 
que la tenian por solemne; una de estas Ventas es la que se sigue. 

‘“ Havia algunos Hombres, que se daban al vicio de jugar, @ la Pelota, 6 al Juego, que llaman Patolli (como dejamos dicho) y puestos 
en necesidad estos Jugadores, deseosos de continuar el Juego, vendianse, y hacianse Esclavos, y el mas comun precio, porque se 
vendian, era veinte Mantas, que es una carga de ropa, que llaman Cenanquimilli, aunque unas son maiores, que otras, y asi son de 
mas, 6 menos precio, y asi se daban de unas, ui de otras, conforme era la disposicion, y Persona del que se vendia por Esclavo. Havia 
tambien Mugeres, que se daban a vivir suelta, y libertadamente ; y para proseguir este mal Estado, que tomaban, tenian necesidad de vestir 
curiosa, y galanamente, y por la necesidad, que pasaban, porque no trabajaban, en la Vida de Amores, que tralan, y por sustentar la bigarria, 

NOTES. 321 

debant. Quare veterum morem aut sensum secuti quidem videntur, qui, ut autores testantur, victimas a victis 
deducebant, ut et hostias ab hoste, quasi sacrifictum oblatio hostis sit. Nunc tamen id vocabulum in genere 
omnibus sacrificiis accommodatur. Porro ne ullo unquam tempore captivi deessent, perpetuis imvicem bellis 
digladiabantur. _Hinc fiebat ut omni studio vivi vivos captare laborarent, quo pro sacrificiis hostiz suppeterent. 
Hance ex ceteris causam Motecuma ad Marchionem de Valle praetendit; qui cum rogasset qui fieret, ut cum tanta 
potentia auctus, plurima sibi regna subjugarit, soli provincie Tlascalee edomande non incumberet, cum ejus tamen 

que usaban, llegaban a necesitarse mucho, y hacianse Esclavas; porque las que se daban A este vicio, en Tiempo de su Gentilidad, no era 
con interés de paga, sino solo con bestial apetito de sensualidad. Estas dos maneras de Esclavos, primero gocaban desu precio, que com~ 
mencasen a servir ; en el Tiempo pocas veces pasaban de Afio, porque en él, 0 poco despues se les acababa la ropa, y acabada, entraban sir- 
viendo : estos Esclavos bien vituperables son, pues servian el precio de su maldad, y bellaqueria. Quando algun Nifio se perdia, luego lo 
pregonaban, y buscaban por todas partes 4su Padre, 6 Madre, 6 Persona, que supiese de él, y le conociese; y si alguno lo escondia, 6 iba 
a vender, 6 de industria lo hurtaba, y lo vendia en otro Pueblo, quando se sabia, prendian al Ladron, y hacianlo Esclavo, por haver ven- 
dido al Nifto, que no lo era. Los Parientes del traidor @ su Sefior,d & su Republica, que supieron de la traicion, yno la descubrieron, ni 
manifestaron, hacianlos Esclavos, y al traidor le daban la muerte, que en otra parte dejamos dicho. Al que hurtaba en cantidad, hurto 
notable, 6 tenia mucha frequentacion, y uso de hurtar, hacianle Esclavo ; y si despues de hecho Esclavo tornaba al vicio, ahorcabanle. 
Quando dos se concertaban, para ir @ hurtar Maiz de una troxe, 6 panera, era fuerca, que el uno de ellos havia de subir & sacarlo 
(porque son estas troxes como mui grandes tinajas, con sus bocas en lo alto de ellas, y el que ha de sacar lo que esta dentro, ha de subir 
arriba) pues el Ladron, que queria hurtar de este Pan encerrado, no podia solo, por la dificultad del subir, y dar luego desde arriba, lo 
que queria sacar del granero, por esto se acompafiava; y si eran cogidos en el hurto, prendianlos, y averiguaban qual de los dos havia 
subido arriba, y 4 este vendian, y al otro castigaban con otras penas menos rigurosas; porque era sospecha de la Lei, que el que subid 
a hacer el hurto, fue el que lo solicitd, pues se puso 4 maior riesgo, y mas trabajo, y como 4 solicitador, que se presumia que era, 
dabanle maior castigo. Al que hurtaba pequefios hurtos, si no eran mui frequentados, con pagar lo que hurtaba hacia pago; y si no 
tenia de que pagar, una, y dos veces, los Parientes se juntaban, y repartian entre si el valor del hurto, y pagaban por el, diez, y doce 
Mantas, y desde arriba; ni es de creer, que hacian Esclavo por quarenta, ni cinquenta macorcas de Maiz, ni por otra cosa de mas 
precio, si él tenia de que pagar, 6 los Parientes ; asi lo afirmaron los de Tetzcuco (como lo dice el Padre Frai Toribio Motolinia) y & las 
Personas, que no llegaban 4 edad de diez Aftos, perdonabanles los hurtos, y delitos, que cometian, porque los juzgaban por inocentes, y 
por menores de edad. 

“En hurtando alguna cosa de mucho precio, asi como Joias de Oro, 6 Mantas ricas, en cantidad, luego ponian suma diligencia, en 
buscarlo por los Mercados, y avisaban 4 las Guardas, que siempre residian en la Plaga, que Ilaman Tianguez; y el primero que daba 
con el hurto, y asia al Ladron, se lo daban, por Esclavo, aunque huviese tambien hurtado a otros, y por esta causa casi siempre 
compraban, y vendian en el Tianguez, 9 Mercado; porque tenian por sospechoso, al que fuera de alli vendia, y en el Mercado havia 
mucha guarda, y aviso sobre los Ladrones. Tienen, y tenian en los mismos Mercados sus Portales, y Saletas abiertas, que miran 
al Tianguez, donde se albergaban los Tratantes, y Pasageros, y tambien para guarecerse del Agua, quando llueve; y como en el 
Mercado, entre otras muchas cosas, se vendian cosas de comer, y se venden, y quedan algunos relieves de ellas, de que luego & la noche 
hacen su plate, y cena los perros: acostumbraban las Guardas del Tianquizco, y a las veces otros muchachos, quando sentian ser hora 
de que los Perrillos estaban dentro, ponian unas redes en las calles, que salen al Mercado, para cacarlos en ellas. Sucedid, pues, que 
una vez estando las redes puestas en el Mercado, 0 Tianguez de Tetzcuco, entre los que estaban albergados en los Portales, levantose un 
Indio, y hurtd la manta a otro, dejandolo descubierto; pero por mui sutil, y ligeramente, que higo el lance, despertd el desnudo, y el 
Ladron huis, y el desnudo fue tras de él, dando voces, y como el malhechor iba turbado, qualquier paso le parecia corto, y llegando a 
desembocar por una de las calles, que salen de la Plaga, caio en la red, que estaba-tendida, para los Perros, y alli enredado le prendieron, 
verificandose en él lo que dice el Profeta Isatus: El temor, y el laco fue sobre ti, que eres habitador, y morador de la Tierra, y estimas las 
cosas de ella, quiere decir, mas que en el honor propio: por las quales vienes & perderlo, y luego 4 la mafiana lo llevaron & los Jueces ; 
los quales le condenaron por Esclavo, diciendo, que sus pecados eran grandes, pues le havian metido en la red de los Perros; y este 
fue hecho Esclavo, por la circunstancia de haverse enredado, y parecer caso particular. 

« Algunos pobres, que tenian Hijos, en especial los Viejos, 6 en tiempo de mucha necesidad trataban Marido, y Muger, de remediar 
su necesidad, y pobrega, y concertabanse de vender un Hijo, y llamados, los terceros (que eran como corredores de lonja) y testigos, 
vendianlo; y acontecia muchas veces, que haviendo servido aquel Hijo algunos Afios, pareciales, que era bien repartir el trabajo, y 
daban al Sefior otro de sus Hijos, y sacaban de servidumbre al primero, y no solo holgaba de ello el Amo, mas daba, por el que entraba 
de nuevo en su servicio, otras tres, 0 quatro Mantas, 4 cargas de Maiz; y esto estaba asi, en costumbre. Havia algunos holgacanes, 
que tenian poco mas cuidado, que andarse comiendo, y bebiendo, y como les faltaba, vendianse, y gogaban de su precio, y luego que 
lo acababan de comer, y de beber, comengaban a servir 4 sus Amos ; y esto que se dice de los Hombres, se ha de entender tambien de 
las Mugeres.” 

“‘ Otra manera de hacer Esclavos tuvieron estas Gentes, los quales llamaron Huehuetlatlacoli, que quiere decir: Culpa, 6 servidumbre 
antigua, y era este el modo. Si una casa, 6 dos se veian, en necesidad de hambre, vendian un Hijo, y obligabanse todos & tener siempre 
aquel Esclavo vivo, que aunque muriese el que sefialaban havian de suplir su servidumbre con otro, salvo si el que actualmente servia, 
moria en la misma casa’de su Amo, 6 le tomaba algo de lo que adquiria ; por lo qual, ni el Amo le tomaba, lo que el Esclavo tenia, ni 
queria que habitase en su casa, mas de que le llamaban, para que entendiese, en la Hacienda de su Amo, como era, en aiudar & labrar, 

CAtn)) 

322 NOTES. 

occupatio facilis videretur, responsum a Motecuma accepit, ejus rei causas geminas esse, unam, quod juventus 
Mexicana perpetuis exercitiis et laboribus viresceret, nec torpore et ignavid perderetur, alteram, quod captivorum 
ac sclavorum quantis ad sacrificia opus esset, satis inde acciperet.. Sacrificiorum hec norma erat. Mactandi in 
supremam aream capitum mortuorum (de his superius nonnihil percensuimus) ducebantur, ubi sud serie dispositi 

sembrar, y coger las sementeras, y algunas veces traia Lefia, y barria; y quando aquel que havian sefialado havia ia servido algunos Afios, 
queriendo descansar, 6 casarse, decia alos otros, que juntamente, con él estaban obligados, y havian gocado del mismo precio, que entrase 
otro a servir algun tiempo; pero no por esto se libraba de la obligacion, nila Muger, que con él se casaba; mas los que de primero se 
havian obligado, con ellos contralan aquella misma obligacion, con sus descendientes; y de esta manera solian estir obligados los de 
quatro, y cinco casas, por un Esclavo 4 un Amo, y a sus Herederos. El Afio de mil y quinientos y cinco, que fue de mucha.hambre, el 
Rei de Tetzcuco, llamado Negahualpilli, viendo el abuso de la mala Lei; y porque con la hambre que huvo no se acrecentase mas, 
anuld, y canceld la dicha Lei, y liberto las casas, que estaban obligadas, que fue una mui provechosa, y necesaria libertad, para el Reino; 
y cree el Padre Frai Toribio, que viendo lo que 4 cerca de esto havia pasado, en Tetzcuco, higo Motecuhguma, lo mismo en esta su 
Ciudad de Mexico, y que lo mismo corrid, por otras partes del Imperio, quitando de las cervices de sus moradores, tan cargoso, y pesado 
lugo, libertando estos Esclavos, que nacieron libres, y la necesidad los havia hecho Esclavos. Havia algunos Esclavos mafiosos, y astutos, 
que por tener para jugar, 6 comer, se solian vender dos veces, y estos eran llevados ante la Justicia, y mandaban los Jueces, que este 
Esclavo sirviese al que se havia vendido delante de testigos, y con obligacion publica; y si ambas veces havia pasado la venta juridica- 
mente, y como la Lei daba el permiso, daban el Esclavo al primer Amo, y perdia su servicio, y precio el segundo, por quanto el Esclavo, 
no tenia de que pagar, y la primera venta havia sido la valedera. ; 

“ Los Hyos del Esclavo eran libres, y lo mismo eran los de la Esclava, como uno de ellos fuese libre ; y lo que es mas, que los Hijos de 
Esclavo, y Esclava, eran tambien libres. Algunos quisieron decir, que si un libre tenia acceso & alguna Esclava, y quedaba prefiada de 
la copula, era Esclavo el Varon que cometid acto con Esclava, y servia al Sefior de la Esclava ; pero esto no fue asi, segun confesion de 
los mismos Indios Sabios, que sabian sus Leies, y las practicaban. Asimismo huvo quien quiso decir, que quando alguno tomaba 
Mantas fiadas de algun Mercader, 6 otra cosa, de equivalente valor, y precio, y moria, sin haver pagado, que el Mercader de su propia 
autoridad hacia Esclava ala Muger del Difunto, por la deuda, que havia quedado debiendo ; y si el Difunto havia dejado Hijo, al Hijo 
hacia Esclavo, y no 4 la Madre. Lo que io sé decir en este caso, es, que los Indios no hicieron tal, en su gentilidad; pero los Espanoles, 
y Castellanos que 01 viven en el Christianismo, en especial obrajeros, y aun algunos labradores, quando se les muere el Indio de su obraje, 
6 labranga, 6 de otro qualquier servicio, que les hacen, y les deben algun dinero, aunque sea mui poco; llevan la Muger, y Hijos 4 su 
casa, para que desquiten lo que el Marido, 6 Padre, quedd debiendo, y muchas veces es dinero, que el Difunto recibié, para beber, y 
emborracharse, y por fuerca, para solo tenerlos toda la vida por Esclavos; y de estos casos he visto muchos, en las Guardianias donde he 
estado, y he dado cuenta de ellus 4 los Sefiores Virreies, y no sé si se han podido remediar, por ser infieles los executores, haviendo de 
ser mui fieles, pues este. es su nombre de el que debe de hacer justicia, por obligacion precisa, que para ello tiene. Dios lo remedie, 
porque las cosas de las Indias no tienen remedio Humano, por estar tan apartadas de los ojos de su Rei, que aunque pone los medios de 
el remedio, nunca llegan 4 bien executarse. Lo que en este caso havia, dijeron los viejos de Tetzcuco, que lo sabian mui bien, porque 
algunos de ellos havian sido Jueces antes de las Guerras, y entrada de nuestros Espafioles, y sabian mui bien las Leies, por donde se 
regian, que pasaba de esta manera: Que si alguno tomaba fiado algo, y no tenia de que pagar, una, y dos veces, los Parientes se aiun- 
taban, y repartian entre si la deuda, y lo libraban de la carcel, y de la deuda, que debia; ‘y si era Difunto, el Acreedor se entregaba en 
los Bienes, 6 Heredades, si acaso las havia dejado, 0 en otras cosas, asi como muebles, 0 raices de casas, y otras semejantes ; pero no se 
hacia jamas entrega de persona que le tocase, asi de Muger, como de Hijos. 

‘‘ Los Esclavos, de mas de servir a sus Amos (como el servicio, que les hacian, no era ordinario) adquirian bienes para si, hasta casarse, 
y mantener casa, y comprar otro Esclavo, que le servia; y asi huvo algunos, que tuvieron Esclavos, en su servicio, siendo ellos Esclavos ; 
y dice el Padre Frai Toribio, que debio de saber esto aquel Negro, que escrivid de esta Nueva-Espafia a otro su Amigo a la Isla Espafiola, 
tambien Negro, y Esclavo, cuias palabras eran estas: Amigo, Fulano, esta es buena Tierra para Esclavos, aqui Negro tiene buena 
comida, aqui Negro tiene Esclavo, que sirve 4 Negro, y el Esclavo del Negro tiene Navorio, que quiere decir: Mogo, 6 criado, por eso 
trabaja, que tu amo te venda, para que vengas a esta Tierra, que es la mejor del Mundo para Negros: y no dijo mal, porque tambien 
se tratan muchos de ellos, como mui honrados Espaiioles; y los mas cafios de quantos hai, y mas deshechados mandan 4 los Indios, 
y los cargan, como si fueran los Virreies de la Tierra. Si los Esclavos eran muchachos, 6 pobres, estabanse en casa, con sus Amos, los 
quales los trataban, como si fueran Hijos, y asi los vestian, y les daban de comer, como a tales, y muchas veces los Amos se casaban, con 
Esclavas swias, y lo mismo bacian las Mugeres, que contralan con sus Esclavos, muertos sus Maridos; y Esclavos havia que regian, y 
mandaban la casa de su Sefior, como hacen los Maiordomos. 

s¢ A los Esclavos, que salian malcriados, perecosos, fugitivos, y viciosos, amonestabanles los Amos, dos, 6 tres veces, y para maior justifi- 
cacion suia, hacian esta amonestacion, delante de testigos; y si todavia permanecian incorregibles, hechabanles la collera, que usaban, 
que es una media Argolla de palo, y puesta en la garganta salia, por detras encima de las espaldas, con dos agujeros, y por los agujeros 
atravesada una vara larga, con que quedaba presa la garganta, y & la vara juntaban otra vara, por defuera de los agujeros, y ambas a dos 
las ataban, una con otra, y la atadura Ilegaba 4 las puntas, 0 estremidades de las varas, donde no podia alcangar con las manos, ni podia 
desatarse ; y asi los llevaban, por los caminos, y 4 las veces les hechaban una trailla de cordel, con que los llevaban atraillados ; y porque 
de noche no se desatasen, 6 cortasen la ligadura del cordel, atabanles las manos, una sobre otra. Despues que hechaban collera al 
Esclavo, lo podian vender en qualquier Mercado, o Tianguez; y si de la primera, 5 segunda venta, no se enmendaban (porque quando le 

NO 2 Es. 323 

firmé custodia diligenter servabantur. Paulo post sacerdos quidam prodibat amiculo cinctus, cujus extremitas 
continuis floccis innexa erat. Is ab editiore templi loco descendens, imaginem seu idolum ex farind maiis cum 
melle subacta formatum manibus gerebat. Idoli oculi ex viridi corallio, dentes vero ex granis maiis constabant. 
Qua summa vero festinatione sacerdos poterat, per gradus decurrebat ; ibi in media area grandem lapidem theatri 

mercaban, preguntaba el comprador, quantas veces havia sido vendido) si todavia perseveraba en su inquietud, y travesuras, por tres, 0 
quatro veces, le podian vender, para el Sacrificio, aunque este Sacrificio acontecia pocas veces; porque todos los que se sacrificaban, eran 
havidos en Guerra. Quando el Esclavo traia una collera, tenia un remedio para libertarse, y era, que si se podia escapar de su Amo, y 
acogerse al Palacio Real, y Casa de los Reies, en entrando dentro era libre, y nadie le podia impedir la entrada, ni bolverlo del camino, 
que llevaba, sino eran sus Amos, y Hijos de su Sefior; y qualquiera otro, que le hechaba mano, 6 pretendia estorvarle la entrada en el 
Palacio era hecho Esclavo; porque pretendia privarle de aquella ventura, de quedar libre; y por el mismo caso lo quedaba el Esclavo. 
Quando alguno tenia Esclavo, y se vela en necesidad, no por eso lo vendia; pero deciale: 1A vés la necesidad, en que estol; y asi con- 
viene, que trabajes, y procures de aiudarme, para que salga de ella; hacialo asi el Esclavo, y comengaba a ir alos Tianguez, 6 Mercados, 
cargandose de lo que valia poco precio, y llevabalo 4 vender a otra parte donde tenia mas precio, y de alli bolvia cargado de lo que en su 
Tierra era de mas valor, y de esta manera hacia principio su caudal; y quandocrecia, en algun buen numero, empleabalo en cosas 
maiores, y asi crecia la ganancia, y con este su trabajo, industria remediaba la necesidad, y pobrega de su Amo. ‘Tambien acostum- 
braban estos Sefiores de Esclavos, dejarlos libres, y horros 4 su muerte, por causas que para ello declaraban; y si esto no hacian, que- 
daban los Esclavos 4 sus Herederos, como los demas bienes, que tenia.” 

We shall only further remark, in addition to this long extract, that slavery of every description was tolerated amongst the Jews. The 
Nethinims were their hereditary slaves, who, being Gibeonites and of the number of those nations doomed by them to destruction, saved 
their lives by practising a fraud on Joshua, as is recorded in the ninth chapter of bis book, who formally, in the twenty-third verse of the 
same chapter, pronounced the sentence of perpetual slavery against them: ‘“ Now therefore, ye are cursed; and there shall none of you be 
freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.” They are again mentioned in the ninth 
chapter of the First Book of Chronicles: “So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies ; and, behold, they were written in the book of the kings 
of Israel and Judah, who were carried away to Babylon for their transgression. Now the first inhabitants, that dwelt in their possessions 
in their cities were, the Israelites, the priests, Levites, and the Nethinims.” From this passage it may be inferred that the Hebrew nation 
consisted at that early period of three distinct orders, viz. the priests, the populace, and their slaves. Another class of slaves existing among 
the Jews were those properly designated Hebrew slaves: these were their own countrymen; and their slavery was not, except in some 
cases, perpetual, since their masters were obliged at the expiration of a certain number of years to release them. Their treatment of them 
was also regulated by the following express laws contained in the twenty-first chapter of Exodus and in the twenty-fifth chapter of Levi- 
ticus; whilst their conduct towards their other slaves seems to have been little restricted by the laws of the Pentateuch: « Now these are 
the judgments which thou shalt set before them. If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall 
go out free for nothing. If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him. 
If his master have given him a wife, and she have born hin sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master’s, and he 
shall go out by himself. And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free: then 
his master shall bring him unto the judges ; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door-post; and his master shail bore his ear 
through with an awl; and he shall serve him for ever. And if a man sell his daughter to be a maid-servant, she shall not go out as the 
men-servants do. If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a 
strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her. And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal 
with her after the manner of daughters. - If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not 
diminish. And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money.”— And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee 
be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bond-servant: but as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, 
he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of jubilee. And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with 
him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return. For they are my servants, which I 
brought forth out of the land of Egypt: they shall not be sold as bond-men. Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour, but shalt fear thy 
God. Both thy bond-men, and thy bond-maids, which thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that are round about you ; of them shall 
ye buy bond-men and bond-maids. Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of 
their families that are with you, which they begat in your land; and they shall be your possession: and ye shall take them as an inhe- 
ritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bond-men for ever: but over your brethren, the 
children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigour.” Slavery amongst the Jews was, however, of more ancient date than 
their first occupation of the land of Canaan; since even before they entered Egypt, where they dwelt for above three hundred years, it is 
recorded of Abraham in the sixteenth chapter of Genesis, that his wife Sarai having no children of her own, gave him her bond-woman 
Hagar the Egyptian as a concubine, whom both then and at a subsequent period she seemed to have considered and treated in every 
respect as a slave, although the Jews had not at that time any particular reason for entertaining enmity or aversion to the Egyptians, 
But a more convincing proof of the antiquity of the custom of selling if not of buying slaves amongst the Hebrew nation, is afforded in the 
thirty-seventh chapter of Genesis, which thus records the criminal conduct of the Jewish patriarchs in selling their brother Joseph to the 
Ishmaelites,—equally so both as regarded their old father, whose favourite he was, as well as the unfortunate object himself of their unjust 
envy. ‘“ And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him. And they said 

324. NOTES. 

specie positum, ascendebat, qui Quauxicalli, id est lapis aquilaris, vocabatur. Ex hoc theatro scalas aliquot ibi 
vicinas scansim ascendebat, e quibus tamen brevi iterum desultans, alias in latere positas exsuperabat, firmis manibus 
suum idolum continud gestans. Posted ad locum illum itabat quo captivi consederant. Horum singulis a summo 
ad imum, idolum apporrigebat, dicens, Ecce, hic deus tuus. Re peractd in altero latere per gradus quosdam se 
proripiebat. Jam ergo omnes et singuli qui pro victimis aderant, ad locum supplicio destinatum se conferebant, et 
morti preparabant, qui ex ordine quoque singulatim neci dabantur. Immolationis autem forma communissima 
illa erat, quod mactandorum, pectoribus diruptis, cor vivum extraherent. Ipsum cadaver cruore undiquaque madidum 
e gradibus templi deturbabatur. Sacrificium vero sex sacerdotes peragebant ; horum binis mactandi manus, duobus 
aliis pedes, et quinto collum firmantibus, sextus pectus scissim dirumpebat, et cruentis manibus palpitans cor 
evellebat. Hoc munus qui obibat, Chachalmua, id est, rerum consecratarum minister, vocabatur ; quod officium 
omnium dignissimum sold hereditatis successione in alios transferebatur, quo modo his in locis feudis posteri suc- 
cedunt. Homicidii iste designator pro summo sacerdote ac Papa habebatur, cui pro temporis et solennitatis 
conditione diversa nomina indebantur. Pro diversitate temporis, iidem ut nomen, sic vestes quoque permutabant. 
Ab officio Papee vel Topilzni nuncupabantur. Vestis illius rubea fimbrie vice in extremitate villis appendebatur. 
Capite coronam ex pulcherrimis ac flavescentibus pennis textam gerebat. Ex auribus annuli aurei gemmis ornati 
dependebant. Labiis versus mentum gemme ‘quippiam simile insertum erat. Sacrifici sex qui hostiam mactabant, 
facies manusque atras et informes ostendebant, quorum quinque capillos floccis intorserant admodum crispis et 
intricatis. Medio capite tenia coriaced revincti spectabantur. In syncipite scuta exilia, papyracea variis coloribus 
depicta suffixa gerebant. estes ex filo candido atroque contexte variabantur. Hoc habitu ipsi cacodemoni 
quadam tenus similes, foedis vultibus omnibus astantibus terrorem certissimum incutiebant. Summus sacerdos 

one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh. Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit: and we will say, 
Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams. And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out 
of their hands ; and said, Let us not kill him. And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the 
wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again. And it came to pass, 
when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stripped Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours, that was on him. And they 
took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it. And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up 
their eyes, and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmaelites came from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, 
going to carry it down to Egypt. And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood ? 
Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother, and our flesh: and his brethren 
were content. Then there passed by Midianites, merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold J oseph to 
the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt. And Reuben retummed unto the pit; and, behold, 
Joseph was not in the pit: and he rent his clothes. And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and I, whither shall 
IT go? And they took Joseph’s coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood: and they sent the coat of many 
colours, and they brought it to their father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy son’s coat or no. And he knew 
it, and said, It is my son’s coat; an evil beast hath devoured him ; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces. .And Jacob rent his clothes, 
and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days. And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him ; 
but he refused to be comforted: and he said, For I will go down into the. grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him. 
And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh’s and captain of the guard.” It is evident from this 
account, that ten out of the twelve patriarchs of the twelve tribes of Israel were implicated in the same degree of guilt, and in vain do we 
seck for arguments to urge in palliation of their conduct; they were all grown-up men, and had long before arrived at years of discretion : 
nor can it even be said that some of them from fear might have followed the multetude to do evil, since their two elder brothers (and pri- 
mogeniture carried with it great weight amongst the Jews) felt some sentiments of commiseration for their younger brother, and for the 
affliction into which they knew that their father would be thrown on receiving the intelligence of his death; and they differed in opinion 
from the others, who proposed to murder him, and to throw him into a pit. Reuben indeed seems to have acted a proper part on the 
occasion; and his exclamation on not finding his brother in the pit, “ The child is not; and I, whither shall I go?” proves that he was not 
devoid of every feeling of humanity. But what a scene of hypocrisy was afterwards acted by them all, when all his sons and daughters 
rose up to comfort their sorrowing father after having shown him the coat, dipped in the blood, which he believed to be his son’s! How, 
after reading this history, can we feel or pretend to feel any reverence for the Jewish Patriarchs? Their moral characters were not only bad, 
but infamous; and to praise them would be to insult virtue. ‘The Bible records many other crimes which at a subsequent period they 
committed ; and the evil report,—true it cannot be doubted,—which before this time Joseph had brought to his father of them, was the 
cause of their originally hating him. Reuben alone is presented to us under favourable colours ;—but how great must have been the 
enormity of which he afterwards became guilty, to have been deprived by his father of his birthright, and to have been cursed by him 
(endued moreover with a prophetic spirit, and therefore well acquainted with the vain attempt which he made to spare him the grief of 
being deprived of Joseph) on his death-bed, as is recorded in the fourth verse of the forty-ninth chapter of Genesis ! 

as sian 

NOTES. 325 

magnum latum et acutissimum cultrum manibus librabat. Alius monile ligneum serpentis forma excisum gestabat. 
Sex hi sacerdotes idolum suum pretergredientes, submissa veneratione ingeniculabantur. Lapis in quem sontes 
illidebantur pyramidis formam habebat, et in opposito sacelli idoli jacebat. Huic tanta acuties erat, ut in illum 
illisus facili opera totus diffinderetur. His omnibus sacerdotibus ex ordine stantibus, hi qui in bello capti pro 
victimis servabantur, magna populi frequentia adducebantur ad eum locum qui supplicio destinatus erat. Ducebantur 
vero nudi. Horum qui primus adstabat hinc pedibus, illinc manibus correptus, in acutum lapidem nudus illidebatur. 
Quo facto, dicto ocius, quintus annulum ligneum collo innectebat. Summus verd sacerdos mira agilitate cultro 
pectus discindebat, ex quo palpitans evulsum cor, ita ut fumabat soli veluti ostendens, obvertebat. A quo iterum 
conyersus ad idolum, viscus in ejus faciem cruentum excutiebat. Ab eo cadaver per gradus subjectos devolvebat, 
qui saxo tam propinqui erant ut vix binorum pedum intervallum intercederet. Hoc ritu consequenter et alii 
mactabantur. Porrd in unum cumulum congestis cadaveribus, domini accedentes quem quisque in bello ceperat, 
auferebant, et ex carnibus coctis lautas epulas domi, et splendida convivia agitabant. Hoc modo qui una vice 
immolarentur, plerunque 40 aut 50 numerabantur. Nam ad hostes vivos capiendos Mexicani admodum agiles 
et expediti fuerant. Qui Mexicanis finitimi erant, hi magna ex parte tum eorum mores, tum leges et statuta, 
tum cultus alios emulabantur.” cap. xx. “Indorum peculiaris alia quoque ratio diebus festis sacrificandi fuerat, 
quam Racaxipe Veliztli, id est, hominum excorationem vocabant; ided quod uni, vel pluribus sclavis quos ad 
id selegerant, corium detraherent. Hec detractio a peculiariter ordinatis et deputatis fiebat. Si quis hoc munus 
obiisset, tum ostiatim per omnes plateas et fora civitatis circuibat, saltando et cantillando, nescio quid animi 
exprimens. Quos prehendebat, si quid erogare stipis cogebantur, tergiversantibus pellem cruentam in facies illidebat 
ut cruore diffluerent. Hoc ludicrum, quamdiu pellis integra esset, durabat. Quo tempore ita passim discurreret, 
stipis quam plurimum colligebat que idoli cultibus impendebatur. Hujus festi ea ratio erat, ut sacrificus cum hostia 
sud seu homine mactando aperta luctaé prius decerneret hoc modo; sclavo de saxo religato in manus gladium cum 
scuto indebant, qui si antagonistam sacrificum equé armatum prostravisset, non saltem a victime sorte liber 
evadebat, sed ducis insuper et bellatoris titulum sortiebatur ; quo nomine etiam deinde apud universos magni fiebat. 
Quod si vero in pugna succumberet, nulla mora super lapide isto ex quo revinctus erat, cedebatur et mactabatur. 
Porro aliud quoque sacrificii genus colebant, ad quod sclavum quemdam seligebant qui idolum ipsum repreesentaret, 
et illud in omnibus vivus exprimeret; hoc pacto, sacerdotibus suis quotannis sclavum unum tradebant incolz 
ut viva idoli imago nunquam deficeret. Provinciam ergo hanc initurus, sclavus probe primum lavabatur et 
mundabatur. Ita veluti initiato, habitum et insignia idoli, et ipsum illius nomen quoque conferebant, et integri 
anni decursu sclavuam non minus ac idolum ipsum destinatis cultibus venerabantur. Duodecim ministris velut 
asseclis assiduo ne quo aufugeret, stipabatur. i fors aufugisset, custodum primarius in ejus locum sufficiebatur qui 
idolum referret, et immolaretur. Sclayo hujusmodi conclave templi omnium ornatissimum et spectatissimum loca- 
batur, in quo ageret, et cibum caperet, et huc ad eum subinde civitatis primates ingrediebantur honoris causa, cibum ei 
ministrantes, et alia officia honoraria deferentes. Animi causa fors aliquo per civitatem prodeambulaturum primatum 
magnus poné numerus insequebatur. Is quam manibus gerebat fistula nonnunquam cantillabat in plateis, ut sui 
presentis populis aliquod signum daret. Ad perceptum sonitum ex edibus certatim effluebant tum viri, tum foemine 
ulnis infantes gestantes, quos ante pedes ejus deponebant, et divina veneratione per gentem prosequebantur. Idem 
et populus reliquus prestabat. Nocte in admodum firmam caveam ferream* illum includebant ne fuga securus 
eluderet, et hoc usque ad feste dici appulsum sedulo ita continuabant, qua pro victimé tandem sistebatur. Hoc et 
similibus dolis Sathanas fatuas gentes ludos fecerat. Korum qui hujusmodi insania ab Indis mactari solebant 
numerus tantus erat, ut tuto pronunciari vix possit. Nam pro compertissimo narratur aliquoties ultra 5000 homines 
mactatos et immolatos fuisse. Ad quam infandam crudelitatem confidentius patrandam cacodemon superstitiosos 
homines hac feré astutia inescabat. Si commodum videbatur, Sathanas sacerdotibus persuadebat ut regulis signi- 
ficarent parum abesse, quin dii jam fame et inedia conficerentur, et taberent; facerent ergd quod ad rem conferret. 
His fatui reges incitati bellum confestim decernebant, et subditis suis ut indicto tempore armati confluerent, 
mandabant, deos enim suos jam victimas et alimenta poscere. Sed et per feciales missos hostibus suis bellum 
denunciabant, et denunciationi causam addebant. Ubi ergd presentibus armis utrinque concursum est, pugna 

* Since the Mexicans were unacquainted with iron, itis probable that the translator of the Spanish text of Acosta’s History into 
Latin has here been guilty of some mistake. 

(Ae) 

326 NOTES. 

commissa nihil aliud molicbantur quam ut alter alterum vivum prehenderet. Nec tam se invicem cxdere et 

prosternere, quam capere et ligare studebant, ut nimirum vivas pro diis victimas tropheis adducerent. 
et id sciendum est, Indos nullum quemquam regem creasse et coronasse, 

Hoc loco 
quin is prius aliquarum. provinciarum 
victor factus fuisset, et captivorum plurimos ante se ad deorum sacrificia egisset. Eo pacto in honorem sacrilegi 
et teterrimi Sathane sanguinis humani inestimabilem copiam assidud profundebant.”—Cap. xxi. bai 

.. The reflection that human sacrifices were almost as common among the Jews at one period of their history as among 
the Mexicans and Peruvians, must give rise to grave considerations. Neither can we, in attempting to vindicate 
the chosen people of God, charge other nations with an equal degree of depravity in this respect; since, whatever 
might have been the sentiments of darker ages, enlightened men of the present day would smile with derision at those 
who should venture to assert that the Egyptians, the Greeks, or the Romans, in any age offered human sacrifices 
in the manner recorded of the Jews by their own Prophets, whose accounts we cannot charge with exaggeration, 
because they were inspired; or imagine their words to have been misrepresented, because they are found in Holy 
Writ. Isaiah in the fifty-seventh chapter of his Book, addressing the Jews, says “ But draw near hither, ye sons 
of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom 
make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood, 
inflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifis of the 
rocks? Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou 
poured a drink-offering, thou hast offered a meat-offering. Should I receive comfort in these? Upon a lofty and 
high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.” And Jeremiah in the second 
chapter of his Prophecies: “ Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thow also taught the wicked 
ones thy ways. Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls. of the poor innocents: I have not found it by 
secret search, but upon all these.” And in the seventh chapter the same prophet cries, “ Cut off thine hair, O 
Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the Lord hath rejected and forsaken 
the generation of his wrath. For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the Lord: they have set 
their abominations tm the house which is called by my name, to pollute it. And they have built the high places of 
Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which 1 
commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.” And in the nineteenth chapter, wherein is declared the 
signification of the type of breaking the potter’s vessel, we are informed by Jeremiah that Tophet, or the valley of 
Hinnom, which is mentioned in other parts. of Scripture as a place famous for the celebration of human sacrifices, 
was close to the walls of Jerusalem. The high places which are alluded to could not have been natural hills or 
mounds of earth, as they are said to have been built: they had altars erected on a platform above, and were 
probably constructed on the same plan as the Mexican Teocalli. The passage. referred to in Jeremiah is the 
following: “Thus saith the Lord, Go, and get a potter’s earthen bottle, and take of the ancients of the people, and 
of the ancients of the priests; and go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry 
of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that,I shall tell thee; and say, Hear ye the word of the Lord, 
O kings of. Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I 
will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle. Because they have forsaken 
me, and haye estranged this place, and have burnt incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their 
fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have jil/ed this place with the blood of innocents; they have 
built also the high places of Baal, to burn thei sons with fire for burnt-offerings unto Baal, which I com- 
manded not, nor spake it, neither came it into my mind: Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, 
that this place shall no more be called. Tophet, nor, The valley of the son of Himnom, but, The valley. of 
slaughter.” Ezekiel also, in many parts of his Prophecies, testifies as to the frequency of human sacrifices 
amongst the Jews,. especially in his twentieth chapter: “ Notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they 
walked not in my statutes; neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a man do, he shall even live in 
them; they polluted my sabbaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger 
against them in the wilderness. Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name’s sake, that it 
should not be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth. I lifted up mine 
hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the heathen, and disperse them 
through the countries; because they had not executed my judgments, but had despised my statutes, and had 

NOTES. | : 397 

polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers’ idols. Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were 
not good, and judgments whereby they should not live; and I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused 
to pass through the fire all that openeth the womb, that J might make them desolate, to the end that they might 
know that Iam the Lord. Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith 
the Lord God, Yet in this your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.’ For 
when I had brought them into the land, for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every 
high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation 
of their offering: there also they made their sweet savour, and poured out there their drink-offerings. Then I said 
unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go? And the name thereof is called Bamah unto this day. 
Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God, Are ye polluted after the manner of your 
fathers ? and commit ye whoredom after their abominations? For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons 
to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be inquired of by 
you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be inquired of by you. And that which cometh 
into your mind shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the families of the countries, to serve 
wood and stone. As I live, saith the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched-out arm, and with 
fury poured out, will I rule over you.” In the twenty-second chapter of the same prophet we find these words with 
reference to Jerusalem: “ Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Now, thou son of man, wilt thou 
judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city? yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations. Then say thou, Thus saith the 
Lord God, The city sheddeth blood in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against herself to 
defile herself. Thouart become guilty im thy blood that thou hast shed ; and hast defiled thyself in thine idols which 
thou hast made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years: therefore have I 
made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking to all countries. Those that be near, and those that be far 
from thee, shall mock thee, which art infamous and much vexed. Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were 
in thee to theer power to shed blood.” And in the twenty-third chapter, Ezekiel reproves Israel and Judah under 
the simile of two sisters, named Aholah and Aholibah: “The Lord said moreover unto me, Son of man, wilt 
thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations ; that they have committed adultery, 
and blood zs in their hands, and with their idols have they committed ‘adultery; and have also caused their sons, 
whom they bare unto me, to pass for them through the fire, to devour them. Moreover, this they have done unto 
me: they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths. For when they had slain 
thew children to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have they 
done in the midst of mine house. And, furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a 
messenger was sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst 
thyself with ornaments.” It says in the twenty-first chapter of the Second Book of Kings: “ Manasseh was twelve 
years old when he began to reign, and reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Heph- 
zibah. , And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the abominations of the heathen, whom the 
Lord cast out before the children of Israel. For he buclt up again the high places which Hezekiah his father had 
destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove, as did Ahab king of Israel ; and worshipped all the 
host of heaven, and served them. And he built a/tars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord said, In 
Jerusalem will I put my name. And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the 
Lord. Andhe made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar 
spirits and wizards: he wrought much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. And he set 
a graven image of the grove that he had made in the house, of which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his 
son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever. 
Neither will I make the feet of Israel move-any more out of the land which I gave their fathers; only if they will 
observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses 
commanded them. But they hearkened not: and Manasseh seduced them to do more evil than did the nations 
whom the Lord destroyed before the children of Isracl. And the Lord spake by his servants the prophets, saying, 

Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations, and hath done wickedh ly above all that the Amorites 
did, which were before fam, and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols; therefore thus saith the Lord God of 
Israel, Behold, I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both his ears 

328 NOTES. 

shall tingle.” The sins of the Amorites and the former inhabitants of the land of Canaan are enumerated in the 
twelfth chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, amongst which, that of eating human flesh is mentioned: “ For it was 
thy will to destroy by the hands of our fathers, both those old inhabitants of thy holy land whom thou hatedst, 
for doing most odious works of witchcrafts and wicked sacrifices. And also, those merciless murderers of children, 
and devourers of man’s flesh, and the feasts of blood with their priests out of the midst of their idolatrous crew, 
and the parents that killed with their own hands souls destitute of help. That the land which thou esteemedst 
above all other, might receive a worthy colony of God’s children. Nevertheless, even those thou sparedst as men, 
and didst send wasps*, forerunners of thine host, to destroy them by little and little.” The Jews are also accused 
by the prophet Micah, in the third chapter of his book, of eating human flesh: “ And I said, Hear, I pray you, O 
heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; Is it not for you to know judgment? who hate the good, 
and love the evil; who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones; who also eat the 
flesh of my people}, and flay ther skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for 
the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.” This address of Micah is to the princes of the house of Israel who were 

* Xicotencatl and Xicochimalco were both Mexican proper names; the first of which signified “ the wasp on the lip,” and the 
other ‘ the wasp on the shield.” 

+ Voltaire, inclining to the opinion that cannibalism is a lesser crime than offering a human sacrifice to the Deity, appeals to the 
authority of Scripture to prove that the Jews were guilty of both these abominations. Some divines have declared this to be a gross 
calumny against the Jews, thereby betraying their own ignorance. The passage alluded to in the writings of Voltaire is the following : 
“Les Juifs en immolaient (des gargons et des filles) Cela s’appelait Vanathéme; c’était un véritable sacrifice; et il est ordonné, au vingt- 
uniéme chapitre du Lévitique, de ne point épargner les Ames vivantes qu’on aura vouées; mais il ne leur est prescrit en aucun endroit 
den manger, on les en menace seulement. Moise, comme nous avons vu, dit aux Juifs que, s‘ils n’observent pas ses cérémonies, 
non-seulement ils auront la gale, mais que les méres mangeront leurs enfans. II est vrai que, du temps d’Ezéchiel, les Juifs devaient 
étre dans usage de manger de la chair humain; car il leur prédit, au chapitre xxxix., que Dieu leur fera manger non-seulement les 
chevaux de leurs ennemis, mais encore les cavaliers et les autres guerriers. Et en effet, pourquoi les Juifs n’auraient-ils pas été 
anthropophages? C’ett été la seule chose qui eit manqué au peuple de Dieu pour étre le plus abominable peuple de la terre.” A note 
added to the context assigns strong reasons in favour of the construction there put upon the words of Ezekiel: « Voici les raisons de ceux 
qui ont soutenu qu’Ezéchiel, en cet endroit, s’adresse aux Hebreux de son temps, aussi-bien qu’aux autres animaux carnassiers ; car assuré- 
ment les Juifs d’aujourd’hui ne le sont pas, et c’est plutét inquisition qui a été carnassiére envers eux. Ils disent qu’une partie de cette 
apostrophe regarde les bétes sauvages, et que l’autre est pour les Juifs. La premiére partie est ainsi concue: ¢ Dis 4 tout ce qui court, 
a tous les oiseaux, a toutes les bétes des champs: Assemblez-vous, hAtez-vous, courez a la victime que je vous immole, afin que vous 
mangiez la chair et que vous buviez le sang. Vous mangerez la chair des forts, vous boirez le sang des princes de la terre, et des beliers, 
et des agneaux, et des boucs, et des taureaux, et des volailles, et de tous les gras. Ceci ne peut regarder que les oiseaux de proie et 
les bétes feroces. Mais la seconde partie a paru adressée aux Hébreux mémes: ¢ Vous vous rassasierez sur ma table du cheval et du 
fort cavalier, et de tous les guerriers, dit le Seigneur; et je mettrai ma gloire dans les nations, etc.’ Il est trés-certain que les rois de 
Babylone avaient des Scythes dans leurs armées. Ces Scythes buvaient du sang dans les cranes de leurs ennemis vaincus, et mangeaient 
leurs chevaux, et quelquefois de la chair humaine. II se peut trés-bien que le prophéte ait fait allusion & cette contume barbare, et 
qu'il ait menacé les Scythes d’étre traités comme ils traitaient leurs ennemis. Ce qui rend cette conjecture vraisemblable, c’est le mot de 
table: < Vous mangerez a ma table le cheval et le cavalier.’ Il n’y a pas d’apparence qu’on ait adressé ce discours aux animaux, et 
qu’on leur ait parlé de se mettre a table. Ce serait le seul endroit de l’Ecriture ot l’on aurait employé une figure si étonnante. Le sens 
commun nous apprend qu’on ne doit point donner & un mot une acception, qui ne lui a jamais été donnée dans aucun livre. C’est une 
raison trés-puissante pour justifier les écrivains qui ont cru les animaux désignés par les versets 17 et 18, et les Juifs désignés par les 
versets 19 et 20. De plus, ces mots, je mettrai ma gloire dans les nations, ne peuvent s’adresser qu’aux Juifs, et non pas aux oiseaux; cela 
parait decisif. Nous ne portons point notre jugement sur cette dispute, mais nous remarquons avec douleur qu’il n’y a jamais eu de 
plus horribles atrocités sur la terre, que dans la Syrie, pendant douze cents années presque consécutives.” Another strong reason for 
attaching the sense in which they are here understood to the words of Ezekiel is, that Isaiah expressly says in the ninth chapter of his 
Prophecies, that the Jews through the wrath of the Lord of hosts should become cannibals. And the only doubt that can possibly arise, 
as to the precise meaning of the prediction of the latter prophet, is, whose flesh was to be eaten,—whether their own or that of 
their brethren ; since ‘“ every man shall eat the flesh of his own arm” might mean, shall eat the flesh of his kindred, and of those who 
were of the same tribe. At any rate, those who began by eating the flesh of their own arms would be very likely to end by devouring 
the flesh of their enemies ; which seems to be the real sense of the prophecy of Isaiah: since what signification otherwise can the next 

disjointed, and, in this case, mutilated sentence bear: “ Manasseh,. Ephraim ; and Ephraim, Manasseh?” It may be proper to cite the : 

entire passage of Isaiah :— Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the 
fire: no man shall spare his brother. And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and 
they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm: Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: and 
they together shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.” 

ue 

NOTES. 329 

guilty of cannibalism. The heads of Jacob were the priests and elders, of whom it is said in the fourteenth verse 
of the thirty-sixth chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles: “Moreover all the chief of the priests and the 
people transgressed very much after a// the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the Lord 
which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.” It is evident from the passages of Scripture which have been quoted, that 
in Jerusalem itself the worship of Jehovah was mixed up with that of idols; the temple profaned probably with 
human sacrifices, and the flesh of human victims eaten on solemn festivals. These enormities did not continue for 
a day or fora year, but, according to Ezekiel, for many ages, from the time of the children of Israel first entering the 
land of Canaan to the period ofthe Babylonian captivity. This interval comprehends two periods of Jewish history, 
that of the Judges, and that of the Kings. Under the judges the Jews were so wicked, that it is said in the last verse 
of the last chapter of the Book of Judges, “In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which 
was right in his own eyes.” Under the kings, from the age of Rehoboam the son of Solomon to the carrying 
away into captivity, scarcely any thing is recorded of the Jews, taken in the mass, but idolatry, witchcraft, and human 
sacrifices. Here Jewish history may be properly said to end, almost where profane history commences; for the 
prophetic spirit being wanting to the second temple as well as the Urim and Thummim, and the rod of Aaron that 
budded forth almonds, the succession of inspired historians ceased, and the relations of later Hebrew writers are 
rejected as apocryphal and uncertain. We however know generally, that the posterity of those who returned from 
Babylon and founded the second temple, much exceeded in iniquity their forefathers, and were accordingly visited. 
with the severest judgments in the destruction of their city and their temple by the Romans, whose standard was 
much less an abomination than the unhallowed rites with which the Jews themselves had profaned the sanctuary. 
The motto taken by Cortes, “ Judicium Domini apprehendit eos,” seems obliquely to refer to them; and the Mexican 
tradition of the destruction of Tulan, and of the apparition of the child with the putrid head, the pestilential effluvia 
proceeding from which destroyed so many of the Tultecas, seems also applicable to Jerusalem, and to the sufferings, 
especially that of pestilence, which the Jews sustained during the course of their memorable siege. In referring 
the motto of Cortes to the destruction of Jerusalem under Titus, which happened so many centuries before his 
age, we must suppose, entering into the feelings of the Spanish general, that he recognized in Mexico a second 
Jerusalem*, and in his own conquests a triumph over the Jews of the New World, as Titus had before vanquished 
those of the Old. 

The secret correspondence of Cortes with the Spanish Court, which may probably still exist either in the archives 
of Simancas, or in the recesses of the Escurial, would, if ever published, throw great light on a mystery which 
religious and state policy has long kept concealed. Peter Martyr does not refer to two or three letters of that con- 
queror, but to a “huge volume” which was laid before the Council of the Indies, of which Garcia de Loaisa, the 
Emperor’s confessor, was president; and he and Gomara, who was chaplain to Cortes, both confess that they have 
mmposed reserve upon themselves in treating of the Mexican superstitions. In fact, all that Peter Martyr says of 
Huitzilopuchtli, the tutelary deity of Mexico, whose temple he briefly describes in the course of his eight Decades, 
is comprised in a single line of the fourth chapter of his Fifth Decade, where he writes to Adrian the Sixth, “It is a 
fearful thing to be spoken what they declare and report concerning their idols: omitting therefore to speake of 
their greatest marble idol Wichilabuchichi, of the height of three men, not inferiour to that huge statue of Rhodes.” 
And it should also be observed that he does not so much as mention Quetzalcoatl. If it be argued that the Mexicans 
could not have been by religion Jews, because the spirit of Judaism was repugnant to a coalition with idolatry and 
to the mixture of other rites and ceremonies with its own, and forbade altogether the worship of graven images, 
that objection will have no weight when it is recollected what is said of the mixed worship of the Samaritans in 
the seventeenth chapter of the Second Book of Kings, and of the eleven hundred shekels of silver, in the seven- 
teenth chapter of Judges, which a woman dedicated to make a graven and a molten image to Jehovah. The passage 
alluded to in the Book of Kings is the following: “ And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from 

* When we read in Gomara and in other early Spanish historians, of, the prodigies which preceded the overthrow of Mexico so 

nearly resembling those which Josephus records to have happened shortly before the final destruction of J erusalem, 
to perceive the spirit in which these relations were composed, and the feelings which were latent behind th 
truth becomes generally, as soon as recognized, persuasive, because those who 
be exempt from the charge of deliberately intending to deceive. ; 

(42 ) 

it is impossible not 
e comparison. Half revealed 
do not even purpose to bestow information, must certainly 

330 NOTES. 

Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria, instead 
of the children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof. And so it was at the 
beginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not the Lord; therefore the Lord sent lions among them, 
which slew some of them. Wherefore they spake to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations which thou hast 
removed, and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not the manner of the God of the land: therefore he hath sent 
lions among them, and behold, they slay them, because they know not the manner of the God of the land. Then 
the king of Assyria commanded, saying, Carry thither one of the priests whom ye brought from thence, and let 
them go and dwell there, and let him teach them the manner of the God of the land. Then one of the priests, whom 
they had carried away from Samaria, came and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the Lord. 
Howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places which the Sama- 
ritans had made, every nation in their cities wherein they dwelt. And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, 
and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima, and the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, 
and the Sepharvites burnt their children in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim. So 
they feared the Lord, and made unto themselves of the lowest of them priests of the high places, which sacrificed for 
them in the houses of the high places: they feared the Lord, and served their own gods, after the manner of the 
nations whom they carried away from thence.” 

On the supposition that Cortes discovered the Jewish religion established in Mexico, it is easy to assign a reason 
for the three years’ delay in sending over regular clergy from Spain, notwithstanding the pressing solicitations which 
Cortes, publicly at least, made to the Emperor to that effect: since the real cause might have been a wish to avoid 
scandal, and to have time to root out with the secular arm some traces of Judaism, which could not fail to strike a 
clerical order of men, however they might have been passed over unheeded by the military followers of Cortes. It 
is proper however to observe, that this delay, which seems very extraordinary, considering the age, the zeal of the 
Spanish nation, and above all the state of the new vineyard, is ascribed, in the second chapter of the fifteenth book 
of Torquemada’s History to other causes, amongst which are enumerated the death of the Pope (Leo the Tenth), 
and the Emperor’s doubts whether he could conscientiously annex to the crown of Spain the newly-discovered 
kingdoms. The analogies between many of the Mexican and Jewish superstitions afford convincing proof that they 
were derived from a common source: and it is a curious fact, that many obscure passages in Scripture may be elu- 
cidated by referring to the works of Torquemada, Garcia, and Acosta. It is said of Manasseh, in the twenty-first 
chapter of the Second Book of Kings, “And he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the house, of 
which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of 
all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever.” Commentators have been much perplexed by this verse, 
and have confessed themselves unable to explain what the image of the grove could have been—which, if considered 
in connection with the following extract from the eighth chapter of the seventh book of Torquemada’s Indian 
Monarchy, (remembering at the same time that groves and high places, whether natural or artificial hills, are gene- 
rally associated together in Scripture, because the high places were planted and ornamented with groves,) may be 
easily understood,—* Estos Indios Occidentales entre muchos sacrificios que hacian, era uno hacer 4 honra de los 
montes unas culebras de palo, 6 de raices de arboles, dandoles cabeca de culebra, y unas munequillas de lo mismo 
que llamaban Ecatotontin; y estas figuras de culebras y nifios fingidos, las revestian de una massa que llaman 
Tzoalli, hecha de semillas de Bledos; y ponianlos en unas armaconcillas de madera, hechas 4 manera de sierras 6 
cerros montuosos, sobre cuia cumbre los fijaban. Y esta era una manera de ofrenda que ofrecian 4 los montes 
altos y sierras empinadas.” “ Amongst the many sacrifices which these Indians of the West made, there was one 
which they performed in honour of the mountains, by forming serpents out of wood, or of the roots of trees, to 
which they affixed serpents’ heads, and also dolls of the same, which they called Kcatotontin; which figures 
of serpents and fictitious children they covered with dough, named by them Tzoalli, composed of the seed of 
Bledos ; and placed them on supporters of wood, carved in the representation of ridges of hills or mountams, on the 
top of which they fixed them. This was a kind of offering which they made to the mountains and elevated hills.” 
Isaiah says, in the sixth verse of the fifty-seventh chapter of his Prophecies, “ Among the smooth stones of the 
stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink-offering, thou hast offered 
a meat-offering. Should I receive comfort in these?” ‘The Mexicans were accustomed to place smooth round 
stones, which they probably found in the beds of rivers, in their temples, and to use them for altars or some other 

NOTES. 331 

consecrated purposes. ‘This kind of stone was called a Teotecpatl. The reverence which the Jews felt for smooth 
stones might have originated in the ordinance contained in the twenty-fifth verse of the twentieth chapter of 
Exodus; “ And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up 
thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it ;’—since it is probable that, in obedience to this prohibition, if they formed 
the altar of a single block of stone, they reduced it to a proper shape, and polished it by rubbing another piece 
of stone against it; or if they built it of several stones, that they chose such as were smooth and even, and not 
rough and shapeless fragments. 

The Peruvians resembled the Jews in another superstition connected with stones, which Acosta thus notices in 
the fifth chapter of his fifth book: “ Aliquo profecturi, tum aut veteres calceos, aut plumas, aut mansam Cocam 
cujus magna ibi copia est, in viarum divaricationibus, vel in montanis ac eorum fastigiis, que Apachitas nominant 
dispergebant. Illis fors destituti, ad minimum tamen, biviis lapidem imponebant qui instar sacrificii esset, 
juxtaque de itineris felicitate et incolumitate vota faciebant, quorum tunc pro somnio suo compotes quoque redde- 
bantur. Et hac in concilio quodam provinciali Peruano ita enarrata fuerunt. Sacrificiorum hujusmodi in viis 
integre persepe strues posite reperiuntur. In hance superstitionis insaniam vetus detortum proverbium esto, 
‘Sicut qui mittit lapidem im acervum Mercurii, ita qui tribuit insipienti honorem.’ Sicut enim Mercurius lapidum 
vim non sentit, sic insipiens non attendit aut curat beneficia sibi prestita.” The proverb cited by Acosta is found 
in the twenty-sixth chapter of the Proverbs of Solomon. It is translated in our English version of the Bible, “As 
he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth honour to a fool:” which is evidently wrong; as, if it has any 
sense at all, it supposes a case that never happened*. The’fortieth verse of the twenty-third chapter of Ezekiel has 
already been quoted, and is referred to here on account of the phrase “ paintedst thy eyes ;” which, though explained 
to signify to dye with black the borders of the eyelids, in order to give greater expression to the eyes, would also 
correspond with the Mexican custom of partially painting the face, beginning at the inner and proceeding to the 
outer angle of the eye. It is surprising that Acosta,—who has traced no less strong a resemblance between 
the ritual observances of the Mexicans and the Jews than Garcia has discovered in their moral codes-, and 
who even ventures to express himself in the following terms in the eleventh chapter of the fifth book of his 
History of the Indies,—* Sic quicquid dicant alii, a Domino et Servatore nostro Jesu Christo prope nihil uspiam in 
evangelio suo constitutum et ordinatum est, quod Sathanas variis modis emulari et in superstitiones gentiles con- 
vertere non annisus sit; id quod ew deinceps dicendorum attentione clarius et manifestius elucebit,’—should still 
reject the rational conclusion adopted by Las Casas, That the Jews had colonized America at an earlier period 
than the Spaniards, and had introduced their customs and superstitions amongst the inhabitants of that continent. 
Was it, we may ask, in consequence of Acosta’s having been so much later an historian than Las Casas, 
and having visited America nearly fifty years after that illustrious prelate, when the active exertions of the 
early missionaries and Spanish clergy had already rooted out many of the primitive superstitions of the Indians, 
that he did not become sensible of what had so forcibly struck Las Casas? Or was it, that he dared not avow 
an opinion which would not have been tolerated in the age in which he lived, and was consequently compelled to 
advance an absurd hypothesis? Or, finally, had Las Casas access to any means of information of which Acosta was 
deprived,—such as original Hebrew documents, a copy of the Teoamoxtli or divine book of the Tultecas, the His- 
tory of Votan, or books in any other languages, which might have been discovered among the Indians?—for where 
all has been misrepresentation and concealment, proof cannot be said to exist of alphabetical writing having been 
wholly unknown in America, or that it might not have been a secret, like the icpa ypappara, or sacred characters of 
the Egyptians, which were only known to some of the priests, who might have thought, with that famous nation 
of antiquity, that esoteric doctrines were best conveyed to the people through the medium of picture-writing; 
because that system of education was best calculated to keep them ignorant and superstitious ; and, powerfully 

* « To sin as it were with a cart-rope,” is another passage occurring in our English translation of the Bible which is liable to the 
just animadversions of Bishop Louth. What can be the meaning of such a metaphor? One might almost imagine that a Jewish Rabbi 
had been the translator of the passage in question who had been reading in the Talmud a fable similar to that of Totec, who commanded 
the Tultecas to bind the image of Sin with thick ropes, and to drag it out of the city of Tulan. 

+; A curious parallel of the Jewish and Indian moral laws may be found in that chapter of the third book of Garcia’s Origin of the 
Indians, which he has entitled, “ Como los Indios guardaron los Preceptos del Decalogo.” ‘How the Indians obeyed the Ten 
Commandments.” 

332 NOTES. 

working through their imagination and their fears on their reason, to induce them to believe the most monstrous 
fables that fancy could invent of their gods. The words of Las Casas, “ Loquela tua manifestum te aor. & Wout 
speech betrays you,” in reference to the Mexicans, or some other tribe of Indians, whom he took to be real Jews, 
deserve the most serious attention; because we have here the opinion of a person who was well acquainted with 
the Mexicans and Peruvians, and who, proceeding to America immediately after its discovery by the Spaniards, spent 
there the greatest part of a long life, and solemnly recorded, in a testamentary document, his conviction of a fact, 
which he might have had many reasons fornot choosing to divulge. Acosta’s alleged reasons for denying the In dians' 
to be Jews or descended from Jews, are found in the twenty-third chapter of the first book of his History of 
America, to which he has prefixed the inscription, “ Quod mué¢ falsissimé illud statuant, Indos ex genere 
Judeorum defluxisse.” He there says, “Longé autem diversa per Atlantidem querenda via est, qua Indiani in 
hune novum orbem pertigerint. Augurantur itaque nonnulli hujus semite indicium apud Esdram reperiri, in cujus 
libro quarto heec feré verba leguntur: ‘Tu autem vidisti eum colligentem ad se aliam multitudinem pacificam. He 
sunt decem tribus que captive: factee sunt de terra sud in diebus Ose regis, quem captivum duxit Salmanasser rex 
Assyriorum, et transtulit eos trans flumen, et translati sunt in terram aliam. Ipsi autem sibi dederunt consilium hoc, 
ut derelinquerent multitudinem gentium, et proficiscerentur in ulteriorem regionem ubi nunquam habitavit genus 
humanum, vel ibi observare legitima sua, gue non fuerant servantes in regione sud. Per introitus autem angustos 
fluminis Euphratem introierunt; fecit enim eis tune Altissimus signa, e¢ statuit venas fluminis usquequd transirent ; 
per eam enim regionem erat via multi itineris, anni unius et dimidii, nam regio illa vocatur Arsareth. Tunc inha- 
bitaverunt ibi usque in novissimo tempore, et nunc iterum cum cceperint venire, éterwm Altissimus statuet venas 
fluminis ut possint transire. Propter hec vidisti multitudinem cum pace.’—Hzc itaque Esdre verba Indis aptare 
satagunt, dicentes a Deo illos eo perductos esse ubi nunquam habitarit genus humanum, et terram illam quam ingressi 
sint tanto intervallo distantem esse, ut ad eam obtinendam unius et dimidii anni profectione opus fuerit, gentemque 
illam natura pacificam esse. Hine indubitata consequentia obtinere volunt, Indos omnino de gente Judaica esse, 
quod plerique meticulosi et timidi, superstitiosique et acuti, ac mendaces sint. His annectunt Indorum quoque 
habitum vestesque, ac facees Judeorum omnino similes esse; nam et ipsos simplici tunica et quadrato pallio amictos, | 
aut nudis omnino pedibus incedere, aut soleis levibus superné tantum revinctis inambulare ; jam verd hanc ipsam 
quoque Hebrzorum fuisse vestiendi rationem modumque, tum ex Judaicis historiis, tum ipsorum quibusdam pig- 
mentis tabulisque antiquis patere aiunt; ex quibus omnibus haud difficulter monstrari posse autumant, maximam 
eorum partem hoc modo vestitam olim fuisse; Samsonem ipsum quoque olim Indorum similia vestimenta saltem 
poposcisse, tunicas nempe et syndonem, hoc est, ut Hispani vocitant, Camisettam, et Mantam, contendunt. Sed hec 
mihi omnia conceptus animi videntur mere puerilis et phantastici, qu et ipsa tamen contra ipsorum sententiam longé 
durius depugnant quam ut eam quoquomodo stabilire’possint. Primum enim satis probe novimus Judzos usos esse 
typis et literis; at his carent Indi *; Judi avide pecunias corradunt conquiruntque ; at Indi pecunie summi con- 

* This fact has not been clearly proved. Nunez de la Vega, the bishop of Chiapa, seems to hint at the existence of letters in America 
at a period anterior to the arrival of the Spaniards, when he says that he found in an old Indian calendar the name of Ninus written in the 
Latin tongue. Rosales likewise, in his History of Chile, gives the following account of a curious inscription discovered in that province : 
«The tradition of some Apostle having come to preach the Gospel in this kingdom is further confirmed by a marvellous thing which 
still exists in the valley of Taurua, where there is a stone a yard and a half high, and two in length, on which are imprinted the footsteps 
of aman wearing shoes, who there left the impression of his feet, having undoubtedly been accustomed to ascend upon it to preach to the 
Indians of that valley, and so leaving his feet imprinted on the stone, and who also wrote on the front of it three lines in plain letters cut in the 
rock in characters which no one understands or can explain. Father Joseph Maria Adamo, belonging to the Society of Jesus, a missionary 
in the province of Cuio, and who has laboured many years gloriously in the conversion of the Indians of that province, caused them to be 
faithfully copied out and transcribed, and sent them to three Fathers of the Company, famous for their skill in languages: to Father 
Angelo de Magistris at Cordova, to Father Conine at Peru, and to Father Nicolas Mascardi in Chiloe; and they none of them were 
able to read them, so that their signification is still unknown.” Garcia states further, from the information of others, that letters 
resembling Greek characters were discovered in his time, as it would appear sculptured in stone, both in Peru and in the province ot 
Chiapa: “ El primero fundamento es, que averiguando Yo en el Pert, si havia algunas antiguallas, 0 congeturas, por donde constase 
haver tenido los Indios letras, fui informado de un Espafiol, que trataba en las Minas de Camora, que es junto 4 Loja en el Pert, como 
entre Gambieta, i Paracuza, Pueblos de Indios de la sobredicha Ciudad de Qamora, esta una Pefia alta con un pico, 6 bordo salido fuera, 
en cuia frente estan esculpidos quatro renglones, cada uno de vara i media de largo, cuias letras parecen Griegas. Y no es contra esto 
lo que en muchas partes havemos dicho, que los Indios no usaron de letras, porque las pudieron perder por algun Diluvio, de que ellos 

N. © TE S. 390 

temptores sunt*; Judei cum se non circumcisos videbant circa preputium, Hebreos se, aut Judzos haberi posse, 
aperté inficias ibant; at Indorum preputia in totum integra sunt, nec de ista superstitione quicquam compertum 
habent--; etsi Aithiopes quidem et populi Orientales cireumcisionem sibi adhibuerint. Hc jam ergo’ inter 
sese collata, quo modo, et qua, obsecro, ratione, plené intelligi queunt? Qui amabo fit, ut cum Judzxi de origine 

tienen noticia: como los mismos Griegos las perdieron por algun tiempo, por aquel Diluvio tan famoso de Deucalion: 6 por Guerras, 
como sucedid en Espana antiguamente, por la venida de Estrangeros, i de los Moros, en tiempo del Rei D. Rodrigo. 

“En unos Edificios antiguos, que ai en el-Perd, junto 4 la Ciudad de Guamanga, 4 la orilla del Rio, llamado Vinaque, de quien 
hicimos mencion en la quarta Opinion, refiere Ciega, que se hallo una Losa, en la qual havia ciertas letras, que parecian Griegas. 

“En Nueva-Espajfia, averiguando Yo esto mismo, me refirid un Mestigo de aquella Tierra, que en la Provincia de Chiapa, en unos 
Pueblos que ai de Indios algados, que llaman Lacandones, perseveran oi Dia unos Edificios mui fuertes, labrados de Cal, i Canto, con 
sus Pilares, i en cada uno de ellos esta un Letrero, que segun me dijo el sobredicho Mestigo, parecen ser letras Griegas.” 

The rumour of inscriptions existing in Yucatan reached the ears of the venerable Las Casas also, who probably only doubted the 
fact because he had not the opportunity of going there to verify it. If however such inscriptions had been numerous in the New World, 
it is not likely that they would have long survived the mutilating hands of the first Spanish missionaries. We may however remark, 
that two curvilinear ornaments, shaped like the letter S, and symmetrically disposed thus—S @—occur upon a broken bust represented 
in the ninth plate of the third part of the Monuments of M. Dupaix, under the number 16, which but for their situation would 
not have been noticed here; although viewed simply as ornaments, and not as letters, their occurrence is rare in Mexican monu- 
ments, which is not the case with the other platted symbol between them. ‘The inscription to which Garcia refers, as mentioned by 
Ciega, is spoken of in the following passage of the eighty-seventh chapter of his Chronicle of Peru: « Of these, the river which is the 
largest is named the Vinaq, on the banks of which are situated some large and most ancient edifices, which certainly, judging from their 
ruined and dilapidated state, must have been built these many ages. Having inquired of the neighbouring Indians, who were the 
founders of those ancient structures? they replied, Bearded and white men like ourselves, who they say arrived in that country long 
before the reign of the Ingas, and there established their residence. And to me it appears that the plan of this and of other ancient 
buildings existing in this kingdom differs from that which the Ingas followed in their buildings ; for this edifice is square, whilst theirs 
were long and narrow. It is reported, likewise, that certain letters have been discovered upon a block of stone in this edifice, which I 
do not affirm; neither can I refrain from entertaining the private opinion, that in former times a race of people sufficiently cultivated 
and civilized to have constructed both these and other buildings which we do not see, arrived in these parts.”——Parte Primera de la 
Chronica del Peru, cap. Ixxxvii. pag. 221. From the various authorities which have been cited, it would appear that letters or alpha- 
betical writing had an imaginary if not a real existence in different parts of America very remote from each other;—in Peru, Mexico, 
Yucatan, and Chili. The Peruvian quipos might have been a kind of syllabic writing like that of the Japanese; and the Spaniards seem 
to have consigned them to intentional oblivion. As regards the tradition of letters in Mexico, it may be proper to recollect what Torque- 
mada says of the book which the Indians declared that they buried underground on the arrival of the Spaniards amongst them, between 
the columns of which Christ was painted crucified, and the intermediate spaces were filled up with alphabetical characters, The 
curious tenure by which those Indians held that book resembled that by which, as Sir William Betham says in the first volume of his 
Trish Antiquarian Researches (which learned and interesting work it is to be hoped he will continue), the ancient Irish family of Mac 
Maor were the constituted guardians and keepers of the book of the Canons of St. Patrick, which was otherwise known by the name of 
the Book of Armagh, which book was perhaps confided to their care by Saint Columba, or some of his disciples, on condition that they 
should hold it in trust. Sahagun affirms, in the following very singular passage of the eighth chapter of the third book of his History of 
New Spain, that the children of the Mexicans who were educated in the temples learned hymns which were written down in books in 
characters: “les ensefiaban todos ios versos de canto para cantar que se llamaban divinos cantos, los quales versos estaban escriptos 
en sus libros por caracteres.” “ They instructed them in all the verses which they were accustomed to sing, to which they gave the 
name of divine hymns, all which verses were written in their books in characters.” This passage, from its singularity, has been 
marked in the original MS.; and it is certainly difficult to comprehend how the Mexicans could have recorded words, and a certain suc- 
cession of different sounds, the connection of which with things and figures is merely arbitrary, by means of paintings, which would 
seem only fit to have preserved a general recollection of events. 

* Gumilla asserts the contrary of the Indians of the Oronoco: and the Mexican merchants, who were a privileged class of men very 
distinct from the other Mexicans, are said by Torquemada and Sahagun to have been indefatigable in travelling over vast tracts of country, 
despising dangers either from the enemy or the difficult nature of the roads which they had to pass, in the pursuit of gain. It would 
be interesting to know the real history and origin of these merchants ; perhaps they considered themselves the honourable of the earth, and 
boasted of their Tultec genealogy. 

‘+ Acosta here manifestly contradicts himself, as Garcia has observed; since he elsewhere admits that the Mexicans did practise 
a ceremony corresponding in some manner to the ancient Jewish rite of circumcision. Herrera, almost in the very words of Acosta, 
notices, in the seventeenth chapter of the second book of his third Decade, this custom as prevalent amongst the Mexicans: “ A los 
nifios recien nacidos sacrificaban las orejas, y el miembro viril, con sacar un poco de sangre, i esta ceremonia se hacia principalmente en 
los hijos de reies, 6 de grandes seftores.” If however there is any thing equivocal in the words of Acosta and of Herrera, Bernal Diaz 
is quite explicit on the subject in the following passage of the two-hundred-and-seventh chapter of his History of the Conquest of New 
Spain: “Tenian por costumbre que sacrificavan las frentes, y las orejas, lenguas, y labios, los pechos, bragos, y mol 

(4@) 

ledos, y las 

334. NOTES. 

et antiquitate sua tantopere glorientur, et eandem in altero quoque orbe seduld asservent descriptam, continuatamque, 
soli hi in India degentes, sui generis ceremoniarumque, et Messie, et judaismi, tam turpiter obliti fucrint 2” 

The three principal arguments by which Acosta endeavours to prove that the Indians could not be Jews;—viz. 
Because they were uncircumcised, Because they did not expect the Messiah, and Because they set no value on 
lineage,—will have little weight with those who consider what strong counter authorities may be adduced to show that 
that learned writer was himself mistaken on all these points. With respect to circumcision, Peter Martyr and Gomara, 
whose veracity as historians.has never been doubted, both affirm that the Indians were circumcised. The former, ad- 
dressing Leo the Tenth, in the tenth chapter of his third Ocean Decade, says, speaking of the Indian fugitive who 
came to the Spanish settlement of Darien, “ He sayde further, that in his countrey there were cities fortified with 
walles and governed by lawes, and that the people also used apparell ; but of what religion they were I did not learne, 
yet hadde our menne knowledge, both by the woordes and signes of this fugitive, that they were circumcised. What 

piernas; y en algunas provincias eran retajados, y tenian pedernales de navajas con que se retajavan.” “ They were accustomed to 
sacrifice (to draw blood from) their foreheads, ears, tongues, and lips, breasts, arms, and the fleshy parts of their bodies and their legs. 
In some provinces they were circumcised, and they had flint knives with which they performed the ceremony.” Since no testimony can 
be more positive as to a matter of fact than that of Bernal Diaz respecting the existence. of this rite amongst the Indians, his means of 
information can alone be called in question; but that point he has himself settled, by premising to his account of these sacrifices this 
remark: “las (maldades de sacrificios) que yo vi y entendi, porné aqui por memoria”—* the sacrifices which I have seen and known, I 
write down here from memory.” Of the History of Bernal Diaz del Castillo, but one opinion has ever been formed ;—that its style is 
rude, and the narrative perfectly authentic. Doctor Robertson thus characterizes it: “ It contains a prolix, minute, confused, narra- 
tive of all Cortes’s operations, in such a rude vulgar style as might be expected from an illiterate soldier. Butas he relates transactions 
of which he was a witness, and in which he performed a considerable part, his account bears all the marks of authenticity, and is 
accompanied with such,a pleasing naiveté, with such interesting details, with such amusing variety, and yet so pardonable in an old 
soldier, who had been, as he boasts, in 119 battles, as renders his book one of the most singular that is to be found in any language.” 
Bernal Diaz appears to have been a soldier who had a great deal of observation though but little learning, and his narrative is very © 
interesting. With respect to the reality of the existence of the rite of circumcision amongst the Indians, since many writers have 
affirmed it and many have denied it, we shall draw a line of distinction between these two classes of authors, leaving to others the 
task of forming whatever conclusion may appear to them the most reasonable. The earliest Spanish writers who wrote on the affairs of 
America, such as Peter Martyr (who scarcely would have ventured to have stated a deliberate falsehood to the Pope, and oné too which - 
he, sooner than any other person, would have been capable of detecting,) and Gomara, (who was chaplain to Cortes, and dedicated 
his History of the Conquest of Mexico to Don Martin Cortes his son, and therefore had the best means of information,) and Bernal 
Diaz, who was one of the first conquerors,—a title given to all the companions of Cortes; and other Spanish writers also who are 
acknowledged to have been men of the greatest learning and research, such as were Garcia and ‘Torquemada, who had themselves 
visited America,—have all declared, that various Indian nations used circumcision. On the other hand, many European literati and 
scholars who wrote in the succeeding age, who were not Spaniards, who had ‘never visited America, who were little conversant with 
Spanish authors, whose studies were chiefly confined to classical literature, and whose fears were excited by the progress of the 
Reformation and by every thing calculated to provoke fresh topics of religious controversy, vehemently denied that such was the fact. 
They argued as if they considered it to be derogatory to the honour of God to make the admission; for not being able to derive 
the American circumcision, like the Colchian, the Egyptian, and the Pheenician, from the Jews, without conceding that the 
Indians might have borrowed other superstitions from them, and that they had colonized the western hemisphere,—their only resource 
was to attempt to throw discredit upon the testimony of the most respectable Spanish authors ; since the other alternative,—of maintaining 
that the Devil had imitated amongst the Indians this revered sign of the ancient covenant which God had made with Abraham,—might 
have appeared to them of dangerous adoption, and likely to entail inconvenient consequences. There is an old remark, than which 
none has been more frequently perverted to sophistical purposes, merely from not considering the nature of the truths alluded to, and 
distinguishing great moral truths from historical truths, and time taken as an indefinite period, from time amouating to only a few cen- 
turies, which is, “‘ Tempus probat veritatem :” this, like the other, “‘ Vox populi, vox Dei,” is only true in part, and especially in religious 
matters ought to be received with caution. For how is it possible that what was doubtful two thousand years ago should be certain 
now. Shakespear somewhere observes, that ‘ uncertainties do crown themselves assured.” But still it must be recollected that false 
religious creeds are in the beginning like despised weeds, which are blown about and inclined by every wind of doctrine; but that in time 
they become trees of stately growth, under which nations repose, and the shade of which often casts a deadly influence around. 
Neither are the opinions of learned men, or of any particular age, a test of truth,—since the erroneous opinions which the learned men of 
the sixteenth century (emphatically called the enlightened age of the revival of letters) adopted with regard to a portion of contempora- 
neous history (for so the history of the state in which religion, civilization, and the arts were found amongst the Indians by the first 
Spaniards who’ visited the American continent may be designated,) afford a'striking proof. If, however, the errors of past times cannot 
serve the useful purpose of beacons, to light on the way to truth those which follow, they will at least forcibly admonish the too credulous, 
who are inclined to take every thing for granted which they believe former ages to have believed, to reflect upon the possibility of a former 

age haying. been itself deceived, and transmitting its delusions to remote posterity. 

NOTES. 335 

nowe thinke you hereby, most holy Father, or what doe you divine may come hereof when time shall subdue all these 
under your throne?” And in the first chapter of his fourth Decade, inscribed to the same pontiff, he gives the 
following account of the people of Yucatan: “ This nation is not apparreled with wooll, because they have no 
sheepe, but with cotton after a thousand fashions, and diversly coloured. The women are clad from the wast to 
the ancle, and cover their heade and brests with divers vayles, and are very carefull that their leges and feete bee 
not seene, They frequent their temples often, to the which the better sort pave the wayes with stone from 
their houses. They are great idolaters, and are circumcised, but not all. They live under lawes, and trafficke 
together with greate fidelitie by exchanginge commodities without money. The sawe crosses; and beeing 
demaunded by interpreters whence they hadde them, some say that a certaine man of excellent beauty passinge by 
that coast left them that notable token to remember him. Others report, a certaine manne brighter then the sunne 
dyed in the working thereof. But concerninge the truth, there is no certainety knowne.” In the third chapter of 
the same Decade he says that the inhabitants of the Island of Cozumella, situated on the coast of Yucatan *, 
were circumcised. And in the sixth chapter, speaking again of that island, in which the Spaniards found innu- 
merable books and rich cotton hangings, he observes, that “they were idolaters and circumcised.” Garcia like- 
wise, in the following passage of the first section of the eighth chapter of the third book of his Origin of the 
Indians, confutes the error of Acosta respecting the use of circumcision amongst the Indians: “ Dice lo quarto el 
Padre Acosta que si los Judios no se vieran circuncidados, no se tuvieran por Judios; pues era tan estimado este 
precepto, que como dice Maimonides, aun en Sabado era licito executarle ; i que los Indios poco ni mucho no se 
retajan, ni han dado jamas en esa ceremonia. En esto se engafié, lo primero, porque él mismo refiere en su 
Historia como los Mexicanos sacrificaban el miembro viril 4 los nifios recien nacidos, i que en alguna manera 
remedaban la circumcision de los Judios, que usaban los Guaycurues del Paraguay, como dice el Compendio i 
Descripcion de Indias. Y Herrera afirma que en Guacacoalco, i Iluta, se circuncidaban, i en Cuetxala, i que asi 
lo tenian por costumbre, lo qual prueba la conformidad, aunque en Yucatan no se usase, como asegura el P. Cogol- 
ludo contra Pineda é Illescas, i Laet contra Pedro Martir, i Gomara. Ni es tampoco cierto que los Espaiioles se 
equivocasen con las bubas de los Indios, como discurridé Laet, de que se rie Grotio. Lo segundo, porque demas 
de lo dicho de la republica de los Indios que escrivio el P. Roman, i de la Historia General que hico Gomara, i de 
otras historias de aquellas partes, consta como en otras provincias se circuncidaban los Indios, de que arriba hicimos 
mencion.” ‘That the Mexicans and other nations of New Spain, as well as the Peruvian Ingas, who boasted of their 
being the descendants of the sun, greatly prided themselves on their origin and the antiquity of their race, may be 
proved from the works of Gomara and other Spanish authors, and likewise from the later Chichimecas and Acol- 
huacans prefixing the epithet of Teo, or divine, to the patronymic appellations of their ancestors.. Gomara gives 
the following reason for the kings of Mexico styling themselves Aculhuatli: “Los Sefiores de Mexico que son 
los majores y los grandes, y en fin los reies de los reies, se precian de ser, y de se lamar de Culhua, diziendo que 
decienden de un Chichimecatlh, cavallero mui esforcado, el qual ato una correa al braco de Quecalcoatlh por 
junto al ombro, quando andava y conversava entre los ombres. Lo que tuvieron por un gran hecho, y dezian 
ombre que ato aun dios, atara todos los mortales, y assi de alli adelante le llamaron Aculhuatli, que como poco a 
dixe, Aculli es el huesso del codo al ombro, y el mesmo ombro. Valio y pudo mucho despues aquel Aculhuatli, 
y dio comienco a sus hijos de tal manera, que vinieron sus decendientes a ser reies de Mexico en aquella grandeza 
que Moteccuma estava, quando Fernando Cortes le prendio. Assi que parece que vienen de Chichimecatl, aun 
que por diversos efetos; y dizen que por diferenciar se, tienen aquel cuento los de Tezcuco, y este los de 
Mexico.”—La Conquista de Mexico, fo. cxx. 

The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus affirms in the following passage, in direct opposition to Acosta, that 
the Mexicans and other nations of New Spain made great account of lineage: “ Altri dicono che non solo scappa- 
rono di questo diluvio quelli due dell’ arbore, ma che altri 7 restarono ascosi in certe grotte, e che passato il 
diluvio, uscirono e repararono il mondo, spartendosi per esso; e€ quelli che dipoi successero Padoravano per iddii, 
ognuno in la sua nazione; e cosi li Tepanechi adoravano uno che si diceya Hulhueteotli, et li Chishimeche a 
Quetzalcoual, et li Culue .a Tzinacoual, perché d’essi uscirono le generazioni sue ; e per questo facevano gran conto 

* The marble image of the lion, which although an animal not proper to America was discovered on that coast, might have had 
some reference to the history of Daniel, and have been a memorial of a famous event in the Jewish history. 

ry 

336 NOTES. 

di lignaggi, e dove si trovavano, dicevano to sono del tale lignaggio ; et a quel suo primo fondatore adoravano, e gli 
facevano gli sacrificii e dicevano che quello era il cuore del popolo, al quale avevano fatto un idolo servato in buonis- 
simo luogo, e vestito, e tutti li sucessori mettevano in quel luogo gioje riche, come oro e pietre preziose; inanzi a 
questo loro cuore ardeva sempre legna dove mettevano il Copalo incenso.” Nunez de la Vega, Bishop of Chiapa, 
in that part of the preface to his Diocesan Constitutions, where he speaks of Votan and of the treasure discovered 
by himself in the “ Casa lobrega,” confirms the account given by the anonymous interpreter of the Vatican MS. of 
the great respect, amounting to idolatry, which the Mexicans and other nations of New Spain paid to their ancestors : 
since he not only mentions the stone images of the ancient Indian pagans preserved in the cave, but adds, that 
their names were in the calendar, and that Votan, who was looked upon by the Indians of one province as the 
heart of the people, was the third in order,—Mox being the first. The calendar to which the Bishop of Chiapa refers 
was not the Mexican but the Chiapanese, which Boturini says, in the following passage of his Idea de una Nueva 
Historia, corresponded with that of the Tultecas: “ Concuerda el systema de los Kalendarios de Chiappa y Soco- 
nusco con el Tulteco, que tengo explicado arriba; pues en lugar de los quatro caracteres Tecpatl, Calli, Tochtli, 
Acatl, se sirven los de Chiappa de quatro figuras de Sefiores, Votan, Lambat, Been*, y Chinax; y las otras veinte 
figuras cuyos nombres son, Mox, Ygh, Votan, Ghanan, Abagh, Tox, Moxic, Lambat, Molo, (en otros Mulu,) 
Elab, Batz, Enob, Been, Hix, Tziquin, Chabin, Chic, Chinax, Cahogh, Aghual, sirven en lugar de los veinte 
symbolos, Cipactli, Ehecatl, Calli, Cuetzpallin, Cohuatl, Miquiztli, Mazatl, Tochtli, Atl, Ytzcuintli, Ozomatli, Ma- 
linalli, Acatl, Ogelotl, Quauhtli, Temetlatl, Ollin, Tecpatl, Quiahuitl, Xochitl, para formar la cuenta de los dias de 
el alo +. 

* Omitting the tradition of the Hebrew-Indian nation, which Doctor Cabrera in the following passage of his short treatise on the 
peopling of America cursorily alludes to.—“ The Licentiate Don Francisco Ortiz also informed me that there is in the possession of the 
present curate of Saint Catharine of Yatahuacan a little historical book of an Hebrew-Indian nation, which may probably be that of 
Been, mentioned by Nunez de la Vega,” (to which tradition, it should be observed, the Bishop of Chiapa lent his much higher authority,) 
—it isimpossible not to remark the resemblance which many of these proper names bear to Hebrew. Mox is like Moses; Ygh, perhaps 
pronounced by the Chiapanese Ysh, resembles Isaac; Ghanan is almost the same as Canaan; Abagh recalls to our recollection Abel ; 
and all the other names (one or two excepted) are analogous to some other names mentioned in Scripture. Chinax, which is elsewhere 
written Chin, seems to refer to Shem; as do Chabin and Enob to Japhet and Enoch. In the last edition of Garcia’s Origen de los 
Indios, we find the clause which follows inserted by the editor in the text: but Garcia notices himself other Indian names which 
resembled Hebrew. ‘ El nombre de Joseph havia entre los Indios Hurones ; i los Souroquis al fin de sus cantares decian Alleluia, si 
se cree 4 Lescarbot, Duret, Hornio, i Rugero Guillermo, & quien cita: en otra parte, dice, que en la Nueva Inglaterra ai ciertos Indios, 
cuio idioma conviene con el Hebreo;*i el P. Sepp, 6 Techo dice, que los Calchines del Paraguay tenian muchos nombres Judios, i 
observaban varias costumbres suias, como dice Rogers, i en el Compendio, i Descripcion de las Indias se dice, que el Cacique de 
la tierra donde se fundd Antioquia, se llamaba Isac, i su muger Judit.” Amongst the names enumerated by Garcia is that of Anna, 
which he says signifies in Hebrew ‘kind’ or ‘compassionate,’ by which name the wives of the Ingas Lloque Yupanqui, and Pachacuti, 
were called, who were styled by another title analogous in its signification, Huacha Cuyac, or ‘the friend of the poor.’ The 
Peruvians, like the Jews, were charitable to their own countrymen and brethren: and probably in Peru, as well as in New Spain, 
—agreeably to the precept contained in the twenty-eighth verse of the fortieth chapter of Ecclesiasticus, “ My son, lead not a beggar’s 
life, for better it is to die than to beg,”—beggars were scarce. Gomara at least informs us that the Spaniards saw none till they arrived 
at Cholula, which was an inland city of New Spain; and where they might have been tolerated on account of its being a place of 
pilgrimage, and a city renowned for its sanctity: “ El termino que alcangan en llano es grasso, y de gentiles labrangas que se 
riegan, y tan Ileno de gente que no ay un palmo vazio. A cuya causa ay pobres que piden por las puertas, que no lo avian visto 
hasta entonces por aquella tierra.” La Conquista de Mexico, fo. xxxviii.—“ The territory of open country which they possess is rich, 
consisting of well-cultivated fields, which they irrigate, and so populous that not a foot of land is unoccupied. On which account 
there are beggars who ask alms from door to door, none of whom had they (the Spaniards) seen till then in that country.”—-The 
following is the passage alluded to in Garcia, who remarks that in the kingdom of Quito, Abba was the term which the Indians used 
to express father, as Gumilla observes that it was amongst the Indians of the Oronoco: “Sea lo que fuere, lo cierto es, que Anna es 
nombre Hebreo, cuia significacion quadra bien al estado, i dignidad de Reina; porque Anna quiere decir ‘graciosa,’ 0 ‘misericordiosa ;’ i 
asi, para maior abundancia de esta significacion, i de el nombre que tenia de Anna la Muger de Pachacuti Inga, le daban los Indios 
otro titulo, i renombre en su lengua, que significaba lo que Anna: el titulo era, Huacha Cuyac, que quiere decir, ‘amadora,’ i ‘amiga 
de los pobres.’ Tambien mando Pachacuti Inga, que diesen este mismo titulo, i renombre al nuevo Sefior, i Orejon, que en cierta 
Fiesta armaban caballero. En la provincia de los Puruaes, que es en el Reino de Quito llaman al Padre Abba, la qual voz es Syriaca, 
i usaban los Hebreos de ella, segun Martino, por haverseles pegado, i mezclado con la suia, en tiempo que vivieron entre los Syrios : 
aunque S. Augustin dice claramente, que Abba es voz Hebrea.” 

+ Boturini assigns the following meaning and etymology to Cipactli, the first sign in the Mexican calendar: “ Siendo Cipactli syncope 
de las palabras, ce, icpac, tlatli, como Cicpactonal de ce, icpac, tonalli, se viene a saber, que Cipactli significa ed Padre superior & 

NOTES. S37 

The painting preserved in the Library of the Institute at Bologna is probably a Chiapanese calendar, which seems 
singularly to confirm what Boturini says of the agreement of the twenty Mexican signs of the days of the year with 
those of Chiapa ; since the first sign at the bottom of the first page is Mox, which corresponds with Cipactli; the 
second is Ygh, which answers to Ehecatl, or the wind; and the third is Votan, agreeing with the Mexican sign 
Calli, or the temple. The same agreement will likewise be found between the Mexican and Chiapanese symbols at 
the bottom of the seven remaining pages of the calendar, in which the order of the Mexican symbols is preserved, 
the sign of the Rabbit (Tochtli) following that of Mazatl the stag ; and Ocelotl, the tiger, that of Acatl, the reed or 
arrow *. It is probable that when the Mexicans had extended their conquests during the latter part of the reign 
of Ahuitzotl, or under Montezuma, as far as Tequantepec and Chiapa, they obliged the Chiapanese, in order 
to enforce a uniformity in the celebration of religious festivals, to adjust their calendar to the Mexican; and 
hence in the painting of Bologna the calendars are combined. ‘The figure of a heart, in which many of the signs 
of the Chiapanese calendar terminate, refers, it must be supposed, to Votan, the signification of whose name was a 
heart. Boturini-+ has remarked, that “the systems of the Indian calendars, as well as the symbols employed in 
them, varied, and that the inhabitants of some of the’ provinces of the diocese of Oaxaca divided their year 
into thirteen months; making use, probably, of a lunar calculation, while other Indian states of the same diocese 
counted their days by winds and by serpents.” He observes in the following passage, speaking of the planets, that 
“the week of the Chiapanese, resembling that of the Tultecas, consisted of seven days,’ which is the more remark- 
able, as the alledged ignorance on the part of the Indians of a week of seven days has been used as an argument to 
prove that they could not be descended from the Jews. It is true that the Mexican lesser period of time contained 
only five days t; “ Los Indios de Chiappa cuentan siete de ellas correspondientes a los dias de su semana, y en las 

todos, y Cicpactonal el Padre superior al sol; y assi Cipactli es el primer Padre de toda la humana generacion, que dicen los Indios tuvo 
por muger 4Oxomozco; y es como si nosotros dixeramos Adan y Eva, los que sublimaron 4 honores de divinidad.” “ Cipactli being a 
syncope of the words ce icpac tlatli, in the same manner as Cicpactonal is of ce tcpac tonalli, we learn that Cipactli signifies the 
Father who is superior to all, and Cicpactonal the Father who is superior to the sun. Cipactli accordingly means the first Father of 
the whole of the human race, whose wife, as the Indians say, was Oxomozco, or, as we should say, Adam and Eve, on whom they con- 
ferred the honours of divinity.” The derivation and meaning which Boturini assigns to the name Cipactli is curious; but since a serpent 
seems to have been considered by the Mexicans as the ernblem of light, perhaps from the piercing nature of its eyes, which induced 
the Jews to attribute the property of wisdom to it, or from its delighting to bask in the rays of the sun, or from its darting motion, or 
from the ring which it forms, round like the solar orb, symbolical of eternity, and a fit type of the everlasting revolutions of that lumi- 
nary ; it may be proper to recollect what the interpreter of the Vatican Codex says of the creation of light on the first day, and to 
consider whether Cipactli may not be a syncope of the words ce, one, or the first, and ¢zpatli, which is the same as icpatli ; the letter 
c with a dash under it being pronounced in Spanish like z. The sign which immediately follows Cipactli in the calendar is Ehecatl, 
or the wind, which was dedicated to Quecalcoatl, who was the reputed lord of that element. Torquemada says that the images of 
Huitzilopuchtli, Quecalcoatl, and Tlaloc, were each represented with a golden serpent bearing different symbolical allusions. That 
with which Huitzilopuchtli was girded, being very large and thick, signified the severtty of the deity, and that he was as a poi- 
sonous serpent to those who displeased him; and the wreathed serpent in the hand of Tlaloc, the god of water, denoted the thunder 
and flashes of lightning which accompany rain. The Jews probably entertained many superstitions about serpents, from the fiery 
serpents which were sent against them in the wilderness, and the serpent with which Moses performed so many signs and wonders before 
Pharaoh. 

* Tt will be found, on comparing the first eight pages of the painting of Bologna with those of the Codex Borgianus, numbered 31, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, and those of the lesser Vatican MS., which follow in the same order (page 49), that the signs of the Bologna 
calendar read horizontally, correspond with the signs of the other paintings read also horizontally, without any reference to the divisions of 
the pages. : 

+ The authority of Boturini, being a man of great learning, is so often referred to, that some surprise must be felt at Gama’s assertion, 
that Don Mariano Veytia (who by some chance was appointed Boturini’s executor, and became possessed after his death of whatsoever 
papers had not been before confiscated) declared that that celebrated scholar confessed to him, on his death-bed, that he should expire 
without being able to comprehend the Mexican calendar. Such an absurd story was probably spread by those who thought that Boturini 
many years before he died knew too much. 

+ The dies quinta was held in almost as much esteem by the early Christians as the dies septima. The Copts, as Ludolfus informs 
us in his Ethiopian Commentaries, entertained a superstitious veneration for that day. As regards the consecration of the sabbath, the 
Jews were commanded, by a perpetual ordinance, to rest from all manner of work on the seventh day, because God employed six days in 
the work of the creation, and rested on the seventh day. But the progress of modern geological science has induced many learned men to 
attempt to put an entirely new construction on the words of Moses, and to maintain that by six days he might have meant six indefi- 
nitely long periods of time: and to this conclusion they have been led by a consideration of the order in which the various strata which 

(42 ) 

Q 

338 NOTES. 

ruedas y tablas de los symbols Tultecos de los dias de el afio, hallo despues de la triadecaterida, el numero 
septenario tan distinguido en la Escritura Sagrada, por haver en el septimo dia de la creacion del mundo tomado 
descanso el benignissimo Criador.” Idea de una Nueva Historia, pag. 43. “The Indians of Chiappa reckon the 
number of them (the planets) to be seven, corresponding with the days of their week; and I have found in the 
wheels and paintings of the Tultec signs of the days of the year, the number seven following that of thirteen, so 
celebrated in the holy Scripture, on account of the Blessed Creator having rested on the seventh day of the creation 
of the world.” 

The names of the Chiapanese chiefs whose heads are found in the calendar, bear a considerable resemblance to 
Hebrew proper names ; and even the signs of the Mexican calendar seem to have some reference tothe emblems under 
which Jacob, when dying, predicted the destinies of his posterity. With respect to the burning incense (sahumar) 
to the Ceiba tree, which superstition of the Chiapanese, Nunez de la Vega, treating of their calendar, mentions,—from 
the roots of which, he says, they believed that they derived their lineage,—it might as well have beenexplained by him 
to be in commemoration of Jesse the father of David, “ the root of Israel,” as to be “ an act of adulation to Ninus,’ which 
latter name the bishop supposes to have been corrupted, “first into Ymos, and lastly into Mox,” since Boturini 
observes, that he could perceive no resemblance between the names of the other chiefs in the Chiapanese calendar 
and those of the descendants of Ninus. Proceeding now to the last argument by which Acosta attempts to prove 
that the Indians could not have been Jews, and which Spizelius has employed ina triumphant manner to throw 
discredit on the relation of Montecinio, what shall we say when we find from the writings of Acosta himself, as well 
as from the works of Sahagun and Torquemada, and the commentary of the anonymous interpreter of the Vatican 
MS., that the Indians of New Spain did expect a Messiah whom they even named Mexi, which name exactly 
resembles the Hebrew, whose advent they expected in the year of the Cane, which was probably, on that account, 
named Xiuhteuctli, or the year of the Lord. Although Cortes himself is silent on the subject, Torquemada has 
recorded in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth chapters of the fourth book of his Indian Monarchy, (the 
translation of which account is here inserted,) the curious fact, that when that Spanish general arrived on the coast of 
New Spain he was not only taken by the Mexicans for their Messiah, but actually received their adorations in that 
character, seated on a throne erected for the purpose on the deck of his ship. To this absurd belief of the 
Mexicans, Torquemada is inclined to attribute the rapid progress of the Spanish arms, as the necessary consequence 
of the general commotion into which their empire was thrown by the rumour, every where circulated, that the Messiah 
had come to take possession of the kingdom. The relation of Torquemada is as follows: “ When Juan de Grijalva 
prosecuted the discovery which Francisco Hernandez de Cordova had commenced along the coasts of New Spain, 
he arrived with his fleet at San Juan de Ula, as has already been said; and since it was a new thing to the 
people of the land to behold ships on the sea,—for never had such a thing entered their imaginations,—it caused them 
great surprise and fear, and they reported the fact to the governors and commanders stationed by the Emperor Mote- 
cuhguma through the whole of that district. On hearing these tidings they all assembled, and agreed amongst each 
other to go with the intelligence to their lord Motecuhcuma, who held his court in this city of Mexico; and in 
order not to proceed on mere surmise to disturb the kingdom, and for more perfect information on the subject 
of their mission, they determined to see that miracle or prodigy which terrified and kept them in alarm and 
admiration. They settled, therefore, that some of their number should go to the sea, and embarking in canoes, 

compose the earth’s surface are placed over each other, and of the contents of each; since in the lower strata, or in those which 
are of primitive formation, no remains of human bones, or even of those of animals, have been discovered, the only indication of organic 
life being connected with its lowest grade, that of plants: neither in the strata which immediately succeed are human bones discovered, but 
only the fossil remains of animals. Whence they contend, that before the creation of man both vegetables and animals existed and had 
died, and that the Mosaic account of the creation may be explained in a new manner without derogating from the authority of Holy 
Writ. If, however, we consider how express the words of Scripture are, and that Moses, when he wrote the Pentateuch, if he were 
inspired, could not have written days for indefinitely long periods of time, without at the same time informing the Jews how they were 
to understand his meaning, and likewise admonishing them that their sabbath was not an imitation, as they always believed it to 
be, (as regarded the interval of time between rest and labour,) of God’s resting from the creation, but only a commemoration of that event ; 
and further, that the sense in which they would fain understand the words of Moses is quite contradictory to that in which Saint Paul 
took them, who says that sin came into the world by man, and death by sin ; evidently declaring that until the creation of Adam there was 
no such thing as death or sin,—this new interpretation of the Pentateuch will appear inadmissible. 

NOTES. 339 

should carry with them refreshments of bread and fruit and other provisions, that, if they were men like themselves, 
they might tell them that they came to sell those things to them if they stood in need of them; but should this not 
be the case, that they might inform themselves what those vast masses were, and what they contained within them. 
The plan was accordingly executed; and some principal Indians, men of resolution, took the charge on themselves, 
and embarking in canoes, rowed towards the ships; when seeing on one of them the royal standard fanned by the 
breeze, and supposing that in that, as in his proper vessel, the captain of all the others was, they proceeded to it and 
came on board. Those in the ship, when they beheld them approaching, stationed themselves so as to observe what 
they did: but the Indians, who in the mean time had come alongside of them, made them a, profound reverence, and 
gave them to understand by signs that their intentions were peaceable, and that they came to sell them provisions 
and articles of dress. Those on board inquired likewise by signs of what country they were, and what had brought 
them thither. They answered that they were Mexicans. Our countrymen replied by saying, ‘ Since you are 
Mexicans, inform us of the name of your king.’ They said that his name was Motecuhguma; and on this quitted 
their canoes to come on board the ship, which they entered without any distrust, and displayed before them rich cotton 
dresses and some articles of provision which highly gratified our countrymen, who exchanged them with the Indians 
for blue and green and other coloured beads, which appeared to them to be of avery fine quality and to exceed in value 
the dresses which they had brought with them. The Indians having concluded their barter of these articles, and 
remaining a considerable portion of the day in the ship, motioned to withdraw; when the captain said to them, 
‘Farewell; carry these stones to your lord Motecuhcuma, and tell him that we are unable now to see him, since 
we are on our return to our own country, but that we shall come back again and shall pay him a visit at his city of 
Mexico’: on which the Indians embarked in their canoes and reached the shore, where they immediately painted, as 
well as they were able, the ships and their rigging, the persons whom they had seen, their dress, their features and 
beards, and other particular objects which appeared to them new and strange. They then set off directly for Mexico, 
travelling with the greatest expedition night and day without stopping to take rest, and soon arrived at that city, and 
proceeded to the palace, confiding to no one the news of which they were the bearers, since it was not customary to 
declare or make public the purport of state dispatches before the king had listened to them and was in possession 
of the facts. They desired the porters to notify to Motecuhcuma their arrival, and that they had come in haste, 
The king was informed by his attendants in waiting that the governors and commanders of the coasts of the North 
Sea awaited his pleasure and had come in great haste to see him. The king was both troubled and surprised, as he 
judged that the affair must needs be very urgent, since those whom he had stationed on guard in that district had 
come without permission to see him; (neither was his surprise without just cause, since he had strong reasons to 
anticipate something untoward, from the prodigies which he had beheld, which prognosticated to him adversity and 
approaching ruin, so that he was continually haunted with the suspicions of the great misfortunes which he fore- 
boded). He replied to the attendants, “Is it true that the captains of the sea-coast have all come in a body? They 
again addressed him and said, ‘Please your Majesty, they are without; let them be summoned into your presence and 
see you. Montecuhcuma answered, ‘Tell them that they may come in, I must see them.’ As soon as they had entered 
the apartment in which he was, they immediately prostrated themselves to the ground and kissed it, and rising saluted 
the king, and said, ‘Lord, we are worthy of death for having come without your leave into your royal presence, 
but the nature of the business which has brought us is so grave and important that it must plead our excuse. It is an 
undoubted truth that we all of us who have come here have seen gods, who have arrived on this coast in large water 
houses’ (by this term they meant a ship), ‘and we have spoken, and conversed, and eaten with them, and given them 
rich mantles; and they have in return given us these precious stones which we have brought with us. They then pre- 
sented to him the beads and bugles which they had brought; and said, ‘They gave us these beads, and added, Go to 
your court and give them to Motecuhcuma your lord, and tell him that we are on our return to our own country, but 
shall come back again and pay him a visit. To this speech the emperor answered not a word, revolving the matter in 
his breast; but he simply observed to the captains, “You must feel weary after such a long and speedy journey; go and. 
repose yourselves, and let not a word transpire of the intelligence which you have brought me; I wish it to be kept 
secret, lest it should cause a commotion amongst the fickle and easily-excited populace. The captains withdrew, and 
they assigned to them the apartments which they were to occupy, since that was an ancient custom. 

“Motecuhcuma remained alone, pensive, and even very apprehensive of some great change in his kingdoms; for he 
was possessed of much foresight, and reflected on past prodigies which had happened, and recollected what his 

340 NOTES. 

soothsayer had told him; in recompense for which he caused his house, while he was in it, to be thrown to the 
ground, and overwhelmed him in the rums. He also called to mind what his sister Papan had informed him many 
years before, and what Necahualpilli had likewise said to him; and it appeared to him that these were not fortuitous 
coincidences, but that they portended some great disaster and change in the government: and since weighty matters 
of state are wont to be imparted to others and to be debated in council, he immediately caused summonses to be 
sent to all the persons of whom his council was composed, who were King Cacama of Tezcuco, his nephew, whom he 
sent for by express ; Cuitlahuatzin, his brother, the lord of Itztapalapan ; Ycihuacohuatl, Tlilpotonqui, Tlacochcalcatl, 
Quapiatzin, Tizoc, Yaoacatl, Quetzalaztatzin, Huitznahuacatl, Tlaylotlac, and Kcatempatiltzin, who were his ordinary 
counsellors ; to whom he declared what had happened. And a considerable time having been employed in the inter- 
change of opinions and conjectures respecting the true state of the case, his council terminated their deliberations by 
persuading themselves and being convinced that it was Quetzalcohuatl, whom in times past they had worshiped as a 
god, and who they likewise expected would again return to reign over their kingdoms; since he himself had long 
before promised them that he would do so, when he departed from thence to the provinces of Tlapala and disap- 
peared on the coast of the sea, going in the direction of the east; and since they on this account expected him, they 
thought that those who had arrived were his train. 

“Under this persuasion they resolved that a certain number of persons should be named to go and receive him: 
and whilst preparations were making in the mean time for their departure, orders were issued to the commanders 
and governors of the sea-coasts to be very vigilant in keeping a watch and look-out for every arrival by sea, 
especially on the coasts of Nauhtla, Toztla, Mictla, and Quauhtla; since from those places, as being more conve- 
niently situated, a better look-out could be kept and more speedy and certain intelligence brought to the court of 
any new event. With these commands the governors and commanders were dismissed, and five lords were appointed 
as bearers of the present which the emperor sent to Quetzalcohuatl, who were Yohualychan who was the principal, 
Tepuztecal who was nearly of equal rank, Tizahua and Huehuetecatl; the fifth and last was named Hueycamecatleca. 
They were commanded to proceed as expeditiously as possible to the sea-coast, and to speak on the part of Mote- 
cuhcuma and of his senate to Quetzalcohuatl their lord, and to offer him the kingdom, and a rich present which was 
given to them that they might be the bearers of it. And this it was that Gomara and Antonio de Herrera make 
confused mention of, as having been brought to Ferdinand Cortes by,the governors of Motecuhcuma on his first 
landing, which they notice in the following words: ‘ Which present it is said was sent for Juan de Grijalva, when 
he touched on those shores; but that, notwithstanding the haste of those who carried it, they found that he was 
gone. The fact was as they state; but I do not understand how those who drew up the account of which Herrera 
availed himself, could have omitted that which I say in this chapter, and many other particulars which shall be 
observed in the sequel; since the circumstances which they mention, and those which I relate, are intimately con- 
nected with each other, and those who could have given an account of the former, could likewise have done so of the 
latter ; although I think that the error lay in their only seeking information from the Spaniards, who at that period 
returned from the Indies, without verifying facts by applying to the Indians, who were mainly concerned in most of | 
them, or I may say in all, since they were the mark which all who have written on the affairs of the conquest strove 
to hit, and were those who were very well acquainted with them, and in the beginning recorded them by means of 
figures and characters, and afterwards, when some of the most curious amongst them had learned how to write, wrote 
them down; which histories are in my possession: and so high is the estimation in which I hold them, on account 
of their language and the style of their composition, that I should be glad to feel myself competent to the task of 
translating them into Spanish with the same elegance and grace as the Mexicans penned them in their own language; 
and since these histories are true and authentic, I follow them to the letter ; but lest the accounts which they contain 
should appear strange to those who read them, I affirm that they are merely a true relation of what actually happened, 
but that other authors have not noticed them before me, because the few that. have written on the affairs of the 
Indies were ignorant of the events which then occurred, nor had they any one to give them the requisite information ; - 
neither should I have mentioned these facts, had I not found that they were verified by Father Bernard de Sahagun, 
a grave and pious ecclesiastic, who was of the second number of those who undertook the conversion of the natives 
of New Spain, but was the first of the first of the investigators of the most secret things of this land, of which he 
knew all the secrets, and employed himself for more than sixty years in composing works in the Mexican language, 
and in incorporating into it all the information which he was able to acquire. 

NOTES. 341 

« Amongst the gentiles of the Hast there was a prophecy which was uttered by Balaam, and is recorded in the 
Book of Numbers, which related to the coming of the Son of God in the flesh, which the gentile prophet delivered 
in these words: ‘A star shall be born from Jacob, and a sceptre shall arise from Israel which shall slay the captains 
of Moab.” And Saint John Chrysostom, commenting upon this passage, cites the authority of some who said that 
those gentiles believing in the future birth of that star, they appointed twelve sentinels, who at stated seasons of the 
year ascended to the top of a high mountain named Victorial, and remained there during three days, praying to 
God, and beseeching him that he would manifest to them the star of which Balaam had prophesied,—who having 
beheld it, the kings came to adore the newly-born infant god. I know not whether the devil, jealous of this pro- 
phecy, and desirous of keeping another people in a continual state of watching and anxiety, instituted this piece of 
fraud amongst the Indians of New Spain,—to understand which it is proper that I should premise, that in ancient 
times there was a man of the kingdom of Tula who was named Quetzalcohuatl, as we have observed elsewhere, who 
was a famous magician and necromancer, whom they afterwards worshiped as a god, and who was accounted a 
king of that country. He was conquered by another greater and more powerful magician, such another as we may » 
suppose Zoroaster of Babylon to have been, who deprived him of his kingdom; from thence he fled to the city of 
Chollula, whither the other pursued him; when, forsaking that kingdom, he fled to the sea, pretending that the 
god, who was the sun, called him to the other side of the sea, to the borders of the Kast ; but he promised that he 
would again return with great power to avenge himself of his enemies, and to redeem (redimir) his people from their 
afflictions and the yoke of tyranny under which they groaned; for they said of him that he was very compassionate 
and merciful: this lie was preserved in the recollection of those who lived in that age, and acquired much greater 
credit in all the ages which afterwards succeeded; and the Mexicans so fully believed in his return, that their kings, 
when mounting the throne, took possession of the kingdom upon the express condition of being vicars of their 
lord Quetzalcohuatl, and of abdicating it on his arrival, and obeying him in it as his vassals. 

“ This history, therefore, being duly known, we assert that that nation expected Quetzalcohuatl, and believed it as 
very certain that he would return to rule over the kingdoms of New Spain ; and on every symptom and demonstration 
of a change or rumour of any novelty, they immediately thought that it was he: and when they received the intelli- 
gence which we have mentioned in the preceding chapter, and further heard that they (the Spaniards) had arrived in 
the quarter where he had disappeared, and that they had come in large ships through the midst of so vast and 
dangerous an ocean, they felt convinced that it was he, and could be no one else: and for this reason they were 
still more vigilant in watching his return ; placing sentinels to keep a look-out towards the sea,—not for three days 
only during every month of the year, like the Gentiles of the East, but night and day the entire year round; at the 
expiration of which period, Juan de Grijalva having sailed to Cuba, and the expedition of Ferdinand Cortes by the 
same route, being the consequence of his return, it necessarily followed that the Indians saw his ships, and, in obe- 
dience to the express commands of their king, they proceeded post to carry him the intelligence, taking with them 
paintings, in which were represented the number of the vessels, and the kind of people whom they beheld on board ; 
all of which they showed to Motecuhguma, who, on receiving the news of this second armament, (which was towards 
the latter end of February of the year 1519,) assembled those who constituted his council, and other persons pos- 
sessed of talents and authority, and communicated to them the tidings which had been brought to him by the sen- 
tinels of the eastern sea-coast, of what had newly appeared on the sea, which confirmed the accounts of the preceding 
year; and the matter having been laid before them, they deliberated upon the measures which it might be proper to 
adopt; and as, when the Magi entered Jerusalem inquiring for the newly-born king, Herod and all his confederates 
and partizans were troubled, and the doctors consulted together and decided upon the place where he should be 
born,—so the Indians who composed the council of the king were troubled together with him, and in great perplexity 
replied, ‘that since it was true that their god and king Quetzalcohuatl had gone to the kmgdom of Tlapala to visit 
the god who was the sun, whose return all their forefathers had expected, he likewise who had appeared in the 
ships might be that god, since it was not humanly probable that mortal men could have penetrated so far into the 
depths of the ocean, without being swallowed up by its waves; and that therefore they believed that it was he, and 
that, since he had come, it was fit that ambassadors and noblemen should be sent to offer him obedience upon the 
part of the senate, and to receive him. Hence, as we may infer, originated the custom amongst the Mexicans of the 
monarchy being elective and not hereditary, which we may prove by observing, that if they believed that they had a 
living king, who at some time or other was to return to take possession of his kingdom, it was impossible that they 

(4s) 

342 NOTH s 

could consent that another should enter upon the perpetual possession of it, but only that he should hold it like 
a viceroy, who in the absence of a king exercises all the regal functions, with a condition which implies that the exer- 
cise of those functions will be for no longer a period than during the absence of the latter, and that he will be ready and 
prepared to forgo them when and as soon as the natural and Jawful heir should appear. But this was folly in them, 
as was also their believing that that magician had gone to visit the sun, in order afterwards to return to enjoy the 
earthly kingdom which he had forsaken: but I can well imagine that, granted that the devil had invented this piece 
of fraud, and devised this trick-in order to deceive this nation, it was likewise by permission of God, not for the 
sake of keeping these mistaken men in a state of delusion, but in order that as soon as Christians should arrive in 
those parts with the annunciation and tidings of his Holy Gospel, they might be already in some measure disposed 
to receive it, from the warning which had been given to them, and the anxiety which they felt about another’s coming 
and depriving them of the kingdom. But if the devil had been able thoroughly to comprehend the matter, he would 
have known that Quetzalcohuatl, whom he pretended to be the king and god of that nation, would in reality be the 
true God and Lord of the whole creation; and that, in the same manner as Cortes came to strip Motecuhcuma of 
the possession of his kingdom, (whom the Indians, unconscious of the meaning of their message, sent to welcome 
as Quetzalcohuatl,) so likewise that this lord and supreme king would come in the character of the monarch of the 
universe to destroy him, and to dispossess him of the kingdom, especially as they already had had forebodings of the 
same; it having been predicted to them ten years before by Papan the princess of Tlatelolco, as we read in a pre- 
ceding book in the chapter which treats of the prodigies which portended the destruction of the Mexican empire. 

“ Returning to my subject,—I say that those Indians, having arranged with their king what under such peculiar 
circumstances ought to be done, prepared a great present (whether it might have been the same as that which had 
been sent for Juan de Grijalva and which had been brought back, or whether it was another like it, or a larger than 
the first, I do not know); but one addition which it received was, that they sent with it all the sacerdotal habits which 
they said had been worn by Quetzalcohuatl when he was in that country, who, as it would hence appear, was both 
priest and king, like Numa Pompilius in Rome: and here we have an example of the pontifical and regal dignities 
having been united at one period of time in the world, as we have elsewhere observed. All the articles of which the 
present consisted, which Motecuhcuma took from his treasury in order that they might be sent to those strangers 
who had made their appearance by sea, were wrapped up in rich mantles which they put into petacas, which having 
been done, Motecuhcuma made the following speech to the lords whom he sent as his ambassadors: ‘Go, my friends, 
and discharge faithfully the duties of this embassy, which we entrust to you, this august senate and myself; take care 
that nothing detains you on the road, but proceed with as much expedition as possible into the presence of our lord 
and king Quetzaleohuatl, and say to him, Your vassal, Motecuhcuma, who is at present the regent of your kingdom, 
sends us to salute your majesty, and to give you the present of which we are the bearers, together with these sacerdotal 
ornaments, which have always been held in the highest veneration and esteem amongst us.’ Charged with this dispatch, 
the ambassadors withdrew from the presence of the king, and immediately set out on their journey; and travelling 
with the greatest possible haste arrived at the sea-coast, which Cortes with his entire company had already reached. 

“ On their coming to the sea-coast they embarked in canoes, into which they conveyed all their baggage, and 
directed their course to the ships of Ferdinand Cortes; and perceiving the flag of the captain’s vessel, they rowed 
towards it, imagining that there they should find the lord and kmg whom they sought. All on board the ships in- 
tently observed what passed, and when the canoes reached the captain’s vessel, the Indians gave them to understand - 
by signs that they wished to come on board; those on deck inquired of them whence they came, who they were, 
and what they wanted: they replied that they were Mexicans, and that they had quitted Mexico to seek their lord 
and king Quetzalcohuatl, who they knew was there. Although the Spaniards did not understand their words, they 
knew the purport of them by their signs, and, astonished at their demand, they debated the matter with each other, 
and said, What can they mean by saying that their king and their god is here, and that they wish to see him? Cortes 
listened to their conversation, and he and all the rest having considered the matter well and deliberated together, they 
agreed amongst each other that Don Ferdinand Cortes should dress himself in the richest apparel that he had, and 
that they should prepare a throne for him in the fore part of the vessel, on which he should sit counterfeiting 
royalty, and that the Indians should then be introduced to see and speak tohim. Having accordingly so done, they 
told the Indians that they were welcome, and that he whom they sought was there, and that they would be permitted 
to see and speak to him. The Indians on hearing this drew their canoes closer to the captain’s vessel, and those 

NOTES. 343 

above assisted them, and lifted up the baggage which they had brought with them: they as soon as they found them- 
selves in the ship sat down on the deck, and dressed and adorned themselves with their finest ornaments, and untying 
their packages disposed the articles of which the present consisted in judicious order. Having so done, they 
begged to be permitted to behold him whom they sought; and were conducted to the fore part of the vessel, where 
Ferdinand Cortes was already expecting them, with the mock majesty which we have just mentioned: they were 
introduced to him carrying the present in their hands; and when they saw him seated, majestically on the throne, 
believing that he was their god and lord Quetzalcohuatl, they immediately prostrated themselves upon the ground 
and kissed it,—that being the obsequious mark of adoration with which they did homage to their gods ; when, rising, 
he who was the principal of them all, addressed him, ‘Our God and Lord, we welcome your arrival, since we, who 
are your vassals and servants, have long expected you. Motecuhcuma, your vassal and the regent of your kingdom, 
has dispatched us to your presence that we may salute you in his name, and he beseeches you to accept this trifling 
present, and these precious ornaments which you were accustomed to wear when you were amongst us in the cha- 
racter of our king and god.’ Having so said, they began to attire him in the ornaments which they had brought ; 
upon his head they put what seemed like a helmet decorated with gold and gems of great value and with a rich 
plume of feathers ; they clothed him in a vest of fine texture, named a Xiculli, which reached from the throat to the 
waist, and descended to the middle of the arm; they next threwa chain of precious stones of great value and beauty 
round his neck: andin this manner they proceeded to load him from head to foot with ornaments and costly sacer- 
dotal vestments, adding to the ordinary habits worn by the god Quetzalcohuatl those likewise which belonged to the 
gods Tezcatlipoca * and Tlalocatecutli, all of which they laid at his feet, (as is also customary with them when they 
make a present to a person of high rank,) signifying by that act that they recognised him as the greatest of their 
gods. After they had so done, an interpreter said to them in the name of Ferdinand Cortes, ‘ What ! is this all that 
you have brought me to welcome my arrival amongst you?’ On which the principal ambassador replied, ‘ Lord and 
king! this was what was given to us to carry to your majesty, and no more.’ Ferdinand Cortes then desired some 
of his men to take them into the cabin and to treat them courteously, allowing them time to repose themselves, and 
afterwards to set before them provisions of Spain, inviting them to partake of them with all civility and politeness. 
When these Indians came on board the ship, many of the men crowded from the other vessels around the captain’s 
ship to see what was there passing ; and they saw and heard what I have related: at which they were astonished, and 
were at a loss for suitable terms by which to express what they thought of such great simplicity and of a scene so 
new to them. 

«« They agreed to terrify these messengers by throwing them into irons, loading them with chains, and discharging 
the artillery, and challenging them to wrestle with them; all with the object of inducing them to report terrible things 
of them, in order that those who heard them might be seized with fear, and dread them as those who were fated to 
march on to victory, and to become the lords of the country. The Indians slept in the ship that night, and on the next 
day as soon as it was morning the Spaniards put into execution what they had planned the day before: they took the 
Indians and threw them into irons, and having chained them by the feet began to fire off the artillery. The Indians, who 
beheld themselves prisoners and in irons, confounded with the noise and the thunders of the cannon and the smell 
of the powder, fell senseless on the ground, and there remained for a long space of time as it were dead : the soldiers, 
on seeing them in this state, raised them in their arms, and seating them, threw water in their faces, and made them 

* Tezcatlipoca was adored, according to Sahagun, under the name of Camastle, in some of the states contiguous to Mexico. The 
following passage may suggest a reason why to the habits worn by the god Quetzalcohuatl, were added those belonging to Tezcatli- 
poca: “ Antes de la Fiesta, quatro 6 cinco Dias, aderegaban todos los 'Templos, y Salas de los Dioses, y encalaban lo desollado, y 
descostrado de ellos; y tres Dias antes, pintabanse los Achcauhtin, unos de negro, otros de agcul, y otros de blanco, y cada qual como 
mejor le parecia; y luego a las espaldas de la Casa, 6 Templo principal de el Demonio, bailaban el Dia entero. Luego vestian la Estatua 
de su Dios Camaxtle, que era de tres estados de alto, y junto de st tenia otro Idolo pequeno, que decian averle traido los primeros Pobla- 
dores de esta Republica. Este Idolo ponian siempre junto a la grande Estatua de Camaxtle; y tenianle tanta reverencia, y temor, que 
no le osaban mirar, ni alcar los ojos en su presencia; aunque diversas veces sacrificaban delante de ¢l mucho numero de Codornices. 
Vestian este Idolo con las vestiduras del Dios Quetzalcohuatl, en esta ocasion, que era el Dios de los Chololtecas ; porque decian estos 
Idolatras, que era Hijo de Camaztle ; y estas vestiduras traian los mismos Chololtecas, para esta Fiesta, por no estar la una Ciudad, de 
lo otra, mas de quatro leguas; y esto mismo hacian los de Tlaxcalla, quando festejaban esotros, 4 su falso Dios: eran muchas, y se las 
vestian con grandes ceremonias, y cubrianle la mala cara con otra peor, y mas fea mascara.’—Monarquia Indiana, lib. x. cap. xxxi. 

344, NOTES. 

drink it ; on which they recovered from the terror and fright into which they had been thrown. They then took off 
their fetters; and the captain said to them, ‘I am informed that the Mexicans are very valiant, possess great strength, 
and are good wrestlers, and that one alone would be enough to conquer ten or twenty of his enemies, and to compel 
them to submit; on which account, in order to ascertain the truth and to assure myself of the fact, I wish you to con- 
tend with my people, that I may see whether you are more valiant than they.’ He gave them shields, swords, and lances 
for the contest. The poor unhappy Indians, who, if even they had known how to make use of the arms which 
had been given to them, were more dead than alive from the chains and the noise of the artillery, did not only not accept 
the challenge, but declined it by saying, ‘Lord! this was not the purpose for which we came, nor did Motecuhcuma 
send us to quarrel with you, or to enter upon a trial of strength with your people, but only to visit you in his name, 
and to kiss your hands as we have done; and if we obeyed your commands, and could be guilty of such great pre- 
sumption, we should not only excite his displeasure, but should pay the forfeit of our lives.” To this the captain 
replied, “You need make no manner of excuse, for you must do what I order you; as I have heard of you Mexicans 
that you are valiant, and you must use your utmost endeavours in attacking and defending yourselves from my men.’ 
He could not however prevail upon them; and seeing that they would not either singly, or two and two, or in any 
way try their strength and skill in fighting with the Spaniards,—in order to induce them to accept the challenge, they 
loaded them with abusive epithets and dismissed them, telling them that they were cowards and effeminate persons, 
and that being such they might go back to Mexico, and that they would come and conquer the Mexicans, who 
should all die by their hands ; and that they might tell Motecuhcuma that his present had displeased them, and that 
they would march to Mexico and would plunder them of whatever they had and take it for themselves. (Whether 
they knew what they were saying or no will be seen in the sequel; for they spoke at random, not knowing the 
future, and without having made any trial of the land.) 

“With this answer, and these threats, (worthy most certainly of the folly of Motecuhguma and of his counsellors,) 
the Indians entered into their canoes ; and so great was their haste that every moment’s delay appeared to them the 
herald and sad harbinger of death: they immediately therefore began rowing,—not only the rowers whom they had 
brought for the purpose, but all indiscriminately, each urging and exhorting the other to apply a strong hand to the 
oar, as well in order to find themselves at a distance from and fairly rid of the ships where they had been treated so 
indifferently, as to hasten their return, to give an account to their king of what had passed between them and Quet- 
zalcohuatl. Proceeding in this rapid manner, they reached a small island called Xicalanco, where they partook of 
some refreshment and rested themselves for a short space of time ; from thence, continuing their course, they arrived 
at a town named Tecpantlayacac on the sea-coast, from whence they journeyed on to Cuetlaxtla, a place situated 
some leagues inland, where they slept; the lords and principal persons of that town entreated them to remain there 
the following day to rest themselves ; but they replied, ‘ Our haste is urgent ; for the embassy with which we are 
charged to our lord Motecuhcuma is of such a nature that it is unprecedented in these kingdoms, and it is not fit 
that any one should know its nature before him; and for this reason it is our duty not to stay to repose ourselves, 
but to travel on in haste.’ They immediately set off, and proceeded on their journey with such distressed and 
harassed feelings, that they reaped no consolation from food or sleep, nothing gave them the slightest satisfaction, 
but they sighed as they went along, overcome with sorrow, wonder, and dismay; they scarcely addressed each other, 
preserving a strange silence ; or if at intervals they spoke, they said, ‘We have beheld terrible and uncommon things, 
which portend evils and great tribulation; but, O Lord God! who are they, and from whence shall they come, who 
shall conquer the Mexicans ? Are not we the powerful, the ancient, and the dreaded in all these lands ? Why do we 
allow ourselves to be disturbed and pained? why do our hearts, heaving within our breasts, forbode to us future ills ? 
—this is a sign of some great impending calamity.’ With these and similar reflections they occupied their minds on 
the road, and arrived by rapid stages at the city of Mexico at an advanced hour of the night, and proceeded straight 
to the palace of king Motecuheuma, when they hade the attendants in the ante-room inform the king of their arrival ; 
and if he was asleep to awaken him, for the business upon which they came did not permit delay or procrastination, 
and to say to him, ‘Lord! the ambassadors have returned whom you sent to the sea to receive our god Quetzal- 
cohuatl” The guards went into his chamber and delivered the message to him, which when Motecuhcuma had heard, 
he answered, ‘ Tell them not to come in here, but to go to the hall of judgment, and to wait for me there.’ He then 
commanded slaves to be prepared for a sacrifice, and. proceeding to the hall of judgment, he assembled those who 
composed his council, and other persons whose office it was to sacrifice the slaves, with whose blood they sprinkled 

NOTES 345 

the ambassadors. This was a customary ceremony on the arrival of any very important embassy, when the circum- 
stances which gave rise to it were grave and unusual. 

« After the idolatrous ceremony of sprinkling the ambassadors with the blood * of these sacrificed victims had been 
gone through, Motecuhcuma seated himself upon his throne and chair, in order to hear with state and majesty the 
tidings which his ambassadors had brought to him: for agreeably to the belief which he had adopted, he was con- 
vinced that it was Quetzalcohuatl who had arrived on the sea-coast ; and he expected to receive perfect information 
of the arrangements necessary to be made preparatory to his visit. The ambassadors immediately prostrated them- 
selves upon the ground and kissed it, (which they name in their language Tlalcualiztli, being an idolatrous cere- 
mony of adoration,) and in this prostrate state, the principal person amongst them, who had gone as superior of 
the rest on that embassy, commenced the delivery of the following speech : ‘ Powerful lord and king! As soon as we 
arrived at the sea shore, these your servants and myself, we beheld some very large houses entirely of wood upon the 
water, contrived very artificially both within and without, which go through the deep water of the sea like the canoes 
which we employ here upon our lake and aqueducts: we were told that these houses were called ships; and it would 
be impossible for any of us to explain the variety of buildings and things which they contain within them. We went 
in canoes to them, and entered the principal ship, or water-house, where was the flag which they carried with them. 
The ships were many ; and in each there were many persons, who all stood looking at us until we entered the 
captain’s vessel. We immediately requested to see the lord Quetzalcohuatl, (in search of whom we had come,) in order 
to give him the presents which we had brought with us: and they showed us, in a separate part of the ship, a lord 
seated upon a throne, clothed in very rich apparel, and pointing to him with their finger, they said to us, Behold him 
whom you seek. We prostrated ourselves at his feet, kissing the ground and adoring him as a god. We next 
addressed the speech to him which you commanded, and proceeded to dress him in the robes and jewels which you 
gave to us, and delivered to him the other articles of which the present consisted: and having laid it all at his feet, 
he gave us to understand that it was very little. That day they treated us well, and set provisions before us, and gave 
us an agreeable liquor to drink, which they called wine: that night we slept in the ship. In the morning they wished 
to come to a trial of strength with us, and ordered us to fight with them, which we persisted steadily in declining : 
they then threw us into chains and discharged their artillery, which greatly terrified us with thunder and lightning, and 
caused us to fall on the ground as if dead. After we had recovered ourselves, and they had obliged us to take some 
refreshment, we inspected their arms, their horses, and their dogs which assist them in fighting, at which we were 
still more terrified. It would he tedious and would take up too much time to give a minute account of every thing 
which we saw :—they say that they have come here to conquer us and to rob us; that is all we know. If they 
should come here, we shall know both what they want, and how far their power may be commensurate with their 
will. We can only say that we return back greatly terrified and alarmed.—Motecuhcuma was very much astonished 
at the words of the ambassadors ; his face changed colour, and he displayed extreme sorrow and dismay ; the con- 
viction took possession of his mind, that he himself as well as all the subjects of his empire would have to suffer 
much and to endure many indignities. Under the influence of this impression he began to weep bitterly, as did like- 
wise all those by whom he was surrounded: their tears and lamentations spread afterwards through all classes of the 
city, high and low; and they soon began to assemble in groups in the public squares and the streets, and to utter 
lamentations, each one exciting the other's grief by the suggestion of melancholy and tender recollections: they spoke 
of the great evils which threatened them, and of the ruin and destruction which impended over them, as if they had 
already happened,—their hearts divining what was afterwards to befall them: all were dejected and a prey to grief; 
fathers sorrowing for their sons exclaimed, ‘Alas, my sons, what troubles must you see, and, what is worse, what 
must you go through and suffer!’ Mothers made the same lamentations over their daughters ; adding other piteous 
ejaculations, which their great love and sorrow prompted. They passed the night and an entire day in their 
manifestations of public affliction ; and Motecuhguma, as more interested in preserving the honours and dignities 
which it might be his fate to lose, felt more acutely than all the rest.” 

The above account, of Cortes having been supposed by the Mexicans to be their god Quetzalcohuatl, is so curious 

* Aaron was consecrated to the sacerdotal dignity by Moses, with the ceremony of being sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed victim, 
as we learn from the twenty-first verse of the twenty-ninth chapter of Exodus. 

(ae) 

346 NOTES. 

that we cannot refrain from subjoining in a note the original passage in Spanish *; remarking at the same time, 
that if most historians have passed over in silence the events here recorded, it was because they had not access to 
the same means of information as Torquemada, or even the opportunity of consulting his History, in consequence 
of the proscription which the first edition of the Indian Monarchy underwent in the course of the seventeenth 

* “Quando Juan de Grijalva vino al Descubrimiento, que Francisco Hernandez de Cordova avia reconocido, por estas Costas de la 
Nueva-Espafia, llegd con su Armada hasta San Juan de Ulua, (como dexamos dicho) y como era cosa nueva para los Moradores de la 
Tierra, vér Navios, en el Mar, porque jamas lo imaginaron, hicoles grande novedad, y espanto, y dieron noticia de ello & los Governa- 
dores, y Capitanes, que el Emperador Motecuhguma tenia, por todas aquellas Poblaciones. Con estas Nuevas, que oieron, se juntaron 
todos, y deliberaron, entre si, de ir 4 dar estas Nuevas & su Sefior Motecuhguma, que tenia su Corte en esta Ciudad de Mexico, y por 
no yenir 4 tiento, 4 alborotar el Reino, y por traer ragon clara del Negocio, determinaron de vér aquel Milagro, u Prodigio, que los 
espantaba, y tenia en pasmo, y admiracion. Dieron traga de que algunos fuesen a la Mar, y metidos en Canoas, llevasen refresco de 
Pan, y Fruta, y otras cosas de regalo, para que si fuesen Hombres, como ellos, les dixesen, que iban 4 vender aquellas cosas, si de 
ellas tenian necesidad; y que sino lo fuesen, se informasen de lo que eran aquellos bultos tan grandes, y de lo que llevaban dentro. 
Hicose asi, y fueron Indios Principales, y Esforgados, & este Negocio, y metidos en sus Canoas, y remando, fueron acia los Navios, 
vieron en uno de ellos el Estandarte Real, que el Aire lo tremolaba, y pareciendoles, que en aquel, como en particular, iria el Capitan 
de todos los otros, encaminaron a él, y llegaron 4 Bordo. Los que iban dentro, como los vieron ir, pusieronse a vér, que hacian; pero 
los Indios, que ya avian llegado, les hicieron una mui profunda reverencia, y por seftas les dieron 4 entender, que venian de Paz, a 
venderles cosas de comer, y de vestir; los del Navio, tambien por sefias les preguntaron, que de donde eran, y como venian alli? Ellos 
respondieron, que eran Mexicanos. Bolvieronles @ decir los Nuestros: Pues si sois Mexicanos, decidnos como se llama el Seftor de 
Mesico? Respondieron, que se llamaba Motecuhguma ; con esto los subieron al Navio, en el qual entraron sin ningun recelo, y mostraron 
Ropa rica de Algodon, y algunas cosas de Vitualla, de que se alegraron los Nuestros, y rescataronselas por Cuentas Acules, Verdes, y 
de otras colores, porque les parecieron a los Indios mui finas, y que en valor excedian a la quantidad del precio que valia la Ropa, que 
llevaron; y aviendo hecho el Rescate, y pasadose mucha parte del Dia, se despidieron los Indios, & los quales dixo el Capitan del 
Navio: Id en buen hora, y llevad esas Piedras 4 vuestro Sefior Motecuhguma, y decidle, que no podemos aora verle, porque nos 
bolvemos A nuestra Tierra; pero que vendrémos otra vez, y llegarémos & verle 4 su Ciudad de Mexico. Con esto se partieron los Indios, 
en sus Canoas, y llegaron 4 Tierra, donde luego pintaron los Navios, y Xarcia, como mejor supieron, las Personas que vieron, el 
trage, los rostros, las barbas, y otras particularidades, que les parecieron nuevas, y nunca vistas. Pusieronse todos en camino, para 
Mexico, y caminando a grandisima priesa, de Noche, y de Dia, sin descansar, llegaron mui en breve a esta Ciudad, y fueron 4 Palacio, 
sin decir A nadie el Mensage, con que venian : (porque era costumbre entre ellos, que las Embaxadas no se manifestasen, ni dixesen, 
hasta que el Rei las oiese, y se enterase de ellas) Dixeron 4 los Porteros, que diesen aviso a Motecuhguma, de su venida, y como era 
con priesa. Fue avisado el Rei por la Gente de Camara, de como los Governadores, y Maiordomos de las Costas de la Mar del 
Norte, estaban alli, que venian con mucha priesa 4 verle; alborotose, y sobresaltdse el Rei, porque pensd, que el caso avia de ser mui 
importante; pues la Gente de guarda, que él tenia, en aquella Tierra, venia sin su licencia 4 verle, (y no fue este sobresalto, que 
recibid, sin causa, porque la tenia mui grande de creer qualquier desgracia, por las cosas prodigiosas que avia visto, que le pronos- 
ticaban Ruinas, y adversidades, y con esto andaba sospechoso de acaecimientos grandes, que se esperaban) Bolvio a replicar a los 
Criados: qué es verdad, que han venido los Capitanes de la Costa, todos juntos? Respondieronle otra vez, diciendo, Sefior nuestro, 
alli fuera estan, mandelos Vuestra Magestad entrar, y verlos ha. Dixo Motecuhguma: Decidlos que entren, verlos hemos. En 
entrando dentro en la Sala, donde estaba, luego se postraron en Tierra, y la besaron, y levantandose saludaron al Rei, y le dixeron: 
Sefior nuestro, dignos somos de muerte, por aver venido sin vuestra Licencia, 4 vuestra Real Presencia; pero el Negocio es tan arduo, 
y grave, que lo sufre. Es el caso, que todos juntos, los que aqui venimos, hemos visto Dioses, que han Ilegado & aquella Costa, en 
grandes Casas de Agua, (que asi llaman 4 los Navios) y los hemos hablado, y conversado, y hemos comido con ellos, y les dimos 
Mantas ricas, y ellos nos dieron en retorno estas Piedras preciosas, que aqui traemos. Luego le presentaron las Cuentas, y Abalorios, 
que traian, y dixeron: Estas Piedras nos dieron, y dixeron; Id a la Corte, y dadlas 4 vuestro Sefior Motecuhguma, y decidle: que 
nos bolvemos & nuestra Tierra, y que otra vez bolveremos, y le veremos. No respondid el Emperador 4 esto nada; (que solo lo estaba 
sintiendo en su pecho) pero dixo 4 los Capitanes, cansados vendreis de tan largos, y acelerados Caminos, id 4 descansar, y no digais 
3X nadie esta Embaxada, que quiero secreto en ella; porque el Pueblo facil, y bullicioso, no se altere, y & su tiempo os llamare, y 
avisaré de lo que conviniere. Salieronse los Capitanes, y dieronles Salas, donde estuviesen (como antiguamente lo acostumbraban). 

“ Motecuhcuma queddse solo, y pensativo, y aun bien sospechoso de mucha novedad en sus Reinos: porque era de mui buen 
entendimieuto, y consideraba los prodigios pasados, y tralia a la memoria lo que su Adivino le avia dicho; por lo qual le hecho la 
Casa encima, y lo matd, y acordavase de lo que su Hermana Papan le avia dicho, afios antes, y lo que Negahualpilli tambien le avia 
dicho, y pensaba, que no eran acaso estas cosas, sino que venian amenacando algun gran mal, 6 trueque de Govierno. Y como los 
negocios graves quieren comunicacion, y consejo, higo luego llamar & todos los que lo eran de él, que fueron el Rei Cacama de Tezcuco, 
su Sobrino, al qual embid & llamar por la Posta, y 4 Cuitlahuatzin, su Hermano, Sefior del Pueblo de Itztapalapan, y 4 Ycihuacohuatl, 
Tlilpotonqui, Tlacochcaleatl, Quapiatzin, Tizoc, Yaoacatl, Quetzalaztatzin, Huitznahuacatl, Tlaylotlac, y Ecatempatiltzin, que eran de 
su Consejo Ordinario, 4 los quales manifesto lo que pasaba, y aviendo dado, y tomado en pareceres, y adivinangas, de lo que podia 
ser, concluieron su Consejo, con persuadirse, y creer, que seria Quetzalcohuatl & quien, en un tiempo adoraron por Dios, de quien 
tambien pensaban, que avia de venir & Reinar otra vez en estas Tierras, por averlo dicho él mucho antes, quando paso de aqui, @ las 

NOTES. 347 

century. It furnishes, moreover, an explanation (affording by so doing a new proof of its authenticity) of what 
almost all historians have pronounced to be the unaccountable conduct of Montezuma, in sending repeated 
embassies and rich presents to the Spaniards, and in still persisting in forbidding them to approach his court; 
since their threats in the first instance to burn and plunder his city, and their reception of his ambassadors, must 

Provincias de Tlapala, y se les avia desaparecido en la Costa de la Mar, é ido acia aquellas Partes Orientales, y como por esta causa 
le esperaban, entendieron ser él, el que avia llegado. 

“Con esta persuasion, que tuvieron, determinaron, que se nombrasen Personas, que fuesen A recibirle, y en elinterin que iban, se 
les mando a los Capitanes, y Governadores de las Costas, que pusiesen gran cuidado, y vigilancia en atalaiar, y descubrir lo que por 
el Mar viniese, en especialen los Lugares de Nauhtla, Toztla, Mictla, y Quauhtla, para que de aquellas partes, por ser mas comodas, 
se viese mejor, y mas presto, y se traxese ragon mas cierta, delo que pasaba. Con este recaudo fueron despachados estos Governadores, 
y Capitanes. Fueron nombrados cinco Sefiores, para que llevasen un Presente, que el Emperador embiaba & Quetzalcohuatl; los 
quales fueron Yohualychan, y este fue por Maior, Tepuztecal, que era casi igual al primero, Tizahua, y Huehuetecatl, y el quinto, y 
ultimo se llamaba Hueycamecatleca, y mandoseles, que con la maior brevedad posible fuesen & la Mar, y hablasen de parte de Mote- 
cuhguma, y su Senado, 4 Quetzalcohuatl su Seftor, y le ofreciesen el Reino, y un gran Presente, que les fue dado, para que le llevasen. 
Este es el que dicen Gomara, y Antonio de Herrera confusamente, que traxeron & Fernando Cortés quando saltd en Tierra, por parte 
de los Governadores de Motecuhguma, y esto dicen por estas palabras: el qual presente, se dixo, que-avia embiado & Juan de 
Grijalva quando llegd en aquellas partes, sino que por mucha priesa, que se dieron, los que le llevaban, hallaron que era ido. Y fue asi; 
pero no sé, como los que pusieron en estilo aquella Relacion, de que se aprovechd Herrera, se dexaron esto, como en este Capitulo 
lo dexo referido, y otras muchas cosas, que en lo que se sigue se diran; porque aquellas, y estas, son corresponsivas, y quien did racon 
de lo uno, pudo darlo de lo otro; aunque pienso, estuvo el yerro en no hacer estas Inquisiciones, ¢ Informaciones, mas que con los 
Espafioles, que entonces vinieron, y no las averiguaron con los Indios, que tambien les toca mucha parte de ellas, y aun el todo; pues 
fueron el blanco donde todas las cosas de la Conquista se asestaron, y son los que mui bien las supieron, y las pusieron en Historia a 
los principios, por sus Figuras, y Caracterés, y despues que supieron escrivir algunos Curiosos de ellos, las escrivieron, las quales tengo 
en mi poder, y tengo tanta embidia al Lenguage, y estilo con que estan escritas, que me holgaré saberlas traducir en Castellano, con 
la elegancia, y gracia, que en su Lengua Mexicana se dicen: y por ser Historia pura, y verdadera, la sigo en todo; y si & los que las 
leieren parecieren novedades, digo, que no lo son, sino la pura verdad sucedida; pero que no se ha escrito hasta aora, porque los pocos 
que han escrito los sucesos de las Indias, no las supieron, ni huvo quien se las dixese; ni tampoco Yo las escriviera si no las hallara 
averiguadas de el Padre I'r. Bernardino de Sahagun, Religioso Santo, y Grave, que fue de los segundos, que entraron en la Conversion 
de esta Nueva-Hspafia, y de los primeros, el primero Investigador de las cosas mas secretas de la Tierra; y supo todos los secretos de 
ella, y se ocupd mas de sesenta afos en escrivir Lengua Mexicana, y todo lo que pudo alcangar en ella. 

“ Huyo entre los Gentiles de el Oriente una Profecia, dicha por Balaan, y referida en el Libro de los Numeros, en orden & la 
Venida de el Hijo de Dios, en Carne Humana; la qual declard el Profeta Gentil, con estas palabras: Nacer& una Estrella de Jacob, 
y levantarse ha una Vara de Israél, y consumira, y matard los Capitanes de Moab. Y San Juan Chrisostomo, sobre este lugar, refiere 
el dicho de algunos, que dixeron, que como aquellas Gentes tuviesen creido el Nacimiento de esta Estrella, que pusieron doce 
Atalaias, que en ciertos tiempos de el Affo subian 4 un Monte alto, llamado Victorial, y estaban tres Dias orando & Dios, y pidiendole 
les manifestase la Estrella, que avia dicho Balaan, y que la vieron, y entonces vinieron los Reies 4 la Adoracion de el Nifio Dios recien 
Nacido, y le adoraron. No sé si embidioso de esta Profecia el Demonio, y deseoso de tener otro Pueblo en continua vela, y vigilancia, 
ordend entre los Indios de esta Nueva-Espafia, este embeleco; para cuia inteligencia hemos de advertir, que en tiempos pasados 
huvo un Hombre en Tierra de Tula, que se llamé Quetzalcohuatl, (como dexamos dicho en otro lugar) gran Magico, y Nigro- 
mantico, al qual adoraron despues por Dios, y fue tenido por Rei de aquella Tierra. Este fue vencido de otro Hechicero maior, y mas 
poderoso que él, (que debid de ser como otro Zoroastes en Babilonia) y le despojd de el Reino. Fuese huiendo & la Ciudad de 
Cholulla, y alli le siguid, y corrid: y dexando el Reino se fue acia la Mar, fingiendo, que el Dios Sol, le llamaba & la otra parte 
de el Mar, por la Vanda de el Oriente; pero prometid de bolver despues, con mucha pujanga, a vengar sus injurias, y & redimir su 
Pueblo de agravios, y tiranias; porque decian de él, que era mui Humano, y Misericordioso. Esta mentira se conservd en aquellos 
Tiempos, y se fue reforgando con mucha maior opinion, en todos los que despues le sucedieron: y fue tan creida su buelta de estos 
Mexicanos, que los que entraban Reinando, recibian el Reino con esta condicion, de que eran Tenientes de su Sefior Quetzalcohuatl, 
y que en viniendo se lo dexarian, y le obedecerian, como Vasallos, en él. 

« Sabida, pues, esta Historia, decimos, que como estas Gentes aguardaban a este Quetzalcohuatl, y tenian por mui cierto, que 
avia de bolver & Reinar 4 estos Reinos, de esta Nueva-Espafia, qualquier demonstracion, y amago, que avia de alteracion, y rumor 
de alguno, que aparecia, luego pensaban ser él: Y como traxeron las nuevas, que en el Capitulo pasado dexamos dichas,-y mas de la 
parte por donde vinieron, en que se avia desaparecido, y en Navios tan grandes, enmedio de un Mar tan ancho, y peligroso, persua- 
dieronse 4 que era él, y no otro; y por esto pusieron maior cuidado, en la vigilancia de su buelta, atalaiando el Mar, no tres Dias 
en todos los Meses de el Afto, (como los Gentiles de el Oriente,) sino de Dia, y de Noche, todo el Afio entero: Al fin de el qual, 
como Juan de Grijalva fue & Cuba, y de su ida, resultd la venida de Fernando Cortés, por la misma Derrota, que el primero, fue 
fuerga, que los Indios viesen los Navios, y con el Mandato expreso, gue tenian de su Rei, fueron por Postas 4 dar el aviso de ello, 
llevando pintado, el Numero de los Navios, yla manera de la Gente, que vieron andar en ellos: Lo qual todo mostraron 4 Mote- 
culiguma; y con el nuevo aviso, que tuvo de esta segunda Armada, (que fue por fin de Febrero de el Afio de mil quinientos y diez y 
nueve) hico Junta de los de su Consejo, y de otras Personas de Prendas, y Autoridad, y didles parte de las nuevas, que avian traido 

BAG) NOTES. 

have made him very unwilling to receive such visitors in Mexico; and his remaining doubts as to whether Cortes 
might not be Quecalcoatle, and his cannon some preternatural agency by which to subjugate his enemies, together 
with the consciousness that all his subjects would be ripe for rebellion on the first report that their god had come 
to take possession of his kingdom,—must have suggested to his prudence the precise line of conduct which he 

las Atalayas de la Costa de el Oriente, de lo que de nuevo avia aparecido en la Mar, que confirmaba las pasadas de el Afio antes. Y 
confiriendo el caso, trataron de lo que convenia hacer: Y como quando entraron los Magos, en Jerusalén, preguntando por el Rei 
nuevamente nacido, se turbd Herodes, y todos los de su Alianga, y Valia, y confirieron los Doctores el caso, y dieron ragon de el Lugar 
de donde avia de tener su Nacimiento. Asi estos Indios de el Consejo de el Rei, turbados con él, y confusos, dixeron: que pues era 
verdad, que su Dios, y Rei Quetzalcohuatl avia ido alos Reinos de Tlapala, a verse con el Dios Sol, al qual todos sus Antepasados 
avian esperado, que tambien lo seria, que era el que en los Navios avia aparecido, pues no parecia caso Humano, que Hombres 
Mortales anduviesen por la Mar metidos, tan dentro de sus Aguas, sin que huviesen perecido en ellas; y asi crelan ser él: y que pues 
venia, era racon, que fuesen Embaxadores, y Personas Principales a darle la Obediencia, de parte de aquel Senado, y & recibirlo. 
De aqui pudieramos inferir, que estos Mexicanos tomaron la costumbre de elegir Reies, y no acostumbrar en su Republica, que lo 
fuesen por herencia; lo qual pudieramos probar, con decir, que si creian, que tenian Rei vivo, y que en algun Tiempo avia de bolver 
ala Posesion de su Reino, que no avian de consentir, que otro entrase en él, con Posesion perpetua, sino como los Governadores, que 
en ausencia de los Reies sirven el Oficio, como la Persona Real, con la limitacion, que dice solo el Tiempo de la ausencia, estando 
prestos, y aparejados de hacer dexacion de él, cada, y quando que venga su Natural, y legitimo Heredero. Pero esto fue locura en 
ellos; como tambien lo fue creer, que este Encantador iba 4 verse con el Sol, para bolverse despues 4 gocar de el Reino Temporal, 
que avia dexado: Pero bien creeria Yo, que ya que el Demonio inventd este engafio, y causd este embuste, para tener engafiadas estas 
Gentes, que tambien seria permision de Dios, no para que en el engafio perseverasen estos Hombres errados, sino para que quando 
Ilegasen los Christianos 4 estas Tierras, con el Apellido, y voz de su Evangelio Santo, estuviesen yd algo dispuestos para recibirle, con 
el apercibimiento, y cuidado que estaban, de que avia de venir otro a despojarlos de el Reino, y Sefiorio; y si el Demonio lo alcangara 
bien a entender, supiera que este Quetzalcohuatl, que él fingia Rei, y Dios de estas Gentes, avia de ser Dios Verdadero, Rei, y Sefior 
de todo lo Criado, y que como Cortés le venia 4 quitar la posesion de el Reino, 4 Motecuhcuma, (que sin saber lo que se decian los 
Indios, le embiaron a recibir por Quetzalcohuatl) asi tambien este Sefior y Rei Soberano, venia en habito de Rei Universal, a destruirlo, 
y quitarle el Reino; maiormente que ya tenian pronosticos de ello, y aviso de Papan, la Sefiora de este Tlatelolco, que antes diez afios 
lo avia dicho (como vimos en el Libro pasado, en el Capitulo de los Prodigios). 

“ Bolviendo al proposito, digo, que determinados estos Indios con el Rei, de lo que se avia de hacer, ordenaron un gran Presente ; 
ora sea el que antes avian llevado a Juan de Grijalva, y que lo huviesen buelta; ora otro tal, 2 maior, que avia sido el primero; pero 
lo que huvo mas fue, embiarle con él todas las Vestiduras Sacerdotales, que decian que usaba Quetzalcohuatl, quando estaba en la 
Tierra, que segun esto, era Sacerdote, y Rei, como Numa Pompilio en Roma; y aqui se verifica, como el Sacerdocio, y el Reino 
ha andado junto, en algun tiempo, en el Mundo (como en otra parte decimos). Todo esto, que Motecuhcuma dio de sus Tesoros, que 
se llevase & los que avian aparecido en la Mar, lo embolvieron en Mantas ricas, y las pusieron en Petacas, y hecho todo esto, hablo 
Motecuhguma & los Sefiores que iban por Mensageros, de esta manera: Id Compafieros mios 4 cumplir esta Embaxada, 4 que os 
embiamos, este Gravisimo Senado, y Yo: Mirad, que no os detengais en ninguna parte, si no que con toda'la brevedad posible, llegueis 
a la Presencia de nuestro Seftor, y Rei Quetzalcohuatl, y decidle: Vuestro Vasallo Motecuhguma, que ahora tiene la tenencia de vuestro 
Reino, nos embia a saludar 4 Vuestra Magestad, y nos did este Presente, que aqui traemos, con las Insignias Sacerdotales, que siempre 
han tenido en grande estimacion, y honra. Con este despacho se partieron estos Embaxadores de la presencia de el Rei, y siguieron 
su camino; y con la maior priesa que pudieron, vinieron 4 la Costa donde ya avia legado Fernando Cortés con toda su Compafiia. 

“ Quando llegaron estos Mensageros de Motecuhguma 4 la orilla de la Mar, entraronse en Canoas, y metieron todas sus cargas en 
ellas, y fueronse & los Navios de Fernando Cortés, y viendo el Estandarte dela Capitana, fueronse a ella, por parecerles que alli estaria 
el Sefior, y Rei que buscaban: Los que venian en los Navios, todos estaban a la mira de lo que pasaba; y como las Canoas llegaron & 
la Capitana, hicieron sefias los Indios de querer entrar; y los de dentro les preguntaron: Qué de donde venian, y quienes eran, y qué 
querian? Ellos respondieron, que eran Mexicanos, y que venian de Mexico a buscar a su Seftor, y Rei Quetzalcohuatl, que sabian que 
estaba alli. Aunque los Espafioles no entendian las palabras, conocieron el intento, por las sefias, y maravillados de su demanda, trataban entre 
si, el caso, y decian: Qué quiere decir esto, que dicen estos, que aqui esta su Rei, y su Dios, y que le quieren vér? Esto oid Fernando 
Cortés, y él con todos pensaron bien el caso; y despues de averlo platicado, concertaron, que Don Fernando Cortés, se ataviase con las 
mejores Ropas que tenia, y le aderecasen un Trono en el Alcagar de Popa, donse sentase, representando Persona de Rei, y que estando de 
esta manera, entrasen los Indios 4 verle, y Ahablarle. Hecho esto, dixeron a los Indios, que fuesen mui bien venidos, que alli estaba el que 
buscaban, y que le verian, y hablarian. Aviendo oldo esto los Indios, juntaron sus Canoas, a bordo de la Capitana, y los de arriba los 
aiudaron & subir, y metieron dentro las cargas que llevaban. Luego que entraron, asentaronse sobre la Cubierta, y ataviaronse, y vistie- 
ronse lo mas galanamente, que pudieron, y desatando sus cargas, pusieron en mui buen orden su Presente. Hecho esto, pidieron licencia 
para vér al que buscaban, fueron llevados al Alcagar, donde ya Fernando Cortés estaba aguardando, con la representacion de Magestad, 
que hemos dicho. Ellos entraron dentro, con su Presente en las manos, y como le vieron en aquel Trono, y Magestad, creiendo que 
era su Dios, y Sefior Quetzalcohuatl, luego se postraron en Tierra, y la besaron; (que era la Adoracion Latria, con que reverenciaban & 
sus Dioses) y levantandose, dixo el que iba por Maior de todos ellos: Dios nuestro, y Sefior nuestro, seais mui bien venido, que grandes 
tiempos ha, que os esperamos nosotros yuestros Siervos, y Vasallos: Motecuhcuina, vuestro Vasallo, y T'eniente de vuestro Reino, nos 

NOTES. 349 

adopted: since his last resource, when all other expedients had failed, was to resist with arms the invading god. It 
is singular that neither Cortes nor his chaplain Gomara (who wrote a History of the conquest of Mexico, which he 
dedicated to Don Martin Cortes the son of the general) should say a word of the scene which was acted on board the 
Spanish ship, in which Cortes sitting upon a throne personified Quecalcoatle and received the ambassadors of 

embia & vuestra Presencia, para que en su Nombre os saludemos: y dice, que seais mui bien venido; y os suplica, que recibais este 
pequefio Don, y estos Ornamentos preciosos, que usabadeis entre nosotros en quanto nuestro Rei, y Dios. Y aviendo dicho esto, 
comengaron & vestirle, con aquellos Ornamentos que le Ilevaban: Pusieronle en la Cabega una piega, hecha 4 manera de Almete, en que 
avia mucho Oro, y Piedras de mucho valor, y un Plumero, ricamente aderegado: Pusieronle una Vestidura, que se llamaba Xiculli, 
que cubre desde la garganta hasta la cinta, y los medios bragos de Tela preciosa: Luego le hecharon al Cuello un Collar de Piedras 
preciosas, de mucho valor, y hermosura; y de esta manera lo fueron vistiendo, de la Cabega a los Pies, con Ornamentos, y Vestiduras 
Sacerdotales, de grande precio, y estimacion ; afiadiendo a los ordinarios del Dios Quetzalcohuatl, los que eran tambien de los Dioses 
Tezcatlipoca, y Tlalocatecutli, los quales todos le pusieron 4 sus pies, como diciendo en esto, que 4 él reconocian por el Maior de sus 
Dioses (como hacen quando dan algun Presente 4 alguna Persona constituida en Dignidad). Despues que hicieron esto, dixoles el 
Interprete, en Nombre de Fernando Cortés: Pues no traeis mas de esto para recibirme? Al qual respondid el Principal de ellos, y 
dixo: Sefior, y Rei nuestro, esto nos dieron que traxesemos 4 Vuestra Magestad, yno mas: Luego Fernando Cortés mando a los Suios, 
que los Ilevasen al Castillo de Proa, y los tratasen humanamente, y dexasen reposar, y que luego les diesen de Comer, de las cosas de 
Castilla, con toda benevolencia, y cortesia. Quando estos Indios entraron en el Navio, vinieron otros muchos de los otros Navios, 4 vér 
lo que en la Capitana pasaba, y vieron, y oieron lo dicho, de que quedaron admirados, y no sabian que decirse, & tan gran simpleca, y 
novedad. 

‘‘ Trataron de espantar & estos Mensageros, con aherrojarlos con Grillos, y Cadenas, y con disparar la Artilleria, desafiandolos, para 
que luchasen ; todo esto a fin de que fuesen diciendo cosas espantosas, para que los que las oiesen se atemoricasen, y les cobrasen miedo, 
que era el que los avia de hacer Sefiores de la Victoria, y Tierra: durmieron alli aquella Noche, y otro Dia de Mafiana pusieron por obra 
lo que el Dia antes avian tratado. Fueronse & los Indios, y metieronlos en Colleras, y hecharonles Grillos & los Pies, y comengaron 
disparar la Artilleria ; los Indios, que se vieron Presos, y aherrojados, y combatidos de tanto ruido, y Truenos dela Artilleria, y olor de la 
Polvora, caieron sin sentido en Tierra, y estuvieron por mui grande rato, como muertos: y como los vieron asi los Soldados, cogieronlos 
entre los Brazos, y sentandolos, los hecharon Agua en los Rostros, y dieronsela & beber, con que bolvieron de el pasmo, y asombro, que 
de lo hecho avian cobrado. Quitaronles las Prisiones, y dixoles el Capitan: Sabido he, que los Mexicanos son mui Valientes, y de 
muchas fuergas, y mui diestros en luchar, y que uno solo basta @ vencer, y rendir, diez, y veinte de sus Enemigos; por lo qual, y por 
satisfacerme de esta verdad, y salir de esta duda, quiero, que lucheis con mi Gente, para vér si sois mas Valientes, que ellos. Didles 
Rodelas, Espadas, y Lancas para que acometiesen ; los Indios, pobres, y desventurados, que quando supieran usar de aquellas Armas, 
que les avian dado, estaban con las Prisiones, y ruido de la Artilleria, mas muertos, que vivos, no solo no aceptaron el Desafio, pero 
escusaronse de ¢l, diciendo: Sefior, no es eso 4 lo que venimos, ni Motecuhguma nos mando, que viniesemios a refiir, ni 4 probar fuercas, 
con vuestra Gente; si no que solo os visitasemos de su parte, y os besasemos las Manos, como lo hemos hecho; y si hiciesemos lo.que 
nos mandais, y nos atreviesemos a tan grande desacato, no solo nos refiiria por ello, pero quitarianos las Vidas. A esto replicd el 
Capitan: No teneis que escusaros con ninguna ragon, porque aveis de hacer esto que os mando ; porque tenémos noticia de Vosotros, 
los Mexicanos, de que sois Valientes, y aveis de hacer todos vuestros poderios, para ofender, y defenderos de los mios. No pudieron 
recabario con ellos: y viendo que no querian uno 4 uno, ni dos 4 dos, ni de ninguna manera, para experimentar sus fuercas, y destrega 
en el peléar; (para si viniesen con ellos alguna vez a las Manos) injuriaronlos de palabra, y los despidieron, diciendo: Que eran 
Cobardes, y Afeminados, y que se fuesen como tales, 4 Mexico, que ellos venian ya 4 Conquistar 4 los Mexicanos, y que & sus Manos 
moririan todos; y que dixesen 4 Motecuhguma, como su Presente no les avia agradado, y que yendo ellos 4 Mexico, les robarian quanto 
tenian, y lo tomarian para si (si estos supieron los que se dixeron, 0 no, bien se hecha de vér, pues hablaron & tiento, no sabiendo lo por 
venir, ni aviendo hecho cata de las cosas de la Tierra). ‘ 

“ No estaban tan habiles, y resabidos nuestros Espafioles, quando Graco Pretor, y Capitan Romano, andando en las Conquistas de 
Espafia, llegd a poner Cerco a la Ciudad de Certima, cuios Moradores, viendose cercados, se fueron a él, y le dixeron que confesaban ser 
sus fuergas flacas, para contra los Romanos; que 4 no ser asi, ellos se defenderian, como mejor pudieran, 4 cuia causa le pedian los 
dexase pasar libremente hasta el Real, que tenian ya puesto en Campo los Celtiberos, para pedirles aiuda, y Socorro; y que quando no 
se lo diesen, ellos determinarian entonces lo que mas les conviniese. El Capitan Sempronio Graco, (como dice Tito-Livio) les concedid 
esta licencia, libre, y liberalmente, y pocos Dias despues bolvieron, traiendo consigo otros diez Embaxadores de los Celtiberos, los quales 
Negaron delante de Graco, y toda aquella Magestad Romana, que la representaban, con grande Autoridad, a la manera, que los Capitanes 
Romanos acostumbraban; la qual acrecenté Graco entonces, para darles Audiencia con maior Autoridad, y Pompa, 4 estos Embaxa- 
dores. Nota Tito-Livio, que era la hora de Medio Dia, (y que hacia mucho Calor) y que antes de hablar, ni decir su Embaxada, 
pidieron al Pretor, que les mandase traer de beber; el qual, riendose de su llanega, y simplicidad, manda, que se lo traxesen, y aviendo 
ya bebido, una vez, y demandandoles la sed, otra, bolvieron a pedirla, 4 que no pudieron reprimir la Risa los Romanos, viendo la mucha 
simplicidad de la Gente, y la poca Urbanidad de su Trato, maiormente para con Romanos, que era Gente Resabida, Avisada, y mui 
Cortesana. Aviendo, pues, ya bebido otra vez, 4 contento de los Embaxadores, dixo el mas Anciano de ellos: Aqui somos embiados, 
de parte de los Celtiberos, 4 preguntarte, con qué confianga nos mueves la Guerra? A la qual pregunta respondid el Pretor: que en 
confianga de un mui grueso, y escogido Exercito, avia venido a hacerla, y que si querian verlo, que él era contento de mandarselo 

(40) 

350 NOTES. 

Montezuma. The incident was too extraordinary to have escaped the memory of either; and from the silence of 
both it must be inferred, either that it never happened, or that they had some reasons for consigning so curious 
a piece of history to oblivion. The first supposition is altogether improbable, because it directly contradicts the testi- 
mony of authors of the strictest veracity, who had the best means of information upon the subject, and likewise 

mostrar, para que Ilevasen 4 los Suios maior claridad, y certidumbre de su valor, y fuerga. Y respondiendo los Embaxadores, que 
gustarian de ello, mandd Graco a los Tribunos, que se Armasen, y Aderecasen mui pomposamente, asi los de la Infanteria, y de & Pie, 
como, los de 4 Caballo, y que Escaramugasen todos por el Campo. Hicose asi, y con mucha atencion, lo vieron todo los Embaxadores ; 
y aviendolo bien visto, se despidieron del Pretor, y se bolvieron & sus Capitanes, los unos para dar respuesta de su Embaxada, y los otros 
con ellos, para traer la que alli se les diese, a los de Certima. Los Embaxadores de los Celtiberos, dixeron, clara, y abiertamente A sus 
Capitanes, que no convenia embiar Socorro a los Cercados, por ser la Gente que era tan robusta, y dispuesta para las Armas; y los 
Cercados se dieron, viendose solos, y sin ainda, de aquellos en quienes confiaban. Dos cosas vémos en este caso: La una, la simplicidad 
Antigua, de nuestros Espafioles en la llanega:con que piden Agua; Y la otra, la astucia de el Pretor, de ensefiarles su Poder, y Pujanga, 
para acobardarlos, y hacerles temer, y que mas facilmente se le rindiesen; y esto mismo sucede A estos Indios con Cortés, iendo en paz, 
buscando 4 su Dios Quetzalcohuatl, a los quales atemorigd, con las cosas dichas, para que su temor fuera maior, y que con él represen= 
tasen 4 Motecuhguma, el poder de los Castellanos, para que pudiese tanto el temor en ellos, como la fuerga de las Armas, con que avian 
de combatirlos. 

“Con estos temores, y respuesta, (digna por cierto de la locura de Motecuhguma, y de los de su Consejo) se entraron los Indios en sus 
Canoas, y tan apriesa, que qualquiera momento de dilacion, les parecia anuncios, y nuevas tristes de su muerte: y con ella comengaron 
a remar, no solo los Remeros, que para esto llevaban, sino todos, sin diferencia, incitandose, y animandose los unos, & los otros, para que 
Remasen fuertemente, tanto por apartarse, y alexarse de los Navios, donde tan mal les avia ido, quanto por venir aca a dar ragon a su 
Rei, de lo que con Quetzalcohuatl, les avia} pasado. Con esta priesa Ilegaron 4 una Isleta, que se llama Xicalanco, donde comieron, y 
reposaron un poco, y de alli se partieron, y llegaron 4 un Pueblo, que se llama Tecpantlayacac, que estaba en la Ribera: De alli fueron 
a4 Cuetlaxtla, que esta algunas Leguas la Tierra adentro, hicieron aqui Noche ; rogaronles los Sefiores, y Principales de el Pueblo, que se 
detuviesen aquel Dia, y descansasen ; ellos respondieron: La priesa que llevamos es mucha; porque la Embaxada con que vamos & 
nuestro Sefior Motecuhguma, es tal, que nunca jamas se ha visto su semejante en estos Reinos: Y no es menester, que ningun otro la 
sepa antes que él, y por esto nos cumple no descansar, sino caminar con priesa. lLuego se partieron, y iban tan turbados, y apresurados, 
que en ninguna cosa recibian consuelo, ni en el comer, ni en el dormir, ni les daba contento cosa ninguna. Iban suspirando, afligida, y 
afectuosamente, atonitos, y angustiados. Callaban todos, guardando silencio estraito, y quando se hablaban A solas, los unos, a los otros, 
decian: avemos visto cosas tan espantosas, y raras, que son indicio, de que han de venir sobre Nosotros grandes males, y tribulaciones. 
Pero Sefior Dios, quienes seran, 6 de donde vendran aquellos, que nos han de conquistar 4 Nosotros los Mexicanos? Qué somos los 
Poderosos, Antiguos, y l'emidos en todos estos Reinos? Por qué causa vamos tan angustiados, y atribulados? Qué nuestro Coracon 
con golpes, que nos da en el pecho, nos dice la pena, que llevamos? Indicio es este de algun gran mal, que se nos acerca. En estas, y 
otras consideraciones, fueron su Camino, y a brevisimas Jornadas, llegaron 4 esta Ciudad de Mexico, algunas horas pasadas dela Noche, 
y fueronse derechcs @ los Palacios del Rei Motecuhguma, y dixeron a los de la Camara, que diesen aviso.al Rei, de su llegada, y que si 
estaba durmiendo, lo despertasen, porque el caso no sufria tardanga, ni dilacion; y que le dixesen: Sefior, buelto han los Embaxadores, 
que embiastes @ la Mar, a recibir 4 nuestro Dios Quetzalcohuatl; entraron las Guardas 4 decirselo, y quando lo oid Motecuhcuma, 
dixo: Decidles, que no entren ac&, sino que se vaian A la Sala de la Judicatura, y que alli me aguarden. Luego mando aprestar Escla- 
vos, para un Sacrificio, é yendo a la Sala del Juzgado, congregd los del Consejo, y Ministros, que hicieron el Sacrificio de los Esclayos, 
con cuia Sangre rociaron 4 los Embaxadores. Esta Ceremonia usaban quando venia alguna Embaxada de mucha importancia, en casos 
graves, y nuevamente acaecidos, 

“ Despues que fue hecha aquella Idolatrica Ceremonia, de rociar 4 los Embaxadores, con la Sangre, de los que avian muerto; 
sentose Motecuhguma en su Trono, y Silla, para oir con Aplauso, y Magestad, la Embaxada, que los Mensageros tralan: porque segun 
creia, tenia por averiguado, que era Quetzalcohuatl, el que avia llegado ala Costa del Mar, y aguardaba la ragon cierta, de lo que 
determinaba en orden de su Venida. Luego los Mensageros, postrados en Tierra, la besaron ; (que en su Lengua llaman ‘Tlalcualiztli, 
que es Ceremonia Idolatrica de Adoracion) y asi postrados, comengd el Principal, que avia ido por Maior, @ esta Embaxada, de esta 
manera: Sefior Poderoso, y Rei nuestro, luego que llegamos a la Orilla de el Mar, estos Criados tuios, y Yo, vimos dentro de la Agua, 
unas Casas grandisimas, todas de Madera, con grandes Artificios dentro, y fuera, las quales andan por el Agua honda de la Mar, como 
las Canoas, que aca Nosotros usamos, para nuestra Laguna, y Acequias; dixeronnos, que estas Casas se llaman Navios, y ninguno de 
Nosotros sabra decir los diversos Edificios, y cosas, que en si contienen. Fuimos en Canoas 4 ellos, y entramos en el principal Navio 
(6 Casa de Agua) donde estaba el Estandarte, que tralan. Eran los Navios muchos, y en cada uno venia mucha Gente, y todos nos 
estuvieron mirando, hasta que subimos en el‘del Capitan. Luego procuramos ver al Sefior Quetzalcohuatl, en cuia busca ibamos, para 
darle el.Presente, qué llevabamos, y mostraronnos en una Piega apartada, un Sefior sentado en un Trono, mui ricamente vestido, y 
sefialandolo con la mano, nos dixeron: Este es el que buscais; postramonos & sus Pies, besando la Tierra, y adorandolo, como a Dios ; 
luego le diximos, lo que nos mandaste, y le compusimos con los Vestidos, y Joias, que nos diste, y presentamosle lo demas, que llevamos 
para darle, y puesto todo & sus pies, nos dieron A entender, que era poco. Aquel Dia nos trataron bien, y nos dieron de comer, y de 
beber de un licor bueno, que llamaron Vino; aquella Noche dormimos en el Navio; &la Mafiana quisieron probar nuestras Fuergas, y 
mandabannos pelear con ellos ; escusamonos con mucha fuerga, y resistencia. Aprisionaronnos, y soltaron piegas, que con sus Truenos, 

NOTES. SI) 

indirectly even that of Gomara himself; since he affirms that the Mexicans, when they beheld the Spanish fleet 
approaching, declared that it was Quecalcoatle who was coming, bringing his temples along with him (“con sus 
templos 4 cuestas”). It is necessary to come therefore to the other conclusion,—that Cortes kept the matter a secret 
because there were those who did not wish it to be known in Europe that he had been taken for the Messiah in 
America. But great as was the folly of Montezuma in thus blindly following the faith of his ancestors, it does not 
surpass that of some of the modern Jews, inhabitants of Morocco, who annually confine in a coffer a virgin 
of their own race, in the hope that she may give birth to their expected Messiah. The fact which is here related 
upon the testimony of a modern traveller will perhaps be denied by those who can see nothing ridiculous or mon- 
strous in any thing that is the subject of Jewish faith or practice. The last authority which shall be adduced to 
confute the argument which Acosta triumphantly brings forward to prove that the religion of the Mexicans had no 
tincture of Judaism mixed with it, and that the Mexicans could not be descended from the Jews,—viz. that they did 
not expect a Messiah,—is taken from the twenty-fourth chapter of the fifth book of that learned writer’s celebrated 
work, The Natural and Moral History of the Indies. He there calls Quecalcoatle by his other appellation of 
Topiltzin, which signifies ow son, since that is the name of which Tolpicni is evidently the corruption; which 
Topiltzin the Mexicans believed had gone to Tlapallan (the country of the Red Sea), and was at some future period 
to return to them from thence; the Jews probably having applied to Quecalcoatle the prediction “Out of Egypt 
have I called my son,” and made him take that imaginary voyage in order to fulfil ancient prophecy by bringing him 
back again *.—It will be seen from the following extract that Acosta and Torquemada nearly agree in their accounts 
of Montezuma’s embassy to Cortes and of the principal cireumstances which attended it. 

“Anno regni Motecume 14, nati verd Salvatoris nostri Christi 1517, in boreali oceano naves, multis populis 
conspicue apparuerunt, magna sané Indorum admiratione. Qui ut sciscitarentur, quanam ille gentes essent, Canois 
suis, cibariis varii generis, ac pannis, vendendi specie onustis, ad ipsas naves quamproxime successerunt. Illis vero 
ab Hispanis in naves receptis, pro cibis ac vestibus fila aliquot lapidum rubrorum, flavorum ac viridium data sunt: 

y Relampagos nos espantaron mucho, y nos hicieron caer como muertos. Despues, que bolvimos en Nosotros, y nos dieron de comer, 
vimos sus Armas, y sus Caballos, y sus Perros, que les aiudan en la Pelea, de que nos espantamos mucho mas; y seria cosa mui prolixa, 
y larga, contar todas las cosas, en particular. Dicen, que vienen acd, a conquistarnos, y 4 robarnos, no sabemos mas; si vinieren aca, 
sabremos lo que quieren, y lo que pueden; solo decimos, que venimos grandemente espantados, y atemorigados. Mucho se admird 
Motecuhguma, de lo que estos Embaxadores dixeron, y mudaronsele los colores de el rostro, y mostro mui gran tristeca, y desmaio. 

“ Asentosele en el Coragon, que se avian de vér en mui grandes trabajos, y afrentas, asi @l, como todos los de su Imperio, y Reino: 
movido de este sentimiento, comeng® & llorar amargamente, y todos los que con él estaban ; y estas lagrimas, y llanto, corrid despues por 
todos los de la Ciudad, asi Chicos, como Grandes; luego comengaron por las Plagas, y Calles a hacer corrillos, y a llorar, los unos con los 
otros, incitandose @ este llanto con ragones tiernas, y sentidas: Decian los grandes males, que amenagaban, y la ruina, y caida, que avian 
de tener, como si ya estuvieran en ella, adivinandolos el coragon, lo que despues les sobrevino. Andaban todos cabizbaxos, y llorosos ; 
los Padres, doliendose de sus Hijos, les decian: Ay de mi, y de vosotros Hijos mios, qué grandes males aveis de vér; y lo peor es, que 
los aveis de pasar, y sufrir. Lo mismo decian las Madres A sus Hijas, con otras lastimas, que el grande amor, y tristeca les ensefiaba. 
Con estas muestras de tristega pasaron la Noche, y el Dia todo, y Motecuhguma, como mas interesado en el honor, y honra, que podia 
perder, lo sentia mas, que todos.” 

* This prophecy is cited by Saint Matthew in the fifteenth verse of the second chapter of his Gospel, who there refers to what Hosea 
says of the Messiah in the first verse of the eleventh chapter of his Book of Prophecies: “When Israel was a child, then I loved him, 
and called my son out of Egypt ;” who would appear to speak historically as well as prophetically. The clearest prophecies relating to 
the Messiah are, however, supposed to be found in the Psalms, which, as being a portion of Scripture so frequently recurred to to prove 
that Christ was the true Messiah, it is the more surprising should have been in very early ages interpolated by the insertion of the following 
passage in the eighteenth verse of the 103rd Psalm (the 104th in the English Bible). “ Illic passeres nidificabunt, Erodi domus dux est 
eorum.” ‘Sparrows shall build their nests there, the house of Herod shall be their resort.” Had this prophecy been genuine, it would have 
been even more famous than that which made mention of Cyrus by name so many years before he was born; since the events to which it 
related,—the desolation of Jerusalem, and its ruined habitations, the abode no longer of man but of sparrows; and the express mention 
of the name of Herod in reference to the punishment which awaited him for his massacre of the children of Bethlehem,—would have 
stamped it with the seal of far greater importance. It may be proper to observe, that in the Venetian vulgate, Herodii is substituted for 
Erodi, which latter reading Sir William Betham found in an ancient copy of the Psalms, which he imagines was transcribed by the hand 
of Saint Columbkill himself, who was born in the year 521 and died in 597. It is probable that the interpolated passage was originally 
connected with the remainder of the sentence by some such expression as ‘but as for the wicked and their habitations.? The remark 
above, that Hosea seems to speak historically as well as prophetically, is made in reference to the twenty-second verse of the fourth chapter 
of Exodus, where God thus addresses Moses: «And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my son, even my 
first-born.” 

352 | NOTES. 

quos Indi pro gemmis accipiebant. Et cum de regis sui magnificentia multa jactassent, discedentes dicebant, se 
gemmas has suo domino dono exhibituros esse. His ergo Hispani mandabant, ut regi suo nunciarent, quod, 
qui dedissent heec, ipsum jam convenire non possint : facturos tamen, ut in reditu suo ipsum compellent et invisant. 
Hoc nuncio Indi in Mexico properabant, et in linteis, quacunque vidissent, accuraté depicta ferebant, nempe tum 
ipsas naves, tum homines, et horum habitum: et simul acceptos ab ipsis lapillos quoque promebant. Quibus auditis, 
cum Motecuma oppido obstupesceret: ne quicquam cuiquam de his revelarent, nunciantibus serid interdixit. 
Sequente die consiliarios suos cogens, pannos ac lapillorum lineas iis ostendens, quid his rebus medii obvertendum 
sit, in commune consulere jubebat. Sententiis collectis, decretum est, ut in littoribus maris diligentes excubie 
fierent, et si quid novi accideret, ad regem maturé enunciaretur. Sequente anno 1518, é littoribus classem illam 
prospectarunt, quam Marchio de Valle, Don Ferdinandus Cortés moderabatur. Hujus indicio accepto, Motecuma 
graviter percellebatur. Et cum de istis rebus cum subditis conferret, universi responderunt, haud dubio avum 
magnum Quetzalcoal, qui jam ab oriente, quo abierat, rediret, classis illius preefectum esse. Nam per omnem Indiam 
passim magnus rumor vagabatur, quod olim a potentissimo quodam domino deserti fuissent, qui abiens ipsis certum 
reditum spoponderit: de qua re alibi planius acturi sumus. Tandem verd communi decreto, cum honorariis amplis- 
simis quinque insignes legati ad Hispanos emissi sunt, qui eos pro more exciperent et salutarent, dicerentque, nihil 
se nescios esse, magnum imperatorem Quetzalcoal jam rursus appellere: ideoque servum ejus Motecumam ad ipsum 
legatos amandasse, qui dicerent, Motecumam Quetzalcoal servum esse. Legati autem Hispanos Indi cujusdam, 
Marine, quem secum adduxerant, interpretatione intelligebant. 

Is enim Mexicanz lingue peritus erat. Hane itaque salutationem Ferdinandus Cortés admodum proposito suo 
in civitatem ingrediundi idoneam fore ratus, conclave suum exornari jubebat, et Legatos ad se intromittebat. Hunc 
Indi tanta: submissione et veneratione adibant, ut quin adorarent, parum abesset. Dicebant autem, servum Mote- 
gumam ipsum salvere jubere, et gubernatoris loco civitatem ejus hactenus moderari. Scire enim se, jam advenam 
non nisi Tolpicni esse ipsissimum, qui ante plurimos annos ad Mexicanos reditum pollicitus esset. Juxta Ferdinando 
quoque vestes eas, quas Tolpicni, cum inter ipsos olim versaretur, gestare solebat, offerebant, devoté rogantes, ut eas 
cum ceteris oblatis donariis accipere non dedignetur. Acceptis muneribus Cortés se ipsum 2llum esse, quem salu- 
tarent, respondebat. Quod Legatis apprimé placebat, se tam familiariter et amicé ab advenis tractari haberique. 
Quz certé Ducis hujus comitas meritd laudanda est. Ommnind enim secum decreverat, gentem hanc beneficentia et 
lenitate lucrari: cui instituto jam delate occasiones non inidonee futuree videbantur. tsi verd, ut diximus, Cortés 
votum hoc unicum haberet, ut comitate et mansuetudine gentes has ad Evangelium agnoscendum invitaret: enormia 
tamen immanissimorum istorum homicidarum, ac Sathane mancipiorum peccata de coelo ingentem poenam sollicita- 
bant: adeo ut moderationi Christiane nullus hic locus esset. Radix enim arefacta excindenda erat: ut unius cecitas 
dicente Apostolo, alterius beatitas esset. Postero die duces et classis preefecti universi in pretoria navi deliberabant, 
qua via, quo modo, cium Motecuma Rex admodum opulentus et potens sit, autoritatem sibi quandam apud Mexicanos 
conciliarent, ut ab ipsis strenui Heroes haberentur, et ut, licet numero pauciores, pre incolarum formidine in 
Mexico facilé reciperentur. Isti captationi ut viam aliquam struerent, tormenta simul omnia, que in navibus erant, 
certatim displodebant: quo fragore Indos, rerum harum nescios, usque adeo terrebant, ut coelum sibi in caput deruere 
putarent. Posted Indos ad conflictum Hispani invitabant. Quod cum Indi detrectarent : magna infamia timiditatem 
ipsis Hispani exprobrantes, deinceps eos durius tractabant, et gladios, hastasque, et bipennes, armaque similia, 
metus et formidinis incutiende gratia ipsis ostendebant. His jam factis offensi Indi, de Hispanis longé aliam sen- 
tentiam ferebant, dicentes dominum ac regem suum Tolpicni inter ipsos haud quaquam versari, sed eos Deos hostes- 
que peregrinos esse, qui ad perdendos se huc contendissent. lLegatis verd in Mexico redeuntibus, Motecuma in 
domo quatuor columnarum sacris vacabat. Ad quem priusquam itarent, infelix homo magnum captivorum numerum 
mactabat, quorum sanguine Legatos perspergens, hoc ritu felix nuncium captabat. Cum verd de forma navium 
armorumque indicium acciperet, horrore totus rigebat: tandemque multis deliberationibus habitis decernebat, ad 
hos advenas exigendos et perdendos nullum medium commodius prostare, quam ut eos vi magica, quam artem ad- 
modum familiarem habebant, et per quam maxima seepius opera communione diaboli confecerant, arcerent. Congre- 
gati ergo undelibet magi Motecume juratd stipulabantur, hos peregrinos é suo territorio penitus ejicere. Quo facto 
in secreta et commoda loca, ubi cum diabolo deliberarent, et ex arte sua efficacius operarentur, secedebant. Tentatis 
itaque tentandis omnibus, nulla tamen parte Christianis nocere se posse videntes, ad regem redeunt, dicuntque, qui 
foris in navibus versarentur, altiores et potentiores ceteris hominibus esse, ut quibus nulla incantatio, nulla effasci- 

NOTES. 353 

natio damnum inferret vel minimum. Hoc ergd medio nihil succedente, viam Moteguma aliam ingressus, simulat, 
quasi adventu hospitum apprimé delectaretur: et per ommes suas provincias mandat, ut subditi ccelestibus diis 
istis jam advenis in omnibus ministrarent, et parerent. Nuncium hoc, et quod simul Hispani de ipsorum Rege, 
et ejus regni ratione et opulentia curiosius inquirerent, Indos universos in moerorem maximum conjectabat. 
Que res vel ipsi quoque regi id intelligenti dividize erat. Cum verd magos suos iterum, quid faceret, consuluisset, 
jusserunt, ut se alicubi absconderet. Facturos se etiam promittebant, ut in ea loca abduceretur, ubi 4 nemine 
mortalium unquam inveniri posset. Hoc cum ipsi consilium inane videretur, decrevit, hospites suos expectare, 
etsi cum vite dispendio ea res futura sit. Tandem verd é palatio suo regio in aliam domum se efferebat, ut in illo 
peregrini Dit commodius haberent.” 

We come now to the last striking trait of resemblance between the Jews and the Mexicans, which consisted in 
their mutual proneness to idolatry, to which we shall give the more general appellation of divination ; understanding 
by that term not only the worship which they paid to inanimate objects and to the beings of their own imaginations, 
but likewise the predilection which both nations equally manifested for diviners, dreamers of dreams, seers of visions, 
and false prophets ;—this was the class of people who led astray the Jews, and these were they who guided the 
Mexicans. If Scripture had been silent respecting the gross state at which idolatry had arrived amongst the Jews,— 
from the mention which it makes of the frequency of their human sacrifices, of their passing their children through 
the fire, and of their shedding innocent blood very much, in allusion to their immolation of infants in the valley close 
to the gates of Jerusalem, called Tophet,—it might reasonably have been supposed from an @ fortiore mode of rea- 
soning, that the Hebrew nation exceeded in idolatry every other nation of the world. But we are enabled, appealing to 
the authority of the Old Testament, to give a faithful account of the rise and progress of idolatry amongst them, (de- 
cline it never experienced any,) and to prove that in this contest all other nations must yield to them the palm. And 
here we may remark, that if but one good result be attained by bringing prominently forward so disgusting a page 
of history as that which records the Hebrew idolatries,—the placing the religions of classical antiquity in a more 
favourable light, by the contrast which they present to the bloody superstitions of the Jews, whose morals it has been 
so much the fashion to commend,—it will not be inconsiderable; since it will tend to advance the cause of truth. 
With the Jews idolatry was coéval with the foundation of their state, and existed amongst them even before they 
were a people, which may at first appear paradoxical, although if we refer to the thirty-first chapter of Genesis, we 
shall find the fact placed beyond the possibility of contradiction: for Rachel the wife of the patriarch Jacob is there 
said to have stolen her father Laban’s idols, for the purpose of carrying those objects of her reverence to the country 
whither she was going. And Laban himself, although the grand-nephew of Abraham, and acquainted with the true 
God, who sometimes appeared to him in visions, as it would seem from his address to Jacob on overtaking him after 
his flight, was still an idolater, as we learn from the same chapter of Genesis; which gives the following account of 
the cause of the quarrel between Jacob and Laban, of the subsequent departure of the former from the house of the 
latter, and of Rachel’s stealing her father’s images. “ And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it 
was not toward him as before. And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy 
kindred’; and I will be with thee. And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock, and said 
unto them, I see your father’s countenance, that it is not toward me as before: but the God of my father hath been 
with me. And ye know, that with all my power I have served your father. And your father hath deceived me, and 
changed my wages ten times: but God suffered him not to hurt me. If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy 
wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all 
the cattle ringstraked. Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me. And it came 
to pass, at the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams 
which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled. And the angel of God spake unto me in a 
dream, saying, Jacob: And I said, Here am I. And he said, Lift up now thine eyes and see, all the rams which 
leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee. I am 
the God of Beth-el, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee 
out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred. And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is 
there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father’s house? Are we not counted of him strangers ? for he 
hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money. For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, 
that is our’s, and our children’s: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do. Then Jacob rose up, and’set 

| (4x) 

354 | NOTES. 

his sons and his wives upon camels: and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten, the 
cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padan-aram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan. And 
Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the images that were her father’s. And Jacob stole away 
unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled. So he fled with all that he had; and he rose 
up, and passed over the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead. And it was told Laban on the third day 
that Jacob was fled. And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days’ journey; and they over- 
took him in the mount Gilead. And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take 
heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad. Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his 
tent in the mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead. And Laban said to Jacob, What 
hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters as captives taken with 
the sword? Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me, and didst not tell me, that I might 
have sent thee away with mirth and with songs, with tabret and with harp? And hast not suffered me to kiss my 
sons and my daughters: Thou hast now done foolishly in so doing. It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but 
the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good 
or bad. And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father’s house ; yet 
wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?” The conduct of Rachel in secretly carrying away her father’s gods must 
appear very strange ; and idolatry in her, who as well as her elder sister Leah had been for so many years the wife 
of a patriarch, was much more scandalous than in her father Laban. But throughout the Jewish history the same 
inconsistencies are met with in the characters even of persons of the greatest reputed sanctity, whom the Jews would 
hold forth as models for example to all succeeding ages: and it is very unaccountable how such persons, in whom 
Suith was the evidence of things seen, should on so many trying occasions haye exhibited in their conduct a total want 
of it. Of Moses himself it is said, that in the wilderness his faith was staggered. If David’s conduct in taking the 
wife of Uriah did not argue a want of faith, he at least displayed the greatest presumption, in so openly defying God 
and the prophet Nathan. But it is most strange of all, that Solomon’s faith in the existence of only one God should 
have become so completely shaken in the latter years of his reign: and that the Jews en masse, immediately after 
emerging from the Red Sea, ere well the fiery bolt that destroyed Pharaoh had returned to the hand that launched 
it, should have called up on Aaron to make them a golden calf, and have exclaimed, on beholding the finish which 
that master’s hand had given to the image, “These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of 
Egypt.” The faith of Abraham, however, in paying such ready obedience to the commands of God, as to be prepared 
to shed the blood of his own son upon his altar, is, after all, the high example of faith which the Jews propose for the 
admiration of all succeeding ages ;—may it ever remain inimitable! but we fear that it has been imitated by his 
descendants in the New World. Whether the sins of the later Jewish kings proceeded from their want of faith, or 
want of knowledge, it would be difficult to say ; since we read in the twenty-second chapter of the Second Book of 
Kings, that in the reign of Josiah a copy of the book of the law was found in the house of the Lord by Hilkiah the 
high priest: from the mention of which curious fact, and the subsequent steps taken by Josiah, it is very evident 
that the Mosaic records had nearly been lost through the utter contempt which the preceding evil generations had 
felt for them, and that their preservation has been owing to the discovery of this chance copy ; which may serve also 
to explain why the Book of the Wars of the Lord, and the Books of Nathan, and of Iddo the Seer, &c. &c. have irre- 
coverably perished. At the same time it may be observed, that the Psalms, the only portion of the Old Testament 
which the laity of Europe were permitted to read during many a long and dark age, although they were required to 
believe its entire contents, might have been that portion only which the priests and Levites allowed the Jewish popu- 
lace to exercise their private judgments upon. And hence but a few copies of the Pentateuch probably existed amongst 
the Jews before the period of the Babylonian captivity, and perhaps no where else but in the temple ; which would ex- 
plain how, without its being so much the fault of the people, all the copies of the Pentateuch might have been lost except 
the one which was found in the reign of Josiah, who lived towards the latter end of the seventh century before the 
Christian era. Under the Judges, under the Kings, during the captivity, and after the captivity until the period of the 
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, the Jews abandoned themselves to all kinds of idolatry: they built high places 
(or teocallis), they planted groves, they worshiped idols under every green tree, they adored the sun and the moon and 
all the host of heaven; they burned incense to the famous brazen serpent called Nehushtan (which in this manner damned 
more souls through idolatry than it had ever cured bodies of diseases); they worshiped other serpents ; the kings 

NOTES. 355 

of Israel made new molten images of calves, probably in recollection of the Egyptian Apis, for certainly they must 
have forgotten the calf of Aaron, which had brought down plagues and not blessings upon the house of Israel; and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem offered up their homage to the queen of heaven, who was perhaps the same as the 
Mexican goddess Chalchiuitlicue. The practice of all these idolatries and of far greater abominations did not last for 
a day or for a year only; but from the reign of Rehoboam the son of Solomon, from whom the ten tribes revolted, to 
that of Zedekiah the last king of Judah, who was carried away captive to Babylon; and from the reign of Jeroboam 
the first king of Israel, to that of Hoshea the last, who was also carried into captivity by Shalmaneser king of Assyria. 
It is true that in the reigns of the very few Jewish kings, whose names are mentioned in terms of approbation in the 
two Books of Kings, and in the Second Book of Chronicles, such as Hezekiah and Josiah, the people, influenced by 
their example, became less corrupt: but it must not be forgotten that the time existed when there was only one 
true prophet im all Israel, as Elijah feelingly declares in the twenty-second verse of the eighteenth chapter of the First 
Book of Kings, “Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord; but Baal’s true 
prophets are four hundred and fifty men:” and the followers of Moses did not amount to more than a few thousand 
persons. ‘This state of things amongst those who boasted that they were the chosen and the sole people of God, 
can more easily be imagined than described. How they ever could have arrived at it may be matter of wonder ; but it 
should at the same time be a lesson to their descendants to moderate their pretensions to the possession of an 
honour to which it is clear their merits never entitled them. It may here be proper to prove, from Scripture, some 
of the facts alleged above; the truth of all of which must be admitted by those who may not think it right to un- 
dermine the authority of the English version of the Bible by appealing from it to the Hebrew text, or wise to set up 
their own suppositions against the interpretations which the most learned Hebrew scholars, including the Rabbis, 
have put upon the very same passages of Scripture. With respect to the similitude of the Hebrew high places to 
the Mexican teocallis, the former of which it might at first be supposed were natural hills; it is evident, from the 
manner in which they are mentioned in many places of the Old Testament, that they were artificial constructions. 
This may be clearly inferred from the words of Ezekiel in the twenty-fourth verse of the sixteenth chapter of his 
Prophecies, where he says, addressing Judah, “ Thou hast also duz/¢ unto thee an eminent place, and hast made thee 
an high place in every street.” Of Josiah it is said, in the twenty-third chapter of the Second Book of Kings, “ And 
the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars 
which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the Lord, did the king beat down, and brake them 
down from thence, and cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron. And the high places that were before Jeru- 
salem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had builded for 
Ashtoreth the abomination of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and for Milcom 
the abomination of the children of Ammon, did the king defile.” It seems probable from this account that the 
Hebrew high places had altars upon their upper area, like the Mexican temples, and courts below; and that they 
were dedicated, as were those temples, to different deities. It would also appear from what follows in the same 
chapter, of Josiah spying the sepulchres and causing the bones to be taken from them and burned upon the altar *, 
in order to pollute it,—that the bones of the Jewish priests and nobles were deposited, like those of the Mexicans, in 
sacred mounds or tumuli within the precincts of the temple. That the Jews worshiped the sun, the moon, and the 
planets, may be proved from the fourth, fifth, and eleventh verses of the above-mentioned chapter of the Second Book 
of Kings, which records the following acts of Josiah: “ And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the 
priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth out of the temple of the Lord all the vessels 
that were made for Baal, and for the grove, and for all the host of heaven: and he burned them without Jerusalem 
in the fields of Kidron, and carried the ashes of them unto Beth-el. And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom 
the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round 
about Jerusalem ; them also that burned incense unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to 
all the host of heaven. And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entering 
in of the house of the Lord, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs, and 
burned the chariots of the sun with fire.” That the tribe of Judah offered incense to the brazen serpent is stated in 

* The thirty-seventh chapter of Ezekiel, where that prophet prophesies over a multitude of dry human bones which he beheld in a 
vision, is a very extraordinary chapter; it might have laid the foundation for some of the many superstitions which the Mexicans practised 
with dry human bones. 

356 NOTES. 

the fourth verse of the eighteenth chapter of the Second Book of Kings, together with the further curious piece of 
information that they had done so from the days of Moses (who, according to Scripture chronology, lived in the 
fifteenth century before the Christian era) until the reign of Hezekiah, which was about seven hundred years later ; 
who, it is said, “removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the 
brazen serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it; and he called it 
Nehushtan.” That the residue of the ten tribes, or the Samaritans, worshiped serpents, is declared in the fifteenth verse 
of the eleventh chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon: “But for the foolish devices of their wickedness, wherewith 
being deceived they worshiped serpents void of reason, and vile beasts, thou didst send a multitude of unreasonable beasts 
upon them for vengeance.” The Jewish populace, after they had sunk into the grossest idolatries, might probably 
have felt disposed to pay superstitious reverence to serpents, on account of the tradition of the mighty prodigies 
which that reptile had been the instrument of performing in the hands of Moses; and their diviners and soothsayers 
might have been tempted to impose upon their credulity, by further availing themselves of the current notion that it 
was the most subtle of the beasts of the field, and hence an animal fit for the purposes of divination. It is very extra- 
ordinary that the Mexicans should have assigned to the serpent the same quality of superior wisdom as the Jews did, 
since we read of no other nations except the Jews and the Mexicans who believed in that fact in natural history. 
Doctor Nardo Reccho, who epitomized, by order of Philip the Second, king of Spain, that portion of the writings of 
Hernandez which related to the plants of New Spain, says, speaking of the Olliuhiqui or Coaxihuitl, that that plant 
received the latter appellation, equivalent in signification to serpent’s grass, and was also named ‘ the plant of the wise,’ 
because the Mexicans attributed wisdom and prudence to the serpent: “ Alia planta Olliuhiqui, a seminis coriandro 
similis rotunditate, eadem Coaxihuitl, id est, serpentis herba, nuncupatur: tribuunt serpentibus saprentiam et prudentiam, 
quare sapientium planta appellatur. Sacrifici enim Indi, cum videri volebant versari cum superis, et responsa acce- 
pisse ab eis, ea vescebantur planta, ut desiperent, milleque phantasmata et demonum obversantium effigies circum- 
spectarent: tribuit enim id Solano maniaco Dioscorides *; quare satius fuisset herbam desipientium et maniacorum, 
et non sapientium nuncupare.”—Rerum Medicarum Nove Hispanie lib. I. cap. v. From the allusion im Scripture 
to the deaf adder that refuses to listen to the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely, it would appear that 

ther species of serpents were considered of a more tractable nature by the Jews. A curious representation of a 
Mexican juggler charming two serpents with a wand, one of which is bending towards him to lick his hand, occurs 
in the seventeenth page of the Mexican painting belonging to M. de Fejérvary. 

The custom of worshiping serpents,—in which the Jews resembled the Mexicans, who sometimes lore Quecal- 
coatle under that form,—was however far more innocent than another kind of worship which that extravagantly 
idolatrous people are said in the fifteenth verse of the eleventh chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles to have 
paid to devils; “ And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he 
had made.” Jeroboam is here signified, to whom the ten tribes revolted from Rehoboam, who, like all usurpers, 
studied in the first acts of his reign to gratify the inclinations of the people;—but over what sort of people must he have 
reigned, when this was the line of state policy which he thought it advisable to pursue! This single verse of the 
eleventh chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles is sufficient, by justifying an appeal from arguments to facts, 
to confute volumes of laboured apology which have been written in the defence of the Jews, by those who are their 
mistaken friends, rather than real well-wishers to the great family of mankind, from whom the Hebrew nation was 
so early separated, and whose professed hatred to idolatry was, as the ancient philosophers alleged, rather a hatred 
to the rest of the human race, and to institutions which differed from their own, than any real aversion to idols}; 
and hence the opprobrium which the epithet of wncircumcised, when uttered by the Jews in reference to their 
enemies, carried with it, although religion might well blush that such a reproach should ever have been cast in her 
name. With respect to the worship which the Jews are said in more places than one in Scripture to have paid 

* The Tultecas, according to Mexican tradition, were well acquainted with the medical properties of herbs. It is singular that they 
should have ascribed to some of them the same imaginary virtues as the old physicians, which coincidence was probably not owing 
to mere chance. The Aristolochia of Dioscorides was named by the Mexicans Phapuame, the reasons for the etymology of the Greek 
and Mexican proper names being the same. 

+ Maimonides we believe it is, who, in his decisions on questions relating to the Hebrew laws, denies that a Jew would be justified 
by the written law of God in killing an idolater simply because he was an idolater, admitting at the same time, that if he saw such a 
person drowning, it might be a question in their law whether he would havea right to save him if he refused to become a proselyte. 

NOTES. BOF 

to the queen of heaven, it would appear from Jeremiah’s expostulation with his countrymen who had fled in great 
numbers into Egypt when the rest of their brethren were carried captives to Babylon, that they continued that 
worship in the country which had again afforded to the outcast seed of Israel an asylum; since the only reply which 
they made to that prophet was that which is recorded in the forty-fourth chapter of his Book: “ Then all the men 
which knew that their wives had burned incense unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude, 
even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying, As for the word 
that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But we will certainly do 
whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out 
drink-offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, 
and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. But sence we 
left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, 
and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine. And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, 
and poured out drink-offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink-offerings 
unto her, without our men?” This chapter of Jeremiah is further deserving of the attention of those who may be 
inclined to suppose that America was colonized by Jews belonging to the ten tribes who were carried away in the 
earlier captivity of Shalmaneser, because it unequivocally declares that Egypt was the country where the Jews who 
had escaped the Babylonian captivity sought an asylum; and it is so much more probable that some of these Jews 
might have passed over to America from a port in the Mediterranean, than that, as grave writers contend, the 
Euphrates should have divided, like the Red Sea, to afford a passage either to all or to a portion of the ten 
tribes, who, crossing over it, they suppose journeyed through Tartary, and arrived at the narrow straits which 
separate the old from the new continent, and in this manner proceeded to America. If, however, we may be 
permitted to venture an opinion upon so obscure a question, it would be, that America was colonized by the Jews at 
a much later period than that of either the Assyrian or the Babylonian captivity,—shortly after the destruction of 
Jerusalem by the Romans; and that in succeeding ages other colonies, consisting both of Jews and Christians, 
visited that continent. It is unnecessary to adduce other passages from the Old Testament, more especially out of 
the Books of Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah, to prove the degsedation of the state at which idolatry had arrived 
amongst the Jews: and we have purposely refrained from referrmg to the works of some of their most eminent 
Rabbis, whose writings teem with portentous narratives, lest the facts alleged should appear to rest upon doubtful 
authority, or at least be pronounced to be apocryphal. We cannot omit, however, to insert in this place a short 
extract from the Jewish author Maimonides, whose notions upon the subject of ancient judicial astrology seem . 
nearly to have accorded with the practice of the Nagualists, as described by the Bishop of Chiapa in his ninth 
pastoral letter: “The ancient astrologers having consecrated to each planet a co/owr, an animal, a tree, a metal, 
a fruit, a plant,—formed from them all a figure or representation of the star, taking care to select for the purpose 
a proper moment, a fortunate day, such as a conjunction or some other favourable aspect: they conceived that by 
their magic ceremonies they could introduce into those figures or idols the influences of the superior beings after 
which they were modelled. These were the idols that the Chaldean Sabeans adored, and in the performance of 
their worship ¢hey were obliged to be dressed in the proper colour. ‘Thus the astrologers by their practices intro- 
duced idolatry, desirous of being regarded as the dispersers of the favours of heaven; and as agriculture was the 
sole employment of the ancients, they succeeded in persuading them that the rain and other blessings of the seasons 
were at their disposal: thus the whole art of agriculture was exercised by rules of astrology, and the priests made 
talismans, or charms, which were to drive away locusts, flies, &c.” Maimonides, More Nebuchim, part 3. chap. 9. 
It is only necessary to observe upon this curious passage of Maimonides, that the Mexicans consecrated a particular 
colour—blue, green, or red—to each of their heavens, which were nine in number. The following is Nufiez de la 
Vega’s account of the Nagualists: “The Nagualists practise it (divination) by superstitious calendars, wherein are 
inserted the proper names of all the Naguals, of stars, the elements, birds, beasts, fishes, and reptiles, with 
observations upon the months and days, in order that children, as soon as they are born, may be dedicated to that 
which in the calendar corresponds with the day of their birth: this is preceded by some frantic ceremonies and the 
express consent of parents, which is an implicit pact between the infants and the Naguals that are to be given to 
them. They then appoint the milpa or place, when after the completion of seven years they are brought into the 
‘presence of the Nagual to ratify the engagement; for this purpose they make them renounce God and his blessed 
( 4y ) 

358 NOTES. 

mother, instructing them beforehand not to be alarmed or sign themselves with the cross; they are afterwards to 
embrace the Nagual affectionately, which, by some diabolical act or other, appears very tame and fondly attached 
to them, although it may be a beast of a ferocious nature, as a lion, a tiger, &c. They persuade the children by 
their infernal cunning, that this Nagual is an angel sent by God to watch over their fortunes, to protect, assist, and 
accompany them, and that it must be invoked upon all occasions of business or occurrences in which they may 
require its aid.” It is to the Mexican paintings, the works of Garcia and Torquemada, and the Old Testament, that 
we beg to refer those who may desire to be better acquainted with the Mexican and Jewish idolatries, which tend 
mutually to illustrate each other. Ezekiel in the eighth chapter of his Book of Prophecies gives the following 
account of a vision, in which he beheld the idolatry of the Jews. How applicable would this description “So I went 
in and saw, and behold every form of creeping things and abominable beasts, and all the zdols of the house of Israel 
pourtrayed upon the wall round about” (the prophet here refers to the temple of Jerusalem, and the sanctuary 
of Jehovah) have been, as applied to the greater temple of Mexico, the walls of which were ornamented with 
very curious ¢magery carved in stone, which Cortes thus describes in his letters to Charles the Fifth: “Hay bien 
quarenta torres muy altas, y bien obradas, que la mayor tiene cincuenta escalones para subir al cuerpo de la torre; 
la mas principal es mas alta que la torre de la iglesia mayor de Sevilla. Son tan bien labradas, assi de canteria, 
como de madera, que no pueden ser mejor hechas ni labradas en ninguna parte; porque toda la canteria de dentro 
de las capillas donde tienen los idolos, es de zmagzneria, y zaquizamies, y el maderamiento es todo de mazoneria, y 
muy pintado de cosas de monstruos, y otras figuras y labores.” “ And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth 
month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in mine house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand 
of the Lord God fell there upon me. ‘Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the 
appearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins even upward, as the appearance of brightness, as 
the colour of amber. dnd he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit 
lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of 
the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to 
jealousy. And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain. 
Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the 
way toward the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy in the entry. He said 
furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of 
Israel committeth here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see 
greater abominations. And he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall. 
Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behold adoor. And 
he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here. So I went in and saw; and behold 
every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, pourtrayed upon the 
wall round about. And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the 
midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of 
incense went up. Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do 
in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath 
forsaken the earth.” 

Idolatry has existed in many countries in many forms, and it must be confessed that if the fine arts have greatly 
contributed by the splendour of architecture, the perfection of statuary, and inimitable paintings, to elevate the 
religious feelings of the soul, their proper use has not unfrequently been perverted. But there is a great deal of 
difference between what are called the idolatries of heathen nations: the Egyptian interests the mind by its 
mysteries; that of the Brahmins by the sacred solitude of their contemplative life; and the images in the Grecian 
temples, by the more than mortal beauty with which the sculptor sought to invest them. But it is idolatry accom- 
panied with living sacrifices, altars reeking with gore, Jewish and Mexican idolatry, that excite our feelings of 
abhorrence and disgust. With respect to the simply placing a statue in a niche or on a pedestal in a temple, since 
many wise men and Christians have approved of the practice and even recommended it as useful, notwithstanding 
the reasoning of the ignorant anabaptists and iconoclasts, who, with the cross for their banner, declared that all 
things were common; the conclusion at which we arrive is, that, since it is not guilty, it is innocent. If the Jews 
were forbidden to make graven images, it was probably on account of their moral debasement; and because Moses 

NOTES. 359 

could not tell under what figures they might have represented Jehovah himself, a reason which has been assigned 
by Lyra * (a celebrated commentator on Scripture) for God’s having chosen to appear to them in the burning bush 
rather than in any other manner ; and, lastly, because he knew they were a nation utterly destitute of taste for the 
fine arts, and feared that they would disfigure the ark by placing in it busts resembling those of the Zapotecas, 
which M. Dupaix believes to have been in the style of the ancient Egyptians. Of this we may be sure, judging 
from the Talmud, (that deformed web of sacred history and tradition which the Jews assert to be the mirror of God,) 
that if once they had been permitted to consign the allegories of Scripture and the miraculous events of their own 
history to painting and sculpture, the most monstrous productions would have emanated from their school, and 
devils rather than angels would have been the offspring of the imaginations of a people disordered with visions, and 
ever prying into futurity through dreams. In the chapter of Ezekiel, immediately preceding that referred to above, 
the following remarkable verse occurs, “Make a chain; for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of 
violence.” It is possible that in obedience to this recommendation the Inga Guainacapa caused the famous golden 
chain to be made, which the Spaniards were so disappointed at never being able to discover. 

Weare induced to cite another passage from the twenty-fourth chapter of Ezekiel, because some of the allegorical 
representations of the Mexican paintings incline us strongly to suspect that the Mexicans were acquainted with that 
prophet’s famous parable of the boiling pot, which he thus delivers: “ Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, 
in the tenth day of the month, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, write thee the name of 
the day, even of this same day: the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day. And utter a 
parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Set on a pot, set it on, and also 
pour water into it: Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it 
with the choice bones. Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it, and make it boil well, and. 
let them seethe the bones of it therein. Wherefore thus saith the Lord God; Woe to the bloody city, to the pot 
whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it. 
For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to 
cover it with dust; That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her blood upon the top 
of a rock, that it should not be covered. Therefore, thus saith the Lord God; Woe to the bloody city! I will 
even make the pile for fire great. Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it well, and let 
the bones be burnt. Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and 
that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed. She hath wearied herself with 
lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire. In thy filthiness is lewdness : 
because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till 
I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I the Lord have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I 

* Lyra was a Jew who embraced Christianity; and possessing a great store of Rabbinical learning, wrote a commentary on the 
Scriptures, calling in the Talmud to illustrate the Bible. His commentary became very famous, as it gratified the taste of those who 
thought that the history of the Jews could never be too wonderful, or the account of the discourses which God held with the Hebrews 
patriarchs descend too much into minutie. It however gave occasion to the following Latin distich : «$i Lyra non lyrasset, Lutherus non 
saltasset.” The Talmud has in fact ever been viewed with jealousy and aversion by the greatest doctors of the Church (of course we do 
not here mean the Protestant church,—for where did that church exist during the many ages that preceded the Reformation?), whether 
on account of the traditions which it contains so frequently contradicting Scripture, or because the Jews affirm that Moses received it 
together with the written law from God during the forty days in which he conversed with him in Mount Sinai, or, as we are rather inclined 
to believe, because it shows that the Jews were a nation of such boundless credulity, and so inordinately fond of the miraculous, that, 
not content with the miracles which Scripture says God wrought in their favour, they invented with unblushing falsehood thousands 
more; and these pretended miracles might have a tendency to bring the other class into disrepute: since it is in vain to argue that the 
truth of the facts recorded in the Old Testament rests entirely upon internal evidence, and in no degree upon the character for veracity 
which the Jewish nation may be entitled to claim. We may here observe, that the Talmud being an obnoxious book to Christians, 
unceasing efforts during ages have been made to destroy it; hundreds of thousands of copies of it have been burned by decrees of the 
Popes, at Milan and the other large towns of Italy. But will any one therefore contend that in the same way as the Jews have been 
miraculously dispersed, so its anathematized pages have been miraculously kept together? With respect to Jewish conversions to 
Christianity, we may observe that they are very rare, although apostacy is common, and infidelity general amongst the Jews of the present 
day, which perhaps the writings of their own countryman Spinoza may have had some share in producing, and the customs of modern 
times, which do not confine a Jew within the pale of his own sect, but allow him to mix freely with other classes of the community, and 
thus to divest himself of ignorance and the absurd prejudices of caste. 

360 NOTES. 

will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, 
shall they judge thee, saith the Lord God.” 

The paintings more particularly referred to are contained in the twenty-ninth and thirty-second pages of the 
Borgian MS., and in the forty-first, the fifty-fifth, the seventy-seventh, and the seventy-ninth of the Lesser Vatican 
MS.: but the figure of a boiling pot is found in other Mexican paintings, and the scum is not untrequently repre- 
sented on it. From the following passage in the first chapter of the Book of Jeremiah, it appears that a boiling 
pot was a type of evil and affliction to the Jews; and it might have had the same signification in the Mexican 
paintings: “ Then the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I 
have put my words in thy mouth. See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root 
out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. Moreover the word of the 
Lord came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an almond-tree. Then said the 
Lord unto me, Thou hast well seen: for I will hasten my word to perform it. And the word of the Lord came 
unto me the second time, saying, What seest thou? AndI said, I see a seething-pot; and the face thereof is 
toward the north. Then the Lord said unto me, Out of the north an evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants 
of the land. For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north, saith the Lord; and they shall come, 
and they shall set every one his throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof 
round about, and against all the cities of Judah. And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their 
wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshiped the works of their 
own hands.” Other Mexican paintings, perhaps, contain allusions to the future restoration of the dispersed tribes 
of Israel; and we may remark that it is not improbable that the three female figures in the eighty-ninth and 
ninetieth pages of the Lesser Vatican MS., represented each of them as suckling an infant, and no doubt introduced 
there with some mysterious design, may refer to the famous prophecy of the return of the Jews to their own 
country, with which Isaiah closes his book, which is as follows: “ Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with 
her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: That ye may suck, and be satisfied 
with the breasts of her consolations ; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. For 
thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing 
stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees. As one whom his 
mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this, your 
heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward 
his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. For, behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his 
chariots like a whirlwind, to rend his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire and by his 
sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain of the Lord shall be many. They that sanctify themselves, 
and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine’s flesh, and the abomination, and 
the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord. For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come, 
that I will gather all nations and tongues ; and they shall come, and see my glory. dnd Iwill set a sign among 
them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, 
to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they 
shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord 
out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy 
mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of 
the Lord. And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the Lord. For as the new heavens and 
the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain. 
And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh 
come to worship before me, saith the Lord. And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that 
have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall 
be an abhorring unto all flesh.” 

The supposition that the three female figures with infants at the breast refer to the above prophecy, is chiefly 
founded upon the situation which they occupy in relation to the Mexican paintings which precede and follow them ; 
since the representation of the Branch is found in the same page as one of these figures, and that Quecalcoatle 
slaying the Leviathan occurs in the next leaf, which appears to be a consummation of all the shadows, types, and 

NOTES. 361 

symbols with which that and the other Mexican paintings abound. It may further be remarked, that in the same 
manner as the prophets used very strong language when predicting God's indignation against the Jews on account 
of their sins, and his retributive vengeance, so the Mexicans would naturally, if they had wished to symbolize that 
language by paintings, have made use of very terrible and revolting images, to do justice to the energy of the 
prophet’s conceptions. How, except by a revolting picture, could they have expressed in painting the following 
denunciation contained in the thirty-fourth chapter of Isaiah—“< The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is 
made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the Lord 
hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. And the unicorns shall come down with 
them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with 
fatness. For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.” 
Some of the representations contained in the Mexican paintings seem to be not unallied to events which happened 
at a very early period of Hebrew history, and which became the theme and boast of the Jews of all succeeding 
ages. Of this description was the exploit of Jael, who, although a woman, destroyed Sisera, the captain of 
the enemies’ host, by driving a nail into his temples while he was sleeping in his tent,—a faint tradition of which 
might have been preserved amongst the Mexicans. In a Mexican painting in the Bodleian library at Oxford is 
a symbol very much resembling the jaw-bone of an ass, from the side of which water seems to flow forth ; which 
might allude to the story of Samson slaying a thousand of the Philistines with such a bone, which remained mi- 
raculously unbroken in his hands, and from which he afterwards quenched his thirst. In the first page of the 
Borgian MS. a remarkable representation of Quecalcoatle (as the head-dress of the figure seems to indicate) vomited 
from the jaws of some amphibious animal occurs ; in reference to which curious painting it would be interesting to 
know whether the Jews had any tradition that their Messiah would be devoured by a monster, who would afterwards 
be compelled to yield up his prey, like the serpent in the seventy-fifth page of the Lesser Vatican MS., which a fierce 
eagle forces to disgorge a rabbit,—the symbol of suffering innocence amongst the Mexicans, according to Baron de 
Humboldt, which corresponded to the lamb of the Hebrews, and which perhaps was a type substituted for the latter 
by the Jews of Mexico, and referred by them to Quecalcoatle, in the same manner as their brethren of Peru appear to 
have replaced the sacrifices of sheep in the Old Continent by those of llamas in the New, the former species of animal 
being unknown to the Indians before the arrival of the Spaniards amongst them. Or, finally, shall we suppose that 
the Mexicans might have had some acquaintance with the Book of the prophet Jonah, and have transferred a portion 
of his history to the mysterious page of their own, which recorded the disappearance of Quecalcoatle in the Red Sea. 
The writings of that prophet being amongst the most ancient in the world, (since he lived as is generally supposed. 
about the time of the Trojan war,) and the adventures of his life being connected with the present subject of inquiry, 
we shall here insert his entire Book, which we shall be the more readily excused for doing, since it is very brief, and 
occupies only two octavo pages of the Old Testament; affording at the same time a new argument in favour of the 
Jews having colonized America, and transported thither their rites and traditions: “ Now the word of the Lord came 
unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying, Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wicked- 
ness is come up before me. But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and went 
down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go 
with them unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and 
there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken. Then the mariners were afraid, and 
cried every man unto his god, and cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them. 
But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep. So the shipmaster came to 
him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think 
upon us, that we perish not. And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know 
for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. Then said they unto him, 
Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thine occupation? and whence comest thou? 
what is thy country? and of what people art thou? And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, 
the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land. Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said 
unto him, Why hast thou done this: for the men knew that he fled from the presence of the Lord, because he had 
told them. Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea 
wrought, and was tempestuous. And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the 
(427) 

362 NOTES. 

sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. Nevertheless the men rowed 
hard to bring it to the land; but they could not; for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them. Wherefore 
they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man’s 
life, and lay not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased thee. So they took up Jonah, 
and cast him forth into the sea: and the sea ceased from her raging. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, 
and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up 
Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his 
God out of the fish’s belly, and said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of 
the belly of hell cried 1, and thou heardest my voice. For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the 
seas; and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves passed over me. Then I said, I am cast 
out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thy holy temple. The waters compassed me about, even to the 
soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head. I went down to the bottoms of 
the mountains; the earth with her bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption, 
O Lord my God. When my soul fainted within me I remembered the Lord: and my prayer came in unto thee, 
into thine holy temple. They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. But I will sacrifice unto thee 
with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of the Lord. And the Lord spake 
unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second - 
time, saying, Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. So Jonah 
arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of 
three days’ journey. And Jonah began to enter into the city a day’s journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, 
and Nineveh shall be overthrown. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sack- 
cloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose 
from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and saé in ashes. And he caused 
it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither 
man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water: but let man and beast be 
covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the 
violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that 
we perish not? And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that 
he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very 
angry. And he prayed unto the Lord, and said, I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, when I was yet in 
my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow 
to anger, and of great kindness, and repentedst thee of the evil. Therefore now, O Lord, take, I beseech thee, my 
life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live. Then said the Lord, Doest thou well to be angry ? So Jonah 
went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the 
shadow, till he might see what would become of the city. And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it to 
come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding 
glad of the gourd. But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it 
withered. And it came to pass, when the sun did arise, that God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat 
upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, It is better for me to die than to 
live. And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he said, Z do well to be angry, 
even unto death. Then said the Lord, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, 
neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished ina night: And should not I spare Nineveh, that 
great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their 
left hand; and also much cattle 2” 

The cause of the prophet Jonah’s anger, it may be remarked, was, that God by sparing Nineveh should have made 
him a false prophet, who had foretold unconditionally its destruction within forty days. But if our admiration for the 
prophet be not in consequence diminished, will our feelings of respect for the man undergo no alteration? Jonah was, 
nevertheless, the most famous type of the Messiah, to whom Christ himself refers in the following passage of the 
twelfth chapter of the Gospel of Saint Matthew, on occasion of the Scribes and Pharisees asking him for a sign to 
satisfy them that he was the Messiah: from whence it may be inferred in what estimation the Book of Jonah was 

NOTES. 363 

held by the Jews, who, having lost so many other books of Scripture, had preserved this for nearly nine hundred 
years, until the age of Christ. “Then certain of the Scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we 
would see a sign from thee. But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh 
after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: for as Jonas was three 
days and three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart 
of the earth.” Many of the Mexican paintings would seem to imply that the Mexicans were acquainted with 
various books of the Old Testament, and had even attempted to express in brilliant colouring and in hieroglyphics 
the very same metaphors as had been employed by the prophets, whose frequent denunciations of vengeance 
against the Jews and other nations, on account of their sins, might have laid the foundation of a school for 
painting amongst the Mexicans, which sought to convey the same ideas of religious terror to the imagination, 
but through the medium of another sense. How, it may be demanded, could so many Scriptural allegories 
and images have presented themselves to the minds of the Mexicans, if they had not had some acquaintance 
with the forcible, not to say gross, language (but well adapted to the morals of the people addressed,) in which 
the prophets Ezekiel, Isaiah, and Jeremiah upbraid the Jews? and from what other source could they have been 
derived? Sahagun says, that in the reign of Ytzcoatl, the lords and principal persons amongst the Mexicans 
(who were the priests, the Mexican government being a theocracy,) burned all their ancient paintings, that they 
might not, by falling into the hands of the laity, smk into contempt. If this passage be not, as we suspect it is, 
wholly an interpolation, (since no sufficient reason is assigned why the Mexicans, after having preserved for so many 
ages the ancient Tultec paintings, should have destroyed them at a comparatively late period of time, not long 
before the arrival of the Spaniards amongst them,) but, on the contrary, founded on a tradition partly true,—it might 
relate to the destruction of the Teoamoxtli (or divine book of the Tultecas) in the reign of the above-mentioned 
Mexican king; from which the Mexicans might have borrowed these notions and metaphors. The following are 
passages in the Old Testament which seem to have suggested types and symbols to the Mexican painters. The 
prophet Jeremiah in the twenty-first verse of the eighth chapter of his Prophecies thus figuratively describes the 
grief which he felt at the afflicted state of his countrymen; which passage of Scripture might likewise have induced 
the Mexican priests to paint their faces black, as a symbol that they mourned and were afflicted for the sins of the 
people: “ For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black ; astonishment hath taken hold on me. 
Is there no balm in Gilead; is there no physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people 
recovered?” That the Hebrew prophets sometimes blackened their faces, is evident from the very curious account 
of the type (which, like that mentioned in the first chapter of the prophet Hosea, was more than mere words,) which 
is contained in the twentieth chapter of the First Book of Kings, by which Ahab was made to pronounce judgment 
against himself. Habakkuk, uttering a denunciation against the Jews on account of their wickedness, in the six- 
teenth verse of the second chapter of his Prophecies thus apostrophizes Jerusalem: “Thou art filled with shame for 
glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the Lord’s right hand shall be turned unto 
thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.” The following passage in the first chapter of the same prophet 
has something mysterious in it, in reference as well to a curious representation in the twenty-sixth page of the Bor- 
gian MS. of fish taken in a net, (which perhaps were named by the Mexicans Tlacamichin, (or men-fish,) on account 
of the configuration of their heads,) as to a custom existing amongst the Matlatzincas noticed by Sahagun. It also 
seems to imply a charge of cannabalism against the Jews, which is darkly hinted at in more places than one in 
Scripture. “Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity: wherefore lookest thou 
upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous 
than he? and makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them? They take 
up all of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag: therefore they rejoice 
and are glad. Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their por- 
tion is fat, and their meat plenteous. Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay the 
nations?” The prophet Nahum, in the fifth and sixth verses of the third chapter of his Prophecies, denouncing the 
fall of Nineveh, puts the following expressions into the mouth of God: “ Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord 
of hosts ; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will show the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms 
thy shame. And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazingstock.” 

364 NOTES. 

Terror is an attribute with which all the Hebrew prophets loved to invest the Deity. Thus Habakkuk, in the third 
chapter of his Book of Prophecies, describing the presence of Jehovah, says ; “Before him went the pestilence, and 
burning coals went forth at his feet.” And David, in the eighteenth Psalm, employs similar language : “ There went 
up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.” The voice of God is 
in various places of the Old Testament likened to the roaring of a lion; as in the thirtieth verse of the twenty-sixth 
chapter of the Book of Jeremiah: “ Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto them, The 
Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation ; he shall mightily roar upon his habita- 
tion ; he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, agaist all the inhabitants of the earth.” And in the 
thirteenth verse of the forty-second chapter of Isaiah: “The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up 
jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies.” The latter prophet twice 
borrows a simile from the hissing of a serpent: “ And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and 
will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly.” “ And it shall 
come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, 
and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.” The twenty-sixth verse of the fifth chapter of Isaiah, and the 
eighteenth verse of the seventh chapter, are the passages of Scripture referred to. As terror was, according to: the 
Jewish belief, the chief attribute of the Deity ; so fire, as being the most destructive of the elements, was the symbol 
to which the prophets most frequently resorted to heighten their descriptions of his power and majesty. Thus Daniel, 
in the seventh chapter of his Book of Prophecies, recording a vision in which he beheld God, says; “I beheld till 
the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his 
head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued 
and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand 
stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.” 

Daniel’s description of his vision resembles in its imagery (if we may be permitted to make use of that term) a 
passage in the ninth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, in which the newly elected king 
of Mexico returns thanks to Tezcatlipoca, who it is to be presumed was Xiuhtecutli, which proper name signifies 
literally ‘the God of Heaven,’ or ‘the God of years.’ The following is the passage alluded to: “Quien soy yo, Seftor 
mio? y que es mi valor, que me pongais entre los que vos amais y conoceis, y teneis por amigos y escogidos, y dignos 
de toda honra, y nacidos y criados para las dignidades y tronos reales, y para este efecto los criasteis habiles y pru- 
dentes, tomados de nobles y generosos padres, y para esto criados y ensefados, y que fueron nacidos y bautizados 
en signos y constelaciones en que nacen los Sefiores, y para ser vuestros instrumentos y vuestras imagenes para regir 
yuestros reinos, esténdo dentro de ellos, y hablando por su boca y pronunciando ellos vuestras palabras, y paraque se 
conformen con el querer del antiguo Dios y padre de todos los Dioses, que es el Dios del fuego, que esta en la alberca 
de agua entre almenas cercado de piedras como rosas, el quel se llama Xiuhtecutli, el qual determina, examina y con- 
cluye los negocios y litigios del pueblo y de la gente popular, como lavandoles con agua, al qual siempre acompafan 
y estan en su presencia las personas generosas arriba dichas?” “Who am I, O Lord? and of what account, that you 
should place me in the rank of those whom you love and know, and number amongst your friends and your elect, 
whom you esteem as persons worthy of the highest honours, and to be such as are born and educated for dignities 
and royal thrones, and accordingly have endowed them with talents and prudence, selecting for the purpose those 
who are descended from noble and illustrious parents, who have been brought up with these expectations, and who 
have been baptized in the signs and constellations which preside at the birth of kings, that they might become your 
instruments and your images to govern your kingdoms, you being in them and speaking through their mouth, and 
they pronouncing your words, that thus they might act in conformity to the will of the ancient God and father of 
all the Gods, who is the God of fire, whose habitation is in the waters, which battlements encompass where he dwells, 
surrounded with rocks as it were with roses, whose name is Xiuhtecutli, who determines, examines, and brings to an 
issue the controversies and disputes of the people and of the multitude, cleansing them as it were with water, before 
whom are ever present and in attendance the noble persons above mentioned?” The supposed habitation of Xiuhte- 
cutli (the Mexican god of fire) in the waters, might almost lead us to imagine that the Mexicans had perused the 
following verses of the eighteenth Psalm, and thence borrowed the notion: “There went up a smoke out of his 
nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it. He bowed the heavens also, and came down: 

NOTES. 365 

and darkness was under his feet. And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the 
wind. He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the 
skies *. At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed, hail stones and coals of fire. The Lord 
also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire.” 

It has elsewhere been observed, that the deity worshiped by the Peruvians under the names of Pachacama and of 
Viracocha (the former of which signifies the Creator) was probably the same as Tezcatlipoca; and it might be conjec- 
tured, from the figure of a man riding upon some unknown animal, which is carved upon the cover of the box said to 
contain the quipoes, (or records of the Peruvian monarchy,) that the Peruvians were not ignorant of the metaphor “And 
he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind”—and had even attempted to make it 
the subject of an ornamental device. Reserving for another place all further mention of these quipoes, we shall only 
remark here, that whatever opinion may be formed of them, there cannot be the least doubt that the box is a specimen 
of ancient Peruvian workmanship. Exact delineations of the various figures carved upon the sides of this box will 
be found in the fourth volume of plates, each of which it will be observed, except the lower, represents a religious 
subject. On one side is a model of the famous temple of the sun at Cuzco, and on the other of that of the moon, 
before it is the pond in which, when the image of the moon became reflected, the priests and people offered up 
their homage to the queen of night-}. At each end are figures of the sun and the moon encircled with rays, with a 
human figure in the orb of each,—the symbol perhaps of the Peruvian trinity, which, according to Acosta, was one 
god, “ trinus uno ” and “ unus trino,” consisting of three persons, the father of the sun, the sun, and the brother of 
the sun; to the last of whom the moon might have been dedicated, as the sun seems to have been to the first. 
Upon the top or principal side of this box, Pachacama seems to be represented riding upon an animal not unlike a 
cherub, the velocity of whose flight may be typified by the swallow carved upon its wing ; the speed of the former 
being thus made to appear equal to that of the latter, since the swallow, the swiftest of birds, seems here unable to 
outstrip the cherub. The figures of the birds, beasts, fishes and creeping things around, may allude to the epithet of 
Pachacama (or Creator), under which the Peruvians adored their principal deity: for although they believed, as did 
also the Mexicans, that that deity was incorporeal, they still, like the Jews, personified him in human shape. To the 
objection which may be urged against our hypothesis, derived from the graceful attitude in which the person there 
represented appears to sit upon the animal which he is riding, and the proper position of his knees and legs,—implying 
that the carver of the box was not entirely unacquainted with European horsemanship,—four solutions may be 
offered. First, that he had seen some Tultec paintings in which men were represented riding on horses; secondly, that 
that position was chosen by the artist because it appeared to him the most graceful ; thirdly, that it was the effect of 
accident rather than of design ; or, lastly, that the Indians might have had horses before the arrival of the Spaniards 
in the New World. The last supposition may perhaps appear absurd; nor would it have been here had recourse to, if 
Peter Martyr, the most celebrated historian of America and the first in order of time, had not seemed in one passage 
of his Ocean Decades to be in doubt upon this point, and to have been embarrassed by conflicting statements ; scep- 
ticism being moreover admissible regarding every thing either asserted or denied of the Indians, but more especially 
of the Peruvians and the Ingas, by the licensed Spanish authors, whose works appeared in the sixteenth century. 
We shall here remark, that the Peruvians entertained as much or even greater superstition for fire than the Mexicans, 
believing like them that that element was an instrument of destruction in the hands of the deity. Many 
passages in Scripture might have induced the Jews to entertain such a notion; from whom the Indians probably 
derived it : but we shall here only refer to the mysterious mention of it in the seventh chapter of the prophet Amos: 
“Thus hath the Lord God showed unto me ; and, behold, he formed grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up 
of the latter growth ; and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king’s mowings. And it came to pass, that when they 
had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I said, O Lord God, forgive, I beseech thee: by whom shall 
Jacob arise? for he is small. The Lord repented for this: It shall not be, saith the Lord. Thus hath the Lord 

* The Mexicans believed that Tlaloc dwelt amidst clouds and dark waters; and hence they paid a superstitious reverence to the 
summits of high mountains which were perpetually covered with mists and dark clouds, believing such places to be his habitation. 

+ The rejoicings which the Jews, of former ages at least, solemnized to the full moon are well known. Although we do not read that 
Solomon provided his temple with a pond for the priests and Levites to bathe in, Scripture informs us that he made a molten sea for that 
purpose, which contained imumerable baths, and it is to be supposed stood in the court of the temple. 

(54) 

366 NOTES. 

God showed unto me: and, behold, the Lord God called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did 
eat up a part. Then said I, O Lord God, cease, I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small. The 
Lord repented for this: This also shall not be, saith the Lord God. Thus he showed me: and, behold, the Lord 
stood upon a wall made by a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand. And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what seest 
thou? And I said, A plumbline. Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumbline in the midst of my people 
Israel : I will not again pass by them any more: ‘and the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries 
of Israel shall be laid waste ; and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.” The account by Amos, 
of the Lord appearing to him upon the top of a wall, might have suggested to the imaginations of the Mexicans the 
sudden and unusual modes of apparition which they ascribed to Tezcatlipoca. The prediction with which the above 
passage closes is also very remarkable, from the terms in which it is couched; since why should the prophet have 
added the epithet “ of Isaac” to the high places, if he had not alluded to the most abominable of all human sacri- 
fices, that of children by their parents, in imitation of Abraham, whose voluntary offering up his son Isaac, even 
some of the Rabbis have been disposed to believe, gave rise to the horrid custom of infanticide, so common amongst 
his descendants ; since an error likely enough to have been incurred by so blind and infatuated a people as the Jews 
would have been sufficient to have led to that dire result ;—the supposing that it was the act and not the faith of 
Abraham that was pleasing to Jehovah, and that on other such occasions if no ram was caught in a thicket, or other 
miracle interposed to prevent the completion of the sacrifice, it was a sign that Heaven willed it to take place, and 
that the act itself would be meritorious. That the Jews, like the Peruvians, entertained notions of the efficacy of a 
vicarial human sacrifice and atonement, is evident from what the prophet Micah says in the seventh verse of the 
sixth chapter of his Prophecies, reprobating their customs: “ Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, 
or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the 
sin of my soul?” In the sixth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Exodus, God commands Moses to address the 
following language to the Jews: “Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.” And Josephus, in 
his Treatise against Apion, boasts that his countrymen were a kingdom of priests, who rendered a pure homage to one 
God, the Creator of the universe *. The Mexicans resembled the Jews in being also a nation of priests ; and their pro- 
phets were not unlike the Hebrew prophets, who are so frequently accused in Scripture of deceiving the people with lies. 
It is very remarkable that both nations were equally inclined to pay superstitious attention to dreams: the Mexicans 
had paintings expressly for their interpretation ; and it is highly probable that “‘hinc fons et origo malorum.” The 
Jews believed in two kinds of divine inspiration, the distinct nature of which will be more clearly understood from 
the perusal-of the twelfth chapter of Numbers; from which (but more especially from the sixteenth chapter of the 
same book) it would appear not improbable that the whole tribe of Levi laid claim to the possession of inspiration 
by dreams ; for that is the only inference to be drawn from the address of Korah and the princes of the congrega- 
tion to Moses and Aaron: “ Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, 
and the Lord is among them ;” since presumptuous and impious as those men were, they would scarcely have ven- 
tured to have told Moses to his face that the Lord spoke mouth to mouth with them as with him (the only other 
mode of inspiration), it being so easy moreover to disprove the fact. A broad line of distinction is drawn in the 
sixth and eighth verses of the above-mentioned chapter of Numbers between these two kinds of inspiration; the 
former of which was received by the priest or prophet in a sleeping state, and the latter by Moses in his full senses 
and awake. This chapter we the more readily insert here at full length, because it has been elsewhere referred to 

* Some writers have contended that the licentiousness of the Poets having lessened the respect which the Romans entertained for their 
ancient faith,—the Philosophers, to remedy the evil of irreligion (but not of atheism, which is opposed both to the feelings and the constitu- 
tion of human nature), thought to substitute pure theism for polytheism ; hoping that an entirely new religious system in name would effect 
a reform in real religion, which they judged to be nothing more than a pure and spontaneous feeling of gratitude from man towards the 
unknown Author of his existence and happiness. They soon, however, discovered their error, and perceived that such a religion would be 
too simple and abstract for the grossness and the ignorance of the age in which they lived; and they became anxious to retrace their 
steps, and sought to restore the statue of Jupiter to the Capitol, and to replace Minerva in her hallowed fane. Two parties had, however, 
grown up in the state, each professing the most opposite principles: both supported by different allies; the one had reason, common sense, 
and learning on its side, with the great disadvantage of being obliged to defend many old abuses to the prejudice of reform; the other 
called in the aid of foreign superstition, availed itself of the passions and physical force of the multitude, conciliated the favour of the 
government, obtained imperial decrees, silenced their opponents by appealing to laws and penalties, of which they were themselves both 
the framers and executors, and soon acquired absolute power,—establishing at the same time a reign of terror and of persecution. 

NOTES. 367 

as presenting a new feature of analogy between the Mexican and Hebrew migrations, in reference to the history of 
Chimalman, who was shut out altogether from the Mexican camp in consequence of her quarrel with her two brothers, 
the leaders of the Mexicans. “ And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom 
he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman. And they said, Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by 
Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the Lord heard it. (Now the man Moses was very meek, above all 
the men which were upon the face of the earth.) And the Lord spake suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and 
unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out. And the 
Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: 
and they both came forth. And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will 
make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who 
is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches ; 
and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses ? 
And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them ; and he departed. And the cloud departed from off the taber- 
nacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was 
leprous. And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein we have done 
foolishly, and wherein we have sinned. Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he 
cometh out of his mother’s womb. And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee. And 
the Lord said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be 
shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again. And Miriam was shut out from the 
camp seven days; and the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again. And afterward the people 
removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderness of Paran.” The displeasure of Moses as recorded in the 
above chapter, who, although slow to provocation and very meek, could not help on that occasion, as it would appear, 
making an appeal to God against Aaron and Miriam, renders their justification very difficult. One thing, however, 
may be said in palliation of their conduct : Moses had contracted two idolatrous marriages in succession, in defiance 
of Abraham’s admonition to Eliezer his steward not to make choice of a wife the daughter of an idolater for Isaac, 
which he could not have been unacquainted with, and of a law afterwards promulgated by himself; for the first wife 
of Moses was a woman of Midian, the daughter of the priest of that land, and his second wife was an Ethiopian, 
whom it would be wrong to confound with the former; since the supposition would be absurd that Aaron and Miriam 
should have quarrelled with Moses so long afterwards, on account of a marriage to which it is evident that they had 
already become reconciled. In reference to an observation made above, that the Jews and Mexicans were inclined to 
consider dreams as ri Pevov, (or possessing a divine nature,) we cannot help here expressing the strongest conviction that 
never would those two nations have fallen into such abominable superstitions, or suffered their priests so grossly to 
deceive them, but for the strange persuasion which they were under, that the Deity commonly communed with mortals 
by means of dreams and visions. What opinion would the ancient philosophers have pronounced on such a doctrine ? 
In what language would the orators have sought to expose to public contempt those witnesses whose evidence could 
not be disproved, because they unblushingly asserted that they had dreamt that the fact was so, and impiously main- 
tained that their dream was God, or in other words a vision of the deity? If the great mind of Brutus, when harassed 
with anxiety for the fate of his country, could have created a phantom of its own imagination which appeared to 
address him in his tent ?—what monstrous visions might not the Mexican and Jewish priests, who had employed the 
day in sacrificing, and whose hands and garments had been so lately drenched in blood, have fancied that they beheld 
when sleep took possession of their frame? The Mexican priests fasted to excess ; and it is admitted that fasting 
makes the imagination more active in dreams. They probably, therefore, when in the morning they took up the 
brush to compose their mythological paintings (a task which Torquemada says belonged more peculiarly to a class of 
Mexican priests remarkable for the austerity of their lives), found their invention much sharpened. The Jews might 

9 

be emphatically styled “a dreaming people ;” and it is probable that whenever any disaster threatened their state, public 
attention was more generally directed to dreams; the population became more credulous, and impostors more numerous 
and bold. Supposing for a moment that the inhabitants of this vast metropolis (London) could be induced to surrender 
up their judgments to the guidance of a few persons, who told them to place implicit faith in dreams,—what disorders 
would not ensue? Some of the multitude of dreamers would necessarily dream what would turn out.true, who would 

be accounted prophets and inspired persons ; the truth of their dreams would be insisted upon; and if religion could 

368 NOTES. 

once be identified with them, the popular delusion would be confirmed. Since no event can have more than two issues, 
when a prediction relates simply to the fact of its future accomplishment,—and the lying Hebrew prophets, as Scripture 
designates them, often prophesied on both sides of the question,—it necessarily followed that they even were sometimes 
true prophets. Saint Jerome has observed that it is no difficult thing to deceive the people; and he might have added, 
that it is frequently a very profitable thing. If the Roman augurs, whom Cicero is disposed to ridicule—affirming that 
they could scarcely meet each other in the streets without smiling, from the consciousness that their art was only cal- 
culated to cajole the populace,——had wished to heighten the respect which the public felt for their order, by encouraging 
the belief that they could predict the future through dreams, as well as by the usual way of divination; such preten- 
sions might possibly have been maintained by the stratagem of depositing, either in the temple of Jupiter or of 
Minerva, predictions framed so as to be adapted to all probable contingencies. One might have foretold and recorded 
his prophecy in writing, that the third Punic War would take place; another that it would not: one that if it did, it 
would be disastrous to the Romans; another that it would be fatal to the Carthaginians. And these prophecies 
having been laid up for some future race of priests to consult, and put in order after the event to which they related 
had occurred, they, by selecting the true from the false, and treating the latter as the Sibyl did her books, might by 
dexterously producing the former, and appealing to signatures and the faded character of the hand-writing as the 
proof of their genuine nature and authenticity, have easily induced the people, who are naturally inclined to the mar- 
vellous, to credit them, and who are disposed, moreover, to think it sinful to doubt any thing which their priests pledge 
their words to be the fact. But if it be objected to this fictitious case, that a preceding generation of mankind cares 
in general very little for those who follow them ; the reverse, it may be replied, experience shows to be the feelings 
of religious corporations, with whom the credit of their order is always a paramount consideration. We shall here 
insert some passages from the Old Testament, to prove how common lying prophets and pretended seers of visions 
were amongst the Jews. The first example shall be borrowed from the eighteenth chapter of the Second Book of 
Chronicles, which records in the following manner the events that followed the league which was entered into by 
Jehoshaphat and Ahab, the kings of Judah and Israel. “ Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and 
joined affinity with Ahab. And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and 
oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ra- 
moth-gilead. And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth- 
gilead? And he answered him, I am as thou art, arid my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war. 
And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the Lord to-day. Therefore the 
king of Israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to 
battle, or shall I forbear ? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver it into the king’s hand. But Jehoshaphat 
said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that we might enquire of him? And the king of Israel said 
unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him; for he never 
prophesied good unto me, but always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not 
the king say so. And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of 
Imla. And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of them on his throne, clothed in their 
robes, and they sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before 
them. And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the Lord, With these 
thou shalt push Syria until they be consumed. And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, 
and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king. And the messenger that went to call Micaiah 
spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one assent; let thy word 
therefore, I pray thee, be like one of their’s, and speak thou good. And Micaiah said, As the Lord hveth, even what 
my God saith, that will I speak. And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go to 
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into 
your hand. And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou say nothing but the ruth to 
me in the name of the Lord? Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no 
shepherd: and the Lord said, These have no master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace. 
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil ? 
Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the Lord; I saw the Lord sitting upon his throne, and all the host of 
heaven standing on his right hand and on his left. And the Lord said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that 

NOTES. 369 

he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one spake saying after this manner, and another saying after that 
manner. Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will entice him. And the Lord said 
unto him, Wherewith ? And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the 
Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou shalt also prevail: go out, and do even so. Now, therefore, behold, the 
Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil against thee. ‘Then 
Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit 
of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt go 
into an inner chamber to hide thyself.” Jeremiah is, however, that true Hebrew prophet who inveighs most fre- 
quently, and in terms of the greatest asperity, against the false prophets who in his days went about deceiving the 
people; which perhaps he was the more inclined to do, having himself been often taken for a false prophet by his 
countrymen, and on one occasion being in imminent danger of his life, as we learn from the seventh, eighth, and 
ninth verses of the twenty-sixth chapter of his book: “So the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jere- 
miah speaking these words in the house of the Lord. Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of 
speaking all that the Lord had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the priests and the prophets and 
all the people took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die. Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, 
This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were 
gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.” The following passages, in which mention is made by name 
of these false prophets, occur in the fourteenth, the twenty-third, the twenty-seventh, and the twenty-ninth chapters 
of the Book of Jeremiah: “Then said I, Ah, Lord God! behold, the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see the 
sword, neither shall ye have famine ; but I will give you assured peace in this place. Then the Lord said unto me, 
The prophets prophesy “ies im my name: I sent them not, neither have 1 commanded them, neither spake unto 
them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart.” 
‘“‘ Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets: all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like 
a man whom wine hath overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness. For the land is full 
of adulterers ; for because of swearing the land mourneth ; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their 
course is evil, and their force is not right. For both prophet and priest are profane ; yea, 7 my house have I found 
their wickedness, saith the Lord.” “I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name, saying, 
have dreamed, I have dreamed. How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies ? yea, they are 
prophets of the deceit of their own heart.” “Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to 
your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king 
of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, 
and ye should perish.” “ Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye 
shall not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you. For I have not sent them, saith the Lord, 
yet they prophesy a lie in my name, that I might drive you out; and that ye might perish, ye and the prophets that 
prophesy unto you.” “For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel ; Let not your prophets and your diviners, 
that be in the midst of you, deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed. For they 
prophesy falsely unto you in my name: I have not sent them, saith the Lord.” From the threat contained in the 
following passage of the thirteenth chapter of Jeremiah, considered in connexion with what is said in the Second 
Book of Chronicles, of the Lord’s putting a lying spirit in the mouth of the Hebrew prophets, it would appear that 
their prophesying falsely was sometimes the Lord’s doing, that is to say, caused by him: “Then shalt thou say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings that sit upon David’s 
throne, and the priests, and the-prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness. And I will dash 
them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the Lord: I will not pity, nor spare, nor have 
mercy, but destroy them.” This state of things made the Hebrew people very credulous, and the false prophets very 
bold, as will more fully appear from the perusal of the twenty-eighth chapter of Jeremiah: “ And it came to pass 
the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month, 
that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which was of Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the Lord, in the 
presence of the priests and of all the people, saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have 
broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. Within two full years will I bring again into this place all the vessels of 
the Lord’s house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to Babylon : 

C58) 

370 NOTES. 

And I will brmg again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, 
that went into Babylon, saith the Lord: for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon. Then the prophet Jere- 
miah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that stood 
in the house of the Lord, even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: the Lord do so: the Lord perform thy words 
which thou hast prophesied, to bring again the vessels of the Lord’s house, and all that is carried away captive, from 
Babylon into this place. Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the 
people ; The prophets that have been before me and before thee of old prophesied both against many countries, and 
against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence. The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the 
word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord hath truly sent him. Then 
Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, and brake it*. And Hananiah spake 
in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon from the neck of all nations within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his 
way. Then the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the prophet, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the 
yoke from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Thou 
hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron. For thus saith the Lord of hosts, 
the God of Israel; I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon; and they shall serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also. Then said the 
prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; The Lord hath not sent thee; but thou makest 
this people to trust in a lie. Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will cast thee from off the face of the earth: 
this year thou shalt die, because thou hast taught rebellion against the Lord. So Hananiah the prophet died the 
same year in the seventh month.” It is not surprising, the priests and the people being so inclined to listen to false 
prophets, that Jeremiah should have been under the disagreeable necessity of recording, in the twentieth chapter of 
his Book, the contumelious treatment which he received from the constituted authorities of the state, or that that 
treatment should have induced him to remonstrate in rather strong terms with the Lord. “ Now Pashur the son of 
Immer the priest, who was also chief governor in the house of the Lord, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things. 
Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was 
by the house of the Lord. And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. 
Then said Jeremiah unto him, The Lord hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magor-missabib. For thus saith the Lord, 
Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends: and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and 
thine eyes shall behold it: and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them captive 
into Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword. Moreover I will deliver all the strength of this city, and all the labours 
thereof, and all the precious things thereof, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their 
enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them to Babylon. And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in 
thine house shall go into captivity : and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, 
thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies. O Lord, éhouw hast deceived me, and I was deceived : 
thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. For since I spake, I 
cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision 
daily. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine 
heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was.weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.” The impreca- 
tions which Jeremiah utters in the fourteenth and fifteenth verses of the above chapter, against the day on which he 
was born, and the man who brought the tidings of his birth to his father,—the former being pronounced against an 
inanimate object, and the latter against an unoffending person,—seem almost unreasonable, or at least argue that he 
did not at the moment appreciate at its proper value the high honour of being a prophet, or the fame and reputed 
sanctity of character which he would enjoy during all succeeding ages. We are induced to add to the foregoing 
complaint the following passage from the fifteenth chapter of the same prophet, for the sake of pointing out an 

* Tt may be proper to remark that Jeremiah had placed a yoke upon his neck as a type that what he prophesied would surely come to 
pass. The horns of iron mentioned in the eighteenth chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles, which were made by Zedekiah the 
son of Chenaanah, were intended to show that Ahab the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah would push and overthrow 
Syria: the latter, however, was a false prophet, who carried plenty of other metal about him besides iron. 

NOTES. ofl 

approximation in the customs of the Jews and the Mexicans, and a singular analogy in the choice of the simile 
mouth, as used by the latter in reference to Tetzcatlipoca, and here employed by God himself: “O Lord, thou 
knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy long suffering: 
know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto 
me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts. I sat not in the 
assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation. 
Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me 
as a iar, and as waters that fail? Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and 
thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them 
return unto thee; but return not thou unto them.” 

Commentators have been at no little trouble in endeavouring to explain to others, and rightly to comprehend 
themselves, the meaning of Jeremiah’: apostrophe, J am called by thy name, O Lord God of Hosts ; and some have 
even, rather than admit that the passage was too difficult for their ingenuity, taken refuge in a supposed mistrans- 
lation of the Hebrew: the literal interpretation of the text of Scripture seems, however, to furnish its right meaning; 
which is no other than that Jeremiah was called by his countrymen by the honorary appellation of the God whose 
priest and prophet he was. This text may receive some illustration from the following curious passage of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain, in which that learned author gives some account of the ancient Tultecas: “Eran muy 
devotos y grandes oradores, oraban a un solo Sefior, que tenian por Dios, al qual le Hamaban Quetzalcoatl, cuyo 
sacerdote tenia el mismo nombre que tambien le Ilamaban Quetzalcoatl, el qual era muy devoto é aficionado 4 las 
cosas de su Sefor y Dios, y por esto tenido en mucho entre ellos, y asi lo queles mandaba lo hacian y cumplian y 
no excedian de ello; y le solia decir muchas veces que habia un solo Sefior y Dios que se decia Quetzalcoatl, y que 
no queria mas que culebras y mariposas que le ofreciesen y diesen en su sacrificio.” Historia Universal de las Cosas 
de Nueva-Espaia, lib. x. cap. 29. sec. 1. “They were very religious and much addicted to prayer; they worshiped 
only one Lord, whom they considered God, and they named him Quetzalcoatl; whose priest bore lkewise the same 
appellation, being also named Quetzalcoatl, who was very devout and zealous in the service of the Lord his 
God, and on that account held in great veneration by them; so that whatever he commanded them to do they did, 
without failing in any part of their obedience to him; he was accustomed frequently to declare that there was one 
only God and Lord, whose name was Quetzalcoatl, and that he required no other sacrifices but snakes and 
butterflies.” We have elsewhere observed, that Scriptural phrases, a Jewish train of sentiment and Hebrew 
metaphors, present themselves abundantly in almost every line of the sixth Book of Sahagun’s History of New 
Spain, which contains the prayers which the Mexicans addressed to the gods, the speeches which on solemn 
occasions they made to their kings, and the advice which they gave to their children. We here only wish to refer to 
the 376th page of the fifth and preceding volume of the present work, in order to point out the probability that 
God's promise to Jeremiah, “Thou shalt be as my mouth,” was known to the Mexicans; since the newly elected king 
of Mexico, in a prayer of thanksgiving to Tetzcatlipoca, there emphatically says of kings in general, “ Vuestros 
instrumentos y vuestras imagenes para regir vuestros reynos, estando dentro de ellos y hablando por su boca, y pro- 
nunciando ellos vuestras palabras.” “They are thine instruments and thine images to govern thy kingdoms, thou being 
in them, and speaking through their mouth, and they pronouncing thy words.” We may further remark, that the 
Mexicans, like the Jews, used very free language in remonstrating with the Deity. Torquemada and Acosta assert 
(perhaps exaggerating querulous chiding into positive insolence) that the Mexicans did not hesitate to apply the epithet 
bellaco to Tetzcatlipoca, when they imputed some bitter disappointment to his rejecting their vows. One more 
passage shall be adduced from Scripture, to show in what utter contempt the Jews held even that prophet, whose 
denunciations of vengeance and unchastened invective render his Book (laying aside its inspiration) one of the most 
extraordinary that can be found in any language. Ezekiel in his twentieth chapter thus bears witness to the little 
estimation in which his predictions were held by his countrymen; “ Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward the south, and prophesy againt the forest 
of the south field; and say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, 
I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame shall not 
be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall be burned therein. And all flesh shall see that I the Lord 
have kindled it : it shall not be quenched. Then said I, Ah Lord God! they say of me, Doth he not speak parables?” 

372 NO TES) 

One reflection must occur to those who meditate upon the history of the Jews and Mexicans,—that the two 
nations were equally addicted to idolatry, and that human sacrifices were quite as common amongst the Hebrews in 
the days of the prophets, as they afterwards became among the Mexicans and the Peruvians: the temple itself was 
profaned by them, and it cannot be doubted that men were devoted and sacrificed to Jehovah. This state of things 
being considered, it is not at all surprising that from time to time prophets should have risen up amongst the Jews 
who endeavoured to bring their countrymen to a sense of their guilty excesses, by threats of speedy and dreadful 
divine vengeance. Since, where was the rational Jew whose heart must not have sickened at the name of Tophet, 
and of the valley of the Son of Hinnom? Or who could have required inspiration to teach him that human sacrifices 
were displeasing to the Deity? The Hebrew prophets were all of them believers in a Deity of a purer nature as 
regarded the acceptance of sacrifice, than the mass of the people imagined the God who brought them ont of Egypt to 
be; and who, as we have elsewhere observed, seem to have put a false construction upon that Mosaic ordinance which 
declared, that none devoted of men should live ; and to have perverted to a dangerous precedent the faith of Abraham 
in offering up his son Isaac; as also not to have benefited by that page in their own history, which recorded the 
destruction of all the first-born in the land of Egypt ina single night, by the same Deity who immediately afterwards 
ordered the first-born, both of man and of beast, to be set apart (or devoted) unto him, in commemoration of that 
dreadful decree. If Mexican history had been handed down to us entire, we should probably have found that the 
Mexicans were not entirely destitute of prophets who denounced the vengeance of Tetzcatlipoca against those who 
sacrificed human victims at his shrine; since it has not failed to inform us that Nezahualcoyotl and Nezahualpilli dis- 
approved of such sacrifices and proposed to the people their abolition ; and that the former of those renowned kings 
built a temple in Tezcuco in honour of the Supreme Being, in which he only allowed incense to be burned, prayers to 
be offered up, music by means of plates of metal to be sounded, but o image whatsoever to be placed. As regards the 
idolatry of the Greeks and Romans, it may confidently be asserted, that it was the purity of their idolatry, compared 
with that of the Jews and the Mexicans, that was the sole reason why their philosophers did not all become prophets. 
Yet still it should be recollected that Socrates fell a victim to his zeal for reforming the religion of the state; and it 
cannot be doubted, if human sacrifices had been customary in Greece in the days of Pythagoras, that he who pronounced 
even sacrifices of animals to be impious, would have loudly protested against them; and if his protest had been written 
down by his disciples and been accompanied with threats, that Jupiter to punish the Greeks would either excite a 
civil war amongst them, or cause a Persian invasion, or finally would afflict them with any other evil which he might 
have thought near or probable,—he perhaps in after ages would have been revered in Greece as an inspired prophet. 

We pass, by an easy transition, from dreams and visions to fables. It may, however, be deemed a more rational 
task to compare the laws of the Mexicans and the Jews with each other: than their fables, which were infinite in 
number and similar in kind; for the imagination both of the former and the latter people,—unlike that of the 
Greeks, which loved to soar to the sunny heights of Olympus and the purple pavilions of the gods, or to repose 
on the banks of winding streams, or visit the battle plain,—delighted in exploring the hidden centre of the earth, 
and in compelling, with magic rings, spells, and incantations, genii to reveal hidden treasures, and witches 
to conjure up the ghosts of the dead. We shall therefore leave to others the task of unravelling the meaning of 
the Mexican and Hebrew fables; who, if they can obtain the assistance of a learned Rabbi, will find their labour 
much lightened; although we cannot refrain from inserting here two Mexican fables, extracted from Boturini’s 
short but learned treatise, because the former seems to contain a confused tradition of Christ and the prophet 
Daniel; and the latter, Boturini confesses, is founded on the Mosaic history of the sun having stood still at the 
command of Joshua. These fables in the original Spanish are as follow: “El primero, y mas célebre Symbolo de 
los Planetas, es el del Sol, que los Indios llaman Tonatiuh, y fabulosamente el Buboso, en su lengua Nanahuatzin. 
La Fabula Indiana de su transmutacion refiere, que, satisfechos los Dioses de las virtudes Heroicas, que havian 
exercitado en esta mortal vida algunos particulares hombres, y resueltos 4 premiarlas, convocaron en un gran Ilano 
4d todas las Gentes de esta Edad segunda, y mandaron que en una hoguera, que en él havia, y 4 la sazon vomitaba 
llamas, se arrojassen los Esforzados para transformarse, y passar 4 Divinos honores. Congregados, pues, al rededor 
de la hoguera los principales Sefiores, empezaron 4 disputar entre 5) 4 quien le pertenecia arrojarse el primero, en 
cuyo tiempo se aparecid 8 uno de ellos enfermo, buboso, y podrido el Dios Centeotl Inopitlzin, esto es, el Dios 
huerfano, solo, y sin padres, diciendole: Qué haces aqui? No ves que tus Compajfieros se detienen en vanas 
altercaciones. Arrimate 4 la hoguera; echate 4 las Hamas, para dar fin 4 tus males, que con heroyca*constancia 

NOTES. 373 

supiste tantos afios placidamente soportar, y hallaras el principio de immortales grandezas. Hizolo assi el Buboso, 
y con dissimulo arrastrandose se precipits generoso en el fuego, con grande admiracion de los demas, los que atentos 
vieron, que lentamente se iba derritiendo, y transformando en las mismas llamas; y no pareciendo ya vestigio alguno 
de cuerpo humano, baxé del Cielo un Aguila hermosissima, que entrando en la hoguera, le arrebatd 4 las Celestes 
mansiones, y es casi lo mismo, que executd Jupiter con Ganimédes, principal Joven de Troya, haviendo embiado 
4 un Aguila, que le Ievasse al Cielo, para que alli le sirviesse de Copero, de que nacid en parte la causa de los 
disgustos de Juno, y de los desayres, que hizo 4los Troyanos, segun Virgilio 1. Aineid. vers. 30. et sequent. 

* manet alta mente repostum 
Judicium Paridis, spreteeque injuria forme, 
Et genus invisum, et rapti Ganymedis honores.’ 
y Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 10. fab. 4. 

‘Nec mora: percusso mendacibus aére pennis 
Abripit Iliadem, qui nunc quoque pocula miscet, 
Invitaque Jovi nectar Junone ministrat.’ 

Y aunque aleunos Autores, con ineptas, y torcidas interpretaciones, afearon el verdadero sentido de esta ruidosa 
q 5 2 2 9 
Fabula, lo cierto es, que los Indios no quisieron dar 4 entender otra cosa, sino que el Sol era un fuego verdadero 
2 » q 2 9 
por cuya razon algunos Filosofos modernos colocan a este Elemento en el Sol, y prueban ser sus manchas los 
humos, que exhala, sin haver menester para mantenerse cosa, que lo alimente, por ser su innata materia abundan- 
2 q 2) 3 2) 
tissima, y no poderse oprimir de los cuerpos vecinos; y aun en caso que necessitasse de ella por lo que desperdicia 
en la Ecliptica, se le afiade otro tanto de sutiles materias por ambos Polos; y nos dice Ovidio Metamorph. lib. 2. 
fab. 1. que haviendo Faeton obtenido de su padre el Sol la merced de poder governar, aunque por un dia tan 
solamente su Luminoso Coche, puso con su inobediente derrota, y con la cercania de sus llamas en extrema 
confusion los Cielos, y Tierra, y obligo 4 Jupiter para remediar tan grande, y nunca visto desorden, le derribasse 
4 fuerza de rayos, precipitandole muerto sobre las tierras de Italia. 

‘ Utque ferant eequos et coelum et terra calores, 
Nec preme, nec summum molire per ethera currum. 
Altius egressus ccelestia tecta cremabis ; 
Inferius terras. 

ambustaque nubila fumant. 
Corripitur fammis, ut queque altissima tellus ; 
Fissaque agit rimas, et succis aret ademptis. 

magne pereunt cum meenibus urbes : 
Cumque suis totas populis incendia gentes 
In cinerem vertunt. Silvee cum montibus ardent.’ 

Confirmase lo dicho de otra Fabula de los mismos Indios, pero radicada en la verdad historica, de quando por 
mandato de Josué se detuvo el Sol en favor de los Israelitas. Dicen, pues, que el afio de stete Conejos, haviendose 
quedado el Sol immobil, fueron excessivos los ardores, que se originaron en la tierra, y que el Mosquito se le 
presentd delante, diciendole: Sefior del Mundo. Acaso quieres abrasar de el todo la tierra, y reducir el Mundo en 
cenizas, pues cansado detienes tu regular curso, y te quedas immobil 4 las suplicas de los Mortales? Pero viendo 
que no le respondia, y se estaba sin movimiento, se le acercd, y le picd en una pierna, la que retirando volvid 3 
proseguir su derrota. El mismo hecho, con otros sales poeticos, refiere tambien Ovidio dict. loc. fab. 4. descri- 
biendo los desmayos, y detencion del Sol 4 causa de la muerte de su hijo Faeton, y nos dice, que 4 instancia de los 
Dioses volvid 4 tomar la rienda de sus caballos, y proseguir su curso regular. 

‘ Squallidus interea genitor Phaethontis, et expers 
Ipse sui decoris, qualis, cum deficit orbem, 
Esse solet: lucemque odit, seque ipse, diemque ; 
Datque animum in luctus; et luctibus adjicit iram: 
Officiumque negat mundo 

(5c) 

374 NOTES. 

Talia dicentem circumstant omnia solem 

Numina: neve velit tenebras inducere rebus, 
Supplice voce rogant, missos quoque Jupiter ignes 
Excusat, precibusque minas regaliter addit. 
Colligit amentes, et adhuc terrore paventes, 

999 

Phoebus equos. 

The following is the translation of the latter fable. “The justice of the above observations is further confirmed 
by another fable of these same Indians, which is founded upon historical fact. They affirm, then, that on the year 
of Seven Rabbits the Sun stood still; when, the earth becoming scorched to an excessive degree, a mosquito presented 
itself before him and addressed him, ‘ Lord of the World, is it your intention to burn up the whole earth and to 
reduce the universe to cinders; since, fatigued as it were in your regular course, you stop and remain immoveable to 
the prayers of mortals?’ When receiving no answer, the Sun continuing motionless, the mosquito approached nearer 
to him and stung him upon the leg, which, drawing back he again renewed his course.” This fable is particularly 
deserving of attention, because it furnishes strong grounds for supposing that the Mexicans were not only acquainted 
with some of the circumstances preceding and attending the flight of the children of Israel from Egypt, and their 
subsequent wanderings in the desert, but had also preserved traditions of the events which immediately followed 
their occupation of the land of Canaan under Joshua. It must also be admitted, that this tradition cannot be 
classed amongst the number of those which connected with a belief in the Deluge, in the existence of giants, and 
with legends of the golden age, have been discovered nearly amongst all nations. On the contrary, it bears a Hebrew 
stamp and character; for, although the fancy of Ovid induced him poetically to describe the consternation which the 
gods and men were thrown into by the rashness of Phaéton, who drove the chariot of the Sun out of its old course, 
when Jupiter interposed to restore order to nature; and Pope has sublimely imagined the effect which the suspension 
of the laws of gravity for one moment would produce throughout the universe, in the often-quoted lines of his 

Essay on Man,— 
« And, if each system in gradation roll 

Alike essential to the amazing whole, 

The least confusion but in one, not all 

That system only, but the whole, must fall. 

Let earth unbalanced from her orbit fly, 

Planets and suns run lawless through the sky ; 
Let ruling angels from their spheres be hurld, 
Being on being wreck’d, and world on world ; 
Heaven’s whole foundations to their centre nod, 
And nature trembles to the throne of God. 

All this dread order break—for whom? for thee? 
Vile worm !—Oh madness! Pride! Impiety !”— 

we are not at liberty to seek in the region of poetry and fiction grave arguments on which to found historical 
conclusions. The annals of the Jews alone inform us, that thrice within the last four thousand years, words pro- 
nounced by mortal lips have effected the greatest changes in the sun, both as regards its orbicular motion and the 
motion of its rays. The following miracle is recorded in the tenth chapter of Exodus as having been performed 
by Moses, in order to compel Pharaoh to let the children of Israel depart out of Egypt, (the representation of which 
occurs in the twelfth page of the Borgian MS.): “ And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward 
heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt. And Moses stretched 
forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days. ‘They saw not one 
another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.” 
In the tenth chapter of the Book of Joshua we read, that at the command of that chieftain of the Jews the 
solar orb stood still for a considerable period of time: “Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the 
Lord delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand 
thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, 

NOTES. 375 

until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the Book of Jasher*? So the 
sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day. And there was no day 
like that before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.” 

Frem a comparison of the following passages, taken from the twentieth chapter of the Second Book of Kings, and 
the thirty-eighth chapter of the Prophecies of Isaiah, it is evident that there was a time when the sun’s motion, whether 
it should go backward or forward, depended upon the will of king Hezekiah: “And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, 
What shall be the sign that the Lord will heal me, and that I shall go wp into the house of the Lord the third day? 
And Isaiah said, This sign shalt thou have of the Lord, that the Lord will do the thing that he hath spoken: shall 
the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees? And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the 
shadow to go down ten degrees: nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees. And Isaiah the prophet 
cried unto the Lord: and he brought the shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the dial of 
Ahaz.” “Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying, Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the 
God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen 
years. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city. 
And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, that the Lord will do this thing that he hath spoken; Behold, I 
will bring again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun-dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So 
the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down.” 

Sacred history. declaring that the sun has stood still, and profane history being altogether silent on the subject, it 
is evident, or at least highly probable, (if the Mexican fable was founded upon historical truth, as Boturini supposes 
it to have been,) that it was derived from a Hebrew source. This assumption will acquire further corroboration if it 
can be shown that this fable is accompanied with any of the characteristics that usually belong to the miracles 
which are related in the Old Testament. Those miracles are in general the greatest that can be conceived, brought 
about by the most insignificant means, and frequently wrought for the purpose of accomplishing ends which to 
erring human judgment must appear comparatively trivial: since of what importance, after all, can the issue of the 
greatest battles in support of the most just of causes, and fought by the most glorious of nations, appear when 
compared with the derangement of the laws of the universe? We are not informed of the precise object of the 
sun’s standing still in the Mexican fable; but a mosquito or some stinging fly was that which caused it to go on 
again: and it deserves to be remarked, that flies are particularly alluded to by Moses as instruments by which 
the Deity accomplished great ends. One of the plagues sent upon the Egyptians was a plague, as it is probable, 
of stinging flies, which is thus described in the eighth chapter of Exodus: “ And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise 
up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus 
saith the Lord, Let my people go, that they may serve me. Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will 
send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of 
the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are. AndI will sever in that day the 
land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there ; to the end thou mayest know that 
Tam the Lord in the midst of the earth. And I will puta division between my people and thy people: to-morrow shall 
this sign be. And the Lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and 
into his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies.” 
In the twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth verses of the twenty-third chapter of Exodus, God promises to extirpate 
the enemies of the children of Israel who dwelt in the land of Canaan, by means of hornets: “I will send my fear 
before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their 
backs unto thee. And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the 
Hittite, from before thee.” The same promise is repeated in the twentieth verse of the seventh chapter of 
Deuteronomy: “ Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide 
themselves from thee, be destroyed.” And it is referred to as having been carried into execution in the twelfth verse 
of the twenty-fourth chapter of Joshua: “And I sent the hornet before you, which drove them out from before 
you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy sword.” It is evident from the passages of Scripture 
which have been quoted, that the mosquito’s agency introduced into the Mexican fable of the Sun having stood still, 

* The Book of Jasher has been unfortunately lost. Not long ago it was reported to have been found, and to be in the possession of 
a Jew in this country. 

376 NOTES. 

makes it still more probable that it was derived from a Hebrew source. It may be also proper to remark, that there 
are certain prophecies in Scripture respecting the sun, which seem all to be represented as fulfilled in the Mexican 
paintings. “The sun shall be darkened,” “it shall be turned into blood,” are denunciations which often occur in the Old 
Testament; and the sun is frequently painted in the superstitious calendars of the Mexicans darkened and streaming 
with blood. The great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, which is mentioned by St. John in the 
twelfth chapter of the Revelations, appears also to have presented itself to the imagination of the Mexican painters ; 
and commentators, by consulting the plates contained in the present work, will be relieved from the difficulties which 
one and all confess that they have felt in guessing what this curious costume could have been. As regards an ob- 
servation which we have made above respecting the miracles recorded in the Old Testament,—that in general neither 
the end to be attained, nor the means by which the miracle itself is effected, bear any proportion in magnitude to it, 
—we must do the Rabbis the justice to give their solution of this difficulty, which they explain on the principle of 
Aaron’s rod, which became a serpent, swallowing up the rods of the magicians which became serpents also, as 
narrated in the twelfth verse of the seventh chapter of Exodus, giving us to understand by this explanation, that the 
Jews rest their claim to be considered God’s peculiar people, solely upon the magnitude of the miracles which he 
performed in their favour, and on their superiority over all other miracles: for they absurdly suppose that to work 
miracles, provided those miracles be neither great nor many, may be the lot of common mortals, even when their end 
is mischievous. If this mode of reasoning of the Rabbis be just, the whole system which they are anxious to uphold 
would fall to the ground ; since what could be proved by miracles, if the origin ascribed to them be of so precarious 
a nature, and if they may be referred to more than one cause? yet this is the only solution which the Rabbis offer 
for God’s accomplishing the most trivial ends by the greatest miracles. The ancient philosophers believed that they 
understood too little of the Deity, of nature, or of man, to place much faith in miracles and prophecies, or to admit 
any extravagant inferences to be drawn from them. They would have allowed little more to the man who called 
himself a prophet, than that he was to be credited in those particular predictions which he had uttered, which time 
had already shown were true ; and his further demands would have been rejected with contempt. If to reason by 
analogy on physical questions can never lead to more than probable conclusions, how manifest is it that such a mode 
of reasoning must be much more inconclusive, where the subject itself is above nature and consequently beyond 
reason, which miracles confessedly are! And yet the Hebrew people, the most ignorant and unphilosophical of all 
nations, were those who deduced conclusions of the greatest latitude from them. That the Jews were a very un- 
philosophical nation, may be proved from the literal sense in which they chose to understand the thirteenth verse of 
the tenth chapter of Joshua; inferring that, as the moon was commanded to stand still as well as the sun, not only 
had the latter motion, but likewise that, since the second command could not have been for the sake of adding to the 
light of the sun, it must have been to prevent the moon coming into collision with the sun, which would have been a 
necessary consequence on the supposition that those luminaries were two large balls which revolved in the same 
circle round the earth. The ancients entertained in common the erroneous belief in the sun’s annual motion 
through the signs of the zodiac: but the Jews are the only people in the world who seem to have been ignorant of 
the earth’s motion round its own axis. Before terminating these notes, we shall point out some analogies in the 
miscellaneous customs of the Jews and the Mexicans. Both nations were most punctual in the payment of their 
religious offerings, first-fruits, &c. The Mexicans, as Montezuma informed Cortes, feared if they failed in this 
portion of their religious duties that they would incur the severest vengeance of the gods: and the prophet Malachi, 
or rather God speaking through the mouth of that prophet, assures the Jews that they would lie under a peculiar 
curse if they did not bring the full quantity of tithe to the temple. It is probable, from the curse denounced and the 
blessing promised in the following passage of the third chapter of the Book of Malachi, that the Rabbis would soon, 
on establishing themselves in the New World, have taught their Mexican and Peruvian converts the necessity of 
complying with this precept of the old law; “ Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherem 
have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole 
nation. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now 
herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that 
there shall not be room enough to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not 
destroy the fruits of your ground ; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord 
of hosts. And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the Lord of hosts.” The 

NOTES. 377 

‘paintings of the Mexicans show that censers were used in profusion in the ceremonies of their religion: and it. ap- 
pears from the sixteenth and seventeenth verses of the sixteenth chapter of Numbers, that they were in as common 
use amongst the Levites: “ And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the Lord, thou, and 
they, and Aaron, to-morrow: and take every man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the Lord 
every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers ; thou also, and Aaron, each of you his censer.” The Mexicans 
were accustomed to mark their respect for the persons of ambassadors by burning odoriferous perfumes in censers 
before them, which it would seem from the forty-sixth verse of the second chapter of the prophet Daniel. was a 
ceremony with which the Jews were acquainted: “Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshiped 
Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him.” The Mexicans, like the 
Jews, used the ceremony of prostration when admitted to the presence of their kings. How gratifying, therefore, 
must it have been to the vanity of the latter people, who were at that time captives in Babylon, to learn that the 
haughty ruler of Asia had prostrated himself to the earth before a child of their nation! And into what repute must it 
have brought the art of interpreting dreams! The Mexicans were accustomed to decorate the inner walls of their 
temples and palaces with figures painted in vermilion. And we learn from the twenty-third chapter of Ezekiel that 
a similar custom prevailed amongst the Jews; since the prophet, describing Samaria and Jerusalem under the type 
of the two sisters Aholah and Aholibah, there says of the latter, ““ When she saw men portrayed upon the wall, the 
images of the Chaldeans portrayed with vermilion, girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire 
upon their heads, all of them princes to look to, after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their 
. nativity: and as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messengers unto them into 
Chaldea.” The Mexican priests lodged round their temples in chambers built for the express purpose; and it says 
in the twenty-seventh verse of the ninth chapter of the First Book of Chronicles, that a certain portion of the Levites 
lodged round the temple constructed by Solomon: “ And they lodged round about the house of God, because the 
charge was upon them, and the opening thereof every morning pertained to them.” The Mexican temples contained 
fountains or ponds in their court-yards in which the priests performed their ablutions ; and Solomon is said, in the 
seventh chapter of the First Book of Kings, to have made a molten sea which contained two thousand baths, which 
served the same purpose, and it is to be supposed stood in the court of the temple. Although images were forbidden 
to the Jews, still frequent mention is made in Scripture of cherubim carved as ornaments upon wood: these cherubim 
were perhaps sometimes merely winged heads, such as now decorate tombs; and it is probable that the Jews orna- 
mented the outside of their edifices with similar heads sculptured in stone. M. Dupaix has observed that heads 
sometimes of a very cadaverous aspect were inserted by the Mexicans into their walls, for the purpose, as he supposes, 
of giving a relief to their monotonous appearance. (Representations of these mural ornaments will be found in the 
fifth plate of the second part of his Monuments of New Spain.) The Mexican priests were accustomed to pierce 
their bodies with lancets formed out of a diaphanous stone named the Yztli; and to draw blood from their arms, 
legs, wrists, tongues, ears, &c. And it is said of the idolatrous Hebrew prophets, in the twenty-eighth verse of the 
eighteenth chapter of the First Book of Kings, “ And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with 
knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.” very thing that related to the preserving unextinguished 
the sacred fire which burnt in their temples, was considered by the Mexicans as a matter of the utmost consequence. 
And it would appear from the following passage of the first chapter of the Second Book of Maccabees, that the Jews 
attached scarcely less importance to the keeping in the fire of their altar: “For when our fathers were led into 
Persia, the priests that were then devout took the fire of the altar privily, and hid it in an hollow place of a pit 
without water, where they kept it sure, so that the place was unknown to all men. Now after many years, when it 
pleased God, Neemias, being sent from the king of Persia, did send of the posterity of those priests that had hid it 
to the fire: but when they told us they found no fire, but thick water; then commanded he them to draw it up, and 
to bring it; and when the sacrifices were laid on, Neemias commanded the priests to sprinkle the wood and the 
things laid thereupon with the water. When this was done, and the time came that the sun shone, which afore was 
hid in the cloud, there was a great fire kindled, so that every man marvelled.” The manner in which the Jews kindled 
their sacred fire is not precisely known. That it was a religious rite, accompanied with certain ceremonies, cannot be 
doubted: and we may even be permitted to believe, from the expression in the fourteenth verse of the nineteenth 
chapter of Ezekiel,—* And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches which hath devoured her fruit,’—that they were 
acquainted with the Mexican method of kindling fire from wood. Many passages in the Old Testament would lead 
(5p) 

378 NOTES. 

us to imagine that the ground plan, at least, of the greater temple of Mexico resembled that of the temple of 
Jerusalem* ; and the temple of Palenque (of which a representation will be found in the twelfth plate of the third 
part of M. Dupaix’s Monuments of New Spain) was perhaps in its basement story not unlike the steep and pyramidal 
rock, the four sides of which were fashioned and rendered smooth by the labour of man, (according to Josephus,) 
upon which the Hebrew temple was built; whilst its upper area, divided into different courts, with porticoes having 
light against light, and containing various edifices, might have imitated in some degree Herod’s temple, in the inner 
court of which was the sanctuary, which rose like a ¢ower high above all the other buildings. It is generally ad- 
mitted that the temple of Solomon was twice rebuilt ; first by the Jews under Ezra after their return from the Baby- 
lonian captivity, and at a later period by Herod. It is most extraordinary, however, that the plan of that temple, 
which was drawn out by God himself for David to be given to Solomon,—as we are informed in the nineteenth verse 
of the twenty-eighth chapter of the First Book of Chronicles, “ All this, said David, the Lord made me understand 
in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern,’—should have become unintelligible to later 
generations: for we defy Mr. Nash or any other eminent architect, whatever learning or ingenuity they may bring 
to the task, to comprehend the description of Solomon’s temple, as given in the First Book of Kings and the First 
Book of Chronicles ; and can assure them that they will reap little assistance from consulting the vision of Ezekiel, 
as recorded in the forty-seventh and forty-eighth chapters of that prophet’s Book. What is here asserted admits the 
most simple proof; since it is only necessary to recur to plans of that temple, which celebrated scholars have caused 
to be engraved and inserted in their works, to find that they almost all materially differ from each other; whilst the 
Rabbis in their plans mix absurdity with ignorance. It cannot be expected that much light should be thrown upon 
the question by Josephus, whose description of Herod’s temple is inapplicable to that which was founded so many 
ages before by Solomon, and who is besides an historian who is guilty of the greatest exaggerations: but an obscure 
passage in the fourteenth chapter of his Jewish Antiquities, seems to afford grounds for supposing that the Hebrew 
temple was built upon a hollow artifical platform, like many of the Mexican temples. The following is the passage 
alluded to: “’Avedwy 8e rove apyavoug Depedrovs, Kat KataBadopevos Er epous, em avtwy Tov vaov myEUpE, pnket pev p ovra 
mXor, TOS whos K TepiTTOLG, OVE, TY XporH ouvelnoavrwy Twv Dewehiwy, UmEBn. Kal TOUTO Ev KaTA ToVG Nepwvoc kaipous 
emeyepew éwoxemer.” “ But Herod having taken away the ancient foundations and laid new ones, erected the temple 
upon them, which was one hundred cubits in length, and twenty additional cubits in height, which (latter) number of 
cubits it sunk, the foundations after the expiration of a time having collapsed. In the age of Nero we resolved to build 
it up again.” It is obvious, from the reasons above assigned, that we cannot compare the temple of Jerusalem, as a 
whole, with any of the Mexican temples, because we have not a perfect idea of all its parts; it is only therefore from 
scattered passages of Scripture that we are enabled to guess that there were many features of resemblance between 
these different structures. That Solomon’s temple was high, we learn from the twenty-first verse of the seventh 
chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles, where it is expressly so designated: “And this house, which is high, 
shall be an astonishment to every one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the Lord done thus unto 
this land and unto this house?” That it had an ascent, which was probably by steps, up to it, is incidentally men- 
tioned in the ninth chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles, which contains an account of the queen of Sheba’s 
visit to Solomon: “And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had 
built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; 
his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord; there was 
no more spirit inher.” That the temple, when repaired by Simon the high priest, had a double height, (which phrase 
is very obscure,) we learn from the following passage of the fiftieth chapter of Ecclesiasticus: “Simon the high 
priest, the son of Onias, who in his life repaired the house again, and in his days fortified the temple: and by him 
was built from the foundation the double height, the high fortress of the wall about the temple.” This description 
would be almost applicable to the architecture of the temple of Palenque, or to the platforms of more than one 
story upon which the Mexican temples were built. The roof and the windows of the house of the forest of 
Lebanon, built by Solomon, are thus described in the seventh chapter of the First Book of Kings ; from which it 
would appear that the roof of that house was supported by transverse beams resting upon three rows of pillars ; 

* Tt deserves to be remarked, that the name of the holy house, which Josephus always bestows upon the temple of Jerusalem, is the 
literal signification of the Mexican term teocalli. 

NOTES. 379 

which was the plan adopted by those who constructed the palaces of Mictlan, although in those palaces, the halls 
being long and narrow, single rows of pillars were judged sufficient to support the roof: “And it was covered with 
cedar above upon the beams, that lay on forty-five pillars, fifteen in a row. And there were windows in three rows, 
and light was against light in three ranks. And all the doors and posts were square, with the windows: and light 
was against light in three ranks. 

M. Dupaix has remarked, that the sides of the Mexican temples almost invariably corresponded to the four 
cardinal points, whilst the staircases were always on the east, because the chapel above looked towards the east ; 
and when the ascent was by a single staircase, faced the upper landing-place. The same was the position of the 
temple which Ezekiel beheld in his vision, as is evident from the first verse of the forty-seventh chapter of his 
Prophecies: “ Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from 
under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters 
came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar.” The stairs of the altar 
appertaining to this temple are said, in the following passage of the forty-third chapter of the same prophet, to have 
looked towards the east: “And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square in the four squares 
thereof. And the settle shail be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad in the four squares thereof; and the 
border about it shall be half a cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs shall look 
toward the east.” It had also many courts, like the greater temple of Mexico, as Ezekiel declares in the twenty- 
first verse of his forty-sixth chapter: “Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass by the 
four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.” From the fourteenth verse 
of the thirty-eighth chapter of Jeremiah, it appears that the temple of Solomon had many courts likewise : “Then 
Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto him into the third entry that is in the house of the Lord: 
and the king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.” A causeway is also mentioned in 
the sixteenth verse of the twenty-sixth chapter of the First Book of Chronicles, as leading to the latter temple: “To 
Shuppim and Hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate Shallecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward 
against ward.” The Jews were commanded by Moses not to make an altar of hewn stone: smooth uncut stones were 
therefore probably used by them in the construction of the altars belonging to their temple. And Sahagun affirms 
that the court of the greater temple of Mexico was paved with smooth and uncut stones as slippery as glass. 
Josephus records the vast size of the blocks of hewn stone of which the temple of Jerusalem was built. And 
M. Dupaix expresses his astonishment at the equally large masses of granite which he discovered in the walls of 
the palaces of Mictlan; wondering at the same time by what means they had been worked, since their perfectly 
smooth surface bore no marks of the chisel; and he could not believe it possible that the founders of Mictlan had 
reduced those blocks to proper shape and dimensions merely by the friction of one stone against another. It did 
not occur to M. Dupaix that emery might have been employed in working them, with several kinds of which 
Sahagun says the Mexicans were acquainted; which in conjunction with the saw would have given to those 
stones the smooth surface that he describes. It appears from the ninth verse of the seventh chapter of the First 
Book of Kings, that the stones with which the temple of Solomon was constructed were sawed both on the inner 
and the outer side: “ All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, 
within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great court.” 

That the Tultecas were the founders of many of the most splendid monuments of the New World may be inferred, 
not only from the signification of the proper name Tulteca, which means an architect, but likewise because the 
figure of a feathered serpent is sometimes represented in Mosaic on their walls, which undoubtedly referred to their god 
Quetzalcoatl. A gigantic serpent of this description ornaments the ruins of the fortress of Xochicalco; and here 
we may observe, that the original drawing of that monument (from which the fifteenth plate in the first part of the 
Monuments of New Spain has been taken) has suffered considerable mutilation, one half of it having been torn off. 
Since nothing appears more admirable in the architecture of the New World than the beautiful and durable Mosaic 
ornaments which cover the walls of the palaces of Mictlan, it is highly probable that those structures were erected 
by the Tultecas ; and they furnish an argument in favour of the belief, that the Tultecas were originally a Jewish 
colony which in remote ages had settled in America; since we do not read that any other nation of the old continent, 
except the Jews, ever introduced this style of ornament into architecture; whilst Josephus, it should be remarked, 
commends in the highest terms the skill which his countrymen displayed in uniting together the stones of which 

380 NOTES. 

the walls of the temple were composed, the joints of which were scarcely visible. And the art of working in mosaic 
seems probably alluded to in the sixth verse of the third chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles, where the 
embellishments which Solomon added to the temple are thus described; “And he garnished the house with 
precious stones for beauty, and the gold was gold of Parvaim.” The walls of the Mexican temples were delicately 
plastered, and frequently ornamented with stucco, especially those of the temple of Palenque, the exterior of which 
presented to the eye groups of colossal figures, which viewed from the ground must naturally have suggested to the 
mind of the beholder the relievos which decorate the temple of the Parthenon; save that in the former, the 
immortal genius of the Greeks was wanting. That the Jews were accustomed to add this kind of ornament to their 
buildings we learn from the simile contained in the seventeenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Ecclesiasticus : 
“ A heart settled upon a thought of understanding is as a fair plastering on the wall of a gallery.” M. Dupaix, in 
describing the figures in plaster upon the walls of the temple of Palenque, notices, as a peculiarity in them all, the 
excessive size of the nose. He did not perhaps know that Solomon ascribed beauty and majesty to countenances 
distinguished by that characteristic, as he intimates in the comparison introduced in the fourth verse of the seventh 
chapter of his Song: “Thy neck is as a tower of ivory, thine eyes like the fishpools in Heshbon, by the gate of 
Bath-rabbim, thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.” Since it cannot be doubted 
that Solomon was the arbiter elegantiarum of Jewish taste, it may be inferred that the peculiar physiognomy of the 
above-mentioned figures, (which induced M. Dupaix to think that they represented an extinct race of mankind,) was 
only, as regarded the junction of the nose with the forehead, an exaggeration of the Hebrew line of beauty into a 
complete curve. 

In some of the temples of Yucatan, according to the testimony of Captain Don Antonio del Rio, statues of men with 
palms m ther hands, in the act of beating drums and dancing, are formed in stucco on the walls: and it should be 
observed, that to rejoice with branches of the palm-tree was peculiarly a Hebrew custom, the observance of which 
Moses strictly enjoined to the Jews.—The following passage is extracted from Captain Don Antonio del Rio’s narrative 
of his visit to the ruins of Palenque, (which preceded, and probably led to, the more extensive researches of M. 
Dupaix,) in which he takes occasion to mention other ancient temples existing in Yucatan. 

“The Rey. Father Thomas de Soza, a Franciscan friar of the convent of Merida, many years collector of alms 
destined for the holy house of Jerusalem, who, in pursuing the duties imposed upon him from his situation, had 
repeatedly traversed the province, fortunately happening to be at Palenque, favoured me with a circumstantial 
account of that country, of which I shall now avail myself in his own words. 

“‘ At the distance of twenty leagues from the city of Merida southward, between the curacy called Mona y Ticul 
and the town of Nocacab, are the remains of some stone edifices ; one very large building has withstood the ravages of 
time, and still exists in good preservation: the natives give it the name of Oxmutal. It stands on an eminence of 
twenty yards in height, and measures two hundred yards on each facade. The apartments, the exterior corridor, the 
pillars with figures in medio-relievo, and decorated with serpents, lizards, &c. formed in stucco, beside which are 
statues of men with palms in their hands in the act of beating drums and dancing, resemble in every respect those 
observable in the buildings at Palenque. Hight leagues distant from the same city to the northward are the ruined 
walls of several other houses, which increase in number as you advance in an easterly direction. In the vicinity of 
the river Lagartos, at a town called Mani, which is under the actual jurisdiction of the Franciscan friars, in the 
middle of the principal square, stands a pillory of a conical shape, built of stones ; and to the southward rises a very 
ancient palace, resembling that at Palenque, which, according to tradition, was inhabited, upon the arrival of the 
Spanish conquerors, by a petty Indian sovereign called Htulrio, who resigned it to the Franciscans for a residence 
while their new convent was building, after which it was used for several years as a public hospital. The erection 
of this palace was long anterior to the time of Htulrio, who replied to the inquiries of the fathers relative to the 
period of its construction, that he was totally ignorant of its origin, and only knew that it had been inhabited 
by his ancestors. From hence we may draw some inference respecting the very remote antiquity of the Pa- 
lencian edifices, buried for so many ages in the impenetrable thickets covering a mountain, and unknown to the 
historians of the New World, by whom no mention whatsoever is made of their existence. On the road from 
Merida to Bacalar there are also many other buildings both to the north and south, according to my informant’s 
narrative, a description of which I conceive unnecessary, not only from being desirous of avoiding prolixity, but 
because the identity of the ancient inhabitants of Yucatan and Palenque is, in my opinion, evidently proved by the 

NOTES. 381 

strong analogy of their customs, buildings, and acquaintance with the arts, whereof such vestiges are discernible in 
those monuments which the current of time has not yet swept away.” 

M. Dupaix observes, that he sometimes discovered a plain cylindrical stone at no great distance from the Mexican 
temples. This stone he is inclined to think might have been destined for gladiatorial sacrifices : but from the absence 
of the groove through which the rope ran that was fastened round the waist of the combatant, (which Sahagun 
makes particular mention of in describing those sacrifices, we imagine that this stone was a Tehuehuetl, or stone 
dedicated to acts of penance. And here again the manners of the ancient Jews and the Mexicans seem to approximate ; 
for the latter did penance by ascending upon a cylindrical stone, and the former by sitting in a czrcle, as the two fol- 
lowing extracts (the one from Boturini’s Treatise, the other from A View of the Jewish Religion,) will more fully 
show. 

“ Por mas célebre refiero la Fabula del Penitente Yappan. Dicen de él los Indios, que acercandose el tiempo de 
las Transformaciones, se apartd, para captarse la benevolencia de los Dioses, de su Muger, y Parientes, y retirandose 
4 hacer vida casta, y solitaria en un lugar desierto, donde se hallaba la Piedra dedicada a los Actos Penitenciales, 
que llamaban Tehuehuetl, subio 4 ella, y did principid 4 su penitencia. Observaronle los Dioses con atencion, y 
dudosos de la firmeza de su proposito, pusieronle por Guarda 4 otro hombre enemigo suyo llamado Yaotl, que 
significa lo mismo que Enemigo, para que desde lexos le estuviesse continuamente espiando, y diesse cuenta de sus 
acciones. Mantuvose Yappan por mucho tiempo constante, y rechazd con valor a muchas Mugeres, que los mismos 
Dioses le embiaron para tentarle. Y mientras alla en los Cielos se celebraban las castas victorias del Penitente, 
Tlazolteotl, Diosa del Amor deshonesto, como desayrada, y reputada por de pocas fuerzas, empezd a hablar, 
diciendo: ‘No creais Altos, é Immortales Dioses, que Yappan tenga heroicos esfuerzos para concluir su penitencia, 
y merecer de vuestra benignidad alguna de las Transmutaciones sublimes. Baxaré Yo, y luego vereis, como es 
fragil su proposito, y fingida su continencia. Hizolo assi, y saludandole con agrado, dixo: ‘Hermano Yappan, Yo 
la Diosa Tlazoltéotl, assombrada de tu constancia, y apiadada de tus trabajos, vengo 4 consolarte;’ y viendole muy 
encumbrado, repitidle: ‘Qué camino tomaré, 6 por qual senda he de subir 4 hablarte?’ No conocid el Simplon la 
treta, y respondidla: ‘Seas muy bien venida: aguardate, que baxaré por ti, y despues la fue subiendo 4 la Piedra 
Penitencial, donde encendido de sus impudicos amores, y encubierto de las vestiduras de la Diosa, cometid torpe 
sacrilegio con ella, pensando que tendria alguna disculpa, por haver sido su yerro con una Diosa, 6 porque ella lo 
callaria 4 las demas Deidades. Indignaronse los Dioses de haver el falso Penitente profanado tan Divino lugar, é 
Yaotl, que de lexos vid el abominable sucesso, olvidado de avisarlos, y cegado de su interna enemistad, se fué en 
derechura a Yappan, dicieridole : ‘ No te averguenzas, Penitente Hypocrita, de haver faltado 4 tu proposito, y enganado 
4 los Supremos Dioses?’ y de un golpe de Macana cortole immediatamente la cabeza, en cuyo instante los Dioses 
le convirtieron en Alacran, quedando en la misma figura, que se hallaba, quando con los brazos pretendia hacer 
resistencia 4 su Enemigo, quien afadiendo mayores delitos, fue luego en demanda de la Muger del Penitente, a 
quien por la misma enemistad del Marido igualmente aborrecia. Llamabase ésta Tlahuitzin, que quiere decir, ‘La 
Encendida. Traxola al sitio de la Piedra Penitencial, diciendola: ‘Has de saber Tlahuitzin, que los Dioses me 
ordenaron estuviesse en estos contornos por espia de la penitencia, que aqui propuso cumplir tu Marido, el qual 
violando tan respetado lugar, cayé en pecado torpe, por cuya causa le corté la cabeza, que traigo conmigo: Y por 
si acaso le diste tu motivo, para que te dexasse, y tomasse por medio su fingido, y mal logrado retiro, he de hacer 
contigo, lo que hice con tu Marido,’ y al punto le cortd tambien la cabeza, y fue de la misma suerte, por los 
disgustos, que did al Marido, transformada en Alacran encendido, y abalanzandose 4 lo baxo de la Piedra Penitencial, 
hallo 4 Yappan en su misma figura. Por esto dicen los Indios, que los Alacranes encendidos nacieron de Tlahultzin, 
y los cenicientos, y obscuros de Yappan, y que ambos se esconden baxo de las piedras por la verguenza, que tuvieron 
de su pecado, no atreviendose 4 parecer en publico, y huyendo siempre de la luz. Que es lo mismo, que sucedid 
4 Nyctiméne convertida en Lechuza, por haver fraudulentamente contaminado con nefario incesto el Talamo del 
Rey su padre.” 

“ For conclusion of this chapter, i cannot but relate in what doing the most learned Rabbins think they observe 
a most religious and holy fast. We read in Medrasch Debharim Rabba to this purpose; ‘So soon as Moses saw 
that the decree of death was signed against him, he enjoyned himself a fast, and having made a cake (or a circle as 
the exorcists and necromancers use to do, or a round pit for so the glosser expounds it) he put on sackcloth, poured 
ashes upon his head, and placed himself in the midst of his cake (or circle), fasted and prayed incessantly, resolving 

(5) 

382 NOTES. 

not to move thence till God had altered his decree, which presently was done. Doubtlesse this pleasant storie had 
its original from that nursery of Jewish fables their Talmud, where in the treatise of Fasting we read, That a 
certain holy Jew, whose name was Chone Hammaagal Carter, did the same when he would obtain any thing of 
consequence, or necessary; as when it had not rained all February and the corn did want rain, he seated ‘himself in 
the midst of such a cake (or circle) and said, “ Lord of the world, thy sons look upon me as one dear unto thee as a 
son is to his father. I swear by thy holy name I will not depart hence till thou hast had compassion on aye sons.” 
He had scarce ended, they affirm, when it began to rain. : 

“ You will wonder more (if any absurdity is 10 be wondered at in the writings of the Jews) that the prophet 
Habakuk is said to have done the same: Hab. 2. 1. It is written, ‘I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon my 
tower, and I will watch to see what he will answer me: that is, Here I stand m my cake (or circle), and expect 
whilest thou answerest me why the wicked are so long lived, as Rabbi D. Kimchi out of the Rabbins writes on this 
place. So miserably blinded are the Jews and given over to a reprobate’ sense, that they are not ashamed to speak 
thus grosly, brutishly, and stupidly of the word of God, and interpret the Scripture out of their own mad fancies.” 

We cannot refrain from observing, in reference to the fable of Yappan, (under which proper name that of Job may 
perhaps be disguised;) that it has a tincture of Jewish superstition: for although the Jews were left completely in 
the dark by Joses in every thing relating to the doctrines of heaven, hell, the devil, a future state of rewards and 
punishments, and the immortality of the soul, which furnished the chief grounds of the disputes between the Pha- 
risees and the Sadducees ; they still believed in an evil spirit who accused them before God, when watching their 
actions he became aware of their having sinned, whom they named Satan, or the adversary: and this doctrine they 
collected from the Book of Job. We may add, in reference to the second quotation, that the Mexicans, like the 
Jews, were accustomed to do penance by sitting on the ground, in which posture their priests are often represented 
in the Mexican paintings. The object of this penance frequently was to obtain rai ; and they might have imitated 
either Quecalcoatl, who procured rain by fasting, or the prophet Jeremiah, who declares in the third verse of the 
third chapter of his Prophecies, that the wickedness of the Jews was the cause of showers having been withholden ; 
and in his prayer for the people to God, in the fourteenth chapter of the same Book, he expresses himself in lan- 
guage very analogous to that which we find in the eighth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New 
Spain was used by the Mexican priests in their prayer to Tlaloc for rain. The Mexicans attached great importance 
to the sacred vestments worn by their priests, which were carefully preserved in their temples; and in this they 
resembled the Jews. In the twenty-fourth verse of the eighteenth chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, the following 
virtues are ascribed to the pontifical costume of Aaron: “ For in the long garment was the whole world, and in the 
four rows of the ‘stones was the glory of the fathers graven, and thy majesty upon the diadem of his head.” They 
were fond of wearing dresses of scarlet and of showy colours, as were also the Jews. The exclamation of the prophet, 
“‘ Who is this that cometh from Bozrah?” and many other passages of the Old Testament might be cited to show that 
the Jews entertained a great predilection for scarlet: and a coat of many colours was given as a mark of peculiar 
kindness by the patriarch Jacob to his favourite son Joseph, as we learn from the following verse of the thirty-seventh 
chapter of Genesis : “ Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age: 
and he made him a coat of many colours.” ‘The Mexicans not only excelled in the fabrication of cloth and hangings, 
but delighted likewise in introducing monstrous and uncouth figures into the labours of their loom ;'a taste that in 
former days prevailed amongst the Jews, who being forbidden by their law to imitate things that existed in EUG, 
had no choice left but to imagine monsters. To this Jewish custom, Claudian alludes in the following verses : 

“ Jam frugibus aptum 
Bquor, et assuetum sylvis delphina videbo ; 
Jam cocleis homines junctos, et quidquid inane 
Nutrit Judaicis que pingitur India velis.” 

It may be proper to remark that some critics, unwilling to allow the Jews the fame which Claudian ascribes to 
them, have, witha total disregard to prosody, wished to substitute the word A/talicis for Judaicis. A cross somewhat 
resembling the Greek letter ¢aw occurs not unfrequently in the Mexican paintings. And it deserves to be noticed, that 
in the kingdom of Naples the Jews in former ages were compelled to wear a badge of that description, as Bayle and 
other authors assert. The representations of ravenous beasts tearing and eagles devouring are so often found in 

NOTES. 383 

the same paintings, that it might almost induce one to suppose that there was an intended allusion to the third verse 
of the fifteenth chapter of the Prophecies of Jeremiah: “ And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the Lord: 
the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and 
destroy.” 

The last argument which we shall adduce to prove that the Jews in early ages colonized America, is the prophetical 
denunciations of the Old Testament, that they should be removed into a// the kingdoms of the earth ;—which required 
for their literal fulfilment (since what dependence can be placed on prophecies that are not to be literally fulfilled ?) 
that the Jews should be removed to Peru and Mexico ; and could never have contemplated that an entire hemisphere 
would remain until the sixteenth century after the Christian era untrodden by the chosen people of God. Nor will 
it avail those who wish, by giving less latitude to the words of Moses, to contend that his prediction has been fully 
accomplished,—to insinuate that he was perhaps ignorant of the existence of America, and therefore did not mean to 
prophesy that the Jews would be scattered over that continent: since this would be arguing absurdly, that human 
knowledge prescribes limits to Divine inspiration. Since the prophecy relating to the dispersion of the Jews, and 
its alledged fu? accomplishment, has always been used as a lever to lift and support an enormous weight,—the 
acknowledgement that we should not have recurred to it here but for the sake of one class of persons, who will 
prefer this to every other kind of proof, and that we do not now address this argument to any others, may appear 
somewhat gratuitous. But we hope that by doing so, those that may henceforward find it disagreeable to admit that 
the Jews had in early ages colonized America, will find it impossible to recede; and that an accumulation of evidence 
will compel them to confess that the old law has been revived in that continent, and that the sceptre has been 
restored to Judah. The reasons that induce us not to consider this last argument of a general kind, are the 
following : First, the Mosaic records are not admitted by all persons to be inspired: and arguments drawn from their 
inspiration to prove that America was colonized by the Jews, would evidently be thrown away upon those who did 
not believe in them. Secondly, The Jews themselves may feel in doubt,—understanding in a limited signification, as 
Christians have done, the words of Moses, “shall be removed into allthe kingdoms of the earth;” and not con- 
sidering their dispersion to be a judgment inflicted upon them on account of the crucifixion of Christ, (to which 
Moses makes not the slightest allusion,) but a punishment on account of their disobedience to his law, which he 
threatened them would actually happen,—whether the accomplishment of all the prophecies relating to their dispersion 
might not have occurred at the time of the Babylonian captivity ; for the second temple wanting prophecy as well as 
Urim and Thummim, of course there could have been no prophecies of more dispersions after the return from 
that captivity: and the predictions uttered during the seventy years might have referred to the probable future lot 
of the Jews dispersed in Egypt and elsewhere. The Jews may therefore ascribe their dispersion after the subjugation 
of their state by the Romans until the present time, first to political and afterwards to religious causes, and not 
consider the argument drawn from Prophecy as affording conclusive evidence that they had in remote ages colonized 
America. Amongst the following denunciations pronounced by Moses against the Jews, will be found that, relative 
to their future dispersion, which is contained in the twenty-fifth verse of the twenty-eighth chapter of Deuteronomy: 
“ But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his 
commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day ; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and 
overtake thee : Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field. Cursed shall be thy basket 
and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the 
flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out. 
The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, 
until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly ; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast 
forsaken me. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land, 
whither thou goest to possess it. The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an 
inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall 
pursue thee until thou perish. And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under 
thee shall be iron. The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it-come down 
upon thee, until thou be destroyed. The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go 
out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the 

earth.” 

384 NOTES. 

If the prophecy of Moses related to the dispersion of the Jews after the Christian era, how very remarkable must it 
appear that he should denounce vengeance against them in case they should disobey those laws which Christ him- 
self came into the world to repeal, and that the Apostles should have attempted to make proselytes of the Jews! It 
may therefore be inferred that neither Moses, nor the other prophets who followed him, contemplated any other 
dispersion than that caused by the Babylonian captivity. It would even seem, from the following passage of the 
twenty-fourth chapter of Jeremiah, that if the prophecy of Moses was not fully accomplished at the period of the 
Babylonian captivity, as far as it related to Zedekiah, the princes of the tribe of Judah, the residue of the Jews that 
were unwilling to quit Babylon, and their brethren who had fled into Egypt to escape from the Chaldean yoke ; it 
was with respect to those who returned to their country and rebuilt Jerusalem. But it was the descendants of the 
latter who crucified Christ, whose dispersion is imputed to that cause, and appealed to as a standing miracle at the 
present day. “ Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; Like 
these good figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this 
place into the land of the Chaldeans for their good. For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring 
them again to this land: and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up. 
And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: 
for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. And as the evil figs, which cannot he eaten, they are so evil; 
surely thus saith the Lord, So will I give Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, 
that remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt: and I will deliver zhem to be removed into all the 
kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I 
shall drive them.” 

It may truly be observed, that what is named an appeal to a standing miracle, whether it proceed from the mouth of 
Christian, Jew, or Mahometan, is generally an argument addressed by the unlearned to the completely ignorant, who 
judge by their senses of the truth of that respecting which their reason cannot assist them in forming any conclusion ; 
and who have not leisure to reflect, or means to know, whether the effects which surprise them may not have been 
brought about by a train of physical and moral causes. There was atime when the colour of the skin of the negro 
was reckoned a standing miracle; the Jews consider the preservation of their Talmud a miracle of that description ; 
and Protestants, and all other seceders from the Church of Rome, declare that the locality of the Holy See upon 
seven hills is a standing miracle, and the fulfilment of prophecy; even the temple of Jerusalem in ruins, has been 
maintained by some learned writers to be astanding miracle. The dispersion of the Jews may either be a miracle or 
may not, since it might have been brought about by the operation of political and religious causes combined. ‘The 
geographical situation of Judea, placed exactly in an angle between Europe, Asia, and Africa, and in the vicinity of 
the sea, favoured a political dispersion after their city and territory had been reduced under the Roman yoke. This 
dispersion, in the first instance compulsory, might afterwards have assumed a voluntary character, when the love of 
gain, for which the Jews have in all ages been distinguished, had taught them the advantages of spreading themselves 
through the various cities of the Roman empire, which comprehended in its vast extent all civilised Africa, Asia 
to the Euphrates, and Europe as far north as Britain, and west as the Ocean. They were then a dispersed 
people, before they felt the rage of Christian persecution, from political causes only: but other causes soon combined 
to disperse them still more, and to entail dispersion and reproach upon their posterity. The Church declared that 
the dispersion of the Jews was a proof of the truth of Christianity, that they were an accursed race, who had cruci- 
fied the Saviour of mankind; and pointing to the prophetical books of the Old Testament, which denounced such a 
judgment against them, called upon the laity to cooperate with prophecy to vex and harass the Jews; who from that 
moment became like the unconscious pieces on a chess-board,—instruments that were moved about by the hands of 
those who played a deep game; whilst the various Christian states, aiding the ecclesiastical with the secular arm, 
permitted and encouraged their several corporations to pass laws and regulations, the object of which was to scatter 
and disperse the Jews, and never to permit them to remain beyond a certain time within the same city or town. 

We have here shown by what natural causes the present dispersed state of the Jews may have been effected. But 
those who prefer miraculous agency to plain and simple probabilities, will, we fear, cut short our reasoning upon the 
subject, in the usual manner, by putting a question with a conditional promise annexed,—that if we can point out to 
them another nation on the globe that has remained for ages a dispersed and separate people like the Jews, they will 
admit that their dispersion is not miraculous. To which we must reply, by promising to do so after they have in- 

NOTES. 385 

formed us of some other nation, who, like the Jews, have been accused by a number of powerful states and empires 
contiguous to their own, of having crucified their God, who—believing that that God had ages before denounced 
his bitterest vengeance against the entire nation of those whom he foresaw would become his murderers, and had 
sentenced them to be dispersed,—resolved to cooperate with prophecy and to carry into execution the will of God, 
External political causes, over which the Jews could exercise no controul, combined in the first instance to make them 
a dispersed people; but religious causes, to which they themselves lent willing aid, contributed, after they became 
dispersed, to keep them a separate people, however identified by local habitation with the subjects and citizens 
of other states. Amongst these may be enumerated the following: The rite of circumcision, and the ridicule 
attached to it immediately after it ceased by the abolition of the old law to be a religious symbol in the opinion of 
Christians: The feast of the passover, and the ceremonies attendant upon it, as described in the twelfth chapter of 
Exodus, which necessarily congregate the Jews together once a year in the cities of the several states in which they 
may reside, and form a kind of national, as well as religious, bond between them: Their strict observance of their 
oral laws respecting marriages, which at the same time that they serve to remedy the evil which their dispersed state 
would seem to entail upon them, viz. diminution of population, strictly forbid them to intermarry with persons ofa 
different faith: The entire spirit of the Mosaic law, which was framed for the express purpose of making and keeping 
the Jews a distinct people; and finally, The crime of which they are accused, of having crucified the Saviour of 
mankind. If due regard be paid to all these natural causes, which in former ages, when Christendom groaned 
itself under despotism and was enveloped in ignorance, operated powerfully on the condition of the Jews, and which 
still continue to affect them in a mitigated degree,—the unreasonableness of the demand of those who are 
determined not to imitate the incredulity of Saint Thomas, and who require that another nation precisely cir- 
cumstanced as the Jews should be pointed out to them before they will cease to believe that their dispersion is a 
miracle, must be apparent to all. 

The time has perhaps arrived when authentic monuments, affording matter upon which to found reasonable dis- 
cussion, will enable men of information to decide upon the certainty or the probability of the Jews having in early 
ages colonized America. The notion prevailed—the conviction was probably felt in Europe at the beginning of the 
sixteenth century, that this was the case: but those who entertained these sentiments, although furnished with the 
necessary proofs, might have been compelled to keep the secret locked up in their breasts, lest they should have 
cast a scandal upon a received religious notion, that the dispersion of the Jews was the fulfilment of Prophecy : since 
how, if it could have been shown that the riches of Peru, or the throne of Mexico, or political ascendancy in any 
part of the New World, had become the lot of the dispersed Jews, would the prophecy seem to be accomplished 
respecting them, where it says that they should borrow and not lend, and that they should ‘be the ¢ai/ and not the 
head? We cannot refrain from inserting in this place a passage from the 424th page of the fifth volume of the 
present work, because the expression outcasts (desechados), as applied by the Mexicans to themselves, is there so 
singularly introduced, and savours so strongly of the tone of complaint in which the Jews, wherever residing and 
however well off in their temporal concerns, have heen accustomed to indulge ever since the fall of their empire. 
“ Nota, hijo, esta palabra, que lo que te tengo dicho te sea espina y aire frio que te aflija, paraque te haga humillar 
y volver en ti. Mira, hijo, que has nacido en tiempo de trabajos y aflicciones, y te ha enviado Dios al mundo en 
tiempo de gran pobreza; mira, que yo soy tu padre; mira, que vida pasamos yo y tu madre, que no somos tenidos 
en nada, ni hay memoria de nosotros; aunque nuestros antepasados fueron grandes y poderosos dejarronnos aquella 
potencia y grandeza? No, por cierto; mira 4 tus parientes y 4 tus afines, que no tienen ser ninguno en la reptiblica 
sino que viven en pobreza y como desechados ; y aunque tu seas noble y generoso de claro linage, conviene que 
tengas delante tus ojos, como has de vivir.” “ Remember the words which I now address to thee, my son; let them 
be a thorn in thy heart and a cold blast to afflict thee, that thou mayest humble thyself and betake thee to inward 
meditations. Consider, my son, that it has been thy lot to be born in a time of trouble and sorrow, and that God 
hast sent thee into the world at a period of extreme poverty. Behold me, who am thy father; see what a life I and 
thy mother lead, and how we are accounted as nothing, and the memory of us has passed away. Although our 
ancestors were powerful and great, have they bequeathed to us their power and greatness? No, truly; cast thine 
eyes upon thy relations and kindred, who fill no public offices, but who live in poverty and as outcasts. Wherefore, 
although thou thyself art noble and illustrious and of famous lineage, it becomes thee to have ever present before thine 
eyes how thou oughtest to live.” The Jews themselves, as it has been elsewhere observed, have entertained a strong 

(SF) 

386 : NOTES. 

belief that America has been colonized by their race, grounding that belief on what is said in certain chapters of the 
Old Testament of the People of the Isles, (to which isles a Hebrew appellation, derived from a Hebrew word sig- 
nifying the West, has been given; evidently showing that they could not have been Ceylon, or the islands of the 
Indian Archipelago,) as also on many analogies in the laws, rites; customs, and ceremonies of the Indians, but 
more especially in the following passage of the thirteenth chapter of the second apocryphal Book of Esdras: “ And 
whereas thou sawest that he gathered another peaceable multitude unto him; those are the ten tribes which were 
carried away prisoners out of their own land, in the time of Osea the king, whom Salmanasar the king of Assyria 
led away captive, and he carried them over the waters, and so came they into another land. But they took this 
counsel among themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a further country, 
where never mankind dwelt, that they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own land. And 
they entered into Euphrates by the narrow passages of the river. Wor the Most High then showed signs for them, 
and held still the flood, till they were passed over. For through that country there was a great way to go; namely, 
of a year and a half: and the same region is called Arsareth. Then dwelt they there until the latter time; and now 
when they shall begin to come, the Highest shall stay the springs of the stream again, that they may go through: 
therefore sawest thou the multitude with peace.” Assuming on the best grounds that the apocryphal Books of 
Esdras are not inspired,—since except on good grounds learned men would not have pronounced the judgment which 
they have upon them, the Church would have made greater use of their authority, and time would not have convicted 
any portion of their narrative of falsehood,—we shall not notice the reveries to which the above passage has given 
rise amongst the Rabbis; but shall,as a way of promoting the end of science, which is truth, endeavour to invalidate 
by just objections what ill deserves the name of proof of any kind. It will be at once admitted that if the Apocryphal 
Books of Esdras are not inspired they are a forgery; and that in that case it would be improper to attach more 
weight to arguments drawn from any passages contained in them, favouring the conclusion that the Jews had colo- . 
nized America, than to mere human authority. The following, then, are reasons. for believing those books not to 
be inspired. First, since it is admitted that the truth of the Christian religion, and that Christ was the real Messiah, 
the Son of God, are mainly proved by the prophecies contained in the Old Testament; and a more famous pre- 
diction relating to his advent, with the time clearly defined (which is seldom the case in Hebrew prophecies), is 
contained in the seventh chapter of the Second Book of Esdras, than can be found in any of the other prophetical 
books of the Old Testament, in which he is mentioned by name four hundred years before his birth ;—it must be 
presumed, the Church making such little use of the authority of this book, and none of the Evangelists referring to 
it, it was not considered genuine. ‘The silence of the Evangelists may be accounted for by supposing that it was 
not in existence when they wrote; and the Church’s rejecting it altogether in the beginning, and afterwards pro- 
nouncing it to be merely apocryphal, was probably because the real story of its fabrication was in the beginning 
well known, and became in after-ages forgotten. The dream of Esdras, as recorded in the eleventh chapter of the 
Second Book of Esdras, which is penned so exactly in the style of the prophet Daniel, bears evident allusion to the 
Roman empire, the triumvirate, and the twelve Cesars, as must immediately suggest itself to the mind of even a 
careless reader, on the perusal of the first verse of that chapter: “Then saw I a dream, and, behold, there came up 
from the sea an eagle, which had twelve feathered wings, and three heads.” 

The time when this book was composed may therefore easily be inferred; and the circumstances of the forgery 
coming to the knowledge of the philosopher Porphyry, might have induced him to form the opinion which he did 
of the Book of the prophet Daniel. The following is the prophecy of Esdras relating to the advent of the Messiah : 
“ Behold, the time shall come, that these tokens which I have told thee shall come to pass, and the bride shall appear, 
and she coming forth, shall be seen, that now is withdrawn from the earth. And whosoever is delivered from the 
aforesaid evils, shall see my wonders. For my son Jesus shall be revealed with those that be with him, and they that 
remain shall rejoice within four hundred years. After these years shall my son Christ die, and all men that have life. 
And the world shall be turned into the old silence seven days, like as in the former judgments: so that no man shall 
remain.” Secondly, because time has convicted Esdras of falsehood, when speaking of the age of the world and the 
time which it had still to last, he definitely says in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth verses of the fourteenth chapter 

- of his Second Book: “ For the world hath lost his youth, and the times begin to wax old. For the world is divided 
into twelve parts, and the ¢en parts of it are gone already, and half of a tenth part: and there remaineth that which 
is after the half of the tenth part.” But how, according to Scripture chronology,—the age in which Esdras lived being 

NOTES. 387 

considered, and the time which has since elapsed,—can the declaration contained in the chapter referred to be consi- 
dered otherwise than as manifestly false? At the same time we cannot omit to notice here an analogous usage 
of the Jews and the Mexicans,—that of dividing time into a certain number of ages; nor refrain from observing that 
the expression of Esdras dike as in the former judgments affords an indication that he at least, and perhaps many 
other Jews in his age, believed, like the Mexicans, that the world had been several times destroyed. Thirdly, 
because if the apocryphal Books of Esdras are to be considered as inspired, the other books of the Apocrypha 
which possess equal claim to inspiration must be considered inspired likewise : but some of these History convicts 
of falsehood, and others are replete with absurdities: for example, the united testimony of all profane historians 
contradicts the account given in the first chapter of the First Book of Maccabees, of Alexander the Great dividing 
during his life-time his kingdom; and nothing can be more absurd than the eighth chapter of the Book of Tobit. 
We trust that the reasons which have been adduced for rejecting as inspired the testimony of Esdras, will induce 
those who may in future discuss so obscure a question in history as the time when, and the passage by which, 
the Jews migrated to America, not to refer to that author in proof of their marvellous journey by dry land through 
the midst of the Euphrates; since it is evidently borrowed from the Mosaic history of the division of the waters of 
the Red Sea, at which it may be observed Esdras elsewhere glances, when he says that God spoke to him out ofa 
bush, as ages before he had done to Moses. We have already alluded to several causes which conspired to spread 
the veil of oblivion over the history of the New World; to which may be added, that the attention of the learned in 
Europe, at the latter end of the fifteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth century, was diverted from dwelling long 
upon any one event, by the magnitude of others, which had either recently happened or which were continually 
occurring around them, such as were the magic effects of the art of printing, and the rescuing from oblivion many 
of the long-lost works of antiquity; the progress of the Reformation, the destruction of the Greek empire, and the 
gigantic and sudden growth of the Ottoman power in Europe; as also the Portuguese discoveries in the Kast. 
Europe in fact knew and cared very little in the sixteenth century about the proceedings of the Spanish . Inquisition 
and the clergy in America. Since, however, nothing will now tend so much as free discussion to throw light upon 
a most mysterious page of history, we shall conclude these remarks by citing,—in anticipation to the objections 
of those who may choose to contend that Jewish antiquities will be profaned by coming in contact with Mexican,— 
a passage from Aristotle’s Treatise on Rhetoric, that contains an argument which furnishes a complete refutation 
to all the reasoning of those who in the present day assert (protesting by so doing against the very principle of 
the Reformation) that it is for the interest of Religion, that the truths which she teaches, and the ordinances of 
Leviticus and Deuteronomy, should be part and parcel of the law of England; which is in other words to deny the 
truth of that approved motto of antiquity, “Magna est veritas et prevalebit ;” to maintain that error is in its nature 
superior to truth, darkness to light, and evil to good; and to attempt to compel the people to acknowledge by 
means of excessive fines and arbitrary imprisonment, that the Jews were the chosen people of God. The Brahmin 
who pronounced Pope’s Universal Prayer to be deserving of being inscribed in golden letters upon a tablet in the 
temple of Vishnou, would probably have judged this sentence of the Stagirite worthy to have been uttered by 
the lips of Brahma, to whom hypocrites were odious, since hypocrisy is here met on its own ground of argument, 
and left altogether without a reply : © Aiew radnOn Kar ra Bedrw ry voc evovlAoyiororepa Kar mOavwrepa, OG aTAws 
etme, (ciot Twy évaytwy.)”—~ That which is true, and by its own nature Jetter, can always, simply speaking, be more 
easily reduced to argumentative form, and is more persuasive than that with which it is at issue.” It must be 
confessed that the wisest of philosophers pays here only a just homage to truth; since the doctrine that it should be 
believed but not contradicted at once destroys its great test, which is the willing assent of mankind. 

SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS. 

Four and eight were very favourite numbers among the Mexicans. They fasted every fourth year eight days, in 
memory of the destructions of the world, and every eighth year four days in recollection of the fall of man. But 
besides the invention of fasts and feasts as a method of keeping alive religious reminiscences (in which they strongly 
resembled the Jews), they devised other means. And if we may believe Boturini, the Tultecas actually built towers 

388 NOTES. 

in memory of the tower of Babel,—perhaps he might have said of the temple of Jerusalem. It would also appear 
from a drawing in the collection of M. Dupaix, representing a curious coin obtained by him in the city of Ciudad 
Real, that they recorded in medals the temptation of Eve and the loss of Paradise. Boturini, in the 113th page of 
his Idea of a New General History of North America, says, “The Indians likewise celebrated their said origin in 
ancient songs, and retained such perfect recollection of the Tower of Babel, that they sought to imitate it in various 
monstrous edifices of the New World.” “Celebraron assimismo los Indios su dicho origen en antiguos cantares, y 
tuvieron tan viva la memoria de la Torre de Babel, que la quisieron imitar en America con varios monstruosos 
edificios.” 

Never was there a nation that attached the importance which the Jews did to types and memorials. In their 
persons, on their clothes, in their eating and drinking, in what would be considered the most indifferent actions 
of life, the past and the future were ever present before their eyes. Circumcision reminded them of their 
covenant with God, which nevertheless they were continually breaking; their fringes and the phylacteries which 
they wore on their foreheads, of the obligation imposed upon them to keep his laws; their not eating the sinew 
of the thigh of a sheep or of any other animal, of Jacob’s wrestling and prevailing with God, when the sinew of 
his thigh shrank. Hence it is not too much to suppose, without going so far back as to the era of the tower of 
Babel, that the Jews did on their arrival in America, and on their acquiring wealth and power in that continent, 
determine to commemorate their ancient temple, by building there other temples of great magnificence in imitation 
of it; such as were the temple of Pachacama, (or of the Creator,) situated at the distance of four miles from the city 
of Lima; and the greater temple of Mexico. The foundation stones of the former of these temples are said by some 
Spanish writers to have been soldered together with gold and silver, and the interior was plated with gold; as was also 
the still more famous temple in Cusco, which was likewise dedicated to Pachacama, who, as the priests pretended, deli- 
vered oracular answers to those who came to inquire of him. The Tultecas, who were great artists, and who excelled in 
working in jewellery, an art, the name of which both in French and English is derived from the proper name Jew, 
probably recollected that exclamation of David in the Psalms: “ If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, may my right hand 
forget her cinning.” But David alludes more particularly to the temple: and it is a fact notorious to all, that 
wherever Jews exist, the recollection of their temple and of its destruction is preserved amongst them; and the 
coming of the Messiah, their own restoration, the New Jerusalem, and the rebuilding of the temple, continually occupy 
their thoughts. Do such feelings, we may inquire, proceed from religion or from patriotism? From the latter we 
should be inclined to imagine, kept up and cherished by the Rabbis; for what Christians believe religiously, the 
Jews believe patriotically. 

The retrospect, however, of the city and the holy hill, which their ancestors seem to have founded in the New 
World, and called Churula after Jerusalem, and Tlachihualtepetl (or the Hill of Sacrifice) after Mount Sion, will not be 
so agreeable to the Jews of the present age as the prospect of the ‘sceptre returning to Israel.’ Many customs of the 
Mexicans, strongly savouring of Judaism, besides that of circumcision, have already been noticed: such as their wearing 
fringes fastened to their garments; practising frequent ablutions ; attending constantly public places of worship, to 
which they were summoned by the blowing of horns, as the Jews are to the synagogues; anointing themselves with 
oils; addressing each other with the appellation of Brother * and Sister; their priests allowing their hair to'grow long 

* Sahagun, in the first section of the twenty-ninth chapter of the tenth book of his History of New Spain describing the manners of the 
ancient Tultecas, says that they were accustomed to address each other by the appellation of Brother and Sister: “ Estos dichos Tultecas 
eran buenos hombres y allegados a la virtud, porque no decian mentiras, y su manera de hablar y saludarse unos & otros era, Seftor, y Sefior ; 
hermano mayor, y Sefior hermano menor, y su habla en lugar de juramento era, es verdad, es asi, asi és, est averiguado, y si por si, y no 
por no.” “ The said Tultecas were good men, who studied virtue in their actions, for they never uttered a falsehood ; and their style of 
address and salutation was Sir, or Sir my elder brother, or Sir my younger brother. In speaking they never made use of an oath, but said 
verily, or so it is, or it is so, or it is true, or yea, yea, nay, nay.” There is something evangelical in the style of salutation and affirmation 
which Sahagun in the above passage ascribes to the Tultecas; and since that author says in the fourteenth section of the same chapter of 
the ancestors of the Mexicans, that they believed life to be a dream or sleep, from which the dead awoke. If that notion had been bor- 
rowed from the Jews or the primitive Christians, how admirably it would illustrate the following passage of the ninth chapter of the 
Gospel of Saint Matthew: “ And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, he said 
unto them, Give place: for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.” 

NOTES. 389 

like Nazarites, though some were tonsured *; their frequently doing penance, strewing dust on their heads, and 
blackening themselves with ashes as a sign of mortification, and eating earth + at the festival of Tetzcatlipoca ¥. 
But something remains to be said of the external religious marks or signs which both the Jews and the Mexicans 
wore on their faces and bodies. In the thirteenth chapter of Exodus, the following ordinance occurs: “ And it shall 
be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the Lord’s law may be in thy 
mouth.” As among the Jews the head, as being the nobler part of the body and the seat of reason, was adjudged 
the place most worthy of receiving the memorials of the law,—so among the Mexicans the nose and ears, parts 
corresponding to the eyes and temples of the Jews, were the places destined to receive their religious badges or 
memorials. It is impossible, on viewing the singular symbols attached to the noses of many of the figures 
represented in the Mexican paintings, not to imagine that they were religious memorials, or to refrain from 
instituting a comparison between them and those worn by the Jews, especially as they seem to contain obvious 
Hebrew allusions. The reversed temple or teocalli might have been worn by the Mexicans as a memorial of the 
destruction of the second temple; as the feasts of Purim, and of the dedication of the temple in the days of Judas 
Maccabeus, were instituted by the Jews in ages long after that of Moses,—one of them at least being a civil rather 
than a religious enactment, although religiously observed. The serpent which is sometimes substituted in the place 
of the teocalli, might have alluded to the temptation of Eve; since the fall of man and the loss of Paradise were 
events which the Spaniards found the Mexicans in the sixteenth century still bewailing. But the amphisbcena or 
double-headed serpent probably refers to the two chiefs designated by the common name of Ometeuli, and fre- 
quently represented in the Mexican paintings by the figure of two persons seated back to back, the one holding a 
serpent and the other a vod in his hand. This figure occurs in the forty-second page of the Borgian painting, and 

* The priests who were tonsured professed to follow the example of Totec, who was otherwise called Xippe, which name, according 
to Torquemada, signifies bald or tonsured. “ Este demonio Xippe, que quiere decir, Calvo 6 Ategado, era mui temido de todos, 
y por esta causa mui honrado, en especial porque tenian por‘cosa mui cierta y averiguada, de tiempos mui antiguos, que daba muchas 
enfermedades 4 los que nole honraban, y sacrificaban; y las mas ordinarias de las que le atribuian, eran viruelas, hinchagones, apostemas, 
sarna, y enfermedad de ojos.” It is recorded in the eleventh verse of the thirteenth chapter of the Acts, that Saint Paul struck the sorcerer 
Elymas blind. The proper name Xippe is variously written Xipe, Chipe, and Thipe; and Totec is sometimes added to it. 

+ The Jews considered eating earth a mark of the greatest humility and reverence, as we learn from the twenty-third verse of the forty- 
ninth chapter of Isaiah; where, speaking of the return of his own countrymen to their native land, and the homage which other nations 
would then show them, he says, ‘And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to 
thee with their face towards the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet ; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.” Looking on the ground 
and averting the eye from the face of persons greatly their superiors, as well as strewing branches on their road, were equally signs of 
reverence amongst the Jews and Mexicans. 

{ The Mexicans appear to have borrowed other customs from the Jews ; such as the complimentary ceremony of offering strangers water 
in which to wash their feet; in reference to which it is to be supposed the festival which was given by the Mexican merchants to their 
friends and kindred on their return home from trafficking in foreign parts, which is described in the nineteenth chapter of the First Book of 
Sahagun’s History of New Spain, was named Lavatorio de pies. Excommunication likewise, or putting out of the synagogue, seems to 
have been imitated by the Mexicans in a practice which is noticed by Sahagun in the following passage of the twentieth chapter of his 
Second Book: “Si alguno de los ministros del templo, y otros que llamaban Quaquavilti, y los viejos, se volvian a sus casas y no llegaban 
a donde habian de matar los nifios, tenianlos por infames ¢ indignos de ningun oficio publico, de hay adelante llamanlos Mocauhque que 
quiere decir dewados.” <“ If any of those who officiated in the service of the temple, or others who were designated Quaquavilti, or the 
old, returned home without going to the place where the children were to be sacrificed, they were accounted infamous and unworthy of 
holding any public office, and were named thenceforwards Mocauhque, which signifies put out.” Sahagun observes, in the twenty-first 
chapter of his Second Book, that some of the Mexican soldiers were instructed in the use of the left hand in battle instead of the right: and 
a passage occurs in the Old Testament in which soldiers who fought left-handed are mentioned in terms expressive of some admiration. 
It may appear diverging into another train of argument to remark, that Coatl (the signification of which is a serpent, and which was a very 
common proper name amongst the Mexicans,) corresponds in some measure to the Hebrew name Nehushtan, which, as we learn from the 
eighth verse of the twenty-third chapter of the Second Book of Kings, was that which was borne by the mother of Jehoiachin king of 
Judah. Lest we should omit (by reserving for another place) mention of a mysterious fact, we shall here observe, that it is singular 
that the Spanish Inquisition should have caused Saint Andrew’s crosses to be painted upon the dresses of Jews sentenced to be 
burnt at the solemnization of acts of faith, as Basnage asserts in the twenty-eighth section of the twenty-first chapter of the Seventh Book of 
his History of the Jews; since that symbol, as well as a cross resembling in shape the Greek letter T, which was in Naples a badge of dis- 
grace which the Jews were compelled to wear to distinguish them from the rest of the community, is not of unusual occurrence in Mexican 
paintings. And the question is curious, what gave rise to the use of these symbols amongst the Mexicans? and what made Christians select 
them as ignominious marks by. which to stigmatize judaism? since the coincidence seems extraordinary. 

(56) 

390 NOTES. 

in the twenty-first page of the Mexican painting preserved in the Library of the Vatican. Whatever may have been the 
attributes which the Mexicans assigned to these.two chiefs, their countenances are terrific like those of all their other 
deities. "That they exercised some influence over the good or bad fortune of the days of the year, and that divination 
or medicinal cures were performed by means of the signs allotted to. the different parts of their bodies, seems to be 
clearly expressed in these: paintings. It may here be proper to observe, thatthe Italian interpreter of the Codex 
Vaticanus is mistaken im attributing the signification of the Trinity, or the place of the Trinity, to: the Mexican proper 
names Ometeuli and Omeyoca ; for ome in'the Mexican language is:¢wo and not ¢hree,—yey being the term by. which 
to express the latter number: neither does tewli mean.a god: but a chief; since the Mexican names for God were 
teotl and teutl, to which tecutli or tlato, words which signify Jord or king, were sometimes added. The Mexicans, 
as Torquemada, observes, called the Spaniards tewlis: long after they had full proof that their. actions were by. no 
means divine, and when they had killed many of them. But-they never named them ¢eotl or gods; and it was the 
vanity of the Spaniards that imduced them to boast that. the Indians. believed them to be, or called. them, gods ; 
Cortes himself excepted, whom they at. first supposed to be Quecalcoatl. The three different kinds of symbols 
which the Mexicans wore .on the lower part of their faces having been noticed, and their probable allusions 
explained, it may be proper. to’ institute a closer comparison between them: and the Hebrew memorials: nor will 
it.avail the Jews to say, should they wish to disclaim consanguinity. with the Mexicans, that departure from ancient 
precedent,—either as to the place on the face on which these memorials were to be worn, or in the form itself of the 
jewel or ornament appended, or in.the substitution of an historical. for a moral allusion,—furnishes any serious 
argument against the supposition here advanced ; for departure from precedent is more justifiable than the abolition 
of a divine law. And what has become of their phylacteries, and of the memorial between their eyes? Why have 
they discontinued the observance of a statute which was ordained to be kept throughout their generations? It 
would really appear that the Jews, whenever occasion requires or a difficulty occurs, understand the words always, 
for ever, and throughout their generations, in a contrary sense to that which they usually bear: but they ought to 
know that if they interpret Scripture thus, it is the same thing as divesting language of the property of truth or 
falsehood ;, and that this latitude of interpretation renders the task of convicting any of their doctrines of incon- 
sistency absolutely impossible. °. : ae . i 

It may very reasonably be doubted whether the Jews of the present day know exactly the nature of the memorial 
which their ancestors wore between their eyes: Some believe it to have been a jewel which was fastened on the top 
of the nose between the eyes. If this opinion be correct, the change of place from the upper to the lower part of 
the nose would be no great deviation from ancient usage or the letter, of the law; since the memorial would still be 
between their eyes, and the greater convenience of fastening it might in the first instance have caused the transition. 
But if it be objected, that it was customary with the Jews to wear a jewel, but that the Mexican symbols were an 
ornament of a different kind, it must be recollected that the expression ‘jewels of gold and jewels of silver’ occurs 
in Scripture without any reference to precious stones; and that the reversed temple worn by the Mexicans was a 
plate of gold or of silver, and consequently a jewel of one of those metals. Coatl, likewise, the primitive mean- 
ing of which in the Mexican language is a serpent, and the secondary signification @ twin, is said by some writers 
to mean a gem also; in the same way as the Latin word gemma is derived from gemellus, the same analogies 
suggesting the use of this metaphor in both languages ; for we associate with a gem the idea of harmony and exact 
correspondence with something else of the same kind. . If, therefore, coaéd signified in the Mexican language both 
a serpent and a gem, and the Mexicans considered it a religious duty to wear a coatl as.a memorial, they might have 
worn indifferently either a plate of gold or a serpent. Other nations have also worn ornaments on the head as 
memorials. Unlike as the Greeks were in every respect to the Jews, whose wisdom appeared even foolishness in 
their eyes, still Thucydides records that the Athenians wore golden grasshoppers in their hair as a memorial of 
their origin, that they were not descended from foreign tribes, but sprung from the earth which they then inhabited. 
This, however, was a civil and not a religious. institution. If memorials. were in use in Greece, they consisted 
of solemn games, instituted in commemoration of departed heroes, whose souls they imagined were enjoying 
happiness in the Elysian Fields, or translated to the society of the immortal gods. A greater calumny has never 
been uttered against the most famous men of antiquity, than that of denying that they believed in the immortality 
of the soul, or in a future state of rewards and punishments. And since the Jews have been very forward in making 
this accusation, we may be permitted to ask them, what gave rise to the bitter hatred which existed between their 

NOTES. 391 

two most famous sects, of Pharisees and Sadducees; and. how, since both appealed to the written word of God 
and to the law.of Moses, could they have interpreted the Scriptures in such a manner as to elicit contrary doctrines 
from them on such a great question as that of the resurrection? If it be true, (and it is a remarkable truth,) that the 
Mosaic code of laws, voluminous as it is, and delivered as it was from Mount Sinai, contains no allusions to a future 
state of rewards and punishments or to an after life, but only promises temporal rewards to virtue; such as long 
life, riches, abundant seasons and rain, victory over the enemy, freedom from pestilence, famine, and invasion ; 
denouncing corresponding evils against the wicked, as may be seen in the twenty-sixth chapter of Leviticus, and in 
almost every chapter of the Pentateuch; the Sadducees might perhaps have opposed the silence of Moses and of 
God in the Pentateuch, to what they considered the inferior authority of the Book of Job, supposing that if such 
important doctrines as those of a future life and of a state of rewards and punishments after death had been taught 
from the chair of Moses, to which all bowed, they would have been repeated over and over again distinctly in the 
Pentateuch, as was the case with other inferior points of the law, and would not have been obscurely alluded to in 
such vague terms as that of ‘showing mercy unto thousands.’ Being Jews likewise, and believing that the covenant 
which they made with God was to be an everlasting covenant, they expected no new dispensation ; and the essence 
ofa covenant being the conditions of which it consists, those conditions being changed, the covenant does not 
remain the same: and hence they might have supposed that the insertion. of any new articles in that which God 
had made with their fathers, would be falsifying the oath which he.sware unto Abraham and unto Isaac and unto 
Jacob, which: did not contemplate the abolition of the old law, and was totally silent on the subject of the immor- 
tality of the soul and a future state of rewards and punishments. And since it is said of Moses, in the last chapter 
of Deuteronomy, “And there arose-not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to 
face,” they might have been unwilling to receive from later and inferior prophets, doctrines which had not been 
revealed to him, and therefore have rejected those vital articles which Moses knew that the Kgyptians held most 
sacred. That the ancients fully believed in the immortality of the soul, and in a divine retribution in another world 
for good or evil actions. performed in this, is attested by the surviving works of their greatest philosophers and 
poets. - Aristotle’s hymn, beginning with the words “’Apern woduvpoyOa yever Bporew,” would alone be sufficient to 
vindicate Philosophy from the unfounded charge of atheism; and the odes of Pindar perpetually inculcate the same 
salutary doctrines. Five hundred years before the Christian era, the Greeks assembled at the Olympic games 
listened with rapture to the following verses of the Theban bard, in which he describes the rewards and punishments 
ofa future state. “Ei de pu éyer ru, oidev ro peAAoy, ore Davovrwv pev evOad avtix’ aadapvor Ppeves Towae éricay; va 8 ev 
rade Arog apXe adurpa kara ‘yac SucaZer Tw, ex Opa Aoyor Ppacas avayKa. ioovde vuKrecow aie, ica & ev apepatc aAvov exyovrec, 
aTroveorepov éoOAou VEMOVT AL Biorov ; ov x0ova TAPAGOOVTEG aAKka KEPwY, ovde TOV TLOV vowp Kelvay Tapa Suauray 5 adXa mapa peev 
TUALOLG Bewy ovrwes éyatpov evoptate, adakpuv VEHOVTAL alwva 3 TOL o ampocoparov OKXEovTL TOVOY 5 Ocou Oe éroApacay éc TPL, 
éxarepwOt PELVAVTEG, amo TaUTav’ aoucwy éyew duyay, éretday Atoc odov Tapa Kpovov TUPOL, evOa flakapwy vaooyv @KEAVIOES avpat 
mepimveovow, avOeua Se ypvoov preyct, ra juev yepooev aw ayAawy SevSpewy, Vdwp 8 adda epBet, oppoicr rw Xepac avamAckovre 
kat oreavors, Bovrats év op0arg PadaparOvoc, ov matnp éyer Kpovog éromov avtw mapedpor, Toots o Tavtwv ‘Peac vrepraroy 
eyousac Opovoy ; TInAeve ve Ka Kado ev rorow aXeyovrat, “AyidXea T eve éret Znvoc nTop Auraig erence parnp.” 

'To return to the consideration of the memorials in use among the Jews.—That which was placed between their 
eyes was not the only one which they wore on their faces. They fastened phylacteries likewise to their temples, 
which were pieces of paper containing written portions of the law. Memorials of this kind the Mexicans, who were 
not acquainted with the art of writing, could not have worn; but the Zemes, or charms, which Peter Martyr says that 
the Indians of Haiti, or the island of Saint Domingo, bound on their foreheads when they went to war, seem to have 
been a remnant of Jewish superstition: nor, when we recollect that the Jews laid the foundation of their cabalistic 
art in Scripture, and used the letters of the divine name, or the tetragram, in their magical incantations, need we feel 
at all surprised that the Hebrew phylacteries should have degenerated into Zemes? Some persons may feel inclined 
to suppose that the Mexicans substituted for those phylacteries pieces of cloth or cotton, which they inserted in their 
ears ; since the former ceasing to contain portions of Scripture, and their use and intention having been probably 
long forgotten, they could have only been looked upon as religious ornaments, which it might have been found more 
convenient to wear in the ears than to fasten to the hair above the temples :—boring the ears for the reception. of 
these ornaments was a religious ceremony amongst the Mexicans and the Peruvians, which Acosta and Torquemada 
both record. The former of these writers, in the twenty-eighth chapter of the Fifth Book of his Natural History of 

392 Ne Ome Ers: 

the Indies, says of the Peruvians: “Hoc mense (Ayamara), qui nobis November est, pro pueris istis quibus postero 
mense aures pertundende erant, necessaria omnia parabantur, et seniores lustrabantur.” “In this month (Ayamara), 
which is November with us, every thing necessary was prepared for those boys whose ears were to be bored in the 
following month, and the elders purified themselves, and other similar preparations were made.” And Torquemada, in 
the thirtieth chapter of the Tenth Book of the Indian Monarchy, describes the Mexican ceremony which took place 
on the last festival of their year, which was named that of Xiuhtecutli*; “ Este mismo dia luego en riyendo el alva, 
comencaban 4 agugerar las orejas 4 los nifios, y los becos de la boca, y hechavanles en las cabecas un casco de plumas 
de papagaio pegado con ocogotl, que es resina de pino, dando 4 todos los nifios y niflas sus padrinos y madrinas, 
para que los instruiesen y ensefiasen en las ceremonias y servicio de este y de todos los otros dioeses.” “ On this same 
day when morning dawned, they began to pierce the ears and the lips of the boys, and to put upon their heads 
a plume of parrots’ feathers glued together with ococotl, which is resin of the pine, giving to all the boys and girls 
their own godfathers and godmothers, in order that they might teach and instruct them in the ceremonies and services 
of this and of all the other gods.” 

This accordance in the practice of an arbitrary rite in the case of two nations, so remote from each other and so 
different as were the Mexicans and the Peruvians, might lead us to expect a correspondence in some of their other 
rites and ceremonies: and since Boturini informs us that he discovered one of those knotted cords called by the 
Peruvians Quipus, and by the Mexicans Nepohualtzitzin, in the possession of a principal Indian of the province 
of Tlaxcallan (although he adds, “ Estaba tan carcomido de Ja antiguedad, que solo me pudo instruir de que los huvo, 
aunque escasos.” (“It was so consumed by age, that it only served to convince me that they had been used, 
although sparingly”),—it would appear equally probable that paintings resembling those of the Mexicans, had 
formerly existed in Peru, although consigned to perpetual oblivion by the prudence of those who thought that 
such documents had better never be brought to light. The same reason may be assigned for Kurope after the 
lapse of three centuries, being, before the publication of the American Monuments of Baron de Humboldt, ignorant 
whether the soil of the New World possessed any remarkable monuments of antiquity. Garcia citing Laet, 
and likewise on his own authority, says that paintings were used in Peru, but that the style of their execution 
was rude; which he seems to have inferred from the inspection of some confessional paintings of the Peruvians. 
We have had an opportunity of seeing some specimens of a similar nature, painted by the Mexicans after their 
conversion to Christianity, exceedingly rude, in which hardly a trace of the old style of Mexican painting can 
be discerned: and the same may have been the case with the later Peruvian paintings, from which it would be 
wrong to form an estimate of the degree of excellence which the art of painting had attained in the time of the 
Ingas; since it is probable, that, identified with the fables of a false religion, it was speedily consigned with them 
to oblivion. It is certainly very extraordinary to find from the “Oronoco Illustrado” of Gumilla, and Coreat’s 
Voyages to the West Indies, that Indian nations so remote from each other as those of the Oronoco and the tribes 
who lived on the confines of Peru on the banks of the La Plata, as well as the Chalchaques, a people situated 
between Peru and Tucuman, all used circumcision, and strictly abstained from the flesh of swine. Captain Cook 
also discovered that circumcision had extended itself to the Islands of the South Sea. How, to use the words of 
Gumilla, are these moral phenomena to be explained? That the Jews were always eager to make proselytes, and, 
like Saint Paul before he became a Christian, would not hesitate to employ force as well as persuasion to effect 
conversion, is a notorious fact; and circumcision being amongst them, what baptism is with Christians, a means of 
grace, and the rite by which in fact a heathen was admitted to be a Jew-, it is highly probable that their zeal, or 

%* Xiuhtl in the Mexican language signifies blue, and hence was a name which the Mexicans gave to heaven, from which Xiuhtecutli 
is derived; an epithet signifying ‘the God of heaven, which the Mexicans bestowed upon Tezcatlipoca or Tonacatecutli, who alone was 
painted with a crown, as Lord of all; as the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis affirms in the 107th page of the Translation, to 
whom they assigned the first and the dast places in their calendar, emphatically styling him the god of fire. “Xiuhtl also signifies a year (from 
the sensible dependence of the seasons upon the sky), and @ crop of grass (because vegetation ushers in the new year) ; and Xiuhtecuth 
may bear the other interpretation of the god of years, or the everlasting one; which connected with the Mexican notion of fire, being the 
element more peculiarly sacred to him, recalls to our recollection the ninth and tenth verses of the seventh chapter of Daniel, descriptive 
of the vision in which he beheld the Ancient of days, from before whom issued a fiery stream, and whose throne was like the fiery flame. 

+ The fifteenth chapter of the Acts is very remarkable, as not only showing how early dissensions crept into the church, but how un- 
settled were its doctrines on some material points. It is singular that none of the Apostles should have silenced the believing Pharisees 
by declaring the sentiments of Christ upon the subject of circumcision. 

NOTES. 393 

rather the rage for proselytism which animated them in the early ages, introduced circumcision amongst the Indians. 
From an examination of some of the Mexican paintings, it would appear that circumcision amongst the Indians was 
not confined to the human species. But the Bible alone informs us that the Jews sometimes circumcised their slain 
enemies,—an example of which is recorded in the twenty-seventh verse of the eighteenth chapter of the First Book 
of Samuel. 

The Mexicans, besides using this rite, marked the breasts and arms of their children on the festival of Toxcatl with 
another sign or token, which Torquemada compares, in the following passage of the sixteenth chapter of the tenth 
book of his Indian Monarchy, with the analogous ceremony of marking the sign of the cross upon the breasts and 
the foreheads of the faithful amongst Christians with the holy oil or chrism: “It is no slight thing to note, that on 
this day the priests made a scar on the breasts and stomachs of all the male and female children, and on the wrists 
and fleshy parts of the arms of others, imprinting them as it were with the iron and mark of the Devil, to whose 
service they offered them, in order that they might be known as his, in the same way as God commands that those of 
his fold should be anointed on their breasts with the holy oil, and on their foreheads with the most blessed cross of his 
passion and death; since this is the sign with which God is accustomed to mark those who are his, as circumcision 
was formerly amongst his ancient people, which is now the cross and the holy chrism. Hence Saint John bade the 
persecutors and murderers desist from their work of slaughter until the people of God and his servants were marked 
on their foreheads, since this is a kind of sign by which he distinguishes those who are his, as the owners of cattle 
mark their herds with some particular print or sign.” Whether the Indians of the Island of Saint Domingo and of 
Cuba,—whose language is said to have been half Hebrew, and who in many of their customs nearly resembled the 
Jews,—practised the same rites as those in use amongst the Indians of the continent, it would be difficult to say; 
but that they possessed traditions in common with them, evidently derived from a Hebrew source, is plain from the 
following relation of Torquemada, which we cannot refrain from inserting here in the original Spanish: “ Verdad 
es que los de los Indios de la Isla de Cuba dicen que tuvieron conocimiento que havia sido el cielo y las otras cosas 
criadas ; y decian que por tres personas, y que la una vino por tal parte, y las otras dos de otras; y que tuvieron 
gran noticia del diluvio, y que se havia perdido el mundo por mucha agua; y decian los viejos de mas de setenta y 
ochenta afios, luego al principio que entraron los nuestros en equella isla, que un viejo sabiendo que havia de venir 
el diluvio, hico una grande nao, y se metidé en ella con su casa y muchos animales, y que embié un cuervo, y no 
bolvié por comer de los cuerpos muertos, y que despues embiéd una paloma, la qual bolvié cantando, y trajo una 
rama con hoja que parecia hobo, pero que no era hobo; el qual salié del navio, y hico vino de las parras monteses, y 
se embriagé; y teniendo dos hijos, el uno se rid y dijo al otro, Hechemonos con 1; pero que el otro le rifio, y cubrié 
al padre; el qual despues de dormido el vino, y sabida la desverguenca de el hijo, le maldijo ; y que al otro did 
bendiciones, y que de aquel havian procedido los Indios de estas tierras ; y que por esto no tenian saios ni capas ; 
pero que los Castellanos procedian del otro, por lo qual andaban vestidos, y tenian cavallos. Lo sobredicho refirié 
un Indio viejo de mas de setenta afios 4 Gabriel de Cabrera; porque un dia rifiendo con el, y llamandole perro, 
respondié que por qué le refiia, y Ilamaba perro, pues todos eran hermanos? Vosotros, le dijo, no procedeis de un 
hijo de aquel que hico la nao grande para salvarse del agua, y nosotros del otro? Y lo mismo refirié el mismo 
Indio delante de muchos Castellanos, haviendolo publicado su amo. Esto dijo aquel Indio; y parece atinar con lo 
que la Sagrada Escritura dice de Noe, y de sus hijos ; aunque ierra en decir que no fueron mas de dos; y si por lo 
dicho quisiere alguno arguirme que estos son descendientes de Can, no se lo concedo ; pero tampoco se lo negaria, 
quando quisiese afirmarlo, por lo que dejamos dicho ; aunque caso tan dudoso y obscuro debemos remitirlo a Dios, 
que es claridad de todas las cosas y las sabe como ellas son, y no cabe duda en su saber infinito.” Monarquia 
Indiana, lib. xiv. cap. xix. 

“Tt is true that the Indians of the Island of Cuba say that they knew that the heaven and other things had been 
created ; and they affirm by ¢hree persons, one of whom came from such a part, and the other two from other parts ; 
that they were perfectly informed also of the deluge, and that the world had been destroyed by a quantity of water. 
The old men above seventy and eighty years of age reported, when first our countrymen settled in that island, that 
an old man knowing that the deluge was about to happen, built a large ship, in which he embarked with his house- 
hold and many animals, and that he dispatched from thence a crow, which did not return, staying to prey upon the 
dead carcases ; and that he afterwards sent a dove, which came back cooing, bringing a leafy branch which resembled 
a hop, although not one: on which he quitted the ship, and made wine of mountain grapes and became drunk; and 

( Sin) 

394 NOTES. 

having two sons, one of them laughed, and said to the other, Turn him into jest; but the other reproved him, and 
covered his father ; who having slept off the effects of the wine, and knowing the impudence of his son, cursed him, and 
pronounced a blessing on the other: and that from the former of these the Indians of those countries were descended, 
who on that account were without coats and cloaks: but that the Spaniards proceeded from the other, and were 
therefore well apparelled and rode horses. The above story was told by an old Indian more than seventy years of 
age to Gabriel de Cabrera; who quarrellmg with him on a certain day, and calling him a dog, he asked him why 
he quarrelled with him and named him a dog, since they were all brothers? You, (says he to him,) do you not 
descend from the one son of him who built the large ship to escape from the water, and we from the other? And the 
same story was told by the same Indian before many Spaniards, his master having spread it abroad. This was the 
account given by that Indian: and it seems to allude to that which the Holy Scripture says of Noah and his sons; 
although he errs in saying that the sons were only two: should any one hence endeavour to persuade me that the 
Indians are the descendants of Cham, I do not admit it, but neither will I deny it, should they choose to affirm it 
on the grounds of what we have just stated; although we ought to leave a matter, so obscure and doubtful, to God, 
who is the light of all things, and understands their nature and essence, and to whose infinite’ wisdom the 
portion of doubt does not fall.” This curious relation Torquemada judges to be so well authenticated, that 
he not only gives it a place in his History, but allows that it may serve as a basis on which to reason respecting the 
origin of the Americans ; although he at the same time professes that he will not be bound by the conclusions which 
others might be tempted to draw from it. The tradition of the inhabitants of Cuba certainly deserves to be com- 
pared with those of the people of Michuacan and Nicaragua, who also approximated to the Mosaic history in 
their accounts of the Deluge; although the former of the last-mentioned nations believed that it was the colibri, or 
the humming-bird, and not the dove, that returned with the branch of the tree. The Indians of Chili, according to 
Rosales, had likewise a tradition of the Deluge: but he observes, that shells and other fossil remains discovered in 
abundance on their highest ranges of mountains, might have suggested that idea to them. And it cannot be denied 
that even the sagacity of savages might have arrived at this conclusion, totally unaided by divine inspiration: nor 
would it have exceeded their moral comprehension to believe that such a convulsion was caused by the sins of 
mankind provoking God to vengeance. On the contrary, they would have been more inclined to attribute such an 
event to that, than to any other cause; for savages and ignorant and superstitious nations are frequently disposed, 
in proportion as calamities are great, which befall numbers of persons or single individuals, to attribute them to a 
particular and signal divine judgment inflicted upon them for their sins: although such a mode of reasoning is 
not more to be despised for its absurdity than condemned for its injustice, since it tends to deprive misfortune of 
all sympathy, and to involve innocence and guilt ina common mass. That the Indians of Chili;—reading in the 
volume of Nature that their highest mountains had been submerged in the ocean, and the bones of animals mixed 
with shells testifying to them that that inundation had been accompanied with a destruction of animal life,—should 
not have suppose” that such an accident might have occurred in the order of the universe, is likely enough; as 
likewise that their piaques, or Priests—who pretended to be in the secrets of Heaven, and to have rain, thunder, and 
good and bad seasons at their command,—should have sought, by appealing to this past judgment, to render their 
own denunciations of the future more probable, and to maintain by these means their ascendancy over the deluded 
minds of the people. But, as Rosales observes, this argument alone is not sufficient to prove that Saint Thomas, or 
any other Apostle, had preached the Gospel in Chili. It is a very remarkable fact, that the curse which Noah 
in the twenty-fifth verse of the ninth chapter of Genesis pronounces against the posterity of his son Ham or Cham, 
to which the traditions of the Island of Cuba evidently referred,—*“ Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall 
he be unto his brethren;” by which expression, brethren, is meant mankind in general, and not the Jews in 
particular; for the descendants of the three sons of Noah comprise all mankind,—justified slavery in the eyes of 
the early Christians, and of some of the Fathers of the Church; which was also sanctioned by the Mosaic laws, 
and is not forbidden in the New Testament, except in the case of Christians, who were not permitted to have other 
Christians for their slaves; -although by the feudal laws, the ascripti gleba, or vassals of the soil, were in a 
much worse situation than the domestic slaves amongst the Greeks. It cannot be denied that that is the most 
goading system of slavery where the law, not content with vesting in the owner a right to the industry and personal 
labour of his slave, impowers him likewise to use cruel treatment towards him, and does not protect his honour 
and civil rights by the same penal enactments and provisions as those of the other members of the community,—as 

NOTES. 395 

in the case of the betrothed female slave amongst the Jews, the violation of whose faith was only to be punished 
with scourging, whilst the other party seems to have escaped with impunity, for the reason alleged in the twentieth 
verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, “because she was not free.” A great distinction is made, in the code of 
laws professedly delivered by God himself from Mount Sinai to Moses, between slaves and those who were free, and 
between Hebrew slaves and such as were bought by the Jews from other nations. It is ordained in the twenty-first 
chapter of Exodus, that “if'a man smite his servant, or his maid with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall be 
surely punished. Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two he shall not be punished, for he as his money.” It 
would little avail a West Indian planter of the present day, if his slave died on the third day from a beating which 
he had inflicted upon him on the first, to urge this obsolete Hebrew law, even in palliation of the crime of murder, 
much less to excuse it. But we must recollect what God says by the mouth of the prophet Ezekiel, in the twentieth 
chapter of his Book of Prophecies, in reference probably to this as well as to many other laws of the Pentateuch : 
“Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live.” The Ten 
Commandments are but a small portion of the laws which Moses received from God in the various conferences 
which he from time to time held with him; but the greater part of the others are inapplicable to modern times, as 
may be proved from their not being found in the statute books of England, France, and the other enlightened states 
of Europe, or from their having been expunged from them*. It is said in the eighteenth and nineteenth verses of 
the thirty-fourth chapter of Jeremiah, that “the princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the 
priests, made a covenant before God when they passed between the parts of the calf which they cut in twain.” The 
eunuchs, who it is singular should be mentioned as parties to this covenant, were slaves whom the Jewish princes 
and nobles, in the true spirit of Oriental jealousy, retained in great numbers in their houses and palaces. And it is 
to be supposed, as well from their being included in the covenant as from their being kept by the Jews, that the silence 
of Moses sanctioned a barbarous custom amongst the owners of slaves, which Acosta observes was also prevalent in 
Peru. The modern opposers of slavery (and we trust that their laudable efforts will be crowned with the fullest 
success) will hardly believe that-its ancient advocates justified it on the authority of the Scriptures, reasoning in the 
following manner, according to Torquemada: “God created man free, and not only free, but possessing lordship: for 
as soon as he had created him, he gave him the entire dominion over every thing ; and made him lord over the birds 
which fly in the air, and the fish of the sea, andthe beasts ofthe earth. He created him in his own image and like- 
ness, and did not ordain that one man should be lord over another, which was the reason why the first righteous men 
were shepherds, and not kings, that in this manner we might understand the order of nature, and the evil which resulted 
from sin. The name of servant is not found in Holy Scripture, until it is related in Genesis, that righteous Noah 
having drunk of the wine of the vine which he had planted, fell on the ground drunk, with his body shamefully exposed. 
Cham, his son, saw him, and called his two other brothers that they might likewise see their father and turn him into 
jest ; but the two good sons, impressed more strongly with feelings of propriety, approached him with their faces 
turned backwards, and covered him. Noah afterwards recovering from his intoxication, and knowing the turpitude 
of his bad son, pronounced a malediction against Canaan, the son of Cham, and said, ‘Cursed be Canaan ; let him 
be a servant to his brethren.’ These words afford grounds for the conclusion, that captivity and servitude were the 
punishment of sin; since this curse which the holy patriarch uttered, was not to avenge himself of an injury, but a 
prophecy, and a denunciation of what was to befall his posterity, the descendants of Cham; and St. Chrysostom 
remarks, as if wondering that a brother born of one womb, and the son of the same mother, became, on account 
of the sin which he committed against his father, the slave (esc/avo) of his brother; since before this fault and 
transgression, servitude and slavery did not exist, for, each possessing enough to satisfy his own wants, no one 
thought of deriving profit from the service of another. Saint Augustin likewise says, that God, on account of his 
having created man in his own image, did not grant him dominion over men, but only over irrational animals ; the 

* The penal laws against witchcraft were repealed some sessions ago by Parliament ; and not many years before, that part of the law 
relating to trials by ordeal, which was named Trial by Combat, was also repealed. It is singular that the Indians of New Grenada should 
have employed a trial by ordeal nearly resembling the trial of jealousy ordained by Moses among the Jews: this curious fact is stated by 
Simon, in the inedited portion of his Notzecas Historiales, which work contains an interesting account of the Muyscas, a civilized people 
of South America. We cannot refrain from observing, that England has much reason to be indebted to one statesman for many emen- 
dations recently introduced into the system of her laws. It is impossible that a code modelled after the caprice of rude ages should be 
as perfect as national vanity frequently pretends. 

396 NOTES. 

former kind of servitude having originated in the sin of Cham the son of Noah, by reason of his transgression ; and 
that accordingly as by the sin of man death came into the world * (as Saint Paul observes), so by the sin of Cham 
came slavery (esclavonia), as the Doctors remark, and the Holy Scripture asserts, saying, ‘ Cursed be Canaan, let him 
be the servant of the servants and domestics of his brethren.” Remote as was this curse, and trifling comparatively 
as was the cause in which it originated, it is not too much to say, that dire have been its consequences in destroying 
the peace and the happiness of mankind. It has been the scourge of two vast continents, Africa and America, and 
of the populous islands of the Western Atlantic sea; it has retarded the progress of civilization: and if a tree is 
to be judged of by its fruit, the vine planted by Noah should be execrated by every friend of the human race. In 
the breast of that holy patriarch it is true that it only awoke the hilarity of intemperance, and in that of another 
the fire of unlawful lust; but it has steeled the hearts and the consciences of succeeding generations of mankind ; 
and, far more cruel than the sword of Agag, it has rendered millions of mothers childless amongst women. The 
Jews themselves, if they had wished to stigmatize and to brand with ignominy all the enemies of their tribe, could 
not have invented a fable more proper for the purpose than what we learn from Moses in the Pentateuch to be 
matter of real history. If for a moment we consider who the near and remote enemies of the Jews were, we shall 
find that the lineage of all of them may be traced up to one or other of the cursed descendants of Cham, or to Lot 
and his two daughters. The Moabites and the Ammonites were the bitterest enemies of the Jews; they were the 
incestuous progeny of Lot. The Canaanites, the dispossessed inhabitants of the land of Canaan, who were to he 
utterly destroyed, were the immediate descendants of Canaan the fourth son of Cham, who is said to have first told 
his father of the intoxication and nakedness of Noah. Under this general name were comprehended many different 
nations, which the Scripture declares to have been equally descended from Canaan, of which the principal were the 
Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgasites, the Hivites, the Arkites, the Sinites, the Arvadites, the Hittites, and the 
Sidonians, or Phoenicians, whose ancestor was Sidon, the e/dest son of Canaan ; whose posterity, notwithstanding the 
curse pronounced against him by his grandfather, laid the foundation of the future glories of Carthage, the rival in 
after ages of imperial Rome. The friendship which existed between Hiram king of Tyre and Solomon, may 
perhaps be alleged as a proof that the Sidonians were not reckoned by the Jews amongst the number of their 
enemies: but they being de facto the possessors of a territory which de jure belonged to the seed of Abraham, and 
addicted to the same idolatries as the other inhabitants of the land of Canaan, were equally included by Moses in 
the sentence of utter destruction; and could not, except in direct disobedience to the word of God and by the basest 
duplicity, have been treated by the Jews as friends and allies: since, professing friendship to the Tyrians, the issue of 
the first-born of Canaan, against whom the curse of Noah was chzefly directed, could only have been smiling to 
deceive those whom they knew that they had irrevocably sworn to destroy. If the judgment pronounced by Moses 
against the Pheenicians was never executed by the Jews, the only reason was, that they were too formidable a people 
for them to attack ; although it is probable that not without repining they beheld themselves masters of only a 
comparatively small territory in Palestine, whilst their origznal grant comprehended all the country lying between 
Egypt and the great river Euphrates, although on that side the name “horrendum late” of the kings of Babylon 
was an effectual barrier to their ambition. The remaining enemies of the Jews, although with the exception of the 
Philistines in a secondary degree so, were the Assyrians or Babylonians, the Syrians, the Egyptians, the Philistines, 
and the Edomites. All these nations were bitterly hated by them; and, although their nearest neighbours, were the 
constant theme of the denunciations of their prophets; and the genealogies of all, one excepted, are traced up in 
Scripture to Cham. The Assyrians were descended in the line of Nimrod from Cush the eldest son of Cham, as 
were also the Syrians ; the Egyptians were the posterity of Mizraim his second son, and likewise the Philistines ; 
but the Edomites, who are coupled in the Psalms with the Moabites, where David speaking in the name of God in 
the first person, as was usual with the Jewish prophets, says, “Moab is my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast out my 
shoe,” were of the seed of Abraham and of the lineage of Shem ; although the Scripture has likewise affixed a stain 
on their nativity, by declaring them to be of the outcast race of Esau, who sold his birthright to his brother Jacob 
for a mess of pottage; Edom the eldest son of Esau, and by the mother’s side a descendant from Cham, being 
their progenitor. It is singular that some of the early Spanish writers who were much more inclined to believe 
that the Indians were descended from the Jews than from the Canaanites, should have imagined that Yucatan was 

* This should silence the disputations of geologists about extinct species of animals. 

NOTES. 397 

named after Joktan the brother of Peleg, and the son of Heber the ancestor of the Hebrews. It has been already 
observed that the Egyptians, the ancient task-masters of the children of Israel, were the offspring of Mizraim the 
son of Cham, whose slaves the Hebrews were for more than three hundred years; the curse pronounced by Noah 
being for that long period of time reversed, and the enslavers in their turn the enslaved, the posterity of Shem 
becoming in fact the servants of the servants of Cham. Later prophecies, however, doomed Egypt to be the basest 
of kingdoms, which (according to the interpretation which many commentators put on Scripture) arts, science, 
and naval and military power are never again to adorn: but modern events clearly show that these prophecies are 
not to be understood in the sense which commentators choose to assign to them. Reasoning by analogy fails us 
in the case of Egypt; or we should say, that if the sceptre had not departed from Judah when Shiloh came, because 
Herod the Tetrarch governed in Judea as viceroy of the Cesars,—neither is it wanting in Egypt now that, under the 
Sultan, Mahomet~Pacha rules that fertile region, which promises again to be the centre of arts, industry, and civili- 
zation, and which (let the part which its fleet took at the battle of Navarin decide) begins to resume a respectable 
rank amongst nations. If it may appear surprising to some that so remote a cause as the curse pronounced by Noah 
against his son Cham should have operated by itself so powerfully in Spain and Portugal as to have laid the foundation 
of the slave-trade ; turning our attention nearer home, we shall find that about the same period another dead letter 
text of the Pentateuch produced a train of consequences, not so important, because neither so lasting nor so pro- 
ductive of human misery as the former, but which, nevertheless, afforded the Spanish king a pretext for sending the 
Armada against England, threatening to inundate Europe with blood ; and which, if queen Elizabeth had had children, 
would have revived feuds as deadly as those of the rival houses of York and Lancaster, and caused Britain to weep 
as bitterly for a verse in the Old Testament, as she has made Ireland rue others contained in the New. Who 
for a moment could have supposed that a law that was made only for the Jews,—namely, that brothers should 
marry brothers’ widows,—and which no other nation ever adopted, would have accelerated the progress of the Refor- 
mation, altered the succession to the English crown, nearly plunged the country into civil war, and cost a queen of 
Scotland and of France her head. There is not the least difficulty im tracing all these effects to this main, though 
remote cause. If Moses had not commanded, and Christ had decidedly condemned such marriages when the Sad- 
ducees came to him, tempting him, as was their custom, to induce him to contravene some part of the Mosaic law, 
and thereby to draw on himself the indignation of the people, Julius the Second would not have granted a dispen- 
sation to Henry the Eighth to marry Catharine of Arragon; nor would Ferdinand of Spain have given his consent, 
or Henry the Seventh have solicited it. But the Pope was persuaded that where morals and not ritual observances 
were in question, the doctrines of the New Testament could not zmpugn those contained in the Old*: for although 
in the case of divorces, when the Pharisees tempted Christ with the Mosaic law, which permitted a man to divorce 
his wife for the most trivial causes and to marry again, his reply was, that because of the hardness of their hearts 
they were permitted to do so, although it was not so in the beginning: still the case of marriages of brothers- and 
sisters-in-law was very different ; since the Mosaic law not only permitted but positively commanded such marriages; 
and to refrain from them was to transgress the express will of God, as declared by the mouth of Moses his prophet. 
When the Sadducees, therefore, who denied the doctrine of the resurrection, appealed to the laws of Moses to disprove 
it; they argued on the assumption that if souls were immortal, the laws of Moses could not be just, and therefore 
could not be from God; for that it would have been unjust in Moses to have deprived the first husband at the resur- 
rection of his wife, by compelling her to invalidate her former by a later contract. The reply of Christ to the Sadducees 
is remarkable, not so much on account of the assurance which he gives them that marriages do not take place in a 
future state, as because he omits the opportunity which presented itself of expressing any opinion on these Hebrew 
marriages ; although on another occasion he censured the frequent divorces of the Jews, which the law of Moses 
authorized. And therefore it is the more astonishing that those divines, who on account of their denying the supre- 
macy of the Pope have been named the champions of the Reformation, should have shared Henry’s antipathy to 
one part of the Mosaic law which had not been condemned by Christ, and yet have retained a strong predilection for 
another which he had formally disapproved: for although they protested against the king’s marriage, they did not 

* This point being conceded, the question reduced itself simply to the consideration of whether the Pope had a right to dispense with 

the obligations of the Canon Law, which England, by becoming party to a treaty that was to guarantee the throne of Portugal to the legiti- 
mate issue of the house of Braganza, was lately disposed tacitly to admit. 

(51) 

$98 NOTES. 

protest against his numerous divorces ; nor did a conscientious scruple arise in their minds, as to whether the unfortu- 
nate women whom he beheaded during the life-time of Catharine of Arragon could be really guilty of the crime of 
adultery; or in other words, whether they were in point of law his wives. Assuredly if such marriages as are here alluded 
to had been instituted amongst any other nation than the Jews, or by any other legislator than Moses, they would 
have incurred lasting infamy ; and later ages would not have hesitated to have imputed them to the sordid avarice of 
the people amongst whom they were encouraged, who recurred to such means to secure to families the dowry which 
the marriage of the widow into another family would have deprived them of. Even amongst the Jews, (if we may be 
permitted to attempt to penetrate the-designs of Moses,) the securing the dowry and inheritance of the widow to the 
family of her deceased husband,—which could only be done by a compulsory law, obliging her to marry his next brother, 
was as much the object of the Hebrew legislator, as the other plea of raising up seed to the elder brother in Israel : 
for the Jewish laws, which aimed by every possible means at increase of population,—unlike those of most other 
nations, which had a greater regard for female delicacy,—not only sanctioned but commanded, under the penalty of 
legal disgrace, reiterated marriages to widows. And hence we have an example in the New Testament of a woman who 
married seven brothers in succession and survived them all, who if a Roman matron had expostulated with her on 
her conduct, would probably have scornfully demanded of her, “Id cinerem, aut manes, credis curare sepultos 2?”—so 
different are the manners and ways of thinking of different countries, and so repugnant were the morals of the Jews 
to those of the Romans and the Greeks ! It is easy to see the distinction which Moses makes between the sanction 
which he gave to divorces, and the obligation which he imposed on brothers to marry brothers’ widows: but if 
further proof be wanting to show that the latter law was not only permissive but imperative, it is afforded in the 
example of divine punishment which Scripture holds out to the disobedient, in the history of Judah and his three 
sons, Kr, Onan, and Shelah. This history is contained in the thirty-eighth chapter of Genesis ; and two things are 
very remarkable in it: The first is, that although special inspiration had not informed the more ancient patriarchs 
that they ought not to marry their own sisters, it had revealed to them the law of circumcision, and of raising up 
seed to an elder brother, which four hundred years later were again to be ratified amidst thunder and lightning from 
Mount Sinai; since, except on this supposition, Judah’s command to Onan in the eighth verse of the same chapter, 
and his apology for Tamar in the twenty-sixth verse, “She hath been more righteous than I,” (after having previously 
ordered her to be brought forth and burnt,) would be quite inexplicable, or would involve that patriarch by his own 
confession in a crime somewhat analogous to that which drew down his father’s curse on his eldest brother Reuben. 
The other is, that Saint Matthew in the first chapter of his Gospel traces up the genealogy of the Messiah, (who, 
according to ancient prophecy, was to be of the tribe of Judah,) to Judah and Tamar through Phares, which doubtless 
involves a mystery which has not been suffered to pass unheeded by the ancient commentators on Scripture; as 
here it was not the younger brother, but the father himself, who raised up seed to his eldest son, and preserved his 
own name in Israel. Since the reflux of religious opinions is generally as violent as their resistless tide, and it has 
become the fashion of modern times to condemn slavery chiefly on Christian grounds, we fear that, reprobating in 
the highest degree such an odious traffic with our fellow-creatures, we shall offend a class of persons whose zeal 
much exceeds their knowledge, by candidly avowing that the Old Testament history, the Mosaic law, the customs of 
the Jews, and the curse pronounced by Noah against Cham, appear to give a strong sanction to it; neither would 
it be very difficult to show, if the occasion required, by appealing to the experience of past ages, and opposing the 
opinions of many centuries to those of the present day, that our ancestors interpreted Scripture, on this and many 
other important points, in amanner very different from ourselves, and deduced from it doctrines in every sense most 
opposed to ours. It was certainly not the publication of a book like Doctor Sepulveda’s in justification of slavery, 
but a decree of the Emperor Charles the Fifth,—who had taken the advice of all the learned in the land, and consulted 
_ the Spanish universities, whose fame in theology was in that age great,—that doomed the inhabitants of the islands 
and continent of America to slavery. This decree was sanctioned-by the Council of the Indies ; anda more solemn 
act could not have emanated from higher constituted authorities. If it was reversed not many years afterwards, this 
was in consequence of the evils which followed, but was no condemnation of a conceded point in divinity and law. 
Those who may wish to learn more of the opinions of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries on the subject of slavery, 
can consult the writings of Las Casas and of Doctor Sepulveda, who although the supporters of contrary systems, at 
least as far as American slavery was concerned, pretended equally to ground their conflicting reasonings on Scripture. 
Doctor Sepulveda’s work has been termed by later authors a bloody book; but Las Casas’s short and pathetic nar- 

NOTES. 399 

rative, entitled ‘The Destruction of the Indies,’ by which he endeavoured to excite the compassion of his sovereign 
towards his Indian subjects, deserves still more that appellation ; since every page describes some new scene of blood 
and slaughter. Whole provinces and islands are there represented as depopulated for the sake of working the mines; 
the sea causes thousands of Indians to perish in the pearl fisheries; and the sugar plantations and other laborious 
works of agriculture swept away the scanty remains of the Indian population. It ought not then to be imputed to 
Las Casas as a crime, that pityig the Indians, a long residence amongst whom had taught him to consider them as 
his children, when he beheld them sinking under burthens which the robust negro was so much better calculated 
to bear, he should have recommended the importation of slaves from Africa to the West Indies and the continent of 
America. That illustrious prelate *, who at a most advanced age frequently crossed the stormy Atlantic from motives 
of the purest philanthropy, would scarcely, in advocating the rights of one large portion of mankind, have wantonly 
trampled on those of another, if his mind had not been subject to errors from which human nature is not exempt. 
The peculiar error of Las Casas was the inipression which he was under, that slavery was authorized by Scripture ; 
that it was the punishment of sin, and the unavoidable accomplishment of prophecy; and that the colour ‘and. the 
features of the negroes were the sign which clearly indicated that they were of the cursed race of Cham, who were 
to be the servants of the servants of the posterity of Shem. The prejudices entertained some centuries ago in favour 
of African slavery from the colour of the skin of the negroes, which for many ages was considered a standing miracle, 
that, like the dispersion of the Jews, corroborated the truth of Scripture, will be best understood from the perusal 
of the following chapter of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy, wherein it is apparent that that learned and excellent 
man partook of the errors of the age in which he lived. This chapter is intitled, “ Donde se prosigue la materia 
del pasado, y se prueba ser el color negro nacido de Ja maldicion que Noé heché 4 su nieto Canaan.” “A continuation 
of the subject of the preceding chapter, wherein it is proved that a black skin was caused by the curse which Noah 
pronounced against his grandson Canaan.” “ Siguiendo la materia de el capitulo pasado, y el parecer de hombres 
sabios, y doctos, que lo afirman, decimos, que de aquel descomedimiento, que Can tuvo con su Padre Noé, quando 
hico alarde, y manifestacion de las partes verendas del viejo 4 sus Hermanos Sem, y Jafet, results la Maldicion, que 
el Santo patriarca heché a su Nieto Canaan ; y en pena de aquel descomedido, y desvergoneado pecado,; les mudd 
Dios el color, y no solo a los descendientes de Canaan, pero tambien 4 sus primos, hijos de esotros Hermanos, es 

* Las Casas has sometimes been called a fanatic; but were it even the case, how much more desirable would it be if modern religious 
fanaticism flowed in a similar channel. His fanaticism was merely an ardent desire to oppose the dignity of his sacerdotal character, his 
acknowledged talents and learning, and the mildness of old age, to brutal oppression and injustice. How different was zeal like his from that 
of Mr. Irving’s, or some other popular preachers of the present day, to whom a crowded audience flocks, scarcely knowing why, except 
that they expect to hear new truths delivered in a new manner. We fear, however, that the speech of Festus to Paul would not have been 
addressed with much propriety to them. But nothing appears more intolerable than their wilful ignorance of modern history, or at least 
open defiance to the principles laid down at the Reformation ; since, although belonging themselves to no ostensible church, and de- 
nying many of the Articles of the Church of England, they still would make the soil of Britain that of persecution. Neither do they 
pay the slightest regard to the Christian precept of—not speaking evil of dignities ; but, as it were in mockery of Saint Jude, pour forth 
unceasing railing accusations against him whose majestic station is quite forgotten by them, because they know that his power is remote, 
and that they are protected by the laws of another state. The principle, that any church has a right to force the conscience, or to impose 
silence on the tongues or pens of the lowest members of the community, should be rejected; but this right, when assumed by new and 
schismatic churches, becomes odious in the extreme, and differs as much from the exercise of the former, as the usurping ruffian from the 
crowned king. Itis impossible that any one can read and meditate on the history of the Protestant Reformation without having his mind 
assailed by such a conviction. But if we are inclined to recoil with horror from flames lit up by Orthodox persecution, with what un- 
qualified disgust must we turn from the page of history that records the death of the unfortunate Servetus,—whilst imagination pictures to 
us the gloomy founder of Calvinism seated in the shape of an ill-omened vulture upon a neighbouring rock, and contemplating with 
steady eye the expiring fires of a pile that might well have drawn down the deadliest bolt of Almighty wrath. Servetus may be considered, 
in reference to Calvin and the pernicious tenets of his sect, to have “ vindicated the ways of God to man;” for how shortsighted must 
those of that school be, who do not perceive that if their doctrines of absolute predestination are inconsistent with’ the notion of man’s 
being an agent possessed of free will,.all moral evil must be referred to God! who would afterwards (far be from us the thought) have to 
be viewed in the light of an unjust and inexorable judge, who would condemn those to eternal punishment who were not able to avoid the 
commission of sin, because their will was under the control of a necessity caused by himself. That poet, whom Lord Byron pronounces to 
be the greatest in our language, in the beautiful line 

“« Who binding nature fast in fate left free the human will,” 

destroys, by making a just distinction between man and inanimate nature, the entire of Calvin’s clumsy and. sophistical web. 

400 NOTES. 

a saber, Mizrain, Fut, y Cus; porque los Hijos de Mizrain, segundo Hijo de Can, y Hermano de Canaan, nacieron 
negros,.y feos, como los Egipcios, y Getulos, Gente barbara, que viven, en una Region, en lo interior de Libia, que 
confina con el Reino de Tombutum*, que son Negros, como carbon, y tienen la boca podrida ; y dice Postelo, en 
su Compendio Cosmografico, que porque no se les corrompa, y les dé cancer en ella procuran traer siempre Sal, en 
la boca. Fut, tereero Hijo de Can, fue Padre de los Alarabes Berberiscos de Mauritania, que por la maior parte son 
Negros, romos, y hocicudos, y notablemente disformes. Los que proceden de Cus, son mui negros, y no se puede 
atribuir este color tan negro, 4 la propriedad, y Naturaleca de la tierra, como muchos han querido, y lo dejamos 
dicho, que se causa por el mucho, y excesivo calor, y gran sequedad de ella; porque si esto fuese asi, los Negros, 
que vienen a vivir en partes templadas, 4 cabo de dos, 6 tres generaciones serian blancos (como dejamos probado) y 
los blancos, que van a vivir, 4 estas mismas Tierras de Negros, por la misma racon se harian ellos, 6 sus Hijos, 6 
Nietos,Negros, y veese por experiencia lo contrario: luego bien se sigue, que ni el sol, ni la calidad de la Tierra 
causan el color negro, sino que procede del origen, y principio, que estos Negros traen de Can, a quien por justo 
juicio de Dios, por el descomedimiento, que tuvo con su padre, se trocd el color rojo, que tenia, en negro como 
carbon, y por Divino castigo, comprehende a quantos de él proceden; y el rigor del castigo se executd en Canaan, 
quarto Hijo de Can, porque fue Autor, 6 origen del escandalo, y descubrio las partes secretas del Abuelo, y las mostrd 
a su padre, el qual, no solamente no le reprehendid, sino que haciendo burla, como mal Hijo, llamé & sus Hermanos, 
para reirse de su padre, mostrandoles aquel feo espectaculo. Y debese notar, que no maldijo el Patriarca Noé A Can 
su Hijo, porque Dios le havia hechado su Bendicion, y tambien, porque no comprehendiese el castigo, 4 los otros 
tres Hijos, conviene 4 saber, 4 Cus, Mizrain, y Fut, que no hayian tenido culpa, y asi hechd su maldicion 4 Canaan, 
como a Autor de toda aquella Tragedia; y puesto, que los sucesores de los otros tres Hijos, quedaron tiznados, por 
la culpa de su mal Padre Can, fueron al fin mui mejor librados que los Cananeos, descendientes de Canaan, porque 
casi todos fueron muertos, y destruidos por los Israelitas los quales estaban estendidos, y divididos en once pro- 
vincias ; mas los descendientes de Cus, que son los Etiopes; y los de Mizrain, que son los Egipcios; y los de Fut, que 
son los de Mauritania, aunque quedaron sefialados, por culpa de Can, no fueron privados de gracias, y favores para el 
cuerpo, y para el Alma; pues los Etiopes de Tiempo mui antiguo poseen un poderosisimo, y floreciente Reino, y 
conocen a Dios desde el Tiempo de la Reina Saba, y del Rei Salomon, y oi dia dura, y se ve su gran Potencia. Los 
Egipcios en la promulgacion del Evangelio recibieron la Doctrina de Christo, y fueron algun tiempo Catholicos, y 
tambien los Africanos. Verdad es, que 4 todos les alcancé el grave iugo de sujecion ; porque las Gentes de Arabia, que 
decienden de Cus, en parte fueron vencidos, y hechos esclavos, de Ismael, Madian, Esau, y otros Hijos de Abrahan 
y de Cetura, y de Moab, y Amon, Hijos de Lot; y las Gentes Africanas casi siempre han sido esclavas de los de Asia 
y Europa, y nunca han tenido Reies naturales, porque han sido Vasallas de Judios, Griegos, Romanos, y Moros, y 
oi lo son del Turco. El Preste Juan de Etiopia-¥ toda su Nobleca atribuie 4 Abrahan, y se gloria de descender de 

* In this name we recognise that of Timbuctoo, a state which it is probable the Portuguese were better acquainted with three hundred 
years ago than we are now. Sufficient praise is not generally bestowed on that enterprising nation for its splendid achievements in navi- 
gation, and the pains which it took to explore Africa, and to discover the sources of the vast rivers which flow from the interior of that 
continent to the ocean. The geography of the interior of Africa was much better known to the ancients than to us, for reasons which 
must be obvious to any one who meditates on the page of History. 

+ The kingdom of Prester John, which so many later writers have been inclined to consider as fabulous, was an ecclesiastical state similar 
to Thibet, of which a priest was at the head. Christianity could have been scarcely more scandalized if it had discovered the Christian 
religion existing under a deformed mask in Peru, than it was by finding into whatits rites had degenerated in Ethiopia, which, though one 
of the most ancient churches, having been long separated from the rest and forgotten by them, had fallen into every kind of heresy, and 
adopted the most absurd fables as ancient Christian tradition. It cannot, however, be doubted that it possessed many books which it cost 
the missionaries much trouble to destroy. Pinelo in his “ Bibliotheca” speaks of the many manuscripts contained in the monastic residence 
of the kings of Ethiopia, which other writers, not so well qualified to judge, have treated as a mere visionary story. Doctor Lawrence, 
the present Archbishop of Cashel, has translated out of the Abyssinian or Coptic language the Book of Enoch, and other books, which 
appear (if we may judge from their style and contents) to be nearly as deserving to be considered canonical as several books of the Old 
Testament. When we contrast the immensely voluminous writings of the Fathers who lived after the third century of the Christian era, 
whose works have been preserved to the present day, with the extreme paucity of those of the apostolic age, and remember the saying of 
one of the Apostles, that if all the actions which Christ performed when on earth were written down, he supposed the world would not 
contain the number of the books,—how must we feel surprised at the apathy and negligence of the primitive Christians, who allowed 
so many books to perish, and did not even preserve the Gospel of Saint Matthew in the original Hebrew! and how little dependence 

can we place on the early history of the Christian church. 

NOTES. 401 

Salomén. Esto dicho nota el Licenciado Diego de Yepes, capellan del Cardenal Don Pedro Gonealez de Mendoca, 
en sus Discursos de varia Historia. Pero aqui se me ofrece dudar, si es verdad, que no maldijo Noé 4 Can, porque 
no comprehendiese la maldicion 4 los Hijos, que no tenian culpa, como les comprehendid, sacando el color negro, y 
tiznado, como los Hijos de Canaan, que fue el verdadero culpado 4 quien justamente comprehendia la maldicion, y 
por ella le era licitamente comprehendido el castigo, 6 hemos de decir (segun esta sentencia) que solos los Hijos de 
Canaan nacieron negros; y segun esto ii no es verdad, que los otros Primos lo son, 6 si decimos, que lo son, id no 
es solamente por la maldicion de Canaan, sino por la culpa del Padre Can, y asi en ella fueron malditos, y comprehen- 
didos ? A esto digo (salvo mejor juicio) que aunque es verdad, que estos Hijos no pecaron, pecd (al fin) el padre, y 
este pecado alcangd a los Hijos en general, queriendo Dios mostrar, que aunque fue causa instrumental Canaan, para 
aquel desacato, la fue su Padre Can total, para la execucion de él, porque llamo 4 sus Hermanos, y que ia que no era él 
maldito, por ser bendito de Dios, alcancase aquella maldicion, en parte 4 sus Hijos, como 4 mala sangre, engendrada 
de aquel emponconado cuerpo, y que en todos ellos se hechase de ver la culpa grave, que el Padre havia cometido, en 
no guardar el decoro debido a su padre; y fuese aquel color, como Sambenito perpetuo, demonstrativo en su culpa, 
y pecado ; porque muchas veces vemos, que castiga Dios (como en otra parte hemos dicho) las culpas del padre, en 
los Hijos ; y esto se debe entender de penas corporales, y no espirituales, de las quales habla el profeta Ecechiel en 
sus profecias, quando dice. El Hijo no Ilevara 4 cuestas la maldad del padre, ni el padre la del Hijo; y esto se 
entiende en lo espiritual, y no corporal ; porque vemos (como digo) que muchos Hijos han pagado culpas paternas, 
con penas corporales, como en el lugar dicho dejamos largamente probado; y de esto tenemos abundantisimos 
exemplos, en las Sagradas Kscrituras ; y dice Noé 4 Canaan (maldiciendo 4 Can) Maldito sea Canaan, sea siervo de 
sus Hermanos, y asi lo fueron. De estas palabras se colige, que la cautividad, y servidumbre de estos descendientes 
de Can, fue pena del pecado cometido por su Padre Can, porque esta maldicion, que el santo Patriarca hechd, no fue 
por vengarse de la injuria que recibid, sino Profecia, y declaracion de lo que havia de suceder en el linage de Can, y 
descendencia de sus Hijos; y por ser Noé justo, y no haver en el Mundo quien castigase aquel pecado, él como 
superior le castigo. De aqui se podia tomar ocasion de decir, que su color negro no procede de causas naturales, 
sino de las dichas en el parrafo pasado, que estos Indios, y todos los que en otras Regiones son de color baco, 
seran Descendientes de aquellos Hijos de Can, t de alguno de sus Descendientes ; y siendo esto asi, como no siguen 
estas Gentes 4 sus antepasados en las costumbres, en las fuercas, y facciones, y color ?” 

Nore II. 

AMERICAN TRADITIONS WHICH APPEAR TO BE DERIVED FROM A HEBREW SOURCE. 

THE present note (which is referred to in the preceding,) contains some American traditions, evidently derived from 
the Old Testament, and tending to prove that the Indians were at least acquainted with that portion of it designated 
the Pentateuch. It is impossible on reading what Mexican Mythology records of the war in heaven, and of the fall 
of Zontemoque and the other rebellious spirits; of the creation of light by the word of Tonacatecutli, and of the 
division of the waters ; of the sin of Yztlacoliuhqui, and his blindness and nakedness; of the temptation of Suchi- 
quecal, and her disobedience in gathering roses from a tree, and the consequent misery and disgrace of herself and 
all her posterity,—not to recognise Scriptural analogies. But the Mexican tradition of the Deluge is that which bears 
the most unequivocal marks of having been derived from a Hebrew source. This tradition records that a few 
persons escaped in the Ahuehuete, or ark of fir, when the earth was swallowed up by a Deluge, the chief of whom 
was named Patecatle or Cipaquetona ; that he invented the art of making wine; that Xelua, one of his descendants, 
or at least one of those who had escaped with him in the ark, was present at the building of a high tower, which the 
succeeding generation constructed with a view of escaping from the deluge should it again occur ; that Tonacatecutli, 
incensed at their presumption, destroyed the tower with lightning, confounded their language, and dispersed them ; 
and that Xelua led a colony to the New World. This age, which was the first of the Mexican ages, and named by 

(5x) 

402 NOTES. 

them Atonatiuh, or the age of water, closely bordered upon that of the Tzocuillicxeque, or age of giants; and it will 
be recollected that the age of the Flood in Scripture was that of giants also. The fact of the Mexicans recording» 
both in their paintings and songs, the deluge, the building of the Tower of Babel, the confusion of tongues, 
and the dispersion of tribes, being generally admitted by the early Spanish writers on America, it is almost 
unnecessary to refer to the authority of any particular writer to prove what no one will deny. Since Gomara, 
however, in his History of the Indies, describing the conference of Nicaragua with Gil Gonealez and the ecclesi- 
astics, introduces that chief as putting a variety of questions to the Spaniards; the first of which was, whether they 
were acquainted with the deluge, and others no less curious, showing that the Indians were not unaccustomed to 
abstruse speculations, and that besides their knowledge of many traditions contained in the Old Testament, they 
possessed some information respecting the predictions of the New. It may be interesting to insert the entire 
passage of Gomara giving an account of this conference. 

“Nicaragua, who was acute and skilled in the knowledge of the rites and antiquities of his own country, had a 
long conference and dispute with Gil Goncalez and the ecclesiastics. He inquired if the Christians were acquainted 
with the great deluge, which had swallowed up the earth, men, and animals; and whether another was to happen? 
whether the earth was to be revolutionized (trastornar), or heaven to fall? when and how the sun, moon, and stars, 
should be deprived of their motion and light? since they were of such vast magnitude, who moved and kept them 
in their orbits ? He inquired the cause of the darkness of night, and of cold, blaming Nature for not having made 
light and heat perpetual, since they were best? What were the honour and reverence due to the triune God 
of Christians, who had created the heaven, and the sun whom they adored as god in those countries, the sea, 
the earth, and man, who rules over the birds which fly and the fish which swim? where souls would go after 
death ; and what would be their occupations after having left the body, since being immortal they lived for so short 
a time? He inquired likewise if the Holy Father at Rome, the Vicar of Christ, who was the god of Christians, 
died? and how Jesus being a God is a man, and his mother being a virgin brought forth? and whether the Emperor 
and King of Spain, whose prowess, virtue, and power they had so vaunted, was mortal ? and why such a handfull of 
men were anxious to obtain so much gold ?”—La Istoria de las Indias, fo. cviii. 

From this account it will be perceived, that as not only in New Spain and in Peru, but likewise in Nicaragua, the 
tradition of the Deluge was generally received among the Indians; that of the temptation of Eve, of the fall of man, 
and of the loss of Paradise, was no less general in the New World. Torquemada, in the thirty-first chapter of the sixth 
book of his Indian Monarchy, gives this description of the goddess Cihuacohuatl, who is named by many writers 
the Aztec or Mexican Eve. “ One of the goddesses greatly esteemed by the natives of New Spain was Cihuacohuatl, 
which name signifies ‘the woman serpent ;’ and they say that she always has twins or brings forth two children at a 
birth. This woman or goddess, whom they named Cihuacohuatl, was according to the etymology of the name, as 
Father Bernard de Sahagun says, the first woman who existed in the world, the mother of the whole of the human race, 
who it is true was tempted by the serpent who appeared to her in the terrestrial Paradise, and discoursed with her to 
persuade her to transgress the command of God. And it is likewise true, that after having committed sin, she con- 
ceived and bore a son and a daughter, both at the same birth, and that the son was named Cain and the daughter Cal- 
mana: and that afterwards she brought forth, at a second birth, Abel and his sister Delborah ; so that she bore them by 
twin births, and continued from that time onwards to give birth to twins, as has been observed ; the Indians therefore 
designated her from these two properties, Cihuacohuatl, which signifies ‘the woman of the serpent, that is to say, whom 
the serpent tempted; and which also signifies, ‘the woman who brought forth two infants at a birth, a girl and a boy ;’ 
for they call twins and infants born at the same birth Cocohua, which name signifies ‘ serpents, as if they called them 
serpents born from the woman serpent. This appears to be a confused knowledge, which they had received by tradi- 
tion, of the ancient truth of the origin of the human race, and of the temptation of the serpent.” The above account of 
Torquemada (or rather of Sahagun, whose authority he cites,) is very curious, and is further confirmed by the repre- 
sentation (in the forty-eighth page of the lesser Vatican MS.,) of the goddess Cihuacohuatl or Suchiquecal, with two 
infants and a serpent near her. Another painting, (contained in the seventy-fourth page of the same MS.,) is more 
remarkable, since it seems clearly to allude to the threat pronounced in the third chapter of Genesis against the 
serpent, “ And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy 
head, and thou shalt bruise his heel :” as in fact the seed of the woman appears to be there in the act of bruising 
the head of the serpent with a staff, whilst the latter has bitten off, and is holding in his jaws, the foot of his 

NOTES. 4.03 

adversary. Mexican traditions seem also to refer to the creation of the one sex from the bone of the other, as is 
recorded in the second chapter of Genesis: “And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he 
slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof. And the rib, which the Lord God 
had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man. And Adam said, This is now bone of my 
bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman; because she was taken from man:”—since the Mexicans 
believed that both sexes had been created from a bone which Xolotle had obtained from Mictlantecutli, who is said 
to have stumbled and fallen down in running away from the God of the dead, who was anxious to take back his 
gift; and that the bone, which had been at first of a single piece, having been broken by the fall into many small 
fragments of unequal sizes, the stature of mankind became in consequence unequal. The Peruvian tradition of men 
having been created by Viracocha, after the likeness of images made by himself, seems also to allude to what is said 
in the twenty-sixth verse of the first chapter of Genesis: “And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our 

9 

likeness :” and in the next verse, “So God created man in his own image; in the image of God created he him.” 
This tradition is mentioned by Garcia in the seventh chapter of the fifth book of the Origin of the Indians, where, 
treating of the origin of the Peruvians, he says: “We have still to state what the Indians of Peru relate of their 
origin, which I shall narrate as Juan de Betancos wrote it, who was one of the first who entered that kingdom, (of 
whom we have already made mention in other places,) who was well acquainted with the general language of the 
Indians, called the Quichua or language of the Inga*; and being thus qualified, served as interpreter or linguist in 
that kingdom, and was on that account ordered by Don Antonio de Mendoga, who was at that time viceroy of Peru, 
to compose a history of the origin and succession of the Ingas, kings of Peru, and of their conquests, deeds, and 
exploits, to the period when the Spaniards entered their country, procuring the necessary information from the oldest 
Indians. Juan de Betancos obeyed the order of the viceroy, and compiled with great diligence and care a history, 
which on account of the death of Don Antonio de Mendoga, to whom he had dedicated it, was not at that time brought 
to light and published; neither was it afterwards printed, by reason of the death of Betancos, who, proceeding to 
give an account of the origin of the Ingas, relates what the Indians told him of the origin of all the first inhabitants 
of that kingdom, which is as follows: ‘Formerly, in ancient times, the kingdom and provinces of Peru were 
enveloped in an obscurity in which neither light nor sun existed, and were consequently without day. A certain 
race of people inhabited them at that period, who were ruled and governed by a lord, whose name as well as that of 
his subjects they forget. The Indians further say, that at this time, in which all was night, and when neither light nor 
day existed, a lord named Contice Viracocha came out of a lake which is in the province of Collasuyo, and brought 
along with him a certain number of persons; and having come from thence, proceeded to a place adjoining to the 
lake, where at present is the city called Tiaguanaco, where as soon as he had arrived with his people, he created in 
an instant the sun and day, commanding the former to encircle and revolve with rapid motion round the whole 
world. He next created the moon, the planets, and the stars, which are in the eighth heaven and firmament. But 
since it may be inquired, when did this Viracocha create the earth, and the people who had lived in that obscurity, 
and those who came with him out of the lake? the Indians say that Contice Viracocha had on a former occasion 
come out of the lake, and that he then created the heaven and the earth, leaving it without sun or light to illu- 
minate it; and made those who came out of the lake with him, and the people who existed at that period, who were 
guilty of some offence against Viracocha, on which account he became incensed at last against them, and as 
a punishment and chastisement for their sins changed them and their lord into stones. He then created the sun, 
the day, and the stars, as has already been said; and having so done, he formed out of stone, (on the same spot and 
site of Tiaguanaco,) figures and images of men and women, some in a state of pregnancy, and others to represent 
mothers with their children in cradles, according to their usages and customs, which were to serve as a model and 
sample of the people whom he was about to create. Having completed the formation of these figures, he removed 
them and put them into some particular province, and afterwards created another province of people of the same kind, 
dividing it from the former; and lastly, he formed out of stone the entire population of Peru, in the same manner as 
he had formed the others. Having finished his work, he said to the people who had come out of the lake with him, 
Mark very attentively the images and busts of stone which I have made, and observe that some of them shall be named 

* The Ingas of Peru had likewise a language peculiar to themselves, which none but those of the royal race were permitted to learn.— 

We leave it to the Jews to decide whether it might not have been the « pure language ” expressly alluded to by the prophet Zephaniah in 
the ninth verse of the third chapter of his Book. 

404, NOTES. 

IN, and shall come out of such a cave or fountain, in such a province, where they shall settle and multiply; others 
shall come out of such a cave, and shall be called JV, and shall settle in such a place ;—all of whom shall come out 
of fountains, rivers, caves, and hills, in the provinces which I have pointed out and named to you, when you call 
to them. It is therefore proper that you should all go except two, who shall remain with me, and journeying on 
towards the rising sun, that each of you should proceed in such a direction, and should take such a line or road. 
The names of the fountains, caves, hills, rivers, nations, and provinces, are not mentioned here, for the Indians do 
not specify them; but the names which Viracocha gave to them, or which they before had, are understood by the 
letter JV, or the expression ‘such.’ Contice Viracocha having finished his above-mentioned discourse and address to 
his ministers and Viracochas, they set out immediately for the places and provinces which had been marked out for 
each of them; and placing themselves near the situation and place where the images of stone were, and where 
Contice Viracocha had told and commanded them to go, they called out in a loud tone,—J, come forth, and people 
this land which is deserted and solitary, for Contice Viracocha so commands it. And immediately men and women, 
agreeing in stature, physiognomy and form with the model and proportions in which the images of stone had been 
sculptured, came forth from the caves, rivers, fountains, and high mountains; and having all come out, they 
proceeded to people those provinces and the adjoining countries which were situated towards the rising sun.” 

This account of Viracocha forming man after the likeness of images fashioned by himself, seems to refer to the 
above-mentioned verse in Genesis: but the following tradition bears a less equivocal mark of having been derived 
from a Scriptural origin. It is taken from an inedited History of Chile by Diego de Rosales: “ De proposito y no 
por olvido he dexado para la postre, por darse le bueno a este capitulo, las lagunas de Taguatagua, que no es digno 
de olvido, sino de perpetua memoria, el caso tan raro y singular que sucedio en ellas. Caen estas lagunas veinte 
leguas al sur de la Ciudad de Santiago cerca del pueblo de Malloa, tienen seis leguas de circunferencia, muchas 
truchas, varios generos de pezes, y muchedumbre de paxareria de varios colores que sobre las aguas forman un 
hermoso jardin de flores vivientes. 'Tiene en medio una pequefia isla, que muchas vezes se ve nadar por encima de 
la laguna y moverse con el impulso de los vientos. No es esto lo singular y raro, que Dausqueyo, y Pomponio 
Mela traducido o illustrado por Joseph Antonio Gonzales de Salas, dicen lo mismo de otras islas que fluctuan en 
las lagunas y se mueven en ellas, y entre otras es muy nombrada la isla de Chemnis, que esta en un lago de Egipto 
poblada de muchas selvas y ennoblecida con el famoso templo dedicado al dios Apolo. Lo singular y de grande 
ensefianza es, que se conserva una tradicion de tiempo immemorial entre los Indios, que en aquel sitio antiguamente, 
antes de la venida de los Espafioles, avia un hermoso valle muy ameno y poblado de infinita gente, y que no avia 
laguna ni sefial de ella, sino mucha amenidad, y sementeras en abundancia para las delicias de los naturales. Pero 
que con la abundancia y el regalo eran sus costumbres tan estragadas y tan enormes sus vicios, que no conten- 
tandose con la muchedumbre de mugeres proprias, y agenas, se desenfrenaban como bestias en los torpisimos vicios 
de la sodomia y bestialidad. Entraron un dia en aquel valle dos hermosos mancebos en el trage y rostros nunca 
vistos, y en la hermosura y gravedad admirables, que en la realidad eran Angeles, y les dixeron a todos los 
habitadores de aquella tierra que venian embiados del Seftor del cielo y la tierra, del mar y de los vientos, del sol, 
luna, y estrellas, y que venian a requerirles de su parte como los requerian, que se enmendasen de tan enormes 
vicios, y obsenidades con que gravissimamente offendian al autor de la naturaleza, ya su Dios y Senor a quien 
devian todo amor y obediencia, y que si no se enmendaban, serian del gravissimamente castigados en esta vida, y 
mas rigurosamente en la otra con eternas penas y tormentos, y dicho esto desaparecieron, y no los vieron mas. 
Causoles alguna novedad al principio, pero no enmienda, porque perseveraron en sus torpezas. O gran paciencia 
de Dios y grande su misericordia que no se contento con este aviso! sino que passados algunos afios, volvieron los 
dos Angeles en figura humana y en el trage y hermosura, dando muestras de que no eran hombres terrenos, sino 
espiritus celestiales. Volvieronles a requerir a los Indios, afearonles sus vicios, y dixeron les que estaba ya cercano 
el castigo de Dios, sino se enmendaban de sus pecados. Desaparecieronse, y los Indios endurecidos en sus malas 
costumbres, y ciegos a tanta luz, perseveraron en sus delitos, incredulos del castigo como los de Sodoma, mas 
despues de pocos dias vino el castigo de Dios sobre ellos, porque temblo la tierra y se estremecio con tanta furia, 
que abriendose en differentes grutas, y por diversas bocas, pronuncio la sentencia y executo el castigo, vomitando 
tanta cantidad de agua, que inundo todo aquel valle, y anego a quantos en el avia, sus casas, haziendas, y sementeras, 
sin dexar memoria de aquella tan nefanda gente, y quedando para eterna memoria y escarmiento de los demas 

aquella laguna, que oy se ve, y a permanecido despues de tantos afios que ha que sucedio este tan maravilloso caso, 

NOTES. 405 

digno de eterna memoria, pues en el resplandece la piedad divina en uno y otro aviso, el amor con que en todos 
tiempos requiere a los hombres para que huigan de su ira y justo castigo, y su justicia en castigar a los que rebeldes 
en sus vicios perseveran en ellos*.” Historia General del Reyno de Chile y Nueva Estremadura, por el. Pere Diego 
de Rosales, Jesuita, Viceprovincial de la Provincia en el Chile. Lib. 2. cap. xi.n.20. The following account, from 
Gomara’s Conquest of Mexico, of a certain Chichimeca prevailing over Quecalcoatl, and binding him, and detaining 
him amongst men, bears some analogy to what is said of Jacob’s wrestling and prevailing with God, in the 
thirty-second chapter of Genesis: “The kings of Mexico, who are the most powerful, and the greatest, and in 
fact the kings of the kings of that country, pride themselves in being and in calling themselves of Culhua, declaring 
that they descend from a certain Chichimeca, who was a very strong chief, who bound a leather thong round the 
arm of Quecalcoatl, close to the shoulder, when he was going, and detained-? him among men, which they con- 

* We cannot refrain from observing, that the story in Genesis, from which this fable is derived, has led many canonists and civilians 
of former days to maintain, that although stoning to death, as a judicial sentence prescribed by the law of Moses, was repealed with the 
old law, still burning to death, in the case of heresy, was not repugnant to the Christian dispensation, for that God had manifested on one 
occasion his approbation of that mode of punishment, and that human justice could not do better than imitate divine. Wretched as is 
the reasoning displayed by these writers, still the consequences of that reasoning were practical, and numerous have been the victims which 
it has hurried to the flames. It is singular that both the Mexicans and the Jews manifested a kind of predilection for the sign of calling 
down fire from heaven; and the Piaques or priests of Chili threatened the, people with a miracle of that kind,—having heard something, 
perhaps, of the prophet Elijah destroying with fire from heaven the two bands of men belonging to Ahaziah the king of Samaria, as 
recorded in the first chapter of the Second Book of Kings: “ Then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab. And Ahaziah 
fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that was in Samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto them, Go, 
inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron whether I shall recover of this disease. But the angel of the Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite, 
Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye 
go to inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron? Now therefore thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not come down from that bed on which 
thou art gone up, but shalt surely die. And Elijah departed. And when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them, 
Why are ye now turned back? And they said unto him, There came a man up to meet us, and said unto us, Go, turn again unto the 
king that sent you, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to inquire 
of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die. 
And he said unto them, What manner of man was he which came up to meet you, and told you these words? And they answered him, 
He was an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins. And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite. Then the king sent 
unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And he went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And he spake unto him, 
Thou man of God, the king hath said, Come down. And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man of God, then 
let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his 
fifty. Again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his fifty. And he answered and said unto him, O man of God, thus hath 
the king said, Come down quickly. And Elijah answered and said unto them, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, 
and consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.” 

‘++ A mistake in reading the Spanish word conversava as conservava has induced us to notice an analogy which the change of expression 
renders very faint. It appears extremely probable, however, that the Jews applied the prophetical language of Isaiah to their Messiah 
Quecalcoatl, and that hence they invented the history of his having been bound. Since moreover the Mexicans believed that Quecalcoatl 
was the son of their supreme deity Tonacatecutli, it is not unlikely that the other name Topiltzin, by which he was designated, was originally 
Teopiltzin, signifying ‘ the son of God,’ indicative of that belief; and that the early Spanish missionaries changed it into Topiltzin, which 
means simply ‘our son, wishing to avoid the association of ideas that names and many other circumstances were likely to create. 
That the Jews however had carried to the New World the tradition of their ancestor Jacob having wrestled and prevailed with God, 
which, like all their other traditions, degenerated there into some monstrous fable or abominable rite, may be inferred from a comparison 
of the following account, taken from the thirty-second chapter of Genesis, with what Sahagun in the twelfth chapter of his fifth book says 
of the Mexicans pretending sometimes to wrestle and prevail ‘with Tezcatlipoca: “ And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a 
man with him until the breaking of the day. And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; 
and the hollow of Jacob’s thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him. And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he 
said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob. And he said, Thy 
name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed. And 
Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he 
blessed him there. And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for 1 have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved. And as 
he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh. Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which 
shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day; because he touched the hollow of Jacob’s thigh in the sinew that shrank.” 
—< When headless phantoms without feet, which skim along the surface of the ground, sighing like persons suffering from illness, 
appear in the night to any one, which they know are illusions of ‘T'ezcatlipoca,—those who see them nevertheless draw a bad omen from 
them, and declare and consider it certain that they will soon die in war or of disease, or that some misfortune will speedily befall them : 

(51) 

406 NOTES 

sidered a great feat, and said that the man who had bound a god could bind all other mortals, and accordingly 
ever afterwards they called him Aculhuatli, since, as I have already explained, Aculli means the bone between the 
elbow and the shoulder, and the shoulder itself. This Aculhuatli became afterwards very powerful and a ‘person 
of great consideration, and laid such a foundation of future greatness zm his sons, that his descendants became in 
course of time kings of Mexico, enjoying the same authority as Motecucuma possessed when Ferdinand Cortes 
made him prisoner.” La Conquista de Mexico, fo. cxx.—The genealogical descent of the nations of New Spain 
from Iztacmixcoatlh and his ¢wo wives, serves also to bring to our recollection Jacob, his two wives, and his sons; 
and it deserves to be remarked, that the proper name Iztacmixcoatlh * seems peculiarly applicable to Jacob, since we 
know from Genesis that Jacob was smooth in person, and fair as compared with Esau, who was red, and that he 
was subtle in disposition; and this name is compounded of two words, Iztac, which signifies in the Mexican 
language smooth or far, and Mixcoatle, @ serpent, which is called in more than one place in Scripture a subtle 
animal, and is characterized by Christ as wise, in the injunction which he gave to the Apostles—to be wise as 
serpents ; and therefore might be no inapt symbol of the subtle and sagacious character of Jacob, to which his 
name in Hebrew would appear to bear some allusion, since the answer of Esau to his father Isaac implies as much; 
and the thirty-sixth verse of the twenty-seventh chapter of Genesis would be otherwise unintelligible, where Esau, 
replying to Isaac, who had told him that his brother came with subtlety, and had taken away his blessing, says, “ Is 
not he rightly named Jacob ? for he hath supplanted me these two times : he took away my birthright; and, behold, 
now he hath taken away my blessing-.” 

and when such phantoms present themselves to the low and timorous rabble, they immediately begin to fly, and their spirits are so 
overcome with dismay that they soon afterwards die, or are overtaken by some calamity: but when they appear to men of courage and 
of resolution, such as veteran soldiers, they are ready and prepared for them; for when walking by night they are always on the alert, 
thinking it likely that they may meet with an apparition, and they even go in search of them through the highways and along the private 
paths, desirous of seeing them, in order to obtain from them some piece of good fortune, or a present of thorns of the aloe, which were 
the sign of it; and if by chance a phantom of this kind presented itself to him who went in search of it, he immediately began to grapple 
with it, and seizing tightly hold of it said, Who are you? speak to me; there is no use in your being silent, since 1 now hold you tight, 
and will not let you go. ‘These words he frequently repeated whilst the struggle continued between them; and when the conflict had 
lasted for a length of time, on the approach of morning the phantom spoke, and said, Let me go, for you weary me; tell me what you 
wish, and it shall be granted to you. On which the soldier replied, What will you give me? when the phantom said, Hereis athora. To 
which the soldier answered by saying, 1 will not have it; why does your present consist of only a single thorn? it is useless. And although 
two or three, or even four thorns were afterwards offered, the phantom was not released from his grasp until it had given him as many as 
he wished, which on bestowing, it thus addressed him,—J grant you riches of all kintls, bidding you to be prosperous in the world. 
Upon which the soldier let the phantom go, since he had now obtained what he sought and desired.” It deserves to be remarked, that 
God’s touching. the hollow of Jacob’s thigh is said in the twenty-fifth verse of the thirty-second chapter of Genesis to have put it out of 
joint ; and in the thirty-second verse of the same chapter, to have caused the sinew of the thigh to shrink ; and hence a question (of little im- 
portance it must be confessed) arises, viz. Whether Jacob suffered one or two accidents in his conflict with God? It is evident on the latter 
supposition that his thigh which had been put out of joint must immediately afterwards have been restored to its proper place, or he never 
would have been able to have walked again. Considering the importance which the Jews attached to this mysterious incident in the 
life. of the most revered of their patriarchs, it is surprising that Moses did not record in a more circumstantial manner an event in Hebrew 
history which redounded so much to the glory of Jacob, the founder of the house of Israel; although his reserve makes it only the more 
probable that the Rabbis corrupted with their traditions the simple narrative of the Pentateuch. ‘They undoubtedly considered the 
shrinking of the sinew of Jacob’s thigh a sign of the blessings,—amongst which riches must be numbered,—which were in store for him 
and his descendants; and it may be a question, whether, in their usual style of absurd reasoning upon every unexplained point in 
Scripture, they might not have argued, that since a mere touch could not have caused the sinew of his thigh to shrink, it might have been 
punctured; and that, as God had appeared to Moses in a bush, so he might on this other occasion have pierced the patriarch’s 
thigh with a¢horn. Itis vain, from the nature of the subject which affords grounds for these discussions, to attempt to refute any thing that 
may be said by the Rabbis, by demanding of them whether a viler fable or one more derogatory to the majesty of the Deity, can be 
found in the whole range of heathen mythology than that which their perverse genius may suggest as a solution of these doubts. At the 
same time, since the Mexicans considered the thorns of the aloe, which the soldier received from the phantom of Tezcatlipoca, to be the 
sign of his having prevailed and of his future good fortune, it is probable that Jewish traditions laid the foundation for this gross super- 
stition amongst them.” 

* Mixcoatl was reputed by the Mexicans to be the god of those who hunted the mazatl or stag; and Jacob and Esau being twins, 
the name of Mixcoatl, the signification of which is ¢ the serpent or twin of the clouds,’ might have been common to both of them, or have 
belonged only to Esau ; and Iztacmixcoatlh, or ¢ the fair-complexioned twin,’ might have been Jacob’s peculiar appellation. 

+ It is not impossible that Jacob was worshiped by the Mexicans under the name of Yacatecutli, (the fair-spoken and deceitful god 
of merchants,) whose assistance they invoked, in order that when making a bargain they might be able to overreach the opposite party. 

NOTES. 4,07 

The following passage, containing the tradition of the Mexicans respecting their own genealogy and that of the 
other nations of New Spain, is taken from the 120th page of Gomara’s Conquest of Mexico, where, treating of their 
antiquities, he says, “ According to their own books, and the common opinion of their learned men, and such as are 
acquainted with their ancient history, the Mexicans came from a country called Chicomuztotlh, and descended all 
from one father, whose name was Iztacmixcoatlh, who had two wives. By Wancueitl, (which was the name of one 
of them,) he had six sons, the eldest of whom was named Xelhua, the second Tenuch, the third Ulmecatlh, the fourth 
Xicalancatlh, the fifth Mixtecatlh, the sixth Otomitlh. By Chimalmatlh, (which was the name of the other,) he had 
Quecalcoatlh.” Gomara next proceeds to state in what part of New Spain each of these sons settled, and the 
names of the cities which they founded. Of Quecalcoatlh he says, “‘he built, or, according to other accounts, 
rebuilt Tlaxcallan, Huexocinco, Chololla, and many other cities. The same Quecalcoatlh was an upright, temperate, 
religious, and holy man, and, as they believe, a god. He never was married or acquainted with women. He lived a 
life of the greatest chastity, performing rigid acts of penance, accompanied with fasting and other austerities. He 
preached, according to report, the law of nature, and inculcated it with diligence, setting an example of morals. He 
instituted fasting, which had not been before practised; and was the first who in that country offered sacrifices of 
blood, but not, in the manner which is now customary with these Indians, with the death of infinite numbers of men, 
but by drawing blood from the ears and tongue, as an act of penance, and as a punishment and remedy against the 
sin of lying and of listening to lies, which are no small vices amongst these people. They believe that he did not 
die, but that he disappeared in the province of Coacacoalco, close to the sea. They paint Quecalcoatlh such as I 
have described; and either because they do not know, or because they conceal his death, they believe him to be the 
god of the air, and worship him in all that country, but principally in Tlaxcallan and Chololla, and in the other 
cities which he founded, and accordingly they celebrate strange rites and sacrifices in them to him.” 

It would be an omission in this place, speaking of American traditions which seem to connect the Mosaic history 
with the mythology of the New World, not to mention Votan, who was a celebrated saint amongst the Chiapanese 
and the Capotecas ; and it is much to be regretted that Nufiez de la Vega, Bishop of Chiapa and Soconusco, should 
have destroyed or consigned to oblivion the historical work which he wrote, (or which at least was written by some 
other person,) concerning him; as it would probably have thrown much light on the ancient history of America and 
the communications which undoubtedly subsisted in early ages between the Old and New Continent. Boturini, in 
the 115th page of his Idea of a New General History of North America, gives an account of the discovery, by 
Nufiez de la Vega, whilst engaged on a visitation of his diocese in the year 1691, of this historical work, together 
with some ancient calendars, which he caused to be publicly burnt in the square of Huehuetan ; an act of mistaken zeal. 
that Boturini thus laments : “These burnings have been frequent and very fatal in New Spain. The Indians deplore 
them, and so do learned Spaniards; and I lament them, because I am convinced that these ancient paintings contained 
not only particular notices of great literary treasures, but likewise of immense riches stored up in the times of 
paganism, and hid on the occasion of the conquest; and I do not despair of being able to perform, some day or 
other, a notable service to Your Majesty.” 

The following account of Votan is taken from a recent publication, but of no great authority. It contains, however, 
a statement of some curious facts relative to him, which bear the appearance of probability; and as that part of 
it which relates to the discovery of the abovementioned history by Nufiez de la Vega is extracted from the Diocesan 
Constitutions, (a work written by that bishop, and published at Rome in 1702,) it is so far entitled to full credit. It 
is necessary however to observe, that the English translation, “he wrote an historical tract in the Indian idiom,” is 
incorrect, as the Spanish passage should have been translated, “ and in an historical tract which was written in the 
Indian idiom, mention is made;” since it is not expressly stated who the author of the book was, whether Votan 
himself or some other person. The account itself is from the pen of Doctor Cabrera, who says: “ Among the 
many small historical works that fell into the hands of this illustrious prelate (Nufiez de la Vega),—who was not 
more zealous for the glory of God than he was mistaken in the interpretations he applies to many of them, and 
particularly when he attributes the whole of them to superstition,—he instances one that was written by Votan, of 
whom he speaks as follows, in No. 34, section 30, of the Preface to his Constitutions: ‘ Votan is the third Gentile 
placed in the calendar: he wrote an historical tract in the Indian idiom, wherein he mentions by name the people 
with whom, and the places where, he had been. Up to the present time there has existed a family of the Votans in 
Teopizca. He says also that he is lord of the Tapanahuasec (‘the wooden drum’); that he saw the great house 

” 408 NOTES. 

(meaning the Tower of Babel), which was built, by the order of his grandfather Noah, from the earth to the sky ; 
that he was the first man whom God sent hither to divide and portion out these Indian lands; and that at the place 
where he saw the great house a different language was given to each nation.’ 

“ This illustrious prelate could have communicated a much greater portion of information relative to Votan, and 
to many other of the primitive inhabitants, whose historical works he assures us were in his own possession; but 
feeling some scruples on account of the mischievous use the Indians made of their histories in the superstition of 
the Nagualism, he thought proper to withhold it, for the reasons assigned in No. 36, section 32, of his preface. — 
‘ Although,’ says he, ‘ in these tracts and papers there are many other things touching primitive paganism, they are 
not mentioned in this epitome, lest, by being brought into notice, they should be the means of confirming more 
strongly an idolatrous superstition. I have made this digression, that it may be observed in the notices of the 
Indians, and the substance of the primitive errors in which they were instructed by their ancestors.’ It is to be 
regretted that the place is unknown where these precious documents of history were deposited; but still more is it 
to be lamented that the great treasure should have been destroyed. This treasure, according to the Indian tradition, 
was placed by Votan himself, as a proof of his origin anda memorial for future ages, in the casa lobrega (house 
of darkness) that he had built in a breath, that is in the space of a few breathings,—a metaphorical expression, 
intended to imply the very short space of time employed in its construction. He committed this deposit to a 
distinguished female and a certain number of plebeian Indians appointed annually for the purpose of its safe 
custody. His mandate was scrupulously observed for many ages by the people of Tacoaloya, in the province of 
Soconusco, where it was guarded with extraordinary care; until being discovered by the prelate before mentioned, 
he obtained and destroyed it. Let me give his own words, from No. 34, section 30, of his preface. ‘This treasure 
consisted of some large earthen vases of one piece, and closed with covers of the same material, on which were 
represented in stone the figures of the ancient Indian pagans whose names are in the calendar, with some 
Chalchihuites, which are solid hard stones of a green colour, and other superstitious figures. These were taken 
from a cave by the Indian lady herself and the Tapianes or guardians of them, and given up, when they were 
publicly burnt in the square at Hueguetan, on our visit to that province in 1691. 

“ Tt is possible that Votan’s historical tract alluded to by Nuhez de la Vega, or another similar to it, may be the 
one which is now in the possession of Don Ramon de Ordofiez y Aguiar, a native of Ciudad Real. He is a man of 
extraordinary genius, and engaged at this time in composing a work, the title of which I have seen, being as 
follows, ‘ Historia del Cielo y de la Tierra,—that will not only embrace the original population of America, but 
trace its progress from Chaldea immediately after the confusion of tongues, its mystical and moral theology, its 
mythology, and most important events. His literary acquirements, his application and study of the subject for 
more than thirty years, his skill in the Tzendal language, (in which idiom the tract just spoken of is written,) and 
the many excellent authors he has collected, lead us to anticipate,” &c. &c. The writer proceeds to say, “To the 
important information of Nufiez de la Vega, I will add the no less valuable notices communicated to me by Don 
Ramon Ordofiez y Aguiar. The memoir in his possession consists of five or six folios of common quarto paper, 
written in ordinary characters in the Tzendal language,——an evident proof of its having been copied from the original 
in hieroglyphics shortly after the conquest. At the top of the first leaf the two continents are painted in different 
colours in two small squares placed parallel to each other in the angles: the one representing Europe, Asia, and 
Africa, is marked with two large SS upon the upper arms of two bars drawn from the opposite angles of each square, 
forming the point of union in the centre: that which indicates America has two S S placed horizontally on the bars ; 
but I am not certain whether upon the upper or lower bars; I believe, however, upon the latter. When speaking of the 
places he had visited on the Old Continent, he marks them on the margin of each chapter with an upright S, and those 
of America with a horizontal S. Between these squares stands the title of his history, ‘ Proof that I am Culebra, 
(a serpent), which title he proves in the body of his work by saying that he is Culebra because he is Chivim. He 
states that he conducted seven families from Valum Votan to this continent, and assigned lands to them; that he is 
the third of the Votans; that, having determined to travel until he arrived at the root of heaven, in order to 
discover his relations the Culebras and make himself known to them, he made four voyages to Chivim, which is 
expressed by repeating four times, from Valum Votan to Valum Chivim, from Valum Chivim to Valum Votan ; that 
he arrived in Spain, and that he went to Rome; that he saw the great house of God building ; that he went by the 
road which his brethren the Culebras had bored; that he marked it, and that he passed by the houses of the thirteen. 

NOTES. 409 

Culebras. He relates that in returning from one of his voyages, he found seven other families of the Tzequil 
nation, who had joined the first inhabitants, and recognised in them the same origin as his own, that is, that of the 
Culebras. He speaks of the place where they built their first town, which from its founders received the name 
of Tzequil. He affirms the having taught them refinement of manners in the use of the table, table-cloth, dishes, 
basins, cups, and napkins: that in return for these, they taught him the knowledge of God and of his worship, his 
first ideas of a king, and of obedience to him; and that he was chosen captain of all these united families.” 

So far Doctor Cabrera; from whose treatise, entitled “Teatro Critico Americano,” this long paragraph has been 
extracted. It is unnecessary to attempt in this place to trace out any further Scriptural analogies in the traditions 
and mythology of the New World, since the coincidences which have been already mentioned are sufficiently 
strong to warrant the conclusion that the Indians, at a period long antecedent to the arrival of the Spaniards in 
America, were acquainted with a portion at least of the Old Testament, although time, superstition, and, above all, 
such an imperfect mode of transmitting to posterity the memory of past events as that of paintings, had greatly 
corrupted their ancient traditions. We shall close these observations with the following curious extract from 
Torquemada, from which it might appear that even the New Testament had been known to the Indians: “ Another 
ecclesiastic, named Brother Diego de Mercado, a grave father, who has been definitor of this province of the Holy 
Gospel, and one of the most exemplary men and greatest doers of penance of his time, relates, and authenticates 
this relation with his signature, that some years ago conversing with an aged Indian of the Otomies, above seventy 
years old, respecting matters concerning our faith, the Indian told him that they in ancient times had been in 
possession of a book which was handed down successively from father to son, in the person of the eldest, who was 
dedicated to the safe custody of it and to instruct others in its doctrines. These doctrines were written in two 
columns, and between column and column Christ was painted crucified, with a countenance as of anger. They 
accordingly said that God was offended; and out of reverence did not turn over the leaves with their hands, but 
with a small bar which they had made for that purpose, which they kept along with the book. On this ecclesiastic’s 
questioning the Indian as to the contents of that book and its doctrines, he was unable to give him further 
information, but simply replied that if the book had not been lost, he would have seen that the doctrine which he 
taught and preached to them, and those which the book contained, were the same; that the book had rotted in the 
earth, where the persons who kept it had buried it on the arrival of the Spaniards. He likewise informed him that 
they knew the world had been destroyed by the deluge, and that only seven persons had escaped in the ark, and 
that all the rest had perished, together with the animals and birds, excepting those which had been saved therein. 
They were also acquainted with the embassy of the angel to Our Lady, under a figure, relating that something very 
white, like the feather of a bird, fell from heaven, and that a virgin stooped down and took it up, and put it in her 
bosom and became pregnant; but what she brought forth they could not tell. What they say of the Deluge is 
attested likewise in Guatemala by the Indians named Achies, who assert that they possessed paintings recording 
that event, with other matters of antiquity, all of which the Brothers, with the spirit and zeal with which they were 
animated for the destruction of idolatry, took from them and burnt, holding them to be suspicious.” 

Nore III. 
REASONS FOR SUPPOSING THAT CHRISTIANS IN EARLY AGES COLONIZED AMERICA. 

Ir is so singular a fact that the Indians of Mexico and Peru should have believed with Christians in many 
doctrines which are held to be peculiarly and exclusively Christian, and to constitute a line of demarcation 
between Christianity and all other religions, that it appears a convincing proof that Christianity must in early 
ages have been established in America, and that ancient communications subsisted between the old and new 
continent at a period long antecedent to the age of Columbus. In pointing out some of the leading doctrines 
of Christianity, the knowledge of which was likewise found amongst the Indians, it may be proper to observe, that 

(5m ) 

410 NOTES. 

although it might be easily shown that the Indians believed in the existence of the Deity, in the immortality 
of the soul, and in a future state of rewards and punishments; still, as these are intuitive truths which all 
religions teach, which all ages have believed, no inferences will be attempted to be drawn from them; since the 
Romans or the Greeks, the Mahometans or the Hindoos, might by the same arguments be proved to have 
_carried on intercourse in former ages with the Indians. The doctrines more peculiarly Christian, a belief in which 
the Indians likewise professed, however mixed up with other superstitions, and from which inferences may be fairly 
drawn, are the following: That of a Trinity, of original sin, of repentance and penance, of a vicarial atonement, of a 
future redeemer, and of the resurrection of the body. But, besides exhibiting a certain degree of conformity on these 
doctrinal points, they likewise seem to have been formerly acquainted with the sacraments, although superstition had 
lamentably perverted these ancient mysteries of the Christian Church, since traces of them may be found in various 
rites and ceremonies common alike to the Mexicans and Peruvians. Having briefly mentioned what the particular 
doctrines of Christianity were, which the gravest writers assert were known to the Indians before the arrival of the 
Spaniards in the New World, we shall proceed separately to adduce proofs to show that the above-mentioned doc- 
trines did in reality constitute a portion of the Indian faith ; and although many testimonies from different authors 
might be cited in confirmation of each article, it will be sufficient in this place to quote the single authorities of men 
like Acosta, Peter Martyr, Garcia, and Torquemada, whose writings are highly appreciated in Spain, and are also known 
to the rest of Europe.—And first with respect to the doctrine of a Trinity *. Acosta says that the belief of the Peru- 

* The doctrine of a Trinity was known not only in Peru and Yucatan, but likewise amongst the more savage Indian tribes of Paraguay, 
as we learn from the following passage of the “ Lettres Edifiantes et Curieuses, écrites des Missions Etrangéres ;” a work published by autho- 
rity, and replete with information. d 

« Pour ce qui est de la religion de ces peuples et des cérémonies qu’ils y observent, il n’y a point, dans toutes les Indes Occidentales, de 
nation plus superstitieuse. Cependant, au travers des fables grossitres et ridicules, et des dogmes monstrueux qui les asservissent au dé- 
mon, on ne laisse pas de découvrir quelques traces de la vraie foi, qui, selon la commune opinion, leur fut préchée par Saint Thomas ou par 
ses disciples : il parait méme qu’ils ont quelque idée confuse de l’avénement de Jésus-Christ incarné pour la rédemption des hommes. 
C’est une tradition parmi eux, que, dans les siécles passés, une Dame d’une grande beauté congut un fort bel enfant, sans l’opération d’aucun 
homme ; que cet enfant étant parvenu a un certain ge, opéra les plus grands prodiges qui remplirent toute la terre d’admiration ; qu’il guérit 
les malades, ressuscita les morts, fit marcher les boiteux, rendit la vue aux aveugles, et fit une infinité d’autres merveilles qui étaient fort au- 
dessus des forces humaines ; qu’un jour ayant rassemblé un grand peuple, 2/ s’éleva dans les airs, et se transforma dans ce soleil que nous 
voyons. Son corps est tout lumineux, disent les Mapono ou prétres des idoles; et s’il n’y avait pas une si grande distance de lui 4 nous, nous 
pourrions distinguer les traits de son visage. Il parait trés-naturel qu’un si grand personnage fiit objet de leur culte: cependant ils n’adorent 
que des démons et ils disent qu’ils leur apparaissent quelquefois sous des formes horribles. Ils reconnaissent une Trinité de Dieux prin- 
cipaux, qu’ils distinguent des autres Dieux qui ont beaucoup moins d’autorité; savoir, le Pére, le Fils et ?Esprit. Ils nomment le Pére 
Omequeturiqui, ou bien Urago-Zoriso; le nom du Fils est Urusana, et Esprit se nomme Urupo. Cette Vierge qu’ils appellent Quipoci, 
est la Mére de Dieu Urusana, et la femme d’Urago-Zoriso. Le Pére parle d’une voix haute et distincte; le Fils parle du nez, et la voix 
de l’Esprit est semblable au tonnerre. Le Pére est le Dieu dela justice et chAtie les méchans; le Fils et ? Esprit, de méme que la Déesse, font 
la fonction de médiateurs, et intercédent pour les coupables. C’est une vaste salle de la maison du cacique, qui sert de temple aux Dieux. 
Une partie de la salle se ferme d’un grand rideau, et c’est ld le sanctuaire ot ces trois divinités, qu’ils appellent d’un nom commun 4 toutes 
trois Tinimaacas, viennent recevoir les hommages des peuples et publier leurs oracles. Ce sanctuaire n’est accessible qu’au. principal 
Mapono; car il y en a deux ou trois autres subalternes en chaque village, mais il leur est défendu d’en approcher, sous peine de mort. 
C’est d’ordinaire dans le temps des assemblées publiques, que ces Dieux se rendent dans leur sanctuaire. Un grand bruit, dont toute la 
maison retentit, annonce leur arrivée. Ces peuples, qui passent le temps a boire et a danser, interrompent leurs plaisirs, et poussent de 
grands cris de joie pour honorer la présence deleurs Dieux. ‘Tata equice,’ disent ils, c’est-d-dire, ¢ Pére, étes-vous déja venu ?” Ils entendent 
une voix, qui leur répond: ‘Panitoques,’ qui veut dire: «Enfans, courage, continuez a bien boire, & bien manger, et 4 vous bien divertir ; 
vous ne sauriez me faire plus de plaisir: j’ai grand soin de vous tous: c’est moi qui vous procure les avantages que vous retirez de la chasse 
et de la péche, c’est de moi, que vous tenez tous les biens que vous possédez.’ Apres cette réponse, que ces peuples écoutent en grand 
silence et avec respect, ils retournent & leur danse et & la Chicha, qui est leur boisson; et bientdt leurs tétes étant échauffées par l’exces 
quils font de cette liqueur, la féte se termine par des querelles, par des blessures, et par la mort de plusieurs d’entr’eux. Les Dieux 
ont soif @ leur tour, et demandent 4 boire: aussitét on prépare des vases ornés de fleurs, et on choisit Indien et V'Indienne qui sont le 
plus en vénération dans le village, pour présenter la boisson. Le Mapono entr’ouvre un coin du rideau, et la recoit pour la porter aux 
Dieux, car il n’y a que lui qui soit leur confident, et qui ait le droit de les entretenir. Les offrandes de ce qu’on a pris & la chasse et 
dla péche ne sont pas oubliées. Quand ces peuples sont au fort de leur ivresse et de leurs querelles, le Mapono sort du sanctuaire, et 
leur imposant silence, il leur annonce qu’il a exposé aux Dieux leurs besoins, qu’il en a regu des réponses les plus favorables, qu’ils 
leur promettent toute sorte de prospérités, de la pluie selon les besoins, une bonne récolte, une chasse, et une péche abondante, et tout 
ce qu’ils peuvent desirer. Un jour qu’un de ces Indiens, moins dupe que ses compatriotes, s’avisa de dire, en riant, que les Dieux avaient 
bien bu, et que la Chicha les avait rendus de bonne humeur, le Mapono, qui entendit ce trait de raillerie, changea aussitot ses magni- 

NOTES. 411 

vians was as follows ;—his words, as far as the Latin translation by De Bry may be supposed to be correct, are these: 
“ That which is here most worthy of remark, is the fact that Satan, in order to incease the majesty of his own 
worship, has wished by cunningly introducing the doctrine of the Holy Trinity among the Indians, to abuse it; for 
they had given these names to the three above-mentioned images of the sun, Apointi, Churiunti, and Intiquaoqui ; 
the significations of which are, The Father and Lord of the sun, the Son the sun* itself, and the Brother of the 

fiques promesses en autant d’imprécations, et les menaga de tempétes, de tonnerres, de la famine et de la mort. II arrive souvent que 
ce Mapono rapporte, de la part des Dieux, des réponses bien cruelles ; il ordonne a tout le village de prendre les armes, d’aller fondre 
sur quelqu’un des villages voisins, de piller tout ce qui s’y trouvera, et d’y mettre tout a feu et & sang. II est toujours obéi. C’est 
ce qui entretient parmi ces peuples des inimitiés et des guerres continuelles, et ce qui les porte 4 s’entredétruire les uns les autres. C’est 
aussi la récompense des hommages qu’ils rendent a V’esprit infernal, qui ne se plait que dans le trouble et Ja division, et qui n’a d’autre 
but que la perte éternelle de ses adorateurs. Outre ces Dieux principaux, ils en adorent d’autres d’un ordre inférieur, qu’ils nomment 
Isituus; ce qui signifie, Seigneurs de l’eau. L’emploi de ces Dieux est de parcourir les riviéres et les lacs, et de les remplir de poissons 
“en faveur de leurs dévots. Ceux-ci Jes invoquent dans le temps de leur péche, et les encensent avec dela fumée de tabac. Si la chasse, 
ou la péche a été abondante, ils vont au temple leur en ofrir une partie en signe de reconnaissance. Ces idolAtres croient que les ames 
sont immortelles, ils les nomment Oquipau, et qu’au sortir de leurs corps, elles sont portées par leurs prétres dans le ciel, ot elles doivent 
se réjouir éternellement. Quand quelqu’un vient @ mourir, on célébre ses obséques avec plus ou moins de solennité, selon le rang qu’il 
tenait dans le village. Le Mapono, auquel ils croient que cette ame est confiée, regoit les offrandes que la mére, et la femme du défunt 
lui apportent ; il répand de l’eau pour purifier ’ame de ses souillures; il console cette mére et cette femme affligées; et leur fait espérer 
que bientot il aura d’agréables nouvelles a leur dire sur ’heureux sort de l’ame du défunt, et qu’il va la conduire au ciel. Aprés quelque 
temps, le Mapono, de retour de son voyage, fait venir la mére et la femme; et, prenant un air gai, il ordonne a celle-ci d’essuyer ses larmes, 
et de quitter ses habits de deuil, parce que son mari est heureusement dans le ciel, ot il attend, pour partager son bonheur avec elle. 
Ce voyage du Mapono avec l’ame est pénible; il lui faut traverser d’épaisses foréts, des montagnes escarpées, descendre dans des 
vallées remplies de riviéres, de lacs, et de marais bourbeux, jusqu’a ce qu’enfin aprés bien des fatigues, il arrive 4 une grande riviére, sur 
laquelle est un pont de bois, gardé nuit et jour par un Dieu nommé Tatusiso, qui préside au passage des ames, et qui met le Mapono 
dans le chemin du ciel. Ce Dieu ale visage pile, la téte chauve, une physionomie qui fait horreur, le corps plein d’ulcéres et couvert de 
misérables haillons. [] ne va point au temple pour y recevoir les hommages de ses dévots, son emploi ne Jui en donne pas le Loisir, parce 
qu'il est continuellement occupé passer les ames. II arrive quelquefois que ce Dieu arréte l’ame au passage, sur-tout si c’est celle d’un 
jeune homme, afin de la purifier. Si cette ame est peu docile, et résiste 4 ses volontés, il s’irrite, il prend ame, et la précipite dans 
la riviére, afin qu’elle se noie. C’est 14, disent-ils, la source de tant de funestes événemens qui arrivent dans le monde. Des pluies 
abondantes, et continuelles avaient ruiné les moissons dans la terre des Indiens Jurucares. Le peuple, qui était inconsolable, s’adressa au 
Mapono, pour demander aux Dieux quelle était la cause d’un si grand malheur. Le Mapono, aprés avoir pris le temps de consulter 
les Dieux, rapporta leur réponse, qui était, qu’en portant au ciel lame d’un jeune homme, dont le pére vivait encore dans le village, 
cette ame manqua de respect au Tatusiso, et ne voulut point se laisser purifier, ce qui avait obligé ce Dieu cruellement irrité, de la jeter 
dans la riviére. A‘ ce récit le pére du jeune homme qui aimait tendrement son fils, et qui le croyait déja au ciel, ne pouvait se consoler ; 
mais le Mapono ne manqua pas de ressource dans ce malheur extréme. II dit au pére affligé que, s’il voulait lui préparer un canot bien 
propre, il irait chercher ’ame de son fils au fond de la riviére. Le canot fut bient6t prét, et le Mapono le chargea sur ses épaules. Peu 
aprés les pluies étant cessées, et le ciel devenu serein, il revint avec d’agréables nouvelles, mais le canot ne reparut jamais. Du reste, c’est 
un pauvre, Paradis que le leur, et les plaisirs qu’on y goiite ne sont guére capables de contenter un esprit tant soit peu raisonnable. IIs 
disent qu’il y a de fort gros arbres qui distillent une sorte de gomme, dont ces ames subsistent; que l’on y trouve des singes, que l’on 
prendrait pour des Ethiopiens; qu’il y a du miel et un peu de poisson; qu’on y voit voler de toutes parts un grand aigle, sur lequel ils 
débitent beaucoup de fables ridicules, et si dignes de compassion, qu’on ne peut s’empécher de déplorer Paveuglement de ces pauvres 
peuples.” 

* The following observations are taken from the English edition of “ Volney’s Ruins,” and they refer to a strange heresy that sprung 
up in the earliest ages of Christianity, which identified Christ in a sort of ézeve1 with the sun. That celebrated writer commenting on 
the word chris, which he says signifies to preserve, and was a name belonging to Vishnou, writes as follows: “The Greeks used to 
express by # or the Spanish iota, the aspirated hd of the Orientals, who said hdris : in Hebrew, héres (p5n) signifies the sun; but in Arabic, 
the radical word means to guard, to preserve, and haris, guardian, preserver. It is the proper epithet of Vichenou, which demonstrates 
at once the identity of the Indian and Christian trinities, and their common origin. It is manifestly but one system, which divided into 
two branches, one in the East, and the other in the West, assumed two different forms: its principal trunk is the Pythagorean system 
of the soul of the world, or Ioupiter. The epithet pater or father having been applied to the Demi-ourgos of the Platonicians, gave rise 
to an ambiguity which caused an inquiry to be made after the son. In the opinion of the philosophers it was the understanding, vous and 
Aoyos, from which the Latins made their verbum; and thus we clearly perceive the origin of the eternal father and of the verb his son, 
proceeding from him (mens ex Deo nata, says Macrobius); the anima or spiritus mundi was the Holy Ghost ; and it is for this reason 
that Manes, Basilides, Valentinius, and other pretended heretics of the first ages, who traced things to their source, said that God the 
Father was the supreme inaccessible light of heaven (the first circle, or the émaaves); the Son the secondary light resident in the sun, and 
the Holy Ghost the atmosphere of the earth.—See Beausob. vol. ii. p. 586. Hence, among the Syrians, his emblem of a dove, the bird 
of Venus Urania, that is of the air. ‘The Syrians (says Nigidius in Germanico) assert that a dove sat several days in the Euphrates on 

4192 NOTES. 

sun. They bestowed the same appellations also on Chuquulla, that is, the god whose habitation they supposed was 
in that tract or region of the air whence proceed thunder, rain and snow, as they had done on the three images. 
In Chuquisaca an idol was once shown to me to which the Indians were accustomed to pray; they called it Tanga- 
tanga, and believed it to be a god who was one in three, and three in one.’—Acosta, lib. v. cap. xxviii. Several 
historians of the New World mention Suchiquecal, and the sin which she committed in eating of the fruit of a tree; 
although they do not expressly state that that fruit was an apple: whilst others assert, that with the Mexicans each 
succeeding year was merely a new anniversary of the fall of man, and that every day in their calendar was dedicated 
to the performance of some cruel austerity intended to blot out the remembrance of that sin; it will therefore be un- 
necessary to appeal to the testimony of any particular author to prove that the doctrine of original sin was believed 
by the Indians. ‘With respect to penitence and penance, these were doctrines introduced by Quecalcoatl, and strictly 
inculcated by the religion of the Mexicans. Gomara (speaking of Quecalcoatl) says, “He was the god of the air, 
that he founded the city of Chollula, and was by tradition chaste, and a great doer of penance, the institutor of fasts, 
and of drawing blood from the tongue and the ears; and that he permitted no sacrifices except those of quails, doves, 
and such animals as were taken in the chace; that he wore a long narrow vest of white cotton, and over it a mantle 
coyered with red crosses.”—Gomara, La Conquista de Mexico, fo. xxxviii. The doctrine of a vicarial atonement, or 
of a sacrifice for sin, whereby the guilt of the one party is expiated and atoned for by the zmnocent blood of the other, 
was also well known to the Indians; and the question is curious, how traces of this doctrine should have been disco- 
vered in America, and how, on the supposition of these traces affording indications of Christianity having in earlier 
ages existed in that continent, the doctrines of a purer faith could have thus degenerated, and in time have become 
mingled with such barbarous superstitions. The following extract is from the History of Chili by Rosales ; since the 
work of Rosales is inedited, the passage in the original Spanish is here inserted, to which the translation is subjoined. 
“ En Culacoya prosiguiendo con su conquista en tierras del gran Sefior Quinchatipai, cinco leguas de la ciudad de 
la Concepcion, tubieron otra fortaleza, y alli ay siete piedras a manera de piramides labradas, que fueron puestas por 
los Indios del Peru para hacer la ceremonia llamada Calpainga, que se hacia para la salud del rey Inga cada 
un afio. Era este rito a semejanza del que hacian los Cartaginenses, que como refiere el Padre Juan de Mariana, 
grave historiador, para obligar a sus dioses les sacrificaban todos los afios algunos dioses escogidos, y assi escogian 
los Ingas dos nifos de edad de seis aftos cada uno, varon y mujer, y los vestian en traje de Inga, y assi ligados 
y vivos los enterraban, diciendo que al pecado que su Rey y Sefior ubiesse echo, lo pagaban aquellos inocentes 
en aquel sacrificio.”—Historia del Chile, lib. iii. cap. 2.“ Prosecuting their conquest in Culacoya as far as the 
country of the powerful lord Quinchatipai, five leagues distant from the city of Conception, they (the Spaniards) 
found another fortress where were seven stones resembling sculptured pyramids, which had been placed there by the 
Indians of Peru for the purpose of performing the ceremony called Calpainga, which was celebrated annually to 
ensure the prosperity of the sovereign Inga. This rite resembled one in use amongst the Carthaginians, who, in 
order to gain the favour of their gods, as Father Juan de Mariana, a grave historian, relates, sacrificed every year 
some selected gods; and the Ingas accordingly selected annually two children, each of six years of age, a boy and a 
girl, and clothed them in the dress of the Inga; and in this manner, having bound them, they buried them alive, saying 
that those innocent victims would by that sacrifice ransom the sins which their king and lord had committed.” If 
our surprise is excited by the discovery that the Peruvians were not altogether ignorant of the nature of a vicarial 
sacrifice or atonement, it will be produced in no less degree when we discover that the inhabitants of New Spain 
generally believed in the coming of a future Redeemer or Saviour, whose advent as well as the last destruction of 
the world they seem to have expected at the close of certain stated periods corresponding with the artificial cycles of 
time which they employed in their calendars: that future redeemer was Quecalcoatl. The letters of Cortes to Charles 
the Fifth fully prove that about the time when the Spaniards first arrived in America, the expectation was very general 
in New Spain of the appearance of Quecalcoatl, and for many years afterwards that expectation continued: so diffi- 
cult is it to root out ancient prejudices; since we are informed that the mere report of their god having come to 

the egg of a fish, whence Venus was born.’ Sextus Empiricus also observes, (Inst. Pyrrh. lib. ili. c. 23,) that the Syrians abstain from 
eating doves; this intimates to us a period commencing in the sign of Pisces (in the winter solstice). We may further observe, that if 
Chris comes from Harisch by a chin, it will signify artificer, an epithet belonging to the sun, ‘These variations, which must have em- 
barrassed the ancients, prove it to be the real type of Jesus, as had been already remarked in the time of Tertullian. ‘ Many,’ says this 
writer, ‘suppose with greater probability that the sun is our God, and they refer us to the religion of the Persians.’ ” Apologet, c. 16. 

N OES 413 

redeem them induced the Capotecas to revolt in the year 1550. Gomara, speaking of this expectation, says, “ The 
Indians viewed with attention the dress, deportment, and beards of the Spaniards; they were astonished at seeing 
the horses feed and gallop; they were terrified at the glittering of their swords, and fell to the ground at the report 
and noise caused by the artillery, thinking that heaven was bursting with thunder and lightning ; and they said of 
the ships, that it was Quecalcoatl who was coming, bringing his temples with him, (con sus templos a cuestas,) since 
he was the god of the air, who had left them, and whose return they expected.”—La Conquista de Mexico, fo. xvii. 
A most striking proof of the firmness of the faith of the Mexicans in Quecalcoatl, is afforded by the relations which 
Cortes in his third letter to Charles the Fifth, and Gomara in his Conquest of Mexico, give of the events which 
occurred during the last days of the siege of that city. Gomara, describing the state of extremity to which the 
Mexicans had been reduced, and their obstinacy in resisting the Spaniards to the last, says, “ Cortes, being desirous 
of seeing how much of the city remained yet to be gained, ascended a high tower, looked around him and perceived 
that there was an eighth part. On the following day he returned to the attack of this remaining portion: he 
commanded his troops to kill none but those who defended themselves. The Mexicans lamented their unhappy 
fate, intreating the Spaniards to conclude the work of slaughter ; and certain chiefs called to Cortes in a very pressing 
manner, who hastened to the spot, imagining that it was to treat of terms of surrender. Having placed himself by 
the side of a bridge, they addressed him, ‘Since you are the son of the sun, why do you not finish with his course : 
O sun! that canst encircle the earth in so short a space of time as a single day and one night, kill us at once, and 
relieve us from such great and protracted sufferings ; since we desire death, in order to go and rest with Quecalcoatl, 
who is expecting us.”—La Conquista de Mexico, fo. Ixxxiiii. The Mexicans and Qapotecas were not the only nations 
in New Spain who expected the coming of a future redeemer. The Totonacas, a numerous people who inhabited 
a mountainous tract of country to the east of Mexico, not far distant from Vera Cruz, believed likewise (if we may 
credit Mendieta, one of the earliest Spanish missionaries who preached the Gospel to the Indians) in this future 
Redeemer. Torquemada, citing the authority of Mendieta, says: “It was likewise found that in some provinces of 
New Spain, as in Totonaca, they expected the coming of the son of the great god, who was the sun, into the world; 
and they said that he was to come to renew all things; although they did not believe or interpret this in a spiritual, 
but in a temporal and earthly sense. They thought, for example, that on his coming, the grain would be of a purer 
and more substantial quality; that their fruit would be better flavoured, and more excellent in its kind; that the 
lives of men would be considerably prolonged, and that every thing else would become better in a corresponding 
degree. And in order to hasten the coming of the son of the great god, they sacrificed at a certain season of the year 
eighteen persons, both male and female; encouraging them, and exhorting them to consider themselves fortunate in 
being the messengers of the republic, which dispatched them to the great god to intreat and to supplicate him that he 
would vouchsafe to send them his son to free them from their many miseries and hardships, and the obligation and 
affliction laid upon them of performing human sacrifices, which, as has already been observed, they considered a 
terrible and cruel burthen; and it was an intolerable torment and grief to them, since they performed them in 
obedience to the commands of their false gods, on account of the great fear in which they held them.” It was the 
cupidity of the Spaniards that first instructed them in another essential doctrine of the Indians,—that of the resur- 
rection of the body. And here we must observe that this doctrine is peculiarly Christian : it is on hes point, and not 
on the immortality of the soul, that Christianity differs from the religions of antiquity ; and it is very singular that 
it should have been discovered in the New World. Gomara, after stating that the Peruvians deposited gold and silver 
vases in the tombs of the Ingas, says: “ When the Spaniards opened these sepulchres and scattered the bones, the 
Indians intreated them not to do so, assuring them that they would be united in the resurrection ; for they fully believe 
in the resurrection of the body, and in the immortality of the soul.”—La Istoria de las Indias, fo. Ixix. Herrera 
likewise, in several passages of his History of the Indies, asserts that the Indians maintained this belief. He says, in 
his fourth decade, page. 187, “ In the provinces of Guazacualco and Yluta they believed that the dead would come 
to life; and when the bones of such as died among them had dried up, they collected them in a basket and hung 
them to the branch of a tree, that they might be at no loss to find them when the period of the resurrection arrived.” 
He says also, “ In the province of Quimbaya they well knew that there was an immortal principle in man, although 
they thought that it was not his soul, but a (bodily) transfiguration, believing that the body would be restored to 
life. They explained further, that its future habitation would be some delightful and pleasant place, and they therefore. 
used interment like the other Indians.”"—Herrera, Historia de las Indias Occidentales, Dec. vi. lib. viii. pag. 177. 

( & wr ) 

Al4 NOTES. 

Having thus traced the resemblance which on many doctrinal points the religion of the New World presented to 
Christianity, we shall now say something of the sacraments: and it is truly surprising to discover that nearly all the 
sacraments of the primitive church were recognized by the first Spanish missionaries, as clearly shadowed out in many 
of the Indian superstitious rites and ceremonies. To begin with Baptism: Peter Martyr, in the eighth chapter of his 
fourth decade, addressing Leo the Tenth, describing the manners of the inhabitants of New Spain, says: “They report 
also another thing worth the noting, which will bee very pleasing to your Holinesse. The priestes seeme to baptise 
children, both males and females, of a yeere old, with holy ceremonyes in their temples, pouring water crosse-wise 
out of a cruet upon their heads; and although they understood not their words, yet they observed their murmurs 
and actions: neyther do they, as the Mahumetanes or Jewes, thinke their temples profaned, if any other sect be 
present at their sacrifices or ceremonyes.” 'Torquemada likewise, in his description of the Mexican baptismal cere- 
mony, says that “the midwife on bathing the infant addressed it in these words: ‘ Receive this water; for the goddess 
Chalchiuitlicue Chalchiuhtlatonac is thy mother. And may this bath wash away and remove the stain and defilement 
which thou deriyest from thy parents, and purify thy heart, and make thee of a good and holy life!’ ”—Monarquia 
Indiana, lib. 13. cap. xvi. It may here be observed that the words “manchas y suciedades que tienes de parte de tus 
padres” can only refer to original sin. This address to the infant about to be baptized, was translated from the 
Mexican language into Spanish by Bernard de Sahagun, one of the first preachers of the ‘Gospel in New Spain. Her- 
rera also asserts that in Yucatan baptismal ceremonies were performed: “ Baptism has been discovered in Yucatan 
alone of all the provinces of New Spain; and its name in their language signifies ‘regeneration’ (nacer otra vez). They 
hold it so much a matter of religion, and entertain such reverence for it, that nobody omits receiving it; they 
imagine that they receive a pure disposition in it to become good, and to escape harm from devils, and to obtain 
the glory which they hoped for ; it is administered to them from the age of three years to twelve, and no one marries 
without having received it. They fix upon a day for the celebration of it which they deem fortunate. The fathers 
fast on the three preceding days, and separate themselves from their wives: in the mean time the priests are occu- 
pied in the purification of the mother, exorcising the devil by means of certain ceremonies; which being completed, 
the children proceeded one by one, and the priest threw some ground maize and incense with his hand upon them. And 
they sent wine in a vase and censer out of the city, with orders to an Indian not to drink it or to look behind him; 
and by the performance of this ceremony they imagined that they exorcised the devil. The priest then came forth 
habited in long and grave vestments, with a branch in his hand, and placed some white cloth on the heads of the chil- 
dren, questioning the elder as to whether they had committed any sin, which on their confessing, he took them aside and 
in certain words blessed them, holding the branch in a threatening attitude towards them, and with some water which 
was kept in a bone, moistened their foreheads, cheeks, fingers, and toes: when some presents having been given, 
the baptismal ceremony was held to be complete, and the festival terminated in banquets. In addition to the three 
days before mentioned, the father and the mother remained apart nine more.”—Historia de las Indias Occidentales, 
Dec. iv. lib. x. cap. iv. 

Proceeding from baptism to the most solemn sacrament of the Church, that of the Lord’s Supper, we shall find a 
mysterious resemblance to the communion of Christians in an idolatrous rite of the Mexicans called Teoqualo, 
which literally signifies ‘to eat god.’ This ceremony consisted in eating the body and blood of Huitzilopuchtli or 
Quecalcoatl under the similitude of bread, which they named Toyoliaytlaquatl, which signifies ‘the food of our life.’ 
Torquemada, in the thirty-eighth chapter of the sixth book of his Indian Monarchy, thus describes it: “‘ Besides the 
image and statue which they had placed in the greater temple of Mexico to their false and abominable god Huitzilo- 
puchtli, which we have already mentioned, they made each year another, compounded and mixed up with different 
kinds of grain and esculent seeds, which was formed in this manner: They collected in one of the principal and 
handsomest halls of the temple, adjoining to the altar and Cu, a quantity of grain and seed of bledos and pulse, which 
they pounded with great care and devotion, and kneaded and formed into the said statue, of the size and height of 
aman. The fluid with which they moistened and worked the flour into dough was the blood of children whom they 
had sacrificed for this purpose; the intention of which was to typify, in the simplicity and innocence of the child, 
that of the god whom the statue represented. After it was made, the priests and satraps took it in their hands, and 
placed it with great reverence and veneration upon the Cu or altar which they had prepared and adorned for its 
reception ; all the ministers of their religion assisting at this act, and blowing trumpets and other instruments, which 
created a loud and tumultuous sound, whilst others went before, singing and dancing. This took place by night. 

NOTES. 7 415 

But as soon as it was morning the ministers and high priest proceeded to consecrate and to bless it, (if such an 
act can he called a consecration and benediction, although the Indians apply that very term to it in their own lan- 
guage,) at which benediction and consecration all the citizens were present, together with crowds of strangers who had 
assembled to witness the said ceremony. The consecration being over, all who could, drew near it, to touch it with, 
their hands, eyes, and mouths, as if it were to touch a relic, or the body of a saint, although that was the lurking-place 
of the Devil; and they at the same time strewed the whole of its body with jewels of gold and precious stones, of value 
proportioned to the devotion and means of each individual, which could easily be pressed into the figure of the idol, 
since the dough which composed it was fresh and soft. They made this liberal offering, thinking that they were 
rendering their god a considerable service, and that on account of it he would pardon their sins; which is what we 
are taught by the sound and Catholic doctrine of the Holy Scriptures,—that charity diminisheth sin. And if when 
done to our neighbour it possesses so much force, it will possess much greater when the offering is made unto God, 
who accordingly has chosen to declare, that it avails those who give and bestow, for their purification and the cleansing 
away of their sins; although in this place it possesses no meritorious quality, inasmuch as it was done to the Devil, 
or, to speak plainer, was done at his instigation. The day of the consecration of that infernal bread and dough being 
past, nobody was allowed to touch it, or to enter into the chapel where it was, but the high priest only. On the 
morning in which they had placed the idol on the altar, they proceeded to make a solemn offering and sacrifice to it. 
They afterwards brought forth the statue and idol of the god Paynalton, the god of war, the vicar or lieutenant of 
the said Huitzilopuchtli, which was made of wood, and was carried in the arms of a priest, who represented the god 
Quetzalcohuatl, and was dressed very richly in curious ornaments and apparel, being preceded by another, holding 
in his hands a large and thick serpent twisted in many folds, which was carried before, and was lifted up on 
high, in the manner of the cross in our processions. They made a very long procession, accompanied by all the 
citizens ; and at certain distances, and on different Cues or altars, the priests who were attached to them performed 
sacrifices as well of prisoners as of quails. The first halting-place was in the division of Teotlacho, where they killed 
two captives and many other slaves ; and approaching this part of the city where I am now writing, called Tlatelulco, 
they went forth to meet it with much solemnity, and sacrificed a great number of quails. Hence the procession 
passed on to Popotlan, where, after having offered incense to it with many ceremonies, they performed the same 
sacrifice ; whence they went to Chapultepec, which is about a league from the city, where they made a similar offering 
and sacrifice. It afterwards returned to the quarter called Tepetoca, the inhabitants of which received it with the 
same festive ceremonies and sacrifices ; and next came to another quarter, named Acachinanco, accompanied with 
the same honours and rejoicings ; from whence it proceeded to the temple from which it had set out. They then 
lifted up the statue of Paynalton, and placed it on the altar by that of Huitzilopuchtli, and there left it, together 
with the banner named Ezpaniztli, which was carried in front; the serpent alone was taken away, and deposited in a 
place allotted to it. This procession being ended, which lasted the greater part of the day, all necessary preparations 
were now ready for the sacrifice; as a commencement of which, the king or supreme lord took a censer, and throwing 
incense into it with certain ceremonies, offered incense to the image of his god, officiating himself as high priest. 
This ceremony being concluded, they took down the image of Paynalton, before which all those who were destined 
to be sacrificed were marched im files, with whatsoever else was required for the sacrifice. They then took three or 
four turns round the temple, as if in procession; and immediately afterwards made the wretched victims ascend the 
platform above, where they sacrificed them, beginning with the prisoners of war, and terminating that horrid act with 
the sacrifice of the fatted slaves who had been purchased for the occasion, tearing out their hearts, and throwing them 
at the feet of the idol. The entire of this day was dedicated to the greatest festivities and rejoicings, in which the 
priests carefully guarded the said statue, watching it during the night with much vigilance, that neither negligence 
nor omission might occur in any thing appertaining to its veneration or service. On the following day in the morning 
they took down the said statue, which being placed on its feet in a hall, the priest Quetzalcohuatl, who on the pre- 
ceding day had marched in procession with the statue of Paynalton in his arms, entered at the same time with it; and 
the king likewise, accompanied by a minister in inner attendance on the god Huitzilopuchtli, who was called Tehua, 
with four other priests of rank, and four principal young men of the number of those whose duty it was to watch 
over the other youths of the temple, who were named Telpochtlatoque, in whose presence, and in that of no others, 
Quetzalcohuatl took a spear, headed with a flint, and threw it at the breast of the idol, with which he pierced it, and 
the idol fell; which ceremony they performed, saying that it was to kill their god Huitzilopuchtli, in order to eat his 

416 NOTES. 

body. ‘The priests afterwards drew near; and one of them took out the heart and presented it to the king, and the 
others divided the body into two parts, and gave the one half to the inhabitants of this quarter of the city named Tlate- 
lulco, who distributed it in crumbs to all the people resident in these suburbs, especially to the young soldiers, without 
giving any part of the dough of the idol to the women. The remaining part, which belonged to the inhabitants of 
that part of Mexico called Tenuchtitlan, was divided amongst the inhabitants of the four quarters named Teopan, 
Atzaqualco, Quepopan, and Moyotlan. They gave it to the male portion of the community, both great and small, 
and also to children in the cradle.—This was their manner of communion, as we have said elsewhere ; and this repast 
was called Teoqualo, which signifies ‘god is eaten.’ And so the composition of this image and likeness of the Devil, 
which had been continued during so many years, ceased on one of the months dedicated to him.” 

Acosta thus describes the same ceremony: “ Luridus Dei ac hominum hostis Sathanas, princeps omnis fastus, 
apud Mexicanos etiam festum Corporis Christi hoc modo imitatus est. Festum Mexicani omnium maxime solenne 
mense Maio in honorem Vitzliputzli celebrabant. Biduo ante, virgines ille, quas monialium ritu in monasteriis ali 
solitas superius diximus, conveniebant, et magnum numerum bledos, seminis genus est, cum tosto maiz permixto 
molebant. Farinam hance cum melle subigebant, ex qua deinde massé magnum idolum, ligneo simile effingebant : 
cujus oculos corallio cyaneo et candido, dentes vero granis maiz insertis exprimebant, et ipsum insuper idolum 
linteis et velis pulchris exornabant. Hoc facto et absoluto, primates confertim accedentes, vestem pretiosam et 
pulcherrimam, forma conveniente concinnatam, idolo injiciebant. Hoc idem postea in sellam cyaneo colore induc- 
tam, ac lecticee impositam, ut bajulari posset, collocabant. Porro ipso festi die, prius quam aurora promicaret, dicte 
virgines candidis vestibus et aliis mundis amicite, conveniebant. Quo die, sorores dei Vitzliputzli ille vocari inci- 
piebant. Ezedem serta ex tosto aut macerato maiz capitibus, ac ex eadem materia crassas corollas collis gerebant, 
ad levum usque bracchium propendentes. Male et vultus earum pigmentis fucati, bracchia vero a cubito usque ad 
manum pulcherrimis ex psittacis plumis ornata erant. Hoc habitu stantes, lecticam idoli suis humeris imponebant, 
quam ad locum, quo juvenes ac adolescentes reticularibus vestibus induti, et similibus cum puellis sertis coronati 
congregatique morabantur, proferebant. Adolescentes, viso idolo, venerabundi accurrebant cominus, et suis humeris 
lecticam suscipientes, idolum ad gradus templi infimos usque deportabant, quo loco universus populus expectabat, 
ad conspectum idoli flexo poplite sese demittens, et pulvere ex pavimento lecto capita sua conspergens. Hoc facto, 
plebs omnis in unam processionem se conferebat, qua maxima fieri posset festinatione in montem quendam Chapul- 
tepec, a civitate Mexico unius leuce spatio distantem procurrens. Ibi conciuncula habita, sacrificia fiebant. Hine 
iterum sese magna celeritate efferentes, in vicinum alium locum Atlacuiauaya vocatum festinabant, ubi secundam 
concionem agebant. Sed nec hic diutius persistentes, contentim ad oppidum quoddam, milliaris unius intervallo 
inde distans, Cuyoacan vocatum, accelerabant: unde in Mexico, nulla quiete media utentes, tandem revertebantur. 
Hoc iter, quod ad minimum milliarium quatuor erat, tribus aut ad summum quatuor horis confectum dabant, quam 
processionem Ypana Vitzliputzli, id est, acceleratum iter Vitzliputzli vocare solebant. In templi ergo gradus infimos 
reversi, sellam deponentes, fortibus funibus eam circumligabant, et nonnullis attrahentibus, ceteris vero protruden- 
tibus et impellentibus, in templi editiora ipsam provehebant; quo propter graduum angustiam humeris imposita 
bajulari non poterat. Interim dum hac peragerentur, populus omnis, cum singulari submissione metuque spectator 
astabat. Sella hec in superiora promota, porro in sacellum quoddam huic rei extructum, et rosis exornatissimum, 
condebatur. A quo deinde juvenes confertim irruentes, fragrantissimis floribus loca templi universa quoquo versum 
conspergebant. Hos deinde excipiebant virgines, predicto habitu insignes, ex cubilibus suis spiras de tosto maiz et 
herba bledos factas efferentes. Has ossium grandiorum forma pistas, adolescentibus tradebant, qui eas tanta strue 
ante idolum congerebant, ut locus capiendis non suppeteret. Kas spiras, ossa ac carnes Vitzliputzli nuncupabant. 
His ossibus ita stratis, seniores, sacerdotesque ac levite, et caeteri ministri continua serie, pro cujusque etate et con- 
ditione accedebant, quorum quilibet flammeum diversis iisque pulcherrimis coloribus intertextum, prout cujusque 
officium poscebat, gestabat. Quin et horum capita sertis, et colla corollis ex floribus concinnatis conspicua erant. 
Hos pone dii deceque, quos varia forma ac habitu venerabantur, insequebantur. Hi, cum ante dictas spiras et idolum 
ex ordine reverenter consedissent, multis ceremoniis peractis, eas cantu et sonis harmonicis quasi consecrabant, ut 
non minus quam ipsum idolum, veneratione digna colerentur. His peractis, ii qui immolandis hominibus destinati 
erant, progrediebantur, et suum munus, ut ante percensuimus, exequebantur. Semper vero hisce diebus festis, 
plures, quam alio tempore, homines mactabantur. Sacrificio finito, omnes tum adolescentes tum virgines e templo 
procedebant, binis uno ordine semper junctis. Continua vero serie se ita locabant, ut virginibus adolescentes semper 

NOTES. ANT 

ex adverso starent, qui saltando et tripudiando motus corporis ad tympanorum sonitum decoros in honorem idoli 
moderabantur. Modulamini illi omnes primores senioresque populi certatim respondebant, choreas et ipsi in orbem 
agitantes, ita, ut in medio interius cum virginibus adolescentes assiduo relinquerentur. Ad hunc ludum spectandi 
animo omnis civitas gregatim confluebat. Festum vero hoc idoli Vitzliputzli magna devotione per omnem provin- 
ciam concelebrandum erat; quo die nemo aliud quicquam preter massam illam, ex qua idolum effictum fuerat, 
gustare audebat. Quin et is cibus swb aurore saltem exortum ingerendus erat, nec ante meridiem potus quicquam 
gustare licebat. Secus qui faceret, sacrilegus censebatur, et ominosa nescio que, ex eo facto prenunciabantur. 
Ceremoniis exactis, jam cuique quod erat, esse licebat. Interea vero temporis, quo hee agitabantur, filios omnes 
domi ab aque potu arcebant, ne ea gustata numinis iram incurrerent, et ejus manu fors occiderentur. ‘Tandem vero 
tum sacrificiis tum saltationibus universis finitis, ornatum suum non sacerdotes solum deponebant, sed archipresby- 
teri etiam idolum habitu sueto exutum confringebant, et cum spiris consecratis in frusta plurima redigebant, que 
postea distribuentes, primum primoribus, ab his deinde universo populo, majoribus, minoribus, viris simul ac foeminis 
offerebant, non secus ac apud nos in Coene Dominic administratione distributio fieri solet. Frustilla hec oblata 
communicantes cum tant4 devotione ac trepidatione accipiebant, ut etiam quasi intime poenitentes nonnunquam 
lachrymas profunderent. Nec quicquam persuasum habebant aliud, quam quod veram carnem et ipsissima sui idoli 
ossa manducarent ; quibus ut vescerentur, se nimis quam indignos profitebantur. Augris per alios ordinarios partes 
mittebantur, quas sacerdotes singulari religione imperticbant. Synaxi hac finita, quidam e senioribus surgens, ad 
populum concionabatur, et clara elataque voce de legibus et ceremoniis suetis verba faciebat.” 

Herrera gives a somewhat similar account: “ The Mexicans celebrated the principal festival of their god Vitzili- 
puztli in the month of May; and two days before the festival, the virgins who were shut up in the temple kneaded 
flour of hledos and roasted maize with honey, and formed a large idol of the dough, with eyes of green, blue, or 
white beads, and teeth of grains of maize. All the lords attended dressed in the same manner as the idol, who being 
seated in a blue chair was placed upon a bier in order to be carried on men’s shoulders. On the day of the festival, 
rather before the dawn of morning, the virgins came forth in new and white apparel, crowned with ears of roasted 
maize, and wearing chains of the same hanging down below their left arms, with their arms ornamented from the elbow 
to the wrist with red parrots’ feathers, and with their faces painted; and during this day they bore the name of Sisters 
of the god Vitziliputzli, and took the bier with the idol upon it and carried it to the court, where the young men 
who were educated in the temple, very splendidly dressed and crowned in the same manner, received it with great 
reverence, and carried it to the foot of the steps of the temple, when all the people humbled themselves, and taking 
dust from the ground strewed it on their heads, since this was a ceremony which was usual in their principal 
festivals. Afterwards the people went in quick procession to the mountain named Chapultepec, a league distant 
from Mexico; and there made a halt and sacrifice and then proceeded with the same haste to a place called 
Atlacuiabaia, which was the second resting-place; and passed on a league further to Cuioacan, from whence without 
stopping they returned to Mexico. This journey of four leagues was performed in four hours, and they named the 
procession Ipaina Vitzilipuztli, which signifies ‘the quick procession of Vitzilipuztli. They brought back the bier 
to the foot of the stairs, and drew it up with great reverence with ropes to the upper area of the temple, amidst the 
loud sound of drums, trumpets, horns, and pipes; for the steps were so high and narrow that they could not carry 
it up on their shoulders. The people likewise assisted with great reverence in this act. Having been drawn up 
and placed in a chamber adorned with flowers, the young men of the temple strewed many more around; and 
the virgins brought a quantity of pieces of the dough of the idol kneaded into the shape of bones, and 
placed them at its feet, calling them the flesh of Vitzilipuztli. The dignitaries of the temple then came forth 
in exact order according to seniority one after the other, attired in dresses corresponding to their offices, with 
garlands and chains of flowers. After them came the gods and goddesses, whom they worshiped under dif- 
ferent figures, habited in the same dresses. They placed themselves around the pieces or bones of dough, and 
performed over them a certain ceremony, which consisted in singing or dancing, by which they became con- 
secrated into the flesh of that god. The benediction being concluded, those who officiated in the sacrifices went 
forth, and the butchery of human victims commenced; more of whom died on that day than on any other, because 
the festival was of such a principal kind. Afterwards the young men and young women who were educated in the 
temple came forth, and placing themselves opposite to each other, danced and sang to the sound of a drum in 
praise of the festival and of the idol; and all the lords and principal persons replied to the song, dancing round 

(50) 

418 NOTES. 

them in a circle, whilst the young men and women holding each others’ hands, occupied the centre. The whole 
city flocked to this spectacle; and the festival being concluded, the priests took the idol and the pieces of dough, 
and distributed it like holy bread in the manner of a communion, and gave it to the people, great and small, men 
as well as women, who received it with great reverence, fear, and shedding of tears, declaring that they ate the flesh 
of God. They sent it likewise to the sick, and considered it a great crime to eat or drink water or any thing else 
till after noon ; and they hid water from the children, and advised all to beware of incurring the anger of God. 
This communion being over, an old man of much authority ascended some elevated place, and preached on their 
law and ceremonies.”—Herrera, Dec. iii. lib. ii. cap. xvii. Having already mentioned penance and penitence as 
doctrines introduced amongst the Indians by Quecalcoatl, it is sufficient in this place to remark, that confession 
and penance, considered as external rites and ceremonies, (and therefore recalling to our minds another sacrament of 
the Church,) were in general practice amongst the Indians. Acosta says, that throughout most of the vast provinces 
under the sceptre of the Ingas, confessors were appointed for the express purpose of hearing confession, distin- 
guished from each other by various degrees of rank, who were under a sacred obligation not to reveal any thing 
communicated to them in the discharge of their religious duties. Women also in some ‘places (as the same writer 
asserts) were accustomed to hear confession. Herrera likewise notices this custom as prevalent in Yucatan; and it 
probably existed in other provinces of New Spain —Having traced at considerable length these analogies, we shall 
now say something of the adoration of the cross, the sign of which occurs frequently in Mexican paintings, and which 
it cannot be doubted was a religious symbol among the Indians. The adoration of the cross in America, if the fact 
were well authenticated, would in itself be a strong argument of the Christian faith having been planted in the New 
World: and thetestimony of the most respectable historians may be adduced to show that crosses were discovered, 
and the adoration of them witnessed by the first Spanish settlers in America. Gomara, in concluding his description 
of a temple in the island of Acucamil, says: “ At the foot of the tower there was a wall of stone and mortar, well 
polished, and ornamented with turrets, and within this inclosure there was a cross formed of plaster about ten palms 
high, which they esteemed and adored as the god of rain; so that when no rain fell and they were in want of water, 
they went in procession to it with much devotion, and offered it sacrificed quails to appease the anger and indig- 
nation which it felt or seemed to feel against them, with the blood of that simple bird. .They likewise burned a 
certain kind of gum as incense, and sprinkled it with water, after which they felt sure that it would soon rain.”—La 
Conquista de Mexico, fo. x. 

Boturini likewise mentions the discovery of some ancient crosses in America, one of which had been found by 
himself.—Since the whole of the passage containing the account of these crosses is curious, it is here given at full 
length. Speaking of his collection of MSS. and paintings, he says, “I likewise possess some historical notices 
concerning the preaching of the Gospel in America by the glorious apostle Saint Thomas. They are contained in 
thirty-four sheets of Chinese paper, and I suppose assisted Don Carlos de Siguenza y Gongora in the composition 
of his work on the same subject, which he entitled ‘The Pheenix of the West, which I have not been able yet to 
procure, as it never was printed. Since there is some connection between the subjects,—digressing for a short time 
from my account of this class of books,—I say in reference to the above-mentioned preaching of the holy apostle, 
that I am in possession of a painting on linen of the most holy cross of the mountain Tianguiztepetl, which I have 
before spoken of in Sec. 20. No. 20, of this Catalogue, which is painted in the form of a Taw, about a cubit in size, 
and of a beautiful azure blue, intermixed with figures resembling white stars, having on its right side a shield 
likewise of a blue colour, with five white balls in the middle, undoubtedly emblematical of the five most precious 
wounds of the Redeemer, which monumients have been preserved from the time of paganism to our days, without 
the rain or the other inclemencies of the atmosphere to which they had been exposed, having been able during so 
many ages to fade the colours. I also possess a painting on linen of another most holy cross of wood, which was 
drawn by means of a machine (that was made on purpose), out of an inaccessible cave of Mizteca Baxa, and which 
is at present venerated in the conventual church of Tonala, belonging to the fathers of Saint Dominic, which had 
also been deposited in the said cave since the Pagan times, and was discovered by the music of angels being heard 
in the said cave on every vigil of the glorious apostle. The above-mentioned preaching is so clearly indicated in 
the Histories of the Indians, that it is even recorded in the paintings of the Chontales, amongst whom a most 
miraculous cross was discovered, besides the other crosses which the Spaniards found in the island of Potonchan 
and in the city of Texcalan, to which the Indians offered adoration, presenting them flowers and incense, and 

NOTES. 419 

invoking them under the name of the god Tlaloc, the god of rain. Many traces moreover of the holy feet of the 
said apostle have remained in different places of New Spain; and besides this, the above-mentioned Histories all 
declare that a white man preached among them a holy law, and the fast of forty days, which the Emperor Netza- 
hualcoyotl, in the greatest vicissitudes of his reign, frequently practised ; and they add, that at his departure from 
them he left a prophecy, that in the year of their calendar, Ce Acatl, One Cane, his sons would come from the 
East to preach again to them; which was the reason why the Indians were so disturbed at the intelligence of the 
arrival of the Spaniards exactly in the year and character Ce Acatl. And I, following the track of the Indian calendars, 
have discovered that the prophecy of the saint was verified to the letter. The Indians, availing themselves of the 
lofty metaphors of their language, have bestowed the name of Quetzalcohuatl upon the glorious apostle, which 
signifies ‘the serpent-bird, intimating by the bird, the swiftness with which he had passed from a distant country to 
theirs; and by the serpent, the wise circumspection of the law which he came to preach, the value of which was 
further denoted by the feathers of the bird, which they called Quetzalli, and infinitely esteemed; since they wore 
them not only as an ornament in war, but likewise at their public dances and solemn festivals.”—Catalogo del 
Museo Indiano, pag. 51. With reference to the tradition which Boturini mentions as prevalent in New Spain, of 
Saint Thomas having preached the Gospel in that part of America, and of the impression of his feet being visible 
in many places, it may be remarked that that tradition seems to have been general over all America. Rosales, in 
his inedited History of Chile, declares that the inhabitants of that extremely southern portion of America, situated 
at the distance of so many thousand miles from New Spain, and who did not employ paintings to record events, 
accounted for their knowledge of some of the doctrines of Christianity by saying, “ that in former times, as they 
had heard their fathers say, a wonderful man had come to that country, wearing a long beard, with shoes, and a 
mantle such as the Indians carry on their shoulders, who performed many miracles, cured the sick with water, caused 
it to rain, and their crops and grain to grow, kindled fire at a breath, and wrought other marvels, healing at once 
the sick, and giving sight to the blind; and that he spoke with as much propriety and elegance in the language of 
their. country as if he had always resided in it, addressing them in words very sweet and new to them, telling them 
that the Creator of the universe resided in the highest place of heaven, and that many men and women who were 
resplendent as the sun dwelt with him. They say that he shortly afterwards went to Peru, and that many, in 
imitation of the habit and shoes which that man used, introduced among themselves the fashion of wearing shoes, 
and the loose mantle over the shoulders, either fastened with a clasp at the breast, or knotted at the corners ; whence 
it may be inferred that this man was some apostle whose name they do not know.” ‘This is the account given by 
Rosales of that wonderful man ; and it deserves to be remarked, as quite in accordance with the gloomy and mis- 
anthropical character with which the Indians loved to invest religion, that they converted an object of reverence 
into one of horror, by assigning to him the attribute of breathing fire from his nostrils. ‘The Mexicans in the same 
way, by representing their deities surrounded with the symbols of skulls, serpents, knives and lances, and under the 
most terrific forms, endeavoured to excite fear in the minds of those who approached them, as the feeling which 
would be most grateful to stern ‘and cruel gods. Kircher * says that none of these symbols were without their 
secret meaning. The mirror in the hands of Tezcatlipoca denoted his providence, which beheld every thing as in 
a mirror: and the skull and heart, according to Torquemada, signified that he possessed equal power over life and 
death. We shall conclude these observations by adducing the testimony of Clavigero in proof of many crosses 

* Kircher notices the subject of Mexican paintings only as it were intentionally to lend the sanction of his great authority and 
learning to the popular notion, that those paintings were entirely devoid of interest, and merely a rude effort of men scarcely beyond the 
savage state at the invention of hieroglyphical writing. That celebrated Jesuit had made hieroglyphics his peculiar study, and therefore 
could not have been really ignorant of the true nature of the Mexican paintings; and that, far from being symbols meaning little or nothing, 
they contained many and great mysteries. His reserve therefore and pretended ignorance must be attributed to the same causes as 
those which so powerfully operated in effecting the almost total destruction of those paintings ; and his silence is in fact eloquent. Paint- 
ings amongst the Mexicans were a mode of religious as well as of historical instruction. It is singular that Christians should have used 
them for the former purpose in the early and middle ages; since the Nicene Council declared (proving the custom by naming it), that 
“ paintings were books for simpletons who could not read.” The Jews likewise made use of paintings; and heraldry was an art which 
sprung up in the unlettered ages of feudal grandeur. From religious paintings cut on blocks of wood, which it became the fashion before 
the art of printing was invented to form into collections and to bind up in volumes, and which in libraries assume the appellation of 
books of images, block-books, or xylographic works,—learned men have been inclined to suppose that that invaluable art took its origin. 
The Biblia Pauperum is a book of this description, the largest of its kind, which doubtless in its day was ¢ fons superstitionum.’ 

420 NOTES. 

having been at different times discovered in America: “The crosses the most celebrated are those of Yucatan, of 
Mizteca, Queretaro, Tepique, and Tianquiztepec. Those of Yucatan are mentioned by Father Cogolludo, a 
Franciscan, in his History, book ii. cap. 12. The cross of Mizteca is taken notice of by Boturini in his work, and 
in the Chronicle of Father Burgoa, a Dominican. There is an account of the cross of Queretaro, written by a 
Franciscan of the college of Propaganda in that city ; and of that of Tepique, by the learned Jesuit Sigismund Tarabal, 
whose manuscripts are preserved in the Jesuit college of Guadalajora. That of Tianquiztepec was discovered by 
Boturini, and is mentioned in his work. The crosses of Yucatan were worshiped by the Yucatanese in obedience, 
as they said, to the instructions of their great prophet Chilam-Cambal; who desired that when a certain race of men 
with beards should arrive in that country from the east, and should be seen to adore that sign, they should embrace 
the doctrine of those strangers. We shall have an opportunity of speaking more particularly concerning these 
monuments in the Ecclesiastical History of Mexico, if Heaven vouchsafe to favour our design.”—History of Mexico, 
page 250. Besides the crosses enumerated by Clavigero, Gomara mentions brass crosses as having been discovered 
in Yucatan by the first Spaniards who visited that province, which induced some learned men of his day to suppose, 
that Christians, flying from Spain at the period of the Saracen invasion, during the reign of Roderic, and hastily 
embarking in ships to escape to other countries, might by the force of tempests have been driven on the shores of 
America, and have carried with them those peculiar symbols of their faith. It would also appear that silver vessels 
resembling sacramental chalices have been discovered in that continent; since Cabrera thus writes: “ Don Ramon 
Ordonez and the presbyter Don Gabriel Chacon y Godoy related to me, that a few years back the presbyter Don 
Patricio Chinchilla, a native Indian, gave an account to the vicar of Saint Bartholomew de los Llanos, in the 
bishopric of Chiapa, that he had discovered in a cavern many sacred vessels and utensils of silver, and repeatedly 
entreated him to go and take possession of them; but perceiving the vicar had not sufficient confidence in him to 
credit his report, he brought as a proof of his veracity a silver chalice: it was very broad at the foot, and the cup 
shaped like an inverted pyramid ; and on being compared with others of a similar make, preserved in the church, it 
is presumable it may be attributed to the times of the Apostles. The Indian died soon after this circumstance, and 
the remainder of this treasure has not since been discovered. The chalice in question, as I am informed, was 
destined by the curate for an oratory on an estate of his own, called Rosario. This discovery is of great importance, 
since it confirms the Mexican tradition before alluded to, of the Gospels having been made known in these countries 
by the apostle Saint Thomas, who was worshiped under the form of the idol Quetzalcoatl. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN, BY M. DUPAIX. 

THE FIRST EXPEDITION IN SEARCH OF ANTIQUITIES, UNDERTAKEN IN THE YEAR 1805. 

I, Wituram Duparx, late an officer in the Mexican dragoons, left this capital (Mexico) on the 
fifth of January 1805, having been commanded by His Majesty to proceed to the investigation of 
whatever monuments of antiquity might be still in existence in this kingdom, of a date anterior to 
that of the conquest. I was accompanied by an artist, an amanuensis, and a corporal belonging 
to the auxiliary dragoons; and directing my course to the east of this city, through the towns 
of Ystapalucan, Rio-frio, Tesmelucan, and Puebla, I could not discover in my progress over 
this line of country any thing connected with the royal commission with which I was charged. 
From the latter city I continued my journey to Tepeyaca, the signification of which proper name in 
the Mexican language is The Nose of the Mountain; which was given to it from its physical 
situation, being built upon the summit of a projecting angle formed by the mountain in that 
particular place. Notwithstanding the antiquity of its foundation I could not find on the entire 
site more than four ancient monuments. 

No.1. The first number represents a stone slab, of a reddish colour and extremely hard, upon 
the surface of which is sculptured in basso-relievo a symbol one foot and a half in length, one foot 
in breadth, and the third of an inch in thickness, which possibly may allude to the ancient arms of 
this city. It is divided as it were into two quarterings: in the first or upper of which the head of 
an eagle is engraved in profile, with a hieroglyphic in front, round which there is a circle with 
mouldings; and in the second quartering, which seems to serve as a basis to the first, three pendant 
ornaments or hieroglyphics are discerned upon a striated pedestal, on which the tail of the said 
bird appears, with various rows of feathers. This stone was discovered in the foundations of an old 
building of the said city, and at present serves as an ornament to the fountain in the principal 
square.—lIt is well sculptured and in good preservation. 

No. Il. There is in the said square a sentry-box called El Rollo (The Gallows), which was built 
by the first Spanish settlers, on one side of the wall of which is imbedded another slab of the same 
quality, having a border of plain ovals, within which is a second border; three hieroglyphics or 
historical emblems occupy its centre, one of which is very singular, since it bears a partial resem- 
blance to the claw of a crab, and is accompanied with thirteen plain and solid ovals: another 
resembles a butterfly, with four ovals similar to the preceding; and the third consists of branches 
like the trunk of a palm-tree.—This piece of sculpture is also in good preservation. 

No. III. presents to our view a semi-human head of gigantic dimensions, being one foot and a half in 
length and one foot in breadth. It is formed out of a hard and very heavy piece of stone, of a dusky 
purple colour ; it is perfect, and was found in the foundation of an edifice in the higher part of this 

CoP) 

4 QQ THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

city: the forehead is ornamented with hair, the eyes and nose are in just proportion and symmetry, 
the ears cannot be seen, the mouth is destitute of proportion and monstrous, and only a single row 
of teeth is visible below the under lip.—The discovery of the other parts of this colossus, that is to 
say, of the trunk and the various limbs, would be highly interesting. 

No. IV. Ina quarter of the same city called St. Michael Tlaixtegui, (which name signifies in the 
Mexican language The Cavity of the Mountain,) at the entrance of the house of Don Sebastian 
de la Cruz Xicotencatl, we found a serpent artificially wrought out of a piece of red porphyry 
of large dimensions, in an attitude of repose, and coiled upon itself in spiral circles, so as to leave 
a hollow space or transverse axis in the middle. The head, which has a fierce expression, is 
armed with two long and sharp fangs; the tongue is double, being divided longitudinally ; whilst 
it is shaped at the extremity like an anchor. It is to be regretted that a portion of the head is muti- 
lated. The entire surface of its body is ornamented or covered with broad and long feathers, and 
the tail terminates in four rattles: its length from the head to the extremity of the tail is about 
twenty feet, and it gradually diminishes in thickness.—It was discovered a short time before our 
arrival, in a deep ravine at the foot of a mountain behind the above-mentioned house. This reptile, 
the monarch or giant of its species, was in pagan times a deity greatly esteemed under the name of 
Quetzalcoatle, or The Feathered Serpent. It is extremely well sculptured, and there are still marks of 
its having been once painted with vermilion. 

No. V. I next directed my course eastwards to the town of Tlacotepec, situated at the distance of 
a day’s journey ; and having discovered nothing remarkable there, I proceeded on the following day 
to an Indian village four leagues to the south of it, named San Christobal ‘l'eopantepec, (which name 
signifies in the Mexican language The House or Temple of God built upon the Hill) ; where, upon an 
eminence or isolated mountain close to others of greater elevation to the west of the said town, there 
is a pyramid with a quadrangular base: it consists of four bodies or stories, which gradually 
diminish in size. Of the highest, the area of which was destined for the altars of their false gods, 
nothing now remains. ‘This oratory or pyramid, the style of which is Keyptian, is built of lime and 
stone, and is a solid structure. Its exterior surface was coated with square stones when J had the 
opportunity of observing it some years ago, which at present is quite in ruins. Its four sides, which 
are rather out of the perpendicular, are turned towards the four cardinal points of the compass. ‘I'he 
staircase which faces the west deserves to be noticed on account of the peculiarity of its diagonal 
ascent from one story to another. Several pavements or floors of shining cement interspersed with 
ruins are still visible at the foot of the pyramid, which convinces me that in former times the habi- 
tations of the priests who were attached to the service of the idols were situated there. The road from 
the plain on which the village is built to the summit of the hill, is by a sort of causeway cut in the 
rocky brow of the said hill. It is to be regretted, when we consider the present state of these ancient 
monuments, that that which neither the lapse of time nor of revolving ages, nor the trunks and roots of 
large trees growing amongst them and insinuating themselves between the interstices of the stones, and 
in this manner separating them, could effect,—indiscreet religious zeal on the one hand, and on the 
other the greediness of the occupiers of the soil as well as of the inhabitants of the surrounding villages 
eager to gain possession of the materials, should have been able to accomplish, which seem to have 

conspired to dismantle and destroy works certainly worthy of lasting preservation, and calculated 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN 4.23 

to throw light on the state of the arts amongst the ancient Mexicans ;—and all for the object of plun- 
dering them of the cut stones which entered into their structure. Other ancient fabrics are greatly 
indebted to their physical situation for their preservation, since they are generally built on rugged 
and inaccessible mountains, and surrounded with precipices ; and likewise to their being far removed 
from towns and adjoining habitations,—their relentless foes,—which occasion much trouble and 
danger to those who undertake the task of investigating them. 

From this last town we proceeded to the city of Tehuacan de las Granadas, the capital of the 
district, where I was unable to discover any thing remarkable. Neither did Old Tehuacan, a place 
so named, about six miles to the east of the latter city, present to our view any remains of antiquity, 
except some spacious ruins of houses and temples built of stone and mortar, and situated upon the 
side of a mountainous declivity. 

No. VI. We found in the last-mentioned town two ancient pieces of sculpture of light green 
jasper, similar in shape and quality : they are alto-relievos, and carved carefully and with symmetry, 
each forming a separate piece. Their figure is somewhat oval; and, joining at their extremities, 
they form a sort of prolonged oval.—lIt is very difficult to ascertain the precise use of many works 
of Mexican art, or even to explain their exact shape and parts, the style of their execution being so 
very original ;—it will be necessary therefore to refer to the drawings, the view of which will be found 
more satisfactory than the most minute description. 

Quitting Orizava, we continued our journey along the rugged steeps of Zongolican or Tzongol- 
liucan, which are within the jurisdiction of that city, being itself the capital of all the hilly country. 
The city of Zongolican is situated at the distance of twelve leagues to the south of the former city, 
and the road to it lying through Teguillan, a village of native Indians, crosses over various undulating 
mountains, and winds with a difficult ascent until it reaches that city, which occupies nearly the 
centre of the hilly country, being built in a deep plain of a somewhat circular shape, and crowned 
with high rocks. Rivulets descend into the plain by cascades and waterfalls, and soon disappear in 
several subterraneous channels. It is a large city: the inhabitants employ themselves in planting 
tobacco, and it possesses an agreeable climate. I discovered a sort of sage in its vicinity, growing 
in bushy shrubs very low and broad, the taste of which is very pleasant: it is here distinguished 
by the appellation of the Sweet Herb. Here are also different sorts of earth or clay, of a very 
unctuous quality, which properly prepared might be applied to several useful purposes: some 
of them are red, others of a blue, yellow, or purple colour. This celebrated range of hilly 
country comprehends every description of climate,—cold, hot, and temperate, with all their various 
modifications : the southern portion is very fertile, and abounds in useful vegetables; the cedar and 
rosewood are very common; there are a great variety of curious plants, amongst which may be 
reckoned those which naturally twine themselves round the trunks and arms of trees, and which bear 
flowers of the most exquisite beauty and delightful scent. 

We left this city after eleven days’ stay in it, our delay having been caused by the badness of the 
weather; and reposed for the night at the residence of the proprietor of a tobacco plantation 
named Rocha, which is situated at the distance of a day’s journey from it. But before our arrival at 
the Indian village Saint Sebastian, where we intended to dine, an accident which might have proved 

of a disastrous nature befel us. In a narrow and difficult passage cut horizontally in the side of a 

424, THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

steep mountain on the brink of a precipice terminating in a deep abyss, the corporal and his horse, 
who were at a little distance behind me, suddenly fell and disappeared: the former, by quickly snatch- 
ing at the branches of some trees, made a successful effort to extricate himself, and escaped without 
sustaining any bodily injury; but the horse rolling downwards caused a sound like the falling of a 
heavy torrent of water, tearing up by the roots and breaking whatsoever opposed itself to the rapi- 
dity and violence of his descent, experiencing in a brief moment the powerful effects of the laws 
of gravity, until his further progress was arrested by accidentally coming into collision with some 
trees of larger growth, which served as a barrier and check to his fall. Finally, after excessive 
exertions, I was enabled, with the assistance of the Indians who accompanied me, and the united 
force of arms, bill-hooks and axes, to draw him up by means of ropes, without having received 
any other injury than a few slight cuts, which did not prevent his proceeding forwards. 

On the evening of the same day, towards nightfall, the horse of the artist, in the attempt to avoid 
some bad places in the road, approached too near its dangerous edge, which bordered on a deep 
precipice completely concealed from view by the surrounding foliage, when making a false step he 
fell: the rider had the presence of mind to throw himself from the saddle into a piece of boggy 
ground on one side; but the horse did not stop until it reached the bottom. The former was obliged 
to proceed on foot three miles to the before-mentioned plantation of Rocha, charging the magis- 
trate of a village in the vicinity where we had partaken of some refreshments, with the task of 
recovering his horse if it was still alive: the Indians accordingly brought it to him in the course 
of the night, very little hurt, our companion being happy to find himself safe and sound not- 
withstanding his fright. From this plantation we proceeded to Cordova, passing through the 
shady town of Naranjal, which is situated on the right bank of a considerable river named the 
Blanco, where we made every exertion to obtain information respecting the antiquities which might 
exist there and in the neighbouring district. We accordingly commenced our researches at the 
town of Amatlan de los Reyes, anxious to view a certain ancient edifice, which on inspecting we 
found to contain merely the ruins of an oratory; but learning that a cave formerly dedicated to 
idolatrous worship was situated at a short distance from it, we proceeded thither, accompanied by 
the curate, the vicar, and a number of Indians, notwithstanding the inconvenience to which we were 
exposed by a heavy fall of rain. The cave itself is curious, and is exceedingly picturesque: it 
may easily be perceived that Art has aided Nature ; it is situated on the declivity of a hill overgrown 
with wood, and we discovered in it various fragments of idols in stone and of baked clay. 

No. VII. From Cordova we directed our course towards Orizaba, through the Indian village of Cha- 
pulco; when passing through some beautiful forests of evergreen oak, adorned with many parasitical 
plants seemingly engrafted upon them, we arrived at another Indian village, named Alcucingo, and from 
thence came to Orizaba. We discovered there a colossal figure (No. 7.) sculptured in basso-relievo, 
on the plain and horizontal surface of an isolated piece of rock which forms part of the floor of an 
Indian cabin, which is situated on the skirts of a plain named Escamela: it lies exactly east and 
west, with its arms and legs open and apart, in the attitude as it would appear of pointing with 
them to the north and south. At its sides are two hieroglyphical figures: that on the right is a large 
fish in a vertical position, with a round unit on one side of it; the other, on the left, is a rabbit 

in a sitting posture with a hieroglyphic between its legs, with ten round units which serve as a 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 425 

border to it: the principal figure, which wears a plume of feathers and a girdle, is twenty-seven feet 
in length; the others on its sides are less. The rock itself is of a somewhat triangular shape, being 
a solid block of stone of a dark colour: its edge or base is six feet above the surface of the ground, 
and some mysterious characters are sculptured upon it. 

No. VIII. shows the profile of a head of the natural size. It has neither hair nor beard, and was 
found in the cave above mentioned, as well as the trunk described in the following number. 

No. IX. is a stone representing the trunk of a human body, of the natural size, and well proportioned 
except the feet. These two antique pieces are executed in the same kind of stone as that of which 
the cave is composed,—a sort of brown limestone. This last figure is placed upon its legs, such 
being the position in which the idols of the country were usually represented. From hence we went 
to the bridge of the river Blanco, about forty-eight miles south-east of Orizaba, in search of a large 
stone called Teololinga. 

No. X. This stone is spherical in its form, very hard (though it will not emit fire when struck by 
the steel), and of a dark blue colour. It has evidently been wrought into its present shape, and 
placed in the middle of a spacious plain, by the ancient inhabitants of the country. It is so artfully 
balanced upon its axis as to revolve at the slightest touch of the finger, but if a greater force be used 
it will stand without the least apparent motion. Its surface contains some holes capable of holding a 
small quantity of water. It appears to have anciently served as a land-mark. ‘There is another of 
these stones to the east, about six miles distant. ey 

No. XI. From the bridge of Rio Blanco we went to the native Indian village now called Santiago 
Guatusco, and formerly Huatdscle, within the jurisdiction of Cordova. This village is about thirty- 
six miles east of Cordova, and is situated on the bank of a rapid river called Xamapa, the temperature 
of which is remarkably warm. ‘The inhabitants are chiefly employed in catching the boby, a large 
and savoury fish which abounds in this river. ‘The ancient town of Guatusco was situated about two 
miles off, upon the same bank of the river, and many of its remains are yet visible on the slope of a 
high mountain called the Old Town. On its summit stands an ancient building, called by the 
neighbouring inhabitants ‘“ The Castle,” which we determined to inspect on the following day. For 
this purpose we arose very early, having engaged a number of Indians, furnished with hatchets and 
other tools, to clear our path. After a laborious and circuitous ascent of more than six miles, 
alternately walking, creeping, and leaping from stone to stone, always in danger of being bitten by 
the many venomous reptiles which abound there, we arrived at the base of that ancient monument. 
This work, intended either for a palace or a great oratory, consists of two stories. The basement 
story is very massy, and of a pyramidical form, divided into three narrow platforms intended merely 
for ornament. A broad and lofty flight of stairs leads to the porch of the second story, which forms the 
place of residence. ‘This is divided into three apartments: the first is a spacious oblong saloon, the 
roof of which is upheld by three pilasters; the other apartments are of unequal dimensions, and into 
these there do not appear to have been any other means of admitting light than through the large door 
which opened into the saloon. Several of the timbers which supported the roof are yet remaining. 
The building terminates in a kind of terrace, the walls of which are a yard in thickness. The whole 
is covered with polished cement, in which are imbedded rows of square stones placed in parallel 

lines. The frieze of each side of the building is enriched with compartments formed by round stones, 

(5a) 

426 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

similarly imbedded, in the form of a parallelogram. ‘The sides of the saloon are rather inclining, 
those of the other rooms perpendicular. The walls are, throughout, about three yards in thickness, 
and the height of the building from the foot of the battlemented staircase to its summit is twenty- 
four yards. The basement story is about eighty yards square. The dimensions may be more 
accurately traced by the graduated scale on the annexed drawing. 

Among the causes which have assisted in the destruction of this very ancient edifice, perhaps the 
chief is the number of trees and plants which have taken root within its neglected walls, and 
compelled their massy joints to separate where they impeded the progress of vegetation. The front 
of the building is to the west; the other sides face the different points of the compass. With two or 
three exceptions, all the Mexican temples are thus placed: it is presumed, in conformity to an 
established law of their religion. We were unable to discover here more than three sculptured 
fragments. 

No. XII. This represents a goddess. Her head is richly adorned, and her neck also graced with 
a necklace of two rows.. The figure is supported by two columns. It is well executed and in 
good preservation, bearing some resemblance to the ancient statues of the Egyptians. The same 
symmetry is observable in Mexican sculpture as in Mexican architecture; and to this figure its 
due and proper proportions must have been given by instruments corresponding to our rule, level, 
and compass. 

No. XIII. The second figure is a snake curiously entwined. It is carved from a ponderous and 
fine-grained stone of a blackish colour (similar to that of the former figure): the head and body are 
fanciful. The snake was a prominent object in the ancient Mexican mythology; and we find it 
frequently carved in different shapes and sizes, coiled, extended, spiral, or entwined with great art 
and beauty ; sometimes clothed with feathers or with scales, at other times divested of any covering. 
These different representations probably denoted its different attributes. 

No. XIV. The third figure is a somewhat fanciful resemblance of a skull. It exhibits only the 
holes for the eyes, and is furnished, instead of teeth, with what appear rather like claws. It is 
executed in the same kind of stone as Figures 8 and 9 found in the cave of Amatlan. 

No. XV. In the annexed drawing under this Number is shown a sort of block, or die of baked 
clay, which we found in the same place. We may see from this that they were acquainted with the 
use of this tool; and I have in my possession two fragments of ancient blocks very finely designed, 
which were employed to stamp their calicoes and the paper which they made of the aloe-tree.. I 
have also some small figures of terracotta which prove that the ancient Mexicans were not ignorant 
of the art of modelling. 

No. XVI. Unfortunately our draftsman fell sick in this town ; and being deprived of his assistance, 
-I was unable to continue the route proposed to the Government, through the provinces of Oaxaca and 
Chiapa. Obliged to return, I determined to pass through the district of Cuernavaca. At the country- 
house called San Antonio, formerly San Andres Chachicomula, I saw an ancient edifice; and two miles 
further to the north of the country-house an oratory four stories high, in a pyramidal form, resting 
upon an oblong base. The highest story, which I conjecture was a small covered oratory, is now 
destroyed. ‘Twelve years ago when I visited this spot it was in existence. The stairs, which were 
facing the west, are also demolished, as well as the other sides, which corresponded to the cardinal points. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 497 

The basement story was coated with volcanic stones regularly squared, and the upper stories were 
plastered and bright. ‘The exact dimensions of these ancient edifices cannot always be ascertained, 
some local circumstances occasionally rendering the operation impracticable ; but every care has been 
taken in giving the admeasurements in such cases with the nearest possible approximation to accuracy. 
The human form lives its appointed time and disappears for ever, leaving behind it its likeness: 
but the monuments of Mexican grandeur sink into decay without the chance of restoration or 
reproduction, and the time is fast approaching when their entire destruction will be effected. From 
the country-house of San Antonio we passed through the village of San Andres Chachicomula and 
Acatzingo, to Cholula. In this famous city we stopped a few days for the purpose of prosecuting our 
researches. 

No. XVII. The first thing we found was a human head of stone singularly formed into the capital 
of a column, after the manner of a caryatid. A crown adorned with plumes encircles its brow, and 
its ears are fanciful. ‘The material is a blackish volcanic stone. 

No. XVIII. On the threshold of a dwelling-house on the high road we discovered another stone 
or slab, of an ash colour, on the surface of which are various hieroglyphics. They are inclosed 
within a circle of about a foot in diameter, and deeply engraven in the stone. On the lower part of 
the circle are inscribed thirteen radii, which diverge from the same point, and terminate in ovals; on 
the upper division are two indeterminate rays, also meeting in the same centre. It is impossible to 
state with certainty the use of this symbol; but the probable conjecture is, that it was connected with 
some of the astronomical observations practised in Choldllan, or Cholula as it is now called. 

No. XIX. In this city Isaw also a mask made of dark green jasper. It rather exceeds the natural 
size, is extremely well carved and polished, and when struck is sonorous. The features, which are 
regular and well proportioned, are truly characteristic of the Mexican nation. The mouth and 
nose are pierced, and two holes are also made in the temples. This ancient relic was found, as I 
was informed, in the progress of an excavation which was made on the side of the great pyramid. 

No. XX. This stupendous work, the result of so much labour, in form resembles the celebrated 
structures of Egypt. It consists of successive stories which gradually diminish as they rise, but its 
present appearance has been somewhat changed by the all-consuming hand of Time, the four corners 
having been worn away until its outline has almost assumed a conical form. It is built of sun-dried 
bricks, and its angles, like those of similar monuments, front the cardinal points. 'The ascent was on 
the side facing the west, and the stairs evidently traversed diagonally from story to story. It is not 
easy to ascertain its original height above the city (on the level of which it stands), so extensive are 
the ravages which time has made; and it is by means of excavations in its sides that the materials 
employed in its structure have been ascertained. The Mexican oratories were usually of a pyra- 
midical form, not exceeding seven stories in height, and resting on a circular or oblong base ;—as 
I have more fully delineated and described in reference to the celebrated and truly stupendous 
pyramid of Papantla. 

No. XXI. We left Choldllan, taking the road to the town of Atlixco, where we stopped but a 
short time, and proceeded to the ancient city of Quauhquechtla. Here we found various pieces of 
sculpture. The first was inscribed on an isolated rock which stands on a plot of ground within the city: 
it is the figure of a creeping snake, executed in alto-relievo on the surface of the rock. The skin 

428 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

appears to be smooth, and at the end of the tail are four or five rattles: the tongue is long, and 
terminates in an anchor, accompanied with a circle. The rock is formed of a hard and dark- 
coloured stone. 

No. XXII. There is another rock in the same field, somewhat similar though not so large. On 
one of its sides is carved, in basso-relievo, a shield vertically placed, and divided into four com- 
partments perpendicular to the horizon, on which are carved several small circles regularly placed. 
They are surrounded by a circular moulding which partly conceals three arrows or darts, which 
with their quiver form across. ‘The stone is similar in quality to that of which the last-mentioned — 
rock is composed. ‘These devices or trophies clearly evince the warlike character of the Mexicans ; 
and by means of such emblems of war, engraven on hard and durable stone, they probably in- 
tended to perpetuate some glorious and memorable event. 

No. XXIII. In another field I discovered, sculptured in relievo upon the four sides of a detached 
rock of a conical form, another ancient military trophy. On the front is represented a fanciful and 
monstrous head, which serves as a base to the whole. On the back there are four arrows undulated 
in imitation of lightning, crossed by a quiver; over which is a circular shield studded with figures 
somewhat resembling turbans, regularly disposed. The two lateral sides are adorned with an eagle, 
breast-plates, and other warlike symbols. This block is movable, and is composed of very hard stone 
of various colours, purple, blue, and grey. When removed, we discovered a snake and a centipede 
of great size lurking below. The height is one yard and a half, and the circumference three yards 
and three quarters. 

No. XXIV. represents a rock which is situated about a gun-shot eastward from the city. On the 
side which faces the city is carved a man’s head in relievo, rather larger than the size of nature. Its 
brow is adorned with a diadem ; its ears are monstrous, but in its other features there is design and 
proportion. 

No. XXV. From this city we travelled to the country-house called Santa Catalina, where I saw 
two pieces of sculpture. One represents a snake so entwined, that the space within the folds of its 
body forms a fent sufficiently large to contain a considerable quantity of water. The stone is volcanic, 
blackish, and somewhat porous. ‘The body of the reptile is spirally entwined, and the head probably 
served as a handle to move it. Itis decorated with circles, and the tail is that of a rattlesnake. 

No. XXVI. is the statue of a man, executed in the same kind of stone. Its attitude is expressive, 
and the mask which veils its countenance has a ludicrous expression. All the ancient statues ought not 
to be regarded as idols; some of them were the appendages of luxury, and some were designed for 
ornament or decoration. Our residence at this country-house of Santa Catalina, which is situated 
on the eastern brow of the volcano of Puebla, called by the Indians Popotepec, (or The Smoking 
Mountain,) would have afforded me an opportunity of ascending to the summit, in order to inspect 
its crater, which I had for a long while desired ; but the continuance of bad weather compelled me 
to postpone this undertaking till another visit. 

No. XXVII. We therefore directed our course to the town of Ayacapistla, and thence to the sugar- 
mill of Casasano, where we saw two ancient fragments. One is a box with a lid very well fitted, and 
made of a firm grey stone : it was found near the mill by the labourers on opening a ditch, and con- 

tained some trinkets made of flint. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 4.29 

No. XXVIII. The other is a circular design carved upon the upper surface ofa stone. 'The division 
made in the plane of the circle is very curious, being accurately traced according to the rules of 
geometry. ‘This sufficiently proves the existence of mathematical knowledge among the ancient 
inhabitants of the country, by some erroneously called barbarians. I conjecture this cylinder to 
have been the base of an idol, or a sacrificial altar: and in treating of works of'such remote 
antiquity, the history or uses of which no written documents explain, conjecture must be admitted. 

No. XXIX. Having nothing more to examine here, we proceeded to Cuernavaca through the town 
of Yauhtepec. The magistrate of this place complied with the requisition of the Royal order by 
affording me all the assistance and information in his power. I began at that part of the town called 
San Antonio, where I found a rock of considerable size, on which the figure of a lizard was sculp- 
tured in alto relievo, accompanied by four convex circles placed at its left in a horizontal line. 

No. XXX. In the place called Chimale (or ‘‘ The spot of the shield,” as it signifies in the Mexican 
language), behind some houses associated by tradition with the name of Cortez, there is an isolated 
rock, on the northern side of which is represented, in relievo, a small turreted castle, with stairs, 
a gate, and an ornamental frieze; on the right of which are three circles or units ranged vertically. 
It is neatly worked, and its parallels are perfectly true. On the other side of the castle is a shield, 
the form of which resembles a cross, with some mouldings, and five mysterious circles placed in a 
perpendicular line to the right. 

No. XXXI. There is another rock about three miles south-east from this town, which apparently 
served as a landmark between this district and that of Quauhnahuac or Quahutetl, which name in 
the Mexican language signifies ‘The eagle of stone.” On the side of the rock facing the west is 
sculptured an eagle with a beak, wings, tail and open claws. The head is ornamented with several 
radiated circles concentric to the eye. This bird is represented too gross in the drawing; the relievo 
projects about an inch and a half, and is worked on a variegated stone of fine grain. 

No. XXXII. On the opposite side of the rock there is a circular shield, which is divided vertically. 
In the left partition are four concentric semicircles ; the right is divided into two quarters. In the 
upper appears the plan of a city situated on the bank of a lake (possibly that of Chalco). The lower 
quarter contains various ovals in close rows, while underneath the shield are five ornamented arrows 
horizontally placed. To the right appears an unfurled standard, which, it is extraordinary, should 
display on its surface a cross of the order of Malta; and at the top a helmet, on which is figured the 
head of an eagle, with a hieroglyphic appended. ‘The whole of the shield is carved with great 
regularity and symmetry. The inhabitants of Cuernavaca, or Quauhnahuac, which signifies in the 
Mexican language “ The resting place of the eagle,” intended to perpetuate their trophies by fixing 
them on the durable surface of their rocks. 

No. XXXII. From Cuernavaca we proceeded to the westward, in order to visit a village of Indians 
called Tetlama, in the Mexican language “The place of stones.” It is situated on a very sultry 
plain, about eighteen miles from that town. At three miles to the south of the village are the ruins 
of a celebrated work called Xochicalco: it was an oratory or palace built by the ancient Mexicans, 
and is a splendid monument of the genius of that people, developing their skill both in architecture 
and sculpture. It is placed on the summit of a natural and isolated mountain of a conical form. Its 
exterior is adorned with platforms of various heights and breadths, supported by massy stone walls 

CoRR) 

430 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

gradually slanting inwards as they attain greater elevation. This peculiarity in its structure renders 
the conjecture probable, that it was designed as a fortified building capable of resisting any 
hostile attack. The ascent to the top where the monument is placed is by an old causeway, 
with a considerable inclination. The area is inclosed by a wall of loose stones, which serves as a 
parapet. The base or first story of the building is the only part now remaining; it is the 
beginning of an oblong pyramid with its plinth. This solid story is divided into three unequal 
parts ; the first, which has some declivity, serves as a base; the second is the frieze, plain and 
vertical ; and the third is a projecting cornice: the whole forming a pedestal. The outside is 
constructed with large square stones firmly united, and differing in their dimensions from three 
feet long, and appropriately wide and thick, to six feet. They are compact, and of a blackish 
colour. The four sides, like those of the other pyramids, face the four winds; the stairs occu- 
pying the western side. It is evident that the sculptural ornaments in relievo on the other three 
sides were executed after the masonry of the building was finished, since some of the figures extend 
into several courses of the work. The same designs are repeated on each side; they consist of a 
variety of hieroglyphical subjects, men, animals, plants, and other unknown figures. The whole 
building was painted over with vermilion, which now appears in various parts of its ‘surface. 
The second body or story (which was the base or pedestal) was likewise oblong, and served as a 
habitation or covered temple ; its four faces corresponding to the same cardinal points and perpen- 
dicular to the base. It is built of the same kind of stone ; but the fragments which are strewed at its 
foot denote figures of a different character to those of the first story. Its height cannot now be ascer- 
tained, but we may suppose it to have been in proportion to that of the base. The stairs were from 
five to six yards wide, and their height, rising by a gentle ascent, about thirteen yards. I could dis- 
cover only the trunks of two great idols carved in stone, lying on the floor of the large area. Here 
again I had to regret that the neighbouring trees had pushed their spreading roots into the joints of 
the masonry, and assisted in the demolition of this ancient edifice. 

In the adjacent parts, scattered without any apparent order, are many small artificial hills of cir- 
cular shape and of various heights, formed partly of masonry and partly of earth. These (if they were 
not the sepulchres of their dead) might have been the minor oratories or military posts of the 
Mexicans, like the works which encircle the greater part of the mountain. 

This sort of fortification was adapted to the mode of warfare which they practised, and, in the present 
instance, a deep fosse also encircled the base of this celebrated mountain. ‘The circumference of the 
mountain is about three miles, and its perpendicular elevation about one hundred yards. The Mexican 
name of this curious edifice (Xochicalco), which signifies ‘‘ The house of flowers,” was probably 
derived from the ornaments which enrich its exterior, of which one of the most conspicuous is a kind 
of garland encircling the walls on three sides. . 

The ancient Mexicans appear to have preferred the pyramidical form for the temples of their false 
deities ; and herein they discovered a degree of taste by no means despicable, but rather worthy the 
imitation of those who profess a purer faith. Among all the forms which architecture has devised, 
the pyramid deserves to hold the preeminence, on account of its antiquity, its massiveness, the strictly 

geometrical regularity of its structure, and its majestic height. In this stupendous monument all these 
are combined. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. A31 

No. XXXIV. In an adit, called the Cave, which the ancient Mexicans opened in the northern 
side of the hard rock which forms the mountain Xochicalco, there is a narrow aperture, serving 
as the entrance to several galleries more than six feet in height. By the advice of the Governor of the 
Indians, who accompanied us, we unsheathed our swords before we entered, in order to defend our- 
selves from the attacks of the lions and wolves, which, he said, often harboured there: and, each 
taking a torch in his hand, we entered the mountain about six o’clock in the evening. 

This subterraneous recess contains various passages, opened in different directions; the ceilings and 
walls of which are smooth, and the pavements which yet partially exist are made with cement and 
covered with red ochre. The difficulty of proceeding from one passage to another was occasionally 
great and not unattended with danger, as we were sometimes obliged to creep along the broken ruins 
of decayed walls and roofs. | 

At the extremity of the gallery, which is about sixty yards from the entrance, are two saloons, 

divided by two pilasters formed of the hard stone of the mountain. In a corner of the innermost apart- 
ment, a conical cupola, two yards in width, and rather more in height, is constructed in the solid 
roof overhead, from the upper surface of which proceeds a tube about nine inches in diameter, which 
served the purpose of ventilation. ‘The whole interior is faced with square stones placed in circular 
rows with great precision and neatness. ‘The floor of these saloons, as well as that of the whole exca- 
vation, is nearly level. It was late when I left the cavern, thankful to Providence for our preserva- 
tion from danger, and filled with pleasing reflections on the wonders I had seen. 
- Now, who would suppose, after visiting this spacious subterranean monument of antiquity, exca- 
vated with great skill, and requiring, from the hardness of the rock, tools of considerable strength and 
temper, that the ancient Mexicans were unacquainted with the use of iron? This, nevertheless, is a 
problem which yet remains to be solved; for no person, as far as my information extends, has ever 
seen any sharp or cutting instruments of this kind of Mexican formation, such as hammers, wedges, 
&c. &c. But, whatever the fact may be, the skill and industry of the ancient Mexicans cannot fail to 
command the admiration of the present and of future generations. 

These subterranean saloons appear rather destined for the repose of the dead than the residence of 
the living, and hence I conjecture this excavation to have been an oratory or private temple consecrated 
to the souls of the departed. These mournful vaults, shrouded in sepulchral darkness, and every thing 
that I observed within them, tended to the same conclusion, that I had entered the mansion of death. 

Thus terminated our first expedition, which employed us rather more than four months, having 
quitted Mexico on the 5th of January 1805, and returned on the 10th of May. During our progress 
we remained in every city and town a sufficient time to enable us to collect from their respective 
governors or magistrates all possible information connected with the object of our commission. I 
would willingly have prolonged our journey, but the weather was now become very sultry and un- 
healthy, particularly in the districts which we had to traverse. We therefore returned to the capital, 
in order to arrange our papers and drawings, and to await the termination of the rainy season ; hold- 
ing ourselves in readiness to begin a second expedition, if the superior Government shall think fit: in 
which event, we should direct our course to the cities of Oaxaca and Chiapa, unless prevented by any 
adverse circumstances : as we are informed that those dioceses contain several important remains of 
-a date anterior to the conquest of this empire. 

432 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

SECOND EXPEDITION IN SEARCH OF MEXICAN ANTIQUITIES, BY M. DUPAIX. 

Witiram Duparx, retired Captain of the Mexican Dragoons and Director of this expedition, 
left the ancient and imperial city of Mexico on the 24th of February 1806, in obedience to the 
command of our Lord the King; accompanied, as before, by Don Joseph Castaneda, engineer and 
draughtsman; Don Juan Castello, secretary ; and a dragoon. . 

In compliance with the instructions of my commission, we took the southern road from the 
capital to the ancient city of Chochimilco (which in the Mexican language signifies “A fertile 
plain”); and, guided by the information which we had received from the magistrate of the place, 
took up our abode in the old hotel facing the main road. 

No. I. The first object (connected with the purpose of the journey) which engaged my attention, 
was the figure of an animal somewhat resembling a lizard, but probably existing only in the imagi- 
nation of the sculptor, executed in alto relievo on a porous volcanic stone of a red colour. It is of 
large dimensions, and appears in the attitude of moving. The surface of the body and limbs is 
covered with scales regularly placed. 

This soft kind of stone, so well adapted for the purposes of sculpture and masonry, is found in 
various parts of New Spain; although the only use to which the ancient Mexicans seem to have 
applied it, was that of ornamenting and enriching both the exterior and interior of their temples, 
sepulchres, and palaces. It is possible, that by means of these symbolical representations they in- 
tended to designate the situation and use of the building*. 

It will readily be conceived that, in attempting to describe and explain these interesting monu- 
ments of antiquity, I must labour under great difficulty, on account of that originality and peculiarity 
in the style of the Mexican school, which superficial inquirers have spoken of with ill-placed 
contempt. But I shall not, on this account, be deterred from endeavouring to rescue them from 
the oblivion in which they-have been shrouded by the lapse of ages, and to exhibit them to the intel- 
ligent examination of the lovers of antiquity. 

In connection with this subject, I will here state my opinion as to the real cause of the ignorance 
and remarkable diversity of sentiment existing among the Indians, as to the etymology and the 
signification of the ancient names of their towns and various remains of antiquity, which, for the 
most part, were significatory and illustrative of their history. The cause of this confusion is most 
probably to be traced to the mixture, by marriage and otherwise, of their various tribes, as well as 
to the establishment of schools of instruction for the Castilian language. These causes are sufficient 
to account for the corruption of the original tongue, and the change of words and family names pecu- 

* As I am desirous, as far as it is possible, of avoiding repetition when speaking of the admeasurement of such sculptures and 
buildings as I shall have occasion to describe in the course of this narrative, considering such repetitions both tedious and unnecessary, 
the reader will understand that all the drawings which are contained in the following sheets, are made to the scale of the Castilian yard, 
with the exception of such figures as are sufficiently small to be given in their original size. He will do well to have a pair of com- 
passes at hand, and to bear in mind that all the architectural and sculptured remains which are described in this narrative, are of a 

date anterior to the conquest of the kingdom. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 4.33 

liar to it: and as I have found myself unable to discriminate between the primitive meaning of the 
Mexican words and those which in later periods were substituted in their stead, ] cannot pretend to 
offer an opinion on the subject. I write the names as they are now spoken and written by all classes 
of the people; and for this reason :—the Mexican language, expressive in its character, and abounding 
with reverential forms of speech, is hastening to decay, and will by degrees be absorbed in the gulf of 
oblivion. The monuments of this nation (which, from its antiquity, language, and its cultivation of 
the arts, might rank among the most renowned of former times) will meet the same, perhaps a more 
speedy fate. The consuming hand of Time, removing even the bases of its pyramids, its temples, its 
sepulchres, and palaces, threatens their approaching and total extinction. The broken statues and 
sculptured stones will crumble away, and thus all the monuments of Mexican grandeur and greatness 
will be a chaotic heap of ruins,—the destined end of the works of man’s ephemeral creation. 

Another painful reflection suggests itself while contemplating this subject, occasioned by the irre- 
parable loss of the historical annals of this country, which were traced in hieroglyphical characters on 
a paper made of the aloe-tree and of cotton. At an early period after the conquest these documents 
were collected and publicly burnt in the square of 'Tescuco ; and thus the key which would have faci- 
litated the interpretation of every inscription and every record has been for ever lost, and all the 
remaining monuments of Mexico buried in impenetrable darkness. 

Many inscriptions on stone yet remain, in defiance of the attacks to which they have been subjected. 
Some of them are deeply engraved ; others are executed in relievo, accompanied with symbolical 
ficures: but I can only describe their appearance, without pretending to discover their meaning, or 
withdraw the mysterious veil which surrounds them. 

No. IJ. Pursuing my researches, I found at the house of Guevaras a stone in the form of a trape- 
zium, which is preserved there. On its surface are two concentric circles, and at the four corners of 
the square other circles, each having a similar convexity in its centre. The stone is hard, and of a 
brown colour. It is placed in its proper position, vertically. Its execution is conformable to the rules 
of art, and it is in a good state of preservation. ‘The design of the artist, in all probability, was to 
appropriate this slab to the decoration of some public building, judging from the purely geometrical 
style of its embellishment *. | 

No. If]. In the quarter of San Marcos in this city, are two similar figures of some monstrous and 
fanciful animal executed in hard red stone, each seated on a square base. They were intended as the 
termination of an aqueduct ; receiving the water at the back of their heads, and discharging it through 
the mouth, eyes, and nose. They are enriched with some ornamental carving on the lower part of 
the head; and the construction of the figures evinces such a theoretical and practical knowledge of 
the principles of hydraulics as was necessary to convey the water from the level of the aqueduct. 

No. IV. In the same place there are two pedestals, both alike, formed of striated limestone, and 
ornamented with alternate ovals and tassels, which are suspended from the upper surface.. The pro- 
jecting base is slightly enriched, but the carving is nearly effaced. These pedestals have been verti- 

cally divided, and the two separate sections when placed together form a semi-globe or altar. 

* The reader is requested to notice that the figures from No. 1 to No. 20 inclusive, describe the sculptured remains which were 

found at Chochimilco. 

(55) 

434. THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

No. V. About two miles to the north of the city is a rock formed of red-coloured stone, and of a 
conical shape. It is accidentally intersected by the wall of the estate called La Noria. Upon it is 
engraven in relievo a shield surrounded by a circle, the field of which exhibits a device in the form 
of a cross resting upon four ornamented arrows; the lower part is adorned with a row of feathers like 
an opened fan, and several tassels are disposed around at regular intervals. On the opposite side of 
the rock is represented a sort of military kilt or apron, divided into five pendants with semicircular 
ends, crossed by smaller ones as exhibited in the drawing. Some remains of foliage ornament 
the base of the shield, which is now almost buried in the ground. It has been an immemorial 
custom among ancient and warlike nations to perpetuate by sculptured trophies the victories which 
they obtained, and to erect them on the spot where such successes were achieved. 

No. VI. In the house called Acocalco we found the representation of a curious fish carved on a 
close-grained grey stone. Its open mouth discovers a row of teeth, and its fins are regularly placed. 
Its belly, which has no scales, is flat ; and its fins, being of the thickness of the stone, would show the 
figure in relievo when built into a wall. Whether this inhabitant of the waters was formerly wor- 
shiped by the heathens I have not been able to ascertain. 

No. VII. This number refers to five fragments, of different size and colour ; three of which are 
cylindrical, one is in the form of a cross, the other square. They are all carved in relievo on the sur- 
face of the stone, the rough part being intended to be imbedded in a wall. The drawing of the devices 
is geometrically correct, and discovers good taste in the artists who designed and executed them. 

No. VIII. On the doorway of the saltpetre manufactory are carved two monstrous and fanciful 
heads, in red stone. As they are both exactly similar, a drawing of one, shown in profile, will suffice. 
It is worked with skill and delicacy, although the artist appears to have given only the leading out- 
lines of the figure. Its open mouth shows two rows of corresponding teeth and two lateral fangs. The 
proboscis or trunk describes a semicircle bending towards the wall. ‘These threatening and mon- 
strous heads were, probably, placed like sentries at the entrance of their temples and sacred caves, 
in order to inspire the people with fear of their gods. 

No. IX. In the interior of these saltpetre works, two pieces of red stone similarly carved are built 
into the buttress which supports a part of the building. On their square surface are represented two 
nosegays or bunches of herbs, with which the ancient Mexicans were accustomed to adorn the outer 
walls of their public buildings and their private houses. 

No. X. In the house of Don Francisco Solares we discovered, on a slab of dark red porphyry 
variegated with white spots, the figure of a large frog or toad built into the angle of the inner wall of 
the court, and level with the balcony. The reptile appears at rest, and has the singular addition of 
two ears extended along its body. In this respect the figure is imaginary, but its proportions are 
good, and itis well executed. It is well known that the ancient Mexicans worshiped various animals, 
particularly the feathered snake; and it would be interesting, if it were possible, to distinguish such 
human or animal figures as were the subjects of adoration among them, from those which were merely 
used for the purposes of ornament and decoration. But at present there are no sufficient data to 
guide the inquirer, and I shall hence consider them all merely as works of art. 

_ No. XI. On the site of a house now in ruins I discovered a broken slab of volcanic stone of an iron 
colour, upon the surface of which was carved the figure of a rabbit in the attitude of motion. It 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 4.35 

doubtless formed a portion of some wall, where it was placed in a vertical position. This animal was 
one of the signs of the Mexican calendar. 

No. XII. In the doorway of the house of Signor de Santa Cruz, there is inclosed a round stone in 
the form of a shield, the outer rim of which is studded with small circles. On its surface are displayed 
several hieroglyphical figures, with five numerical circles on each side, carved in alto relievo, as 
shown in the annexed drawing. Although the surface of this circle is small, being only about 18 inches 
in diameter, it may be presumed that the hieroglyphical writing, where every dot has a meaning, 
comprehends more ideas than words would be able to convey. 

No. XIII. These figures, the symbols and sad mementos of death, one of which is represented 
in profile, and the other in front, both of the size of a human skull, are built into a wall in the 
court of Donna Ana Paton’s house. The skull was an emblem in frequent use by the ancient 
Mexicans. They carved it in different kinds of stone, and in various ways displayed it on the inte- 
rior and the exterior of the tombs of their deceased relatives. The hinder part of the block whence 
these figures are carved being shaped into a form adapted for the purpose of insertion into masonry, 
shows that it was intended to be so employed. 

No. XIV. In the house of Don Joseph Ortiz there is another hieroglyphical figure of death, consist- 
ing of a gigantic skull carved from a hard red stone, which was most probably employed in the gloomy 
decoration of one of their mausoleums. 

No. XV. In the house of Don Joseph Ystapan, at this time governor of the Indians, we found the 
figure of a snake in porphyry, artificially coiled. Its long body was gracefully entwined, leaving the 
head and the tail free. There is something showy in the execution of this figure. Its head is ele- 
vated and curiously ornamented: its open mouth is defended by two long and pointed fangs ; its 
tongue, which is unusually long, is cloven at the extremity like an anchor ; its body is fancifully scaled, 
and its tail, covered with circles, ends with three rattles. 

The snake was a frequent emblem with the ancient Mexican artists. The flexibility of its figure 
being susceptible of an endless diversity of position regular and irregular, they availed themselves of 
this advantage, and varied their representations of it without limit, and without ever giving it an un- 
natural attitude. Its appellation was derived from its position and the mode of its decoration. Like 
the Egyptian Sphynx, the mystical snake of the Mexicans had its enigmas, and both are equally beyond 
our power to unravel. 

No. XVI. In the threshold of a doorway in the house of Signor Martinez is a block of red stone 
with a plain moulding, on the surface of which is sculptured in basso-relievo the figure of a strange 
amphibious animal. The scaly head and tail resemble those of a fish; four bands are placed across 
the body, the ends of which appear like paws. In our conjectures on the origin and design of these 
fanciful figures, we must be careful not to assign a mysterious character to that which may have been 
only the extravagant invention of the artist. ; 

No. XVII. In the Town-hall I saw another stone, of a dark brown colour, carved into the likeness 
of an Indian female, seated in a tranquil position with her legs doubled under her. She is clothed in 
a short garment, which is confined with a sash tasseled at each end; and her hair is formed into 
various tresses. ‘The sex of the figure is indicated by the breasts. The simplicity of the dress leads 
us to refer its date to those early periods when luxury was unknown; and, on this account, no 

436 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

accurate conjecture can be formed whether it was intended to typify a deity, or merely some 
individual personage. It has neither ornament nor appendage by which its character may be guessed 
at ; and as there is no other way of classifying a bird but by its plumage, it is to be regretted that 
this uncertainty must, in some measure, pervade the entire series of these descriptions. 

No. XVIII. This statue, of red stone, which we discovered in the house of a shoemaker, is also 
seated in the same posture (the usual attitude of Mexican sculpture), its legs being folded under its 
body. It is entirely naked, and its forehead is encircled with a diadem adorned with bands studded 
with pearls. Its ears are also ornamented. The lower part of the figure is somewhat mutilated. 
Although its head, as well as the ornaments attached to it, are characteristic of manhood, the great 
prominence of the breasts evidently denotes its sex.; unless the artist by this ambiguous or equivocal 
design intended to represent an hermaphrodite. 

No. XIX. In a room at the entrance of the saltpetre works I found this monstrous head or skull. 
It is executed in red stone, of the natural size. The upper part of the forehead, though resembling 
a skull, is ornamented: the eyes are circular, and the nostrils highly relieved; the open mouth dis- 
covers two formidable rows of teeth, and on each side of the head the hair is separated into two long 
tassels. ‘The workmanship is excellent, and does credit to the artist. What shall we think of this 
singular production, in which life is so mixed up with death? It has no resemblance to those heads 
which adorned the walls of the ancient Mexican buildings, but had, doubtless, a different destination, 
although I am unable to assign it. 

No. XX. In the house of Joseph Pichardo, the Alcade of the Indians, a circular red stone is 
imbedded in the wall, the surface of which is divided into regular compartments surrounding a 
circle, in the centre of which is a human head, also perfectly circular, and resembling the usual 
representations of the full moon. It is surmounted by the figure of a cross. I was at a loss to con- 
jecture its design. At first sight it seemed to resemble a shield; but I was afterwards inclined to 
regard it as some astronomical emblem, on account of the apparent figure of the full moon, placed 
in the centre of its orbit. Or it may be a work of mere fancy, designed, from its masterly execution, 
to enrich, with others of equal excellence, some considerable building. 

No. XXI. From this city we proceeded to the ancient town of Cuitlahuac, a word which in the 
Mexican language means “ The deposit of the waters.” It is situated on a fine island in the middle 
of the lake of Chalco, almost on a level with its surface, and surrounded by many inhabited 
Chinampas*. The communication with the shore is by means of two causeways stretching to 
opposite points of the compass, the one to the north-east, the other to the south-west, and extending, 
in their whole length, about three miles. This noble work, which was constructed by the ancient 
natives with volcanic stone, sand, turf, and stakes, is from five to six yards wide, varying in its 
height according to the depth of the lake; and, after the lapse of so many centuries, it remains 
unimpaired, and continues to be used for the purpose of its first destination, evincing at once the 
solidity of its foundations and its skilful execution. 

In this town we discovered the following remains. At the entrance of the parish church-yard are 

two volcanic stones, of a porous substance and black colour, lying on the ground, and somewhat 

* Small floating islands. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 437 

resembling millstones in their shape. The one which is in the best preservation has a pedestal or base, 
intended to support it perpendicularly on some solid foundation of earth or masonry. The surface of 
each side is deeply engraven. The figure carved on the stone has the singular appearance of being 
retained by its own gravity in its present position. The sculpture on each side is similar. Its form is 
partly human and partly animal ; or, probably, merely ideal, accompanied by some lines of which I 
was unable to develope the meaning. I cannot conjecture to what purpose these stones were applied 
by the ancient Mexicans; whether to that of amusement, of worship, or of sacrifice: yet being found 
in several different towns, they must have been of general use. 

No. XXII. In the hut of an Indian, situated in a Chinampa, is a pedestal or sacrificial altar, of a 
cylindrical shape, formed of a hard and dark-coloured stone. The upper surface is a plain circular 
tablet, the edge of which is ornamented with carving in relievo, and intersected by several parallel 
and regularly arranged fillets. It is probable that to each imaginary deity worshipped by these 
heathens was assigned his peculiar altar, being in shape either circular or polygon. 

No. XXIII. In the rector’s house we were shown a circular stone vase, the whole exterior of which 
discovers great skill in the artist. Its carved ornaments and mouldings are fancifully entwined around, 
displaying a graceful symmetry: the interior (of which the diameter is about eighteen inches) is 
covered with symbolical figures, disposed in the same order. The execution is neat, and the stone 
of which the vessel is formed is hard, fine-grained, and of an iron colour. It is sonorous and suffi- 
ciently hard to emit sparks when struck by the steel. The engraving on this curious isolated vessel 
has neither beginning nor end (a fit emblem of eternity); but as I have no clue by which to 
determine its use, or to decipher the hieroglyphics with which it is covered, I forbear to offer any 
superfluous conjectures. 

No. XXIV. We proceeded by water to the village of Misquique, lying only a short distance from 
Cuitlahuac, and which probably derived its name from the misquite tree, so abundant in this country. 
It is situated on an island of the same lake, somewhat larger than the last-mentioned one, and is 
surrounded by Chinampas. ‘The communication with the main land is on the western side, by means 
of a long causeway of ancient date. I found there a well-executed head, of frightful aspect, 
intended by the ancient Mexicans to project from the wall of some public edifice. There is no 
attempt at any imitation of nature; imagination alone has given existence to it. This head, carved 
out of a blackish volcanic stone, was once painted with vermilion, some of which yet adheres to it. 
The Mexicans were accustomed to give a gaudy appearance to their works, both of sculpture and 
architecture, by the use of various colours. They first applied a coat of lime or some whitish sub- 
stance, and then another of yellow ; but red, as the most brilliant of the prismatic colours, appears 
to have been most frequently used. 

No. XXV. In a wall facing the churchyard chance has introduced a stone, on the surface of which 
are designed several circles in alto-relievo, with some symmetrical ornaments, all having a common 
centre. 

No. XXVI. Another stone of the same kind is imbedded in the walls of the church steeple, exhibiting 

on its face a spiral ornament in relievo. If, divesting ourselves of prejudice, we were to enumerate 

"the various purely geometrical figures on those stones which have already been described and deli- 

neated, they would bear sufficient and ample testimony that the ancient Mexicans were acquainted 
(ee) 

438 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

with the elements of geometry, whether it existed among them in theory or only in practice. It is 
time, therefore, that we dismiss those erroneous impressions which are merely the result of imperfect 
information, and learn to respect those intellectual powers, which enabled the natives of this vast 
continent to enrich it with works of art. 

No. XXVIII. In the parish church is preserved a large ancient vessel, formed out of a block of 
hard marble, and now used as a baptismal font. The lower part is flat, and the border is enriched 
with ornamental foliage. What an immense number of strokes must the chisel have given, to hollow out 
a space of which the circumference is thirteen feet and a half, leaving only the thickness of five inches 
in the rim, and exhibiting correctness of proportion with a highly polished surface. The exterior and 
interior of the vessel were formerly covered with a fine and burnished cement. It was, no doubt, 
designed to hold some particular liquor, but of what kind or for what use, it is difficult to conjecture. 
We know that the ancient Romans employed lustral waters to sprinkle the animal victims in their 
holocausts ; and perhaps in the New World a similar practice existed, where not only beasts but 
human beings were offered in sacrifice: or the vessel may have been applied to the purpose of 
holding water, with which to wash the bodies of the dead before they were committed to their last 
home. 

No. XXVIII. In the wall of an inclosure near the church, I discovered a brown and porous 
volcanic stone, somewhat resembling that delineated in No. 21. It differs in size as well as in 
design, but its use was probably similar to that which I have described above. 

No. XXIX. In the vestry of the old village church is a heathen altar, of an iron-grey colour and 
a cylindrical form. On the centre of the shaft is carved a snake in alto-relievo, partly coiled 
up, and adorned with a crown and plume of feathers. The mouth is open, and the tongue cloven 
at its end: the body is covered with scales, and the tail terminates with rattles. There are some 
other devices or enigmatical figures, all inclosed within two mouldings, and the whole appears to 
have been painted red. 

We cannot help pitying those dark and wretched times, when the altars of heathenism were stained 
with the smoking blood of victims, offered up in the vain hope of propitiating idol deities, alike 
insensible to hatred as to love. 

No. XXX. In the wall of a house called La Tecpan, is inclosed a slab of black and fine-grained 
volcanic stone, on which is sculptured in mezzo-relievo the figure of a wild dog, which, however, 
displays but little of that animal’s natural character. It appears to have been formerly covered with 
a varnish or wash of fine lime. The Mexican draughtsmen, in their delineations of flowers and 
animals, were generally very correct imitators of simple nature ; in works of imagination they were 
not equally expert. 

The proportions of the human form they sometimes grossly violated, evidently not from ignorance 
of their art, since many of their works display correctness of design; but rather in consequence of 
some political or religious laws existing in the Mexican empire, which compelled its artists to 
give to the statues of their deities a similarity of attitude and a uniformity of style and character ;— 
as in Egypt, where the priests prescribed fixed rules for statuary and the formation of images ; thus 
fettering the inventive genius of the artist, and checking the progress of sculpture. 

No. XXXI. In the house of an Indian, situated on the banks of the lake to the north of the church, 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 439 - 

we found a human head of the natural size, formed of a dark purple-coloured volcanic stone, and 
decorated on each side with similar ornaments and pendants. This is one of the figures so much used 
by the ancient Indians, for the purpose of fixing into their walls by means of the shaft before men- 
tioned. The Mexicans not only attempted to adorn, but in some measure to give animation to the 
fronts of their temples and palaces, by geometrical designs or the figures of animals. And they like- 
wise made use of the human form for the same purpose; thus uniting every species of embellishment 

-in the decoration of these buildings. I regard this kind of ornament as peculiar to the Mexican 
nation, and employed according to rules prescribed by their taste in architecture. 

Nos. XXXII & XXXII. These numbers refer to two small stone idols of fantastic shape, the 
originals being of the same size as the drawings. The first is in a sitting posture ; its head raised as 
if in the act of contemplation, and covered with a kind of skull-cap. Its body is without arms. A 
perpendicular hole passes through the figure, which was thus suspended by a rope. The stone is 
unctuous, glossy, and of a blackish ash colour. It appears to have been polished by being rubbed 
with another stone. 

The other figure is formed of a volcanic stone, of the colour of half heated iron. It is in a muti- 
lated state, having neither arms nor legs. On the head is placed an ornamented cap: the features 
are prominent and expressive ; the eyes are closed, and the mouth open as if singing, or expressing 
suffering ; the body appears to have been flayed to the lower extremity of the ribs. 

These figures may be considered either as household gods, or as mere toys formed for no definite 
purpose. Their forms are infinitely varied ; some being painted, others appearing in the colour of 
the substance of which they are composed. These pigmy and portable divinities, the tutelar gods of 
the Mexican houses, were common to most of the nations of antiquity. ‘The Scriptures mention the 
“images” or idols of Laban, which were probably formed of baked clay: the histories of the Egyp- 
tians and of the ancient Romans record the existence of their household deities ; and we know from 
the records of this kingdom that the Mexicans had likewise their Penates, who were always treated 
with veneration, and placed in the most honourable part of their houses. It is evident that these little 
idols were bored through for the purpose of being affixed to the walls. 

_ No. XXXIV. Having finished our researches in this village, we went to that of Tlalmanalco, where 
we found in the house of the priest a female bust. It is well executed ina sort of green stone which the 
natives name Chalchihuitl ; its size is rather beyond that of nature, and its proportions are well formed. 
The features of its face and the prominence of its breasts discover its sex. The ornaments of the head 
are carved in relievo and disposed in regular order ; the bosom contains a square concavity, well 
adapted for receiving a plate of gold or silver. This bust was probably so formed with a view to its 
being placed on the top of some temple or pyramid fronting the East, in order that the rays of the 
rising sun or moon falling on the burnished surface of the plate might reflect and diffuse a beautiful 
and brilliant light. 

No. XXXV. In the house of a neighbouring Indian we found a human figure perfect from the 
waist upwards, carved from a pale ash-coloured stone. There was nothing remarkable in its ap- 
pearance, except that its arms were raised, and the hands shut and reclining on its breast. 

No. XXXVI. This block of stone, of a somewhat cubical shape, served as a small pedestal. It is 
enriched with ornaments, and formed part of an old wall. 

44,0 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

No. XXXVII. This is a woman’s head slightly decorated. The artist has taken nature for his model, 
and the bust is fashioned according to her unchanging rules. Its substance is a firm and finely-grained 
stone, of a lead colour. It is evident that it was originally covered with some white and glossy compo- 
sition. We found it in the curate’s house, and there the annexed drawing was made. As the contour 
of the human head is the greatest difficulty the sculptor has to surmount in the execution of a statue, 
it is to be regretted that in the present work of art, the limbs and the rest of the body should be want- 
ing ; since he who succeeded so well in the most elaborate part of the sculpture would not be likely to 
have failed in that which was of easier execution. 

Nos. XX XVIII. XXXIX. & XL. These numbers represent three stone statues, which were found 
in a wall of the mill called La Madonna del Socorro. The first is seated in an easy posture ; her 
arm is raised, as if she were lifting something with her hand (which has been broken off) to her 
mouth. 

No. XXXIX. represents the bust of a female, designed according to the ancient and primitive 
style of Egyptian sculpture. It was originally a work of skilful execution, but destructive Time has 
now very much impaired it. ’ : 

No. XL. is remarkable for its strange and monstrous formation. It consists of a head without a 
body, covered with a sort of conical cap. It stands on two legs, its hands resting on its knees. This 
very rare figure, which is probably symbolical, has in its style some resemblance to the preceding one. 

No. XLI. In the wall of a ruined house I found another stone of a cubical figure; on one 
side of which are represented in alto-relievo two bones crossed, and inclosed in a square moulding. 
I imagine that these last relics of a part of the human body were placed in some mausoleum, and 
were designed to infuse into the mind of the spectator that horror which such emblems of death are 
so well adapted to inspire. 

No. XLII. The block of stone represented in this drawing is of an oblong form, encircled with a 
moulding. In the centre of its surface is a figure of regular design, resembling a flower with six 
petals. This ornamented slab, like some before mentioned, served to enrich the front or doorway 
of some public or private building. 

No. XLII. In the hut of an Indian we found the figure of an unknown animal, represented (as in 
the annexed drawing) in profile. The stone which forms its substance is close-grained, of an iron- 
grey colour, and capable of receiving a fine polish. The lifeless attitude of this animal would seem 
to mark the appearance of an embryo extracted from the womb, while its execution displays the 
elaborate attention of the artist. I am entirely ignorant to what class of animals it should be referred, 
and equally at a loss to assign the reason for perpetuating its likeness in sculpture. 

No. XLIV. In the road from the village of Tlalmanalco to that of Mecamecan, about three miles 
eastward of the latter, and within the boundaries of the estate of Senor Don Joseph Tepatolco, there 
is an isolated rock of granite, artificially formed into a conical shape, out of which are hollowed six 
steps facing the East. The summit of the rock forms a platform or horizontal plane, well adapted to 
the observation of the stars on every side of the hemisphere. It is almost demonstrable that this very 
ancient monument was exclusively devoted to astronomical observations ; for, on the south side of the 
rock are engraved several hieroglyphical figures having a relation to that science. But the most 

striking feature in the group is the figure of a man in profile, standing erect, and directing his view 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 44,1 

to the rising of the planets in the heavens. He holds to his eyes a tube or optical instrument, 
Underneath his feet is a frieze divided into six compartments, with as many celestial signs carved on 
its surface : the results, most probably, of such observations as had been made and calculated. Some 
of these symbols have an affinity to those, which are to be found in that ancient Mexican sphere which 
is an object of such attention and admiration to all who visit the city of Mexico. In front of the figure 
is engraved the likeness of a rabbit sitting, as well as two parallel rows of numerical signs. In addition 
to these, there are two symbols connected with astronomical science. This interesting discovery will 
of itself be sufficient to convince the most incredulous, that astronomy was known and cultivated by 
the ancient Mexicans. 

No. XLV. At a short distance from Mecamecan, or Amatemecan, is situated the town of Ozumpa. 
On our arrival there we discovered in the pavement of the churchyard a circular piece of stone, of a 
hard and ferruginous substance. Its surface is divided by radii proceeding from the centre of the 
circle to its circumference. The regularity displayed in the perforation of this stone, had probably 
no other design than that of varying and adorning its appearance. 

No. XLVI. In the town of Chimalhuacan Tlachialco, not far distant from Ozumpa, I found the 
stone represented in the annexed drawing. It was discovered in the house of an Indian, behind the 
Town Hall. Its form is circular, and in its centre is carved a flower with six petals, beyond which 
extend four petals of another flower. This slab is probably one of those which the ancient Mexicans 
used for the purpose of giving some variety to the gloomy monotony of their walls. 

No. XLVII. This carving represents a human figure, apparently that of a female, seated in the 

accustomed manner. Her head resembles that of Cybele, as represented in the mythology of Greece, 
"being surmounted with a mural crown. ‘The features are very prominent: and her right hand 
grasps some unknown symbol. ‘The material is a coarse stone very much consumed by time. 

No. XLVII. This piece of stone was also found in the same town. Its form is circular, its surface 
convex, surrounded with a fanciful border. In the centre is displayed a flower with many petals, 
opening around a cross. ‘This stone, like those already mentioned, was merely designed as an orna- 
ment for some building. 

No. XLIX. In speaking of the town of Ozumpa, I should have said that in the house of the Lieu- 
tenant Don Francisco Muniain we made the drawing of a statue placed on a square base. It is 
full length. Its head is merely encircled with a band, while its ears are adorned with pendants, and 
the cartilage of its nose pierced with aring. A sash or short apron is tied round its waist. This 
figure, which is that of a male, has no visible symbols from which its character may be determined. It 
is one of the few statues of which the posture is erect ; they are usually sitting. 

No. L. From the town of Ozumpa we went to Cuauhitla Amilpa, and thence to the village of 
San Juan Ahuehuepan, lying about three miles to the west of Ozumpa. We here found the mutilated 
trunk of a statue sculptured in red stone. If we may judge of the execution of the whole from what 
remains, there is great reason to regret its mutilation. It is destitute of all ornaments and apparel with 
the exception of a sort of frill, and a sash tied in a bow, which serves the purpose of an apron. 
The trunk of this beautiful statue discovers great skill and accuracy of proportion, and was probably 
designed by the artist to represent some hero or superior deity. 

No. LI. The drawings attached to this number represent the head of a female carved in solid red 

C5u) 

4 AD THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

stone: the one exhibits the front, and the other the back of the bust: it is of the natural size, and 
its ornaments are disposed with regularity. It is to be regretted that only a fragment of so well 
executed a figure should have been preserved. 

No. LII. From the last-mentioned villages we pursued our route to the town of Chonacatepec, 
where the magistrate showed us at his house a sort of mask, made of a white transparent and gritty 
stone, (known there by the name of Tecalle,) well proportioned and neatly finished. It seems as if the 
artist designed to portray in it the distinctive features of the Mexican face: the ears are pierced 
laterally, either for the purpose of being decorated with ear-rings, or of suspending it as an ornament 
from the neck of an idol. It was discovered on opening an ancient and deserted cave on the side of 
a mountain. The back is flat, unlike the generality of masks, which are usually formed concave so as 
to fit the face. ’ 

No. LIII. On our way to the town of Chila, at the distance of about three miles, we saw on the 
summit of a mountain called Tortuga, a pyramid of a solid mass resting upon an equilateral base, 
formed by four isosceles triangles. It was constructed with massy materials, but its primitive covering 
has mouldered away. The four sides front the four cardinal points of the compass. It does not ter- 
minate in an acute angle; the summit, at a third part of its perpendicular height, stretching into a 
spacious area, which was ascended for the purpose of prayer or sacrifice by a flight of stairs on the 
western side. 

No. LIV. At the foot of the northern angle of this pyramid, at the depth of three yards and three 
quarters from the surface of the ground, exist the ruins of a sepulchre in the form of across. We 
descended by six steps into an oblong vault, the four compartments of which, like the sides of the 
pyramid, front the four points of the compass. The walls of this subterraneous building are constructed 
of squared blocks of stone, cemented with mortar and polished. The ceiling is coated with lime, 
sand, and probably some other ingredients. We found the remains of only a few human bodies. 

No. LV. From Chilan I proceeded to the town of Huahuapan. About three miles eastward of which, 
at the top of a little hill called ‘Tallesto, I found lying on the ground a block of hard and fine-grained 
stone of a bluish colour. Its shape is prismatic, and on one of its sides is carved in relievo a circular 
shield. Its field displays some unknown symbol, and from the lower part of the circle extends an arm, 
the hand of which grasps some kind of offensive weapon resembling a dart or spear, to which certain 
ornaments are appended. ‘This shield, belonging to a class of defensive arms in general use amongst 
the ancient Mexicans, is engraved with great skill, and is probably the memorial of some deed of 
valour ; or it might have been the honourable military device of a warlike province. 

No. LVI. In the town of Yanquitlan I saw a solid red stone carved into the resemblance of a head. 
It is of the natural size, but of strange and uncouth physiognomy. It bears some resemblance to a 
skull masked and adorned. This fanciful piece of sculpture indicates a style differing from that which 
is strictly Mexican. 

No. LVII. This small vessel, in shape resembling a censer, and formed of well baked clay or some 
other hard red substance, is smooth and polished on its surface, and very neatly and tastefully executed. 
It is an ancient toy, formed of two pieces; the upper one, which serves as the cover, is cast in a 
mould and fluted: the lower, which is solid, is encircled by a moulding. There is a hole at the top 

and bottom, by means of which the two pieces may be fastened together with a string. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 443 

No, LVIII. This number describes the barb of a dart or arrow, consisting of three sharp edges 
forming a triangular figure. The shape of this very ancient offensive missile weapon is no less 
adapted to inflict a wound than to prevent its extraction. It is made of a light grey flint stone, and 
is furnished with a shaft by which to attach it to a handle. | 

No. LIX. These figures represent a small idol, which exhibits a departure from the characteristic 
style of Mexican sculpture. They are made of a light green jasper, and are found in abundance in 
the ancient sepulchres of the Mistecas. Like Isis and Osiris, those constant appendages to the 
Egyptian mummies, they invariably present the same attitude and prismatic form, with the exception 
of one or two which have four sides. The shoulders, either straight or angular, are pierced with two 
right lines to a certain depth, which meet at a given point, and for man angle of greater or lesser 
degree, without the employment of any other than a straight instrument for this purpose. This is . 
a simple invention, but it proves the ingenuity of the artist. These figures, with the addition of beads 
or precious stones of a green colour, either round or fluted, formed the necklaces with which the 
bodies of the dead were wont to be adorned. 

No. LX. This small idol, of a similar class to those just mentioned, and sitting in a contracted 
attitude, differs somewhat from them in form, being cut down the back vertically. 

No. LXI. The sight of those instruments with which the Mexicans executed their admirable sculp- 
tures cannot fail to be highly interesting. —This number represents an heptagonal chisel, or perhaps a 
burnisher, the form of which may be seen in the annexed drawing. It is made of a very hard kind 
of touch-stone, fine-grained, and of a jet black colour. Its surface still retains a high degree of polish. 

No. LXH. This number represents a sharp-pointed instrument, which probably was the chisel 
of the Mexican sculptors. Its material is a hard stone of a dark green colour; its figure is hexa- 
gonal. One end was originally sharp, although now somewhat blunted ; the other exhibits the blows 
which were given to it by a hammer or some tool of the kind which they were accustomed to use. 

No. LXII. This last number of the antiquities of Misteca represents a kind of cylinder, made 
of a dark green stone, having an extremely smooth surface. 

The original figures indicated by the Nos. 61 to 63 are somewhat smaller than the drawings, 
as I thought they would be better understood if their proportions were rather enlarged by the 
draughtsman. The intrinsic value of works of art depends not upon size; they are not to be 
measured by the yard, nor estimated by their weight in the balance. Invention and finished 
execution are the true tests of excellence ; and to speak according to the rules of art, it is neither 
the bulk nor the material which can determine their merit, since a figure of clay may be of more 
value than one of gold ; and a work of diminutive proportions more worthy of admiration than a 
Colossus. 

After having finished my search after antiquities in Tanhuitlan, I proceeded to the city Oaxaca, 
where I prosecuted my inquiries concerning the ancient remains which yet existed in that province, 

beginning with those of Mount Alvan, which is about six miles distant from that city. The result 
will be found in the following pages. 

4 AA THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

THE ANTIQUITIES OF MOUNT ALVAN. 

TO the west of the town of Antequera, at the distance of about six miles, there is a mountain named 
Mount Alvan, the summit of which forms a table. Although apparently the work of nature, there can 
be little doubt that the art and patient industry of the Zapotecas (an Indian nation so called) has 
contributed in no small degree to its formation. It is a well known fact, that this race of Indians 
always availed themselves of the favourable disposition of the ground to erect monuments to their 
deities, their deceased kings, and their kindred ; as well as fortifications which they constructed in 
their own defence, in accordance with the usages of those remote times. In the beginning of the month 
of July I resolved to ford the dangerous river called the Atolliaque, which flows between the above- 
mentioned fixed points,—a thing not always practicable. It is true that in the dry season the waters 
of this river are so shallow, that its appearance is rather that of a gentle brook; but in the rainy 
season it not only receives a great, accession of water which flows from the valleys, but carries with 
it in its whole passage a quantity of fine sand, which sinking to the bottom by its specific gravity forms 
horizontal banks, destitute of firmness, and renders the fording of it treacherous in the extreme, as 
was experienced by our secretary, who together with his horse fell.midway in the channel, and 
would have perished had it not been for the great exertions of the Indians who attended us. Finally 
we reached the summit of this memorable place, which we found to be formed out of a group or 
assemblage of high hills, which separate the greater valley of Oaxaca from the less, where the 
following ancient ruins attracted my observation. 

No. LXIV. Upon the plane or the table formed by the above-mentioned mountain there is a 
little hill somewhat resembling a tomb, artificially raised, of a conical shape and covered with a great 
quantity of trees and shrubs. It is traversed through its centre from north to south by a very well 
planned gallery, having a semi-elliptical vault, and lined (on the left hand side as one enters) with 
many large and oblong slabs of granite, on the surface of which, sculptured in alto-relievo, appear 
several figures or human busts, rather exceeding in dimensions the common stature of man, with 
open mouths, and in various attitudes; some sitting, some standing, and all in profile, looking 
towards the north along the interior of the gallery, five only of which I have taken copies of, because 
they were found in a perfect state of preservation. 

No. LXV. The first figure is represented in a sitting position, rather in front, and without any cover- 
ing or ornaments except those which it wears on the head. 

No. LXVI. This figure resembles the first, except that its position is more in profile, and the 
attitude of the arms and legs different. 

No. LXVII. The figure represented under this number displays a greater degree of diversity, 
being in an upright position and in the act of walking: some difference is also observable m the 
ornament (or crown) which it wears on its head ; at the lower part of the legs a flourish of the chisel 

and two circles are discernible. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. . 445 

No. LXVIII. This figure is also in the act of walking in the same direction as the foregoing, but 
the attitude of the right arm is somewhat different. Its crown is similar to those worn by the two 
first, but it is distinguished by the peculiarity (perhaps a hieroglyphic necessary for the explanation 
of this curious and enigmatical piece of history) of manifesting a superfluous sign of the sex to which 
it belongs. 

No. LXIX. This figure is represented in profile, seated with its arms crossed over its breast; its 
head armed with a sort of helmet or close cap, and a fanciful circle under the ear, with a lock of hair 
behind in the form of a cue. In the right angle of this square block of stone there appears a 
hieroglyphic of the king of birds, with a crowned head and an ornamented eye: it is in the act of 
devouring the body of a bird, upon which are six numerical signs, disposed with some degree of 
order, with three symbolical figures underneath. I directed that an excavation should be made in 
the interior of this hill, but found nothing remarkable except the fragment of a skull, a thigh bone, 
and some other small bones very much decayed. ‘There was sufficient, however, to convince me that 
this was the tomb of some king or illustrious family of the Zapotecas. But I must confess that what 
perplexed me, was the grotesque attitudes and apparent flexibility of limb displayed by these 
male figures, sculptured in relievo on the above-mentioned stones, as well as their being beardless, 
naked, without the distinctive marks of sex, and all directing their attention towards the centre of the 
tomb, with their mouths open as if in the act of exclaiming, while performing the part of mourners 
over the body there deposited. | 

No. LXX. Near this monument there is another similar to it, which was probably raised for 
the same purpose: it has a spacious gallery which traverses diametrically, in a straight line from 
south to north, the centre of the artificial hill, the interior of which is faced with square stones 
disposed in horizontal rows, whilst some large slabs which form a projecting angle over the solid 
masonry of the lateral walls resembling the ridge of a house, serve as a roof; the pavement is com- 
posed of a hard mortar of sand and lime. These sepulchral monuments evince the recollection 
and tender affection whick this nation bore to the dead. 

No. LXXI. Another monument presented itself to our view, externally of the same shape and mate- 
rials as the preceding ones, as may be seen by referring to its plan and elevation: it has likewise a 
gallery lined with wrought stones, having a somewhat concave roof. It deserves to be noticed 
that the gallery of this tomb does not follow a straight transverse line, but terminates on arriving at 
the centre of the cone, where, having formed an oblong saloon, it is divided into two equal portions, 
each following its meridian line. 

No. LXXII. At a short distance from the last’ monument, there yet exists an ancient building 
(either a temple or mansion for the dead, for it might have served both purposes). 1 found this 
great structure rested upon an immense base or terrace of hewn stone, the projection of which forms 
a quadrilateral figure, each side facing one of the four cardinal points of the compass. A tomb of a 
conical figure rises from its area: I was struck at beholding, in the interior of this solid body, 
a sort of well-constructed rotunda, from the centre of which proceeded four spacious passages 
dividing the whole plane into equal portions; and the interior walls of this famous work of art 
were formerly (judging by what is still visible) lined with uniform and perfectly even stones. It 
is to be lamented that time and vegetation,—the enemies of buildings, but more especially of 

(5x) 

4.46 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

monuments of antiquity,—should confound art with nature, assigning to the former a brief and 
transitory existence. 

No. LXXIII. At the foot of the above-mentioned artificial hill there is a large block of granite, 
the visible surface of which contains several hieroglyphics engraved in relievo: on one of the 
sides are sculptured in profile six human figures in a row, ornamented and dressed in a uniform 
manner ; six other figures, with which I am unacquainted, are alternately placed between them. 'The 
ingenious art of transferring the thoughts to cloth or stone by means of symbolical figures, was in 
general use in the Mexican empire; and if the surface of this historical basso-relievo displays a 
difference in the order and formation of these figures, this may have originated in the diversity of 
national customs ; since as the language of the Zapotecas was totally different from the Mexican, so 
likewise the symbols by which they expressed their thoughts might have been equally different. 

No. LXXIV. I found near the same place a light and cylindrical stone, belonging to that class 
which mineralogists call breccia. This ancient piece is wrought in a simple style, and I judge it to 
have been an altar for sacrifices: it deserves its place amongst the antiquities of this country, on 
account of its having been an instrument, if I may so term it, famous in Mexican mythology, upon 
which was shed with profusion the blood of so many human victims. 

No. LXXYV. In Zocho, a town in the vicinity of Oaxaca, I was shown a copper instrument, in the 
house of an Indian labourer named Pasqual Bartolano, who a short time before my arrival discovered, 
when ploughing his field, twenty-three dozen of these tools, contained in two large earthen pots, in 
very good preservation: they are all of the same cast metal, and of similar form; they only differ 
from each other a little in length, but appear to be of equal thickness ; and the silversmiths are very 
anxious to obtain them on account of their fine alloy. It remains for me to attempt to explain (which 
I fear I shall find an impossible task) the use to which these instruments were applied; since those 
ages, the customs of which were so wholly different from ours, would likewise have had their peculiar 
usages, with which we cannot be acquainted. It is possible, therefore, that they might have employed 
them either in agriculture, war, or sacrifices ; or, perhaps, as cutting instruments in their arts,—none 
of which suppositions are improbable. 

No. LXXVI. This small and well wrought piece of sculpture, of a semi-spherical shape, formed 
of a kind of copper-coloured pyrites, possesses excellent proportion and a fine polish, particularly 
on the side intended for a mirror, or to serve as an ornament for some idol: on the convex side a hole 
has been bored for the purpose of fixing it in any situation at pleasure. This pretty little specimen of 
art confirms the opinion I have ever entertained of the ingenuity of the natives of this large portion of 
the new continent: they employed almost every known metal, especially those of a more shining na- 
ture ; and it is probable that iron, not possessing this superficial property, was not worked by them, 
and they consequently remained ignorant of its intrinsic qualities, of which we have so advan- 
tageously availed ourselves. 

No. LXXVII. Séveral chisels of red copper have also been found in the immediate environs of 
this city. We are ignorant of their mode of giving a temper to these sharp-edged tools, whatever 
may have been the purposes to which they were originally applied, whether to fashion and cut wood 
into a regular shape, or perhaps even stone itself. 

- THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 4AT 

ANTIQUITIES OF SAINT PAUL OF MITLAN. 

DESIROUS of quitting as soon as possible the city of Oaxaca, in order to inspect the far-famed 
ruins of Mitlan, we set out on our journey on the first of August, 1806, leaving behind us on the road 
the town of Tlacolima.—The town of Saint Paul of Mitlan, or rather of Miguitlan, is situated in a deep 
valley surrounded with mountains in seventeen degrees and a half north latitude, and about twelve 
leagues to the south-east of the city of Oaxaca, in a warm climate; the soil being dry, venomous 
insects multiply there in excess, including many sorts of snakes and spiders, particularly tarantulas, 
of immense ‘size. The produce of the country is maize and the maguey, although of a species 
different from that which grows in the cold provinces ; the chief fruit is the pitaya. The population of 
this town has experienced the same decay as its ancient monuments, both having participated in a 
common fate. The language which they speak is the Zapotecan: its original and proper name was 
Liuba, which means, a burial place; but the Mexicans, after having subdued this nation, named it 
Miguitlan, which in the Mexican language signifies Hell, or a place of sorrow. It is evident that both 
names appear to be well adapted to each signification, if we only consider the sepulchral nature 
of its ancient monuments, the sterility of the surrounding mountains, the gloom of the valley, and 
the scarcity of water which prevails there. On my arrival in the town, I presented to the governor 
of the Indians, and to the officiating rector of the parish, Don Joseph Castillano, the civil and eccle- 
siastical orders which I bore, charging them to aid me in my antiquarian researches : they accordingly 
provided me with every thing necessary to carry into execution His Majesty’s commands. As I was 
very anxious to commence operations as soon as possible, I made diligent inquiries on the following day 
concerning the monuments of ancient architecture and sculpture which might exist in this neighbour- 
hood, desirous of comparing them with each other, that I might judge which of the sister arts here 
enjoyed the preeminence : but to my great disappointment I could only obtain the three following 
small specimens of sculpture. 

No. LXXVIII. This is a bust of terra cotta; the face of the figure is masked, and it is modelled 
after a fashion in the highest degree capricious, and novel. I must therefore dispense with the neces- 
sity of further description by referring to the drawing. Behind it we perceive a cylindrical tube 
capable of containing chips of pine, or any other combustible substance; or to express my meaning 
more clearly, to serve.as a candelabra at their pagan festivals. 

No. LXXIX. This image, formed out of greyish purple jasper, well polished, presents to our 
view a dwarf-like figure seated in a natural and easy position, with the arms crossed over the breast, 
and its forehead, neck and waist, girt with a sash; the ears consisting of curved lines, the eyes shut, 
the mouth half open, and showing the tip of the tongue, whilst the back of the figure forms a vertical 
plane. What shall we think of such a being, who appears to be filled with compunction and absorbed 
in some mental abstraction ! 

No. LXXX. This piece was brought by an Indian to me at the rector’s house, the place of our 

448 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

temporary abode. It isa small head of baked clay, of solid consistency ; its aspect is martial, and it 
exhibits great correctness both in outline and proportions ; it is armed with a sort of graceful helmet, 
ingeniously displaying the crest of a crowned or royal eagle. In the cavity formed by the aperture 
of the beak (where are described two circles in the points of the lateral angles) the head of a warrior 
appears, beardless and without mustachios. 

It is very strange that on so renowned a site, which led us to form sanguine expections, (proceed- 
ing on the supposition that the ancient artists would have managed with equal dexterity the chisel 
and the square,) we should have been unable to discover a single fragment of sculpture; since it was 
reasonable to suppese that a soil so rich in monuments of architecture would likewise have possessed 
many valuable sculptured remains. Our surprise should cease, however, when we consider the 

causes to which their disappearance may be ascribed. It is alleged, that at the eventful period 
} immediately preceding and after the Spanish conquest, the Indians either buried their idols, or carried 
them elsewhere. But I think the true and more probable cause was, the violent and open pro- 
scription which these false gods suffered from the iconoclasts, who destroyed every thing appertaining 
to them, without sparing aught for the sake of history or from love of the arts : and thus their false zeal 
effected their entire annihilation. But if our researches after monuments of sculpture were attended 
with little success, the contemplation of architectural remains considerably lessened our disappoint- 
ment; and although these latter monuments have yielded to the ravages of time, nevertheless some 
portions possessing beautiful perfection still remain, by judging from the parts of which, we may 
form an opinion of the whole.—Let us proceed then to the examination of them, since they will 
assuredly repay our curiosity to the utmost. 

There are four edifices which have received the common appellation of the Palaces of Mitlan, of 
these two are contiguous to each other ; the third forms a part of the parish church, and the fourth 
stands upon a spacious foundation ; they are all situated at short distances from each other. With 
respect to their plans, elevations, and general geometrical dimensions, the drawing of each edifice 
contains its scale of admeasurement, to which it will be easy to refer. 

These great and splendid fabrics, partly in ruins, have been erected with a lavish magnificence 
worthy of ancient Rome. Situated in the most elevated part of the town, notwithstanding the 
destructive revolution of ages, they convey a high idea of the power of the prince who caused their 
construction, as well as of the inventive genius of the artist who planned and executed them. 

No. LXXXI. This drawing presents to our view the geometrical plan of the largest edifice, and of 
the three square buildings attached to it, of which one alone retains some traces of its ancient and 
beautiful front. 

No. LXXXII. This monument, which from its present state of preservation we are enabled more 
accurately to delineate, immediately creates the admiration of the beholder by its majestic appearance 
and mosaic decorations; the whole producing in the soul of the visitor a soft melancholy, and 
an emotion of pleasure that cannot be defined. 

Whenever in the course of this description I shall avail myself of technical terms employed in Greek 
and Roman architecture, to explain the architectural parts of these buildings,—such as pilaster, 
architrave, frieze, cornice, and others of a similar kind,—it is by no means my intention to display 

scientific knowledge, but merely to express myself in language which may be intelligible to artists: 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 449 

thus I say that the ichnography of this monument has for its foundation and base a socle of cut 
stones (the circumference of which embraces and measures, in a polygonal figure, a superficies 
extending over a vast area) of suitable dimensions and elevation above the level of the ground, 
the principal sides facing the cardinal points of the compass. On the southern front there are three 
staircases, of which the central one conducts to three doors, and the other two, placed at the projecting 
angles of the lateral extremities, serve equally to facilitate the ascent to the gallery formed along 
the upper plane: the steps consist of large and well cut stones, of a regular shape, and lead 
to the three great doors or vacant doorways, divided by as many pilasters, with their capitals 
or cornices having each a circular niche adapted to receive the head of some animal, or perhaps 
a skull; the discovery of which would have been very serviceable for the illustration of this 
description, by removing every doubt as to the destination of these edifices, and establishing cer- 
tainty on almost infallible grounds. Although I was informed that an Indian woman possessed one 
of these, and kept it concealed in the wall of her house, all my inquiries to ascertain the fact were 
fruitless. | 

The architrave, resting upon three pilasters, is a solid block of square evenly cut granite of enor- 
mous size; the base of the latter is composed of a row of stones perfectly square, with their edges well 
adjusted. The surface of the walls is covered and adorned with various entablatures or oblong compart- 
ments terminating in mouldings, which project from the vertical line of the walls, and in the planes 
of which are mosaic ornaments executed in alto-relievo and of most beautiful invention ; the designs 
presenting to the eye a series of very intricate flourishes, following in geometrical order with the most 
perfect union between the stones composing them, all of which are cut and of different shapes and 
dimensions. 'The exact evenness of this admirable mosaic work is further remarkable; and it is 
protected and crowned by a very deep moulding, whilst all the projecting angles are strengthened by 
beautiful buttresses of stone decorated with mouldings. 

The interior of the building corresponds to the magnificence of its exterior. ‘The three doors lead 
straight into a vast saloon, longitudinally divided from east to west by six granite columns, each of a 
single piece, one yard in diameter, and five yards and a half long, without base or capital. These 
columns were employed to support the transverse rows of beams which formed the roof of the saloon. 
The inside walls of this spacious room are merely covered with plaster, over which is a coat of 
fine stucco nicely spread with the trowel, and another of vermilion mixed with ochre, having a hard 
and excellent polish; the greater portion of this has crumbled to pieces, with the exception, however, 
of here and there some entire fragments, by which some estimate of its merits may be formed. We 
should not omit to remark, that the exterior as well as the interior of the whole palace, even the 
columns, was dyed or painted with the same colour. The pavement forming the floor of the entire 
edifice is a composition of lime and sand, covered with a coat of a finer and more solid cement, of 
a blueish grey colour, highly polished and shining. In that part of the inner wall which faces the 
principal door between the two centre columns, there is a square niche, in which probably was placed 
some mysterious statue. 

This saloon communicates with a quadrangular court, formed by four oblong edifices or apart- 
ments, with which there is a communication by a passage covered with large and very thick slabs 
placed horizontally. These inner apartments or long chambers, narrow in dimension, and with their 

(5x) 

ASO: THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

doors facing each other, are covered externally with the same fanciful flourishes as decorate the outer 
wall of the entire building. 

The horizontal roof or terrace which formerly covered the apartments of this edifice was com- 
posed of several rows of stout beams or trunks of the sabine tree, each one foot and a half in 
diameter, of which only three remain as a sample to posterity, the whole being now unroofed. 
Upon these strong beams was a floor of square flags, and over that a layer of mortar, composed of 
lime, sand, and earth, one foot and a half thick : and the whole was covered with a solid and smooth 
coat, forming the terrace, which is not perfectly horizontal, but has an almost imperceptible declivity, 
sufficient however to allow the rain to run off, which following its natural course flows into a pipe or 
gutter, and is conducted by this channel into a reservoir dug in an angle of the court. 

This great pile is connected with or attached to three other mferior edifices, which are built upon 
socles exactly on a level with it; and the equilateral figure described by the four principal fronts 
of these edifices, forms a square, that incloses within its compass a spacious area, the pavement 
of which is formed of cement of a good quality. It is to be regretted that only one of these 
three minor structures or saloons should exist, and that only in a very dilapidated state ; their magni- 
ficent ruins nevertheless proclaim their past splendour. We here behold an oblong saloon, of such 
narrow dimensions that it only occupies a third of its plane, divided from north to south by a row 
of five columns of the same length and diameter as those before mentioned, two of which are still 
standing. The entablatures of the wall are completely stripped of their original ornaments, but its 
three doorways still remain, with the four circular niches cut in the capitals of the pilasters, and an 
architrave of an immense block of stone, on the surface of which are engraven in basso-relievo the 
designs which are there visible. It is evident, from the traces which still remain, that when entire it 
was only ornamented with a single external frieze contained within two mouldings, having in its 
plane the same patterns in mosaic as those which are represented on the principal edifice. ‘The view 
which this ancient ruin presents when contemplated from afar has a grand effect. We recognize in 
it the features of venerable antiquity, and behold at the same time the havoc which time’s unsparing 
hand commits on the fragile works of man. 

No. LX XXIII. Under this number is represented a small fragment of the beautiful mosaic work 
which once ornamented these edifices, and which will soon disappear from the face of the earth, 
time and vegetation being its relentless foes. 

No. LXXXIV. The plan of this second palace, which is more simple, presents a perfect square, 
the sides of which are formed by four narrow long saloons; which arrangement comprises a 
spacious inner inclosure of a rectangular shape. ‘Three only of these saloons at present exist : 
all that remains of the fourth, which is in ruins, is its socle or platform; for these saloons, like 
those of the first palace, were all constructed on platforms. The three which still exist, although 
in a very dilapidated state, retain their principal parts, such as the walls, doors, and pilasters, with 
their niches. The excessive thickness of the walls is remarkable, as likewise the extreme narrowness 
of the interior apartments, which are unroofed. ‘The solid union of the rows of stone composing the 
former has been entirely destroyed, together with their mouldings, frieze, and mosaic ornaments, with 
the exception of some fragments which have escaped the hand of rapacious man, who, when desirous 
of converting the materials to his own use, is a more formidable enemy even than Time to ancient 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 451 

monuments.—The drawing contains all the information which we have been able to acquire respecting 
this palace. 

Nos. LXXXV. & LXXXVI. These drawings represent the four fronts of the saloons; and I 
should observe, for the more clear comprehension of this description, that as regards their symmetry, 
those saloons which are opposite to each other correspond in their ornaments ; since the two, the 
situation of which is diametrically the reverse of the other two, and which occupy the same line north 
and south of each other, differ in their external style of decoration from those lying east and west, 
as will easily be perceived from their plans. 

No. LXXXVII. Under the socle of the saloon facing the south there is a sepulchre or pagan mau- 
soleum, the plane of which is in the form of across. It is spacious, and the walls on the inside are 
embellished with various compartments in mosaic. A cylindrical column rises vertically from the 
central point of the plane of a square block of stone, formed by the intersection of the perpendicular 
and horizontal lines, which supports a large square stone that constitutes the ceiling ; the four angles 
of which embrace as many right angles, that divide and portion off four square rooms, the sad recep- 
tacles of the mortal remains of man, which are covered with large square slabs forming the roof. 
Every visible part of this dismal.abode was painted with vermilion : a door, subterraneous passage, 
and staircase, give admission to the tomb. I was unable to discover in this magnificent sepulchre any 
thing either artificially or naturally emblematical of death. 

No. LXXXVIII. The parish church and the rector’s house occupy the walls of this third palace ; 
and its plan may be seen in the ichnographical delineation. The materials employed in its construc- 
tion, its doorways, and ornaments, were similar to those of the other palaces, with the admission 
nevertheless of some variety, which evinces the fertile genius of the architect. 

No. LXXXIX. This, which we may designate the fourth palace, comprises in its plan two 
edifices, the walls of which are distinct. They do not constitute a single body except by their 
similarity and close proximity, being only three feet apart: the walls and doors are at present 
much decayed, and have even been propped up, which rendered the task of drawing their plan 
more easy. 

No. XC. At the distance of a league and a half to the east of Mitlan there is an ancient house 
built upon the summit of a high hill, the commencement or beginning of the Mijian range of moun- 
tains. The walls are constructed of square stones laid in rows and cemented together with lime, plain, 
and without the addition of any ornaments ; its plan is quadrilateral, and it has a court, platforms, 
and corresponding doors. At the back there is another contiguous edifice of smaller dimensions, 
which has likewise its four little platforms; and over one of the doors (that which faces the principal 
entrance) there is a stone of considerable length, on which are sculptured in basso-relievo some orna- 
ments resembling those of Mitlan. This monument is fast going to decay ; and the trees and shrubs 
which surround it will contribute by the slow and penetrating progress of their roots to the total down- 
fall of these valuable remains of antiquity. 

No. XCI. Under the principal entrance of this building, at a very little depth, there is a subterra- 
neous sepulchre ; it is constructed in a simple style, and its plane is in the form of a cross, constituting 
four square chambers, the walls of which are coated. with square stones polished and painted with 
ochre ; a flight of stairs conducts to it, and their descent faces the west. We found nothing in this 

452 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

dismal vault but the remains of a deer and a kid, which some leopard or wolf, the present occupants of 
these ancient ruins, had dragged to this solitary spot. ; 

No. XCII. On our return from the building which we have just described, and before our arrival 
at Mitlan, I directed an excavation to be made, all the inhabitants of the town aiding me in the task ; 
when we found beneath an artificial hill, at the depth of six feet, a sepulchre, the form of which was 
oblong, and its walls lined with square hewn stones with mouldings and mosaic work of well finished 
execution : the roof was composed of large square flags ; and on the outer side, which faces the west, 
there was a small door. All that we found in this vault was a skull and some smaller bones, together 
with fragments of pitchers, jugs, and dishes of fine earthenware of a blue colour, destined for the use 

of him who could eat and drink no more. 

SEPULCHRAL ARCHITECTURE. 

The idea of absolute annihilation is repugnant to the physical constitution of man, even amongst 
savages themselves, who for the most part indulge in the fallacious hope of being able to prolong the 
body’s material existence beyond the verge of the tomb: but the love which this nation entertained 
for the bodies of their deceased friends equalled in some measure that which they bore to their gods ; 
the altar scarcely differed from the tomb. 

Experience has convinced me of the skill which this nation possessed in subterranean archi- 
tecture, which in art and in manual labour has a decided superiority over the more common kind, 
of which the sphere of operation is the open air. Let their adits, conduits, idolatrous caves, temples, 
and sepulchres, bear testimony to the truth of this assertion. It may even be doubted with respect to 
the last, whether any people of the Old Continent, the Egyptians not excepted, evinced a more tender 
affection for their deceased friends and kindred, in the solicitude which they displayed to erect suitable 
monuments to their memory, than the Capotecas ; who, besides the subterraneous sepulchres already 
mentioned, constructed artificial hills and pyramids above-ground, strengthened on the outside with 
strong masonry; whilst the interior was the sanctuary, where, as in the centre of a citadel defended 
by external works, they deposited the body of the deceased, making choice of the best materials 
for these sepulchral edifices, and employing them with method and order to ensure their longer 
duration. 

The art of subterranean architecture requires that attention should be paid to certain rules: in 
common architecture there is only one gravitating power, the column of air above; but in the former, 
of less frequent necessity, there are two, namely, earth and air; both which elements conspire to 
accelerate the sinking in and the downfall of subterraneous buildings. 

No. XCIII. There are two pyramidal oratories in this town, erected by this nation in honour of 
their false deities ; the first of which has a quadrangular base and four stories diminishing in size, and 
is of great height, being built of stones and unbaked bricks. It forms a massive and solid edifice : 
each story has a terrace, with a pavement of cement of the colour of ochre, and well polished. It 
is evident that the entire fabric was coated with square blocks of cut stone: the side on which 
the staircase is situated faces the west, and the other three sides the corresponding points of the 
compass. It has likewise a court of an oblong shape inclosed within three elevated platforms, which 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 453 

in pagan times served as socles for the quadrangular saloons destined for the habitations of the priests 
and the other ministers of this open temple. Exactly in the centre of the court there is a square 
altar built of stone and mortar, with a flight of steps opposite the stairs of the pyramid. 

No. XCIV. The other oratory has an oblong base; it consists of three stories built of unbaked 
bricks dried in the sun, placed in simple rows, with alternate layers of bricks made of a kind of com- 
position. Its revestment no longer exists, and time and the rains have diminished the bulk of its solid 
body. It serves at present as a representation of Mount Calvary, for the pious exercises of Christians, 
who ascend to the summit by a broad and beautiful staircase, furnished with landing places recently 
formed out of the spoils of the ancient palaces. This oratory in other respects resembles the 
preceding. 

From the vast number of idols, and consequently of temples or oratories erected for their worship, 
which even still remain scattered over the extensive surface of this kingdom of New Spain, without 
counting those already ruined and destroyed, we may justly characterize the Mexicans as one of the 
most religious nations which has ever existed on the face of the earth, not excluding from the compa- 
rison those of antiquity; but at the same time they were plunged in the deepest abyss of idolatry, 
until the happy arrival of their conquerors, who by rescuing them from it became their re- 
deemers. 

Nature was their prototype in the construction of their temples, the mountains themselves serving 
them as models; and they sought in this manner to exalt their gods above mankind, by placing them 
in more elevated and retired regions. From heaps of mud and shapeless mounds the majestic pyra- 
mid, consisting of a single body, took its origin; but as the genius of man advanced, the architect 
added to it progressively nine successive stories, gradually decreasing in size. At first it was formed 
simply of earth or of unbaked bricks ; but it was afterwards coated with well-cut stones disposed in 
regular rows. ‘This grand fabric served as a basis to the altars and thrones of their gods; and 
in the same way as the art of statuary has its colossal productions, so architecture can boast of the 
pyramid. I shall only further remark, that this excessive abundance of temples and idels clearly 
indicates that this great and ancient continent possessed a most numerous population. 

ARCHITECTURE. 

The destruction of so many monuments of sculpture and architecture, which might at this time have 
aided our inquiries, and guided us through the dense darkness of remote antiquity, excites our deepest 
regret. As a matter of probability, we may be permitted to hazard the conjecture, that when the Spa- 
niards first landed on these shores, Liuba and its primitive population had ceased to exist; and that 
the present are a more recent race of Indians, who replaced the ancient population by whom the struc- 
tures which we so much admire were erected. But whence did that primitive population come? and 
at what period did they people this soil? and, finally, whither have they emigrated, carrying away with 
them their arts and the instruments which they employed in them? since their first arrival and their 
subsequent disappearance are equally problematical. In order to arrive at any conclusion upon this 
great and famous question, it would be necessary to have a number of original monuments of archi- 

(5z) 

ABA THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

tecture and sculpture, by means of which we might form some plausible conjecture respecting the 
uncertain race of this most ancient people, from comparing statue with statue, building with building, 
and hieroglyphic with hieroglyphic. 

The ancient Capotecas cultivated the fine arts, were extremely religious, and entertained great 
reverence for the dead, as their own monuments, works owing their existence to a wise form of 
government, unequivocally show. But what may have been the epoch of the construction of these 
sumptuous edifices ? Were they all built at the same time, or were they founded progressively? We 
certainly find, on consulting their plans and style of ornament, that they uniformly preserved the same 
order of architecture, differing from each other only in being more or less complex in execution, 
but modelled according to the elements of the same school, which happily combined the solidity of 
the works of Egypt with the elegance of those of Greece. 

The architectural parts which immediately invite the attention of the connoisseur are, first, the 
transverse architrave, or, as we may otherwise define it, the stone which closes the upper empty spaces 
of the doors resting upon the jambs and pilasters. ‘This solid block, of the nature of granite, of enor- 
mous magnitude, forms a prism with a square base, on none of the sides of which is there any visible 
sign of its having been worked with a sharp tool or chisel; neither is this observable on any of the 
other stones which enter into the composition of these wonderful structures, all of which have a soft 
and finished evenness of surface, such as might have been produced by the grinding, or rather the 
friction, of one stone against the other. Secondly, the nice and perfect squaring of many of the stones, 
both great and small, which face and adorn the walls of the above-mentioned palaces, giving by their 
beautiful union and exact correspondence an admirable finish to the work. But what is most remark- 
able, interesting, and striking in these monuments, and which would alone be sufficient to give them 
the first rank amongst all known orders of architecture, is the execution of their mosaic relievos, very 
different from the plain mosaic, and consequently requiring more ingenious combination, and greater 
art and labour; they are inlaid on the surface of the wall, and their duration is owing to the manner 
of fixing the loose stones into it, and to their frm union. 

When the line of ornament could not be pursued along the wall, they continued it over the door- 
ways, engraving there a series of picturesque ideas. No cement or glutinous substance whatsoever can 
be discovered in the perfect union of these little stones with each other: an exactly cut square or 
level surface composes the mechanism of these mosaic works. ‘The intaglio of the stones resembles 
the figure of a wedge or of a pyramid with a quadrangular base, the vertex of which is encrusted in 
the wall, which is composed of a blackish earth well tempered. Some of these stones are laid on 
the plane, others on the edge, others vertically, and lastly some are placed diagonally, as the 
design may require. 

The interior body of the wall is a solid composition of earth and sand with a mixture of lime, into 
which the loose stones have been pressed to a certain depth. It appears to me vain to inquire when 
or from whom was borrowed the beautiful conception which still remains in the thirteen compart- 
ments which embellish the principal fronts of these monuments, or to seek to determine which of 
them was prior in foundation to the others. It is natural in works of human art that less perfect 
efforts should precede the more perfect; but these admirable structures, combining grace with majesty, 

display a style of architecture which it is impossible could be more original, since in truth we here 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 455 

behold a gigantic piece of mosaic work such as antiquity never produced. Four things are princi- 
pally deserving of notice in these palaces, of which the first is, that only two of them have socles ; 
the others are built immediately upon the surface of the ground. Secondly, the first palace occupies 
amore elevated site than the second. Thirdly, they appear to owe their situation to mere acci- 
dent, since neither symmetry nor order is observable in their disposition with respect to each other. 
Fourthly, they are built of the same materials and in the worst situation, although the highest in the 
neighbourhood ; for which, two reasons may be assigned ; one is, that a rocky soil is more fit to support 
the weight of such massive buildings ; the other, that they might not be exposed to the inundations to 
which the plains are liable in the rainy season. Lastly, considering the solid structure of these works, 
the narrowness of their chambers, and their physical situation, I am of opinion that they never were 
intended for the habitations of their kings. History informs us, and I have verified the fact, that the 
palaces of those monarchs occupied the most agreeable and delightful sites ; the proof of which may 
be found in the remains of those of Chapultepec, Ystapalapan, T'escuco, Huastepec, and others, which 
are the very reverse of Mitlan, which seems more adapted by its situation to be a receptacle and 
abode for the dead, who desire such places for their eternal rest. 

No. XCV. About three quarters of a league to the west of Mitlan, an ancient fortress towers 
over the rugged summit of a steep and isolated rock, which is only accessible on its eastern side, and 
which is crowned and circumvallated with a solid wall of stone, one and twenty feet thick and eighteen 
feet high ; forming in its wide range, which is about a league in extent, several salient and retiring 
angles, with curtains interposed: and on its assailable side, at which is the principal entrance, it is 
defended by double walls which mutually flank each other. The first, or that more advanced, 
forms an enceinte or elliptic rampart, upon which, at short distances from each other, there are heaps 
of small round stones for slinging, and in the centre of its crescent there is an oblique gate to avoid 
the enfilade or right line of arrows, darts, and stones. The second wall, which is joined at its 
extremities to that of the fortress, is of greater elevation, and forms a sort of tenaille. This wall 
differs from the other in having its sides or flanks more open ; and the second gate of the fortress is 
formed on its right side; it has likewise its rampart and heaps of stones. ‘There is besides a parapet in 
the obtuse inner angle of this work, which leaves in the recess formed by the wall a small vacant space, 
sufficiently large to admit a certain number of troops to be drawn up on a sudden attack or in defence 
of the entrance to the fortress: and for greater security in case of an attack, batteries were disposed 
according to their system of tactics, in front of the fortification, which consisted of loose round 
stones about three feet in diameter, placed on high and balanced on the upper edge of the talud, for 
the purpose of being directed to their aim by the power of the lever or united manual strength, 
and forming by their rapid rotation on their axis bounds and rebounds, so as accidentally to imitate 
the batteries named rebound. In the interior of the fortress, or the space contained within and defended 
by the above-mentioned circular wall, there exist, on the convex and plain surface of the rock, vari- 
ous ruins of square buildings and edifices of capacious size, which were the barracks of this ancient 
garrison. In the part diametrically opposite to the entrance there is a postern or sally-port, for fur- 
nishing the fortress with supplies of men and provisions, or to facilitate a forced retreat. Itis evident 
from the reasons above stated, as well as from the epoch in which this work of military architecture 

was constructed, that it was not susceptible of any other system of defence, due regard being paid to 

4.56 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

the nature of the offensive weapons and the tactics or art of attacking then in use, as the topogra- 
phical plan and its scale will show. 

Proceeding about a league in an eastern direction from Mitlan, I discovered the ancient and 
famous quarry of stone of the nature of granite, which was the bed from whence were procured the 
voluminous masses employed in the erection of these various monuments. It extends longitudinally 
from east to west on the top of a mountain. Its naked surface forms furrows or parallel ridges, or rather 
perpendicular strata, contrary to the general order and disposition of nature. In the spaces between 
the furrows holes are visible, which were made by the ancients to serve as a point of support for the 
lever, when, dividing with the stone wedge (of so much use in their arts) the parallel strata, they after- 
wards had occasion to raise from the quarry those enormous blocks of which they formed archi- 
traves and columns; some of which, in an unfinished state, are even still scattered on the surface 
of the ground ; which proves that it was the intention of that people to execute the plans which they 
had in idea formed of other works, but that the course of circumstances prevented them. Nearly 
the same is reported by travellers in Egypt, who have found at the present day in the ancient 
quarries of granite, which supplied the materials of the colossal figures and obelisks, some in an 
unfinished state and still in the rock, and others half trimmed and detached from it. But what, we 
may inquire, was the power employed in raising these stones from their primitive bed? Experience 
has taught us that the power of the lever is unlimited; and it is probable that they employed it for 
that purpose, otherwise we must suppose that they were acquainted with some other mechanical con- 
trivance wholly unknown to us, which perhaps may be reserved for the investigations of others to 
discover : amidst so many conflicting doubts, we can only have recourse to conjectures and supposi- 
tions, which in the end leave us in the same state of uncertainty as we were in at first. If, again, 
we seriously consider the difficulty of transporting these stones, either in blocks, half worked, or 
finished, to the place of their destination, we must in each case suppose that powerful machinery 
was required to effect the object. It would be difficult to persuade me that the ancient Romans 
placed in their great and proud edifices stones comparable in magnitude to these, (and I appeal 
to their original monuments still in existence.) ‘They would have been obliged to have called to 
their aid all the powers proposed by Archimedes; whilst the Indians, barbarians as many ignorant 
writers complacently style them, who do not hesitate to apply to them that degrading epithet, with 
less parade of art attained in their works the same practical results, and who knows if not greater? 

After the conveyance of these stones, the task of lifting and fixing them in their proper places 
was further requisite; for which we must suppose the pulley was used or some other machine 
equally available. Finally, as regards the elevation of their columns, all was concerted with precision 
and skill; although, in order to give a firm foundation to them, a knowledge of their horizontal planes 
was necessary, since on the proper fixture of a column depends its being able to resist the weight 

which it is intended to support. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 457 

INSTRUMENTS EMPLOYED IN THE ARTS. 

It may not unreasonably be expected that I should close my description of the monuments of 
Mitlan with some account of the instruments which the ancient Mexicans employed in squaring, 
cutting, and polishing the stones which entered into the composition of their monuments. Desirous 
of attaining information so highly interesting to the arts, I did not neglect making the most diligent 
inquiries respecting them, and charged the local authorities and the inhabitants of the town, to 
collect whatever stones could be found, either there or in the neighbourhood, which bore any re- 
semblance to a wedge, chisel, punch, axe, hammer, &c. My expectations were not disappointed, 
since I was so fortunate as to obtain, in the course of a few days, several stone chisels shaped like 
wedges, which I considered a propitious omen of further discoveries. The Indians displayed during 
the entire of my stay amongst them the greatest solicitude to oblige me. Availing myself of this 
favourable opportunity, I made a large collection of stone implements, with the intention of se. 
lecting out of the number the most perfect specimens: I was most desirous of obtaining metal 
instruments ; and it was not long before I procured several of copper, of various sizes and shapes. 
But what I chiefly wished to discover, were iron tools; my inquiries after this metal were, however, 
fruitless. 

Long experience proves that gold, silver, and copper, when wrought, whether exposed to the open 
air or buried underneath the surface of the earth, will remain for many ages in an uncorroded state ; 
but this is not the case with iron, which from its nature is exposed to the attacks of rust and moisture 
that in time effect its entire decomposition. 

What theory shall we advocate, or what new hypothesis propose, on this difficult question? Modern 
art certainly has never had recourse to so simple a process as that of reducing stones to proper shape 
and dimension by means of mutual friction; neither is it probable that any ancient nations of the 
Old Continent resorted to this expedient, which on the supposition that it might be found available, 
where all that was requisite was to fashion stone in a plain manner, would be totally inapplicable 
to the formation of relievos. If the Indians had ever used copper instruments, copper being ex- 
tremely ductile and not susceptible of a sharp and hard edge, they could scarcely have employed 
them for other purposes than carving wood: I should also observe, that stones which had been 
fashioned by the simple friction of one against another, would acquire a plane surface from having 
been ground, and would likewise have a certain polish, which is in fact perceptible on the surface 
of the slabs, as well as of the lesser stones, which enter into the composition of the mosaic ornaments, 
the most interesting feature in these monuments. Impressed with a full conviction of the difficult 
nature of this inquiry, I shall conclude by candidly confessing my ignorance on a subject which 
does not admit of superficial reasoning, and shall leave to others, who may be perhaps more fortunate 
in this respect than myself, the task of solving this interesting problem. In fine, having thoroughly 
investigated and taken the plans of the most ancient ruins of the venerable town of Saint Paul 
of Mitlan or Miguitlan, we resolved on our departure, and directed our course towards Zachila, 
the court and residence of the ancient sovereigns of the Zapotecan empire. 

(64) 

4.58 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

ANTIQUITIES IN THE TOWNS OF ZACHILA AND QUILAPA. 

IN the beginning of September, 1806, we quitted Mitlan, directing our course to the towns of Saint 
Pablo Guilaa, Ocotlan, Zachila, and Quilapa. The first of these places, situated on the brow of a 
steep mountain, is remarkable for a singular willow of large dimensions and lofty height, which 
grows in that neighbourhood. ‘This venerable production of the earth forms, by the spreading of 
its roots, an oblong reservoir, the sides of which resemble basket-work, or interwoven snakes. So 
close and firm is this fibrous union, that with the exception of some apertures which are filled up 
with stones and mortar, it is capable of holding a sufficient supply of water for the town, either for 
washing linen, for bathing, or other purposes, and is ever replenished with the clear water of a peren- 
nial spring. The bottom of this curious bath or reservoir is formed by roots of the same tree, from 
which protrude several excrescences, some of which are round, some conical, and others of most 
grotesque shapes. It was impossible not to contemplate with pleasure this probably unique pro- 
duction of nature, at once so rare and so serviceable to the inhabitants of this town. From hence 
we went to the village of Ocotlan, where we remained some days, without observing any thing 
remarkable. Having arrived at the town of Zachila, we entered upon a wider field of research ; for 
here, as we had anticipated, we discovered several interesting monuments of antiquity ; this place 
having been in former times the court or residence of the ancient Zapotecan kings. Its original 
name in the Zapotecan language was Zaachillattoo, as I ascertained from the inspection of some 
old documents: but when in process of time victory followed in the train of Mexican invasion, it 
seems to have changed its appellation into that of Teozapotlan, which latter name fell likewise into 
disuse, and it was finally called Zachila, a diminutive or corruption of the primitive term, as is the 
case with almost all the proper names of places in this ancient empire. This town, being extremely 
populous, extends through a vast and smiling plain situated in the middle of the great valley of 
Oaxaca; the principal produce of which is cochineal. Here we beheld several pyramids of earth 
and stones : we commenced our researches by causing excavations to be made in some of the groups 
which tower majestically in the centre of the plain: these were probably oratories, sepulchres, or 
watch-towers. ‘The Indians, whose exertions were heightened by the presence and exhortations of 
their rector and magistrates, applied themselves with alacrity to the task. In the progress of our 
excavations we often met with human bones, as well as statues or idols made of terra ‘cotta, and. 
small earthenware vessels, such as plates, jugs, and censers. Now and then we came to the moulder- 
ing remains of massy sepulchral walls, formed of very large burnt bricks. This confirms what iI 
have elsewhere remarked, that the ancient Mexicans not only used sun-dried bricks, but such also 
as had been hardened in the furnace. 

On the southern brow of one of these hills we saw the print or impression of a human foot, cut deep 
in the rock, and pointing to the meridian. I have occasionally found similar impressions in different 

parts of this kingdom. They most probably were intended to guide travellers on the road: I have 

om *] 
om 
i 

ae 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 459 

observed on some ancient maps, traced by the Mexicans on paper made of the maguey, a series of 
impressions of the same kind directed to some of the principal points of the compass. 

I am fully persuaded that excavations conducted on a grand scale, would bring to light another 
subterraneous world buried beneath the soil of this ancient continent, the latent record of remote 
ages. I gave orders to dig holes to a considerable depth in several artificial hills, but without suc- 
cess. ‘This, however, ought not to discourage any further attempt, for it is probable that sooner or 
later some important discoveries will be made. 

No. XCVI. I found at the rector’s house a statue formed of a stone of a yellowish grey colour, 
representing an idol or human figure seated: its arms are crossed over the breast as if in the act of 
praying ; an attitude expressive of the reverence which this people felt for their gods and princes. 
The forehead is encircled with a diadem garnished with precious stonés (an ornament designedly in- 
troduced by the sculptor) ; the hair hangs loose and dishevelled ; a sash is girded round the lower part 
of the body ; the nose and chin are a little mutilated. This statue, together with a human skeleton, 
was found in a sepulchre beneath an artificial hill. The style of the carving induces me to suppose 
that it was executed by the Zapotecas, which nation is of greater antiquity than the Mexicans. 

No. XCVII. In one of the lesser pyramids, which forms part of the group already mentioned, 
and perhaps not far from the site of the greater oratory of this town, there is a large oblong slab 
of granite, encircled with a plain moulding, and containing profile representations of four human 
figures in a sitting posture. In the centre of the group (which consists of a series of basso-relievos) 
appears a kind of altar, to which the attention of each figure is directed. The first on the right 
wears a sort of cap or crown, surmounted by an eagle. It is beardless; nor could I discover any 
traces of apparel upon it: on the right arm, which is raised, are engraved two numerals, one near 
the shoulder, the other at the elbow. The head of the second figure is curiously adorned with a 
plumed turban ; ear-rings are added to the other ornaments ; the right arm, although mutilated, ap- 
pears to be pointing to the same object of veneration. This figure, like the preceding, is destitute 
of apparel ; but it is distinguished by the peculiarity of having a long and thick beard. Time has 
deprived the first figure on the left of its ornamental head-dress: the ear-rings are similar to those 
of the opposite figure. In its right hand is a branch of palm; its left is raised, and points to the 
centre. 'The last figure has suffered most from time. The upper portion of the head is mutilated, 
but the ear-rings and part of the beard are yet remaining.. Both its arms are extended as if in the 
act of adoration, and the sash which encircles its waist is distinctly visible. It would be a hopeless 
task to attempt to decypher the meaning of this mysterious and hieroglyphical stone. We must 
content ourselves therefore with admiring the excellence of its sculpture and the expressive character 
of the figures. 

No. XCVIII. This granite statue represents a human figure seated in an attitude of repose. Its 
head is ornamented with a sort of mitre, covered with relievos and fanciful decorations. The face is 
masked, and its neck is encircled with a necklace of pearls or precious stones. A peculiar dress, 
terminating in an apron, appears in front ; and its hands rest or are supported upon its knees. This 
statue must evidently be referred to a new school, since the style of its execution differs materially 
from that of the Mexicans, who, when they subjugated the Zapotecas, gave a new character to the 
arts as well as to the language of their empire. 

4.60 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

Although the Mexicans, never attained great celebrity as artists, being a nation more addicted to 
arms than to arts, they nevertheless availed themselves of the inventive genius of the Tultecas, 
whose ancient state deserves the appellation of the Athens of the New World. At the back of this 
statue two locks of hair, a portion of the necklace, and the girdle, are visible. 

No. XCIX. This statue of white marble, well carved and in excellent preservation, was found 

in making an excavation in the parish churchyard. It appears to be a male figure, and the attitude 

in which it is represented is very strange. The head is adorned with a profusion of feathers, with . 

other ornaments intermixed. The ears are carved in a fanciful manner, and might almost be con- 
sidered a part of these ornaments. ‘The face is masked; a string of pearls is suspended round its 
neck, and a plaited mantle is thrown over the shoulders. The band which encircles its waist is 
not visible in front, and the arms are entirely concealed, displaying only the extremity of the right 

hand, in which is a vase of a globular shape, accompanied with some symbols which I cannot ex- 

plain. This statue was originally painted with vermilion or red ochre, a brilliant colour that ac-— 

corded with the national taste, as their palaces and sepulchres sufficiently declare. 

No. C. This is a block of polished grey marble, forming part of a buttress in the hermitage called 
‘* La Soledad.” he figure carved upon it is spherical, and that part which is visible exhibits a 
face resembling the image of the full moon, which is frequently symbolized by a human countenance. 
It is probable that the ancient Mexicans worshipped this planet, and that it occupied a distinguished 
place among their numerous deities. . 

No. CI. At the foot of the steps leading to the parish churchyard stands a block of marble, on 
which is carved the prominent bust of an eagle. It is represented in profile, in an erect position, 
with expanded wings; its talons grasp the tail of a snake, while it attacks with its beak the reptile’s 
head. ‘This part of the figure is much mutilated. It is probable that this ancient and well-executed 
piece of sculpture was destined to adorn some regal edifice ; since the eagle, the king of birds, has 
always been considered the type of strength and dominion, on account of which it was embroidered 
on the Roman standards, and enjoys among birds the place which is allotted to the lion amongst 
beasts. The breast exhibits a small cavity, which was doubtless filled by a plate of gold or silver: 
whence I imagine that its intended situation was the summit of some stately palace facing the east, 
in order that the rays of the rising sun might be reflected from it. 

No. CII. Of these massy blocks of stone (similarly numbered) the first was discovered in the steps 
leading to the churchyard ; the second in the south entrance of the church; the third formed part of 
the wall of the rector’s house.. They vary in size and in quality, as well as in the figure and arrange- 
ment of their relievos, which exhibit a regular and symmetrical design. It is impossible not to 
behold with regret these fragments hastening to decay; since there is every reason to suppose that 
they were originally destined for the decoration of some magnificent structure. Their surface is now 
defaced, and part of the carving has mouldered beneath the hand of time, which destroys alike the 
porphyry column and the brazen bust. 

The remains which I am now about to describe are specimens of an art which probably preceded 
that of sculpture ;—the art of forming figures in clay, either with the hand or the mould, solid or hollow, 

which were afterwards baked in the sun or hardened by fire. My reason for supposing that this art 

Ps 
Pi 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 461 

preceded that of sculpture, is, that it is so much easier to mould plastic clay, than to give shape and 
symmetry to stone, metal, or wood. 

No. CIII. The first specimen of terra cotta is a very extraordinary figure or fanciful bust. It 
serves as the cover to a square hollow pedestal resembling a box, resting upon four cylindrical and 
hollow feet. This idol, which is formed of fine and well-baked clay, is perforated by a perpen- 
dicular tube which is a sort of support to it. I should in vain attempt to explain the various de- 
signs in relievo with which this figure is embellished, since they are too complicated and too fanciful 
for my comprehension; but they exhibit (as reference to the drawing will show) the most exact 
symmetry throughout. It was found some time ago, together with four others of a similar size, 
shape, and substance, in ploughing a piece of ground near the rector’s house. For what purpose 
could it have been designed? This is a difficulty no less perplexing than the development of the 
meaning of its various hieroglyphics. The figure comprises three distinct pieces or parts; the 
pedestal or box, the lid or masked bust, and the tube. Perhaps the box was used to hold jewels 
or incense ; the bust was the cover; and the tube served to diffuse odours, or to hold some torch 
or lighted piece of wood in honour of their deities, or of the sovereigns of Zaachillattoo. 

No. CIV. The description we have just given of the preceding figure is applicable to that which is 
represented in this drawing. 

No. CV. This number represents a female figure of diminutive proportions; it is fashioned in 
lead-coloured clay. The disposition of its limbs (which are visible only at their extremities) is re- 
markable. Its garments are thrice folded round it, and enriched with a fringed border; its head is 
richly adorned with ribbons, tresses, and rings, and its neck encircled with a necklace of precious 
stones. ‘The erect and fixed attitude of this figure, resembling a mummy, its folded arms, its singular 
vestment, and the circular tube which perforates its body, seem to indicate, that like the figures last 
mentioned it was intended to hold some sort of torch. 

No. CVI. 'This small, hollow, and rather fanciful head bears some resemblance to that of a tiger or 
leopard, or perhaps it is the likeness of an unknown wild beast. It is formed of red clay ; its surface 
is smooth, its expression ferocious, and its execution finished. The dilated jaws show it to be in the 
act of seizing upon its prey, and they likewise display formidable fangs and a cloven tongue. A 
collar confines its neck, which is tied with a knot. . 

No. CVII. This strange figure, which represents a kind of mastiff, is of very finished workmanship. 
It is destitute of limbs. The ears and the belly are large; the eyes distended, and it holds in its 
mouth a human head, which it appears in the act of devouring. This figure, like those which pre- 
cede it, is attached to a tube, and was apparently destined for the same use. It is rather muti- 
lated: works formed of clay being very liable to suffer injuries from time. 

No. CVIII. This is a small hollow head very similar to that of the domestic quadruped which the 
Mexicans name the “Cacomistle”. The mouth is just opened sufficiently wide to display the teeth 
regularly arranged. The Mexican artists were better delineators of the forms and proportions of 
animals and vegetables than of the human figure ; the probable reason of which I have before at- 
tempted to explain. This figure is formed of baked clay of a reddish brown colour. . 

No. CIX. Is the head of an armadilla, forming a hollow figure of baked clay. I regret that the 

(63) 

4.62 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

body of this animal is wanting, since its execution may be presumed to have been of equal excellence 
with the head. 

No. CX. This is the head of some animal unknown to naturalists. It is moulded in solid clay of 
an ash colour, hardened in the fire. . This antique fragment is very valuable on account of its origi- 

nality, finished execution, and its animated expression. © 

Pottery, as another branch of the plastic art, next merits consideration. 

The ancient Zapotecan potters manufactured their jugs and other vessels, either by the help of 
moulds, or simply with their hands ; preparing the clay, of different qualities and colours, with appro- 
priate tools. Their workmanship was good; that of their thin plates and dishes especially, which 
might rival the celebrated wares of Sagunto in the brilliancy of their colours and the clearness: of 
their varnish. . Fragments of this description I have occasionally found under the ruins of their mag- 
nificent buildings. 

No. CXI. This common-sized jug deserves attention from its perfect symmetry, its fine material, its 
transparent varnish, and the skilful display of dark yellow and lead colour which adorns both its 
interior and exterior. It stands upon three hollow feet, shaped like the rattles of a snake, and its 
neck is encircled at top and bottom with a ring or moulding: it has no handle. The materials of 
this vessel are so well, tempered, and the baking so perfect, that when struck it emits a clear and 
brilliant sound. The ancient Zapotecas evinced the fertility of their genius, by giving a thousand 
different shapes and colours to their manufactures, and enriching them with ornamental designs of 
flowers and animals, either painted or moulded. 

No. CXII. In the cluster of artificial hills near the town of Zaachillattoo before mentioned we dis- 
covered a sepulchral vault of hewn stone; on entering which we observed a row of human skulls, 
each placed in a dish standing upon a separate pedestal: every dish also contained a small artificial 
skull with the hair longitudinally extended. I imagine these skulls to be the relics of the victims 
which were sacrificed to inhuman deities, whose nature it was to be ever thirsting after human blood. 

No. CXIII. & CXIV. These numbers describe two vessels which were employed either in the 
service of the temple or the sepulchre. The first is a portable censer, to which a long hollow handle 
is affixed. Its circular patera or bowl is perforated with several holes to admit the action of the air. 
The other, which may more properly be named a chafing-dish, rests upon three feet. ‘These ancient 
vessels were in all probability intended to fumigate the temples and the images of their deities. If 
the religious rites of this ancient people had merely consisted of these simple offerings, they would 
have been less deserving of censure ; but to propitiate their ferocious divinities with the reeking 
limbs of their fellow-creatures was an act no less barbarous than superstitious. 

No. CXV. Proceeding with our excavations, we met with a great variety of small pots of different 
shapes. Of these I shall mention only the two of which representations are given in the annexed 
drawings. The form of the first is simple and well proportioned. The bottom is flat, and the middle 
as well as the neck are neatly finished. 

No. CXVI. The form of the other vessel is more singular. The mouth resembles that of a funnel or 

trumpet. From the foot project three prongs or roots, and two similar ones extend from the body. It 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 463 

was customary with this nation to deposit in the tombs of their deceased friends various jugs, basins, 
and dishes, which vessels I have described in order to show their taste and skill in the manufacture of 
them. Nothing is insignificant which points out the origin or the merit of the arts in which they 
chiefly excelled: viewed in connection with so interesting an enquiry, every relic however minute 
forms a link in the chain of knowledge, and thus acquires value and importance. 

From this ancient imperial court of Zaachillattoo, I proceeded to that of Quilapa, the residence 
in past times of the sovereigns of the two Mistecas, whose territory, in respect to its geographical 
position, lay in an opposite direction to the Zapotecan empire: the former extending from south to 
north, the latter from north to south, as far as the city of Tehuantepec. 

Having made the necessary arrangements for commencing the task of excavation, I procured, 
through the obliging exertions of the rector of the parish, the help of some Indians, when we pene- 
trated to the centre of several artificial mounds, which the ancient inhabitants had erected in honour 
of their deities, and which were the only monuments of antiquity that continued to exist in that 
neighbourhood. Here we found the following relics. 

No. CXVII. This figure represents a musical wind-instrument, or rather a whistle, such as was in- 
use among this people, both sides of which are copied in the drawing. The first resembles the ra- 
diated and bearded face of a man, and rests upon a triangular base which composes the other extremity. 
The mouth-piece is at the lower end of the opposite side. Besides this, I have discovered several 
other different kinds of wind-instruments, upon all of which tunes might be played. Among these 
there is one which is now in my possession, resembling a German flute, of which the material is a 
very fine clay of a dark purple colour, well polished, and finished. Another is a sort of trumpet, 
formed of the same kind of earth. I might add to the list of these musical instruments, but those 
already named will be sufficient to satisfy even the careless enquirer, that the people of this country 
were not entire strangers to the charms of music. 

No. CXVIII. This is a female bust formed of terra cotta, and, as the drawing shows, gracefully 
ornamented. 

No. CXIX. In the progress of our excavations we found this small head of clay, which exhibits 
a pleasing and manly combination of features. The ears, as well as the forehead, are furnished with 
ornamental rings: a beard is visible on its chin, which contradicts the opinion of those naturalists 
who deny to the aborigines of this vast continent that characteristic sign of manhood. 

Thus empires cease, nations disappear, and last of all those monuments of art decay, which, while 
they silently proclaim their founders’ skill and genius, testify how transitory is the existence of man’s 
proudest works. 

From the province of Oaxaca we went to the town of Tehuacan de las Granadas, and thence to the 
city of ‘Tepeyacac. This journey was retarded in consequence of our party being attacked by a 
malignant fever, brought on by the dampness of a very rainy season, and by frequently inhaling the 
noxious vapours contained in the excavations and sepulchral vaults which we had explored at 
Zachila and Quilapa. This severe attack of illness, by which our draughtsman was brought to the 
point of death, delayed our progress for more than two months. 

4.64 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

ANTIQUITIES OF THE CITY OF TLASCALA. 

No. CXX. HAVING arrived at the town of San Pablo del Monte, near the city of La Puebla, 
T made diligent enquiries after two statues, which I had been informed existed in that neighbourhood, 
and which I found to be the figures of two Mexican vestals. They were placed upon a wall, in the 
court of a chapel named Santiago. Both are represented kneeling upon square pedestals. The 
first is almost entirely without apparel; her hands conceal her breasts : her hair is confined under a 
cap, which is formed into a bag at the back of her head. 

No. CXXI. The second statue represents a female figure of the same class. A plain collar is 
fastened round her neck, and her head and shoulders are covered with a long cloak which reaches 
to the extremities of her feet. She likewise modestly veils her person with her hands and .arms. 
These statues are sufficient to show that the ancient inhabitants of this country were not so rude 
and barbarous as some writers have falsely represented them. The same feelings of delicacy which 
suggested to the Grecian artist the attitude in which he has represented the Venus de Medici, guided 
the chisel of the Mexican sculptor. These feelings are common to human nature; and the artist 
who carved the coarse Mexican block was as much under their restraint, as he who gave form and 
beauty to the Parian marble. 

No. CXXII. In the ancient capital of this province, called Tizatlan, the Spaniards have built 
a hermitage, dedicated to the proto-martyr St. Stephen, upon the ruins of the palace which 
once belonged to Chicotencatl. An Indian showed me here a small female bust, sculptured in 
iron-grey stone, in a sitting posture, and dressed according to the ancient costume of the country. 
Destitute as this statue is of merit as a work of art, the description of it cannot be deemed useless, 
since it will be serviceable to those who may desire to acquire a more perfect knowledge of the 
history of the kingdom of New Spain, and of the manners of its inhabitants. 

No. CXXIII. Another statue, formed of a similar hard and dark-grey stone, was brought to me 
from that quarter of the city called St. Sebastian. It is of very small size, and stands on a square 
pedestal, having its body covered with a garment fastened with a girdle. Notwithstanding the 
hideous expression of its features, which in part resemble those of a man and in part those of a 
beast, its brow is encircled with an ornamented crown, which likewise covers the back of the head. 
Its hands are folded over its breasts, and discover an excrescence upon the back of each. The 
Mexican or Tlascaltecan nation, however enlightened in other respects, were not singular in as- 
sociating these monstrous images with their religion: we recognize also the same practice among the 
ancient and wise Egyptians,—I need scarcely mention their worship of Osiris, Anubis, Canopis, &c. 

No. CXXIV. In an Indian hut in the same quarter of the city I found a piece of ancient 
sculpture, the most perfect in material, execution, and proportions, that my researches in this con- 
tinent have yet discovered. It is a mask carved in green agate and finely polished ; probably the 
resemblance of one of the four chiefs who once swayed the destinies of this celebrated republic. The 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 465 

ears as well as the forehead are pierced, for the purpose of suspending some kind of rings or jewels 
from them. ‘The chin is destitute of beard. It seems to have been the intention of the artist to fill 
up the cavity left in each eye with pupils of a different substance from that of which the mask is 
composed, a custom not uncommon amongst the Greeks and Romans. The drawing represents both 
sides of this image. 

No. CXXV. In that part of the city called St. Stephen I found the flint barb of a lance, 
such as the Tlascaltecas used in their wars. This is the only weapon of its kind that I was able 
to discover in the country of that warlike and celebrated people; and this fact inclines me to be- 
lieve that they were accustomed to bury their arms in the earth. The annexed drawing will convey 
an accurate idea of its form. 

No. CXXVI. I directed an excavation to be made in the quarter of St. Sebastian above men- 
tioned, but with little success; some human bones and fragments of idols, together with a vase 
named a Popocaxtli, which signifies a fumigating vessel, were all that we discovered. This relic is 
however interesting, from its having been employed in the funeral rites of this nation. It is a 
small and well-formed vessel of fine clay, standing upon three feet. One of the borders which 
encircles its exterior is painted with a fanciful pattern; the other is perforated with regularity, in 
order to give admission to the air, and by so doing to facilitate the burning of the incense or odo- 
riferous gums which it was intended to contain. 

No. CXXVII. During our stay in this city, the Indians of the village of Tepoyango brought me 
a military musical instrument, or Teponastle, made of a dense, heavy, and dark-coloured wood. 
It is cylindrical and hollow. No ornaments are painted upon its surface; but festoons and other 
devices are carved at each extremity. In the centre, which is the part where the instrument was 
struck, are two bars longitudinally placed, which project from the surface, each of which possesses 
its distinct tone: these, when struck, return a deep and loud sound. The instrument is formed out 
of a single block of wood, and, like a drum, was intended to be beaten with two sticks. 

No. CXXVIII. This figure represents another kind of Teponastle, probably that which was most 
anciently in use among the Tlascaltecas. The material and the execution serve equally to give 
beauty and value to this instrament; the former being a hard and heavy wood of a rich purple 
colour, and susceptible of the finest polish; the latter exhibiting a specimen of that peculiar style 
of carving in wood, which the ancient Indians alone were capable of executing. It is supported 
by a human figure lying on its breast; and by striking the back of the instrument, two tones are 
produced similar to those already mentioned. The head is remarkable for the singular beauty of its 
proportions ; both the eyes and the lips are formed of mother-of-pearl, while two pendants are at- 
tached to the nostrils. The shape of this instrument is not unlike that of a canoe: it weighs about 
twenty-five pounds, and after the lapse of so many ages it is still in the most perfect state of preser- 
vation. ‘The sounds of this martial instrument were employed to animate the Indians to battle. 

These ancient drums were the first specimens of the art of carving in wood which I had met with. 
They are valuable on account of the abundant testimony which they bear to the skill and ingenuity 
of this nation. I should in vain endeavour to explain the mysterious imagery which decorates the 
latter Teponastle ; but the three drawings which are annexed will give the reader a correct estimate 

(6c ) 

466 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

of its proportions. The first represents the head viewed in front, and the other two the different 
sides of the instrument. . : 

No. CXXIX. In the province of Tlascala there yet remain two bridges constructed by the 
ancient Indians, though now in a state of great dilapidation. One of these, situated at the distance 
of a league from the town of Los Reyes, crosses a deep ravine at the foot of a steep and lofty hill on 
the road to San Francisco Temetzontla, and is built of large stones of various sizes, of even shapes, 
and well cemented with mortar. This bridge has a sort of arch, which forms an obtuse angle springing 
from its two side walls or buttresses; the height of whichis about seven feet, its breadth the same, and 
its width forty-two feet. It had originally a parapet on both sides, of which some traces yet remain. 
The work was ornamented with four stately obelisks, built of stones and mortar within, and faced 
on the outside with large bricks disposed in circular rows, with the addition of mouldings, which 
divided the obelisks into four parts, in the highest of which there was a niche destined perhaps to 
receive the statue of some rural deity. At each angle of the bridge stood an obelisk forty-two feet 
high, and collectively they must have presented to the eye of the passenger an object of striking 
grandeur. 

No. CXXX. The other bridge is constructed over a difficult pass on the same road, about a 
mile distant. In the brick parapets of this bridge the architect has made gutters for the discharge 
of water. Its length is about one hundred and two feet, its breadth thirty-six feet, and its per- 
pendicular elevation sixty feet. The aqueduct is four feet and a half in breadth, and five feet high, 
and is covered with large slabs of stone horizontally disposed. This bridge is likewise adorned 
with four obelisks placed at its four angles. Their dimensions are larger than those before men- 
tioned, and they have no niches in the upper compartment. Their execution is equally skilful. 

What opinion shall we form of these stupendous works, which, all circumstances considered, are 
unique in their kind? Constructed amidst rugged precipices in the deep glens of mountains, they 

afford a striking proof of the population and the power of this once mighty republic. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 467 

ANTIQUITIES OF TEHUANTEPEC. 

PROCEEDING from the city of Mexico through Puebla and Mosaque, we pursued our journey 
first to Molcaxaque, and thence to New Tepexe. Here I obtained from the magistrate of the town 
the requisite assistance to enable me to explore some ruins which still exist about three leagues 
westward of the site of Old Tepexe. 

No. I. My curiosity was gratified by the sight of several ruins which I discovered in that neigh- 
bourhood. ‘The first that attracted my attention was a massy pile of building, apparently designed 
for the defence of some interior structure. This work exhibits a system of fortification which I 
cannot persuade myself was ever known to the inhabitants of the Old Continent. The walls are 
constructed of square stones, cemented with a durable mortar composed of lime and sand, and 
present an elevation which gradually recedes from the base to the summit, forming a series of over- 
hanging platforms; thus giving each platform (of which there are eight) the command of that be- 
neath it, as may be seen in the drawing annexed. 

The space which this building covers is immense, but its situation precluded the possibility of any 
accurate admeasurement. It stands on the projecting angle of a rock, surrounded by vast precipices ; 
while innumerable serpents, fostered by a climate so intensely hot as that of Lower Misteca, lurk 
in its recesses and guard its mouldering walls from intrusion. The buildings which form the in- 
terior of this vast structure are disposed with such order and regularity, as to lead me to imagine 
that they were once the residence of some potent Indian prince; for notwithstanding its present 
state of dilapidation and decay, the traces of arrangement and design in the disposition of its several 
parts are clearly visible, while the whole building must have been executed with rule, compass, and 
level, or some instruments of a corresponding description. 

No. II. In the middle of a spacious area we found a fragment of red granite, the carved surface 
of which resembles the calendar affixed to the steeple of the cathedral at Mexico. It exhibits several 
concentric circles, two of which inclose a row of square compartments. The few hieroglyphics or 
astronomical symbols which this fragment contains (sufficient to enable us to form an opinion of 
the appearance which the perfect whole presented), show that astronomy was a favourite science 
among the ancient Mexicans. In addition to these, our attention was drawn to the transverse orifice 
in the centre, the probable receptacle of a hand or gnomon; which, supposing this dial to have 
been horizontally placed, was intended by its shadow to mark the hours through every month of the 
revolving year. 1 computed the diameter of this instrument to have been six feet, and its thickness 
nine inches; and I contemplated it with a feeling of regret, that any part of so valuable a testi- 
monial of Mexican science should have been irreparably destroyed. 

No. III. This spherical stone, about a yard and a half in diameter, which we found at the en- 
trance of the ruins above mentioned, was probably employed by the ancient inhabitants to sharpen 
the points or edges of their domestic tools and weapons of war; since we observed on its surface 

several marks which confirmed us in the opinion that it had formerly been converted to such a use. 

468 — THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

From this ancient site we proceeded to Oaxaca, being obliged to pursue a circuitous course in 
order to arrive there. 

No. IV. Some Indians of the village of Quilapan brought me a small axe of red copper, which 
had evidently been cast in a mould, of the size and shape represented in the drawing. At first sight 
it resembled a labourer’s tool, but it might also have been applied to the purposes of war or sacri- 
fice; or perhaps, when mounted on a shaft, have enjoyed the more honourable distinction of being 
borne in the hands of the civil magistrate. 

Leaving behind us the city of Antequera, and journeying by the main road to Tehuantepec, we 
arrived there without meeting with any ancient building during the whole of our journey. 

No. V. Soon after our arrival at Tehuantepec we were informed by Don Vicente Lelo, the Deputy 
Governor of the district, an enlightened man and a loyal subject of our sovereign, that within a 
few leagues of that town we should find various architectural remains. Whilst I was preparing to 
proceed thither, a military weapon was brought to me which had been found in those ruins. It is 
the barb of a sort of dart such as I had never seen, made of very hard flint, and of the size repre. 
sented in the drawing. Like our bayonets it has three edges, and the end is formed into a shaft with 
the design of its being fixed in the socket of some pole or handle. 

In furtherance of the object of the commission which had been intrusted to me, I made the 
necessary arrangements for exploring a plain three leagues to the westward of the town. Accom- 
panied by the Deputy Governor, we arrived at the base of a lofty mountain called Guingola (which 
name signifies in the Zapotecan language The High Rock), on the summit of which we observed 
some ruins. We ascended the mountain by steep, winding, and rugged paths, and our progress was 
rendered more toilsome by the intense heat of a vertical sun. Having reached the summit, not- 
withstanding the difficulty of the ascent, we discovered amidst heaps of earth and fragments of 
ruined edifices, some buildings yet remaining of a pyramidical shape, and in a state of good pre- 
servation. | 

No. VI. The first of these is a pyramid consisting of four stories, built of stone. The walls are 
coated with flags which are overspread with a cement of lime, sand, and ochre. ‘The principal ascent 
is on the western side, while two smaller flights of stairs face the north and south, all conducting to 
the horizontal surface, on which worship was paid, and barbarous sacrifices performed to false and 
imaginary gods. The second story is ornamented with stones inserted longitudinally, and at equal 
distances in the wall, the extremities of each projecting from its surface: on these the natives 
were probably accustomed to fix lighted torches, or to range the heads of their sacrificed victims. 
The dimensions of this structure may be seen by the scale. The basement story is perpendicular, 
and its form oblong: the three other stories are oblique, each receding about a yard from its base. 
The principal ascent consists of about forty steps; the height and breadth of each step is about nine 
inches. ‘he breadth of the staircases on the north and south sides is two yards. 

No. VII. The dimensions and the form of the second pyramid, though apparently built at the 
same period, differ from those of the first: the former, as I have stated, being of four stories, the 
latter of only two. The principal staircase has likewise a contrary direction, facing the east; the 
smaller ones, like the others, front the north and south; and it is remarkable that the angles of the 
basement story are curvilinear. The materials of which this monument is composed are similar to 

those of the one last mentioned; but grandeur is united with simplicity in the architectural deco- 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 469 

rations of the upper story, which consist of two parallel friezes with square mouldings, inlaid with 
large blocks of white marble, covered with hieroglyphics, now in a state of decay. There is some- 
thing painful in the reflection, that the proudest works of man must sooner or later yield to time. 

No. VIII. This monument is of a conical form, divided by stories, resembling a flight of steps. 
The base or platform upon which it stands is sixty-six feet in length, and its height twelve feet. 
Its construction is perfectly regular; the material is stone covered with a coat of lime and sand, 
painted with ochre. It is probable that the flat surface by which it is terminated, served as the 
pedestal of some heathen statue placed in this open and conspicuous situation, or it possibly might 
have been a sepulchre destined to contain the remains of some distinguished warrior. I must here 
remark, that of the many pyramidical edifices which I have had the opportunity of observing in 
my different excursions through the provinces of New Spain, none terminate in a point, but in- 
variably in a horizontal plane of greater or lesser extent. It is evident that the founders of these 
structures spared neither labour, time, nor cost, in the erection of fabrics which they consecrated to 
religion, or hallowed to the memory of their deceased kings and ancestors. 

No. IX. Before I quit this memorable spot, I shall notice another curious monument, which 
from its circular form I imagine was dedicated to the celebration of gladiatorial sacrifices. It is 
composed of stones and mortar formed into a solid mass, and its whole surface is coated with a 
hard, smooth, and white cement. It occupies the centre of a square area in front of the principal 
ascent to the second pyramid, at the distance of about one hundred paces. This position confirms 
my Conjecture that it was associated with some religious rite. It might, however, have been con- 
structed for the very different purpose of serving asa stage for the exhibition of burlesque repre- 
sentations. 

No. X. I quitted the town of Tehuantepec, having been much gratified with what I had seen in 
it, and proceeded to an Indian village named Chilhuitlan, situated at the distance of a day’s journey, 
where I found an ancient stone bridge in a state of good preservation, still serving as a passage 
over the river which flows in the neighbourhood. It is about twelve feet long, six feet wide, and its 
elevation is nine feet above the level of the stream. Its sides are provided with low parapets, which 
are intersected with gutters for the discharge of water. That which first attracts the spectator’s at- 
tention, and forms indeed the most interesting feature in this ancient piece of masonry, is its pointed 
arch, which is composed of two blocks of stone of curvilinear shape and large dimensions, com- 
prising within their span a space of nine feet. 

From this village we continued our journey to the town of St. Dominic Petapa, lying in the 
direct road to Ciudad Real, where, thank God, we arrived in safety. 

No. XI. A few days after my arrival at this city, I inquired, as was my general practice, for some 
intelligent persons from whom I might procure information on the subject of the commission with 
which I was entrusted, and I had the pleasure of finding in Don Ramon de Ordones, the Vicar- 
general of the diocese, a gentleman whose love of antiquarian research well qualified him for the 
task. He showed me two curious relics in his possession. The first is a head formed of green 
porphyry, measuring seven inches in breadth and two in thickness. It is a whimsical attempt to 
represent a man’s face in double profile, as will be better understood by reference to the annexed 
drawing. ‘The countenance is beardless, the ears fanciful, and the cap which covers the head quite 

(6p) 

470 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

original. ‘There is a protuberance on the forehead, and to imitate nature seems never to have been 
contemplated by the artist. A semicircular fracture is visible at the top of the head, which was 
perhaps originally a circular hole, by which it was suspended like a medallion round the neck of 
some gigantic statue. The surface of this curious piece of sculpture displays an exquisite polish. 

No. XII. This number presents to our view in miniature one of the most valuable specimens in 
existence of Mexican or Guatemaltecan antiquity. We here behold an engraved copper medallion, 
about two inches in diameter and a quarter of an inch in thickness, the weight of which rather ex- 
ceeds that of a Mexican dollar, as the Vicar-general ascertained at Guatemala. He conjectures, 
and I think with reason, that its date is as ancient as the first colonization of this continent. It was 
found on that celebrated spot which in later ages received the appellation of Palenque. It is 
evidently not struck from any die, but shaped and engraved by the hand, the point made by the 
compass or some similar instrument when forming the concentric lines on its surface being still visible 
in the centre. The upper side of the medal contains an historical device, composed of a mysterious 
hieroglyphical group, of which the principal figure is that of a man kneeling in the attitude of a 
suppliant, and entirely destitute of apparel, with the exception of a turban and buskins. The beard 
denotes the sex of the figure, although the lip is without mustachios. Placed between the ferocious 
and menacing heads of two monsters, nearly resembling the alligator or the Egyptian crocodile, he 
seems, not without imminent peril, to have gained admission to this romantic, luxuriant, and fruitful 
portion of the globe, so favourable to the multiplication of the human species. 

The reverse, as I term it, of this medallion, which nevertheless may be its principal face, is 
equally enigmatical and difficult of explanation. How in attempting to escape Scylla shall we avoid 
falling into Charybdis? Its field displays the same mountainous yet luxuriant scenery ; but the effigy 
of a lofty tree in the centre, covered with fruit and spreading foliage, is that which chiefly attracts 
attention ; the size of its trunk undoubtedly indicates the fertility of the soil in which it grows. 

We perceive at the root of the tree a scaly serpent entwining itself round the trunk, which may 
possibly allude to the primitive occupation by some ancient colony of this chosen and retired spot. 
The bird of Jove, perched upon the summit of an adjoining mountain, was perhaps intended as the 
symbol of rising power. ‘These and similar conjectures must, however, be received with caution, 
since the subject to which they relate is as dark and mysterious as was the riddle proposed by the 
Theban Sphynx. If I may venture to offer an opinion, it would be, that the principal side of this 
medal records the migration of a colony, which, after encountering many difficulties, at last arrives 
at the land of its destination ; whilst the reverse signifies the flourishing and prosperous state which 
the same colony afterwards attained*. 

Having terminated our researches in this place, notwithstanding the obstacles interposed by the 
inhabitants, who designated us as traitors, we continued our journey to Ocotzingo. 

No. XIII. We observed in the town-hall of the latter place two large blocks of stone, the first of 
which is of a hard substance and of a dark grey colour. It exhibits a male figure executed in alto- 
relievo. The style of the sculpture is good, but the attitude is constrained and painful, the head 
being very much inclined to the right, while the arms and hands appear to be bound. It was im- 

* A similarity is perceptible in the ornamental border which surrounds this medallion, to the necklaces of several statues which we 

discovered in the ancient city of Palenque. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. A71 

possible to ascertain the position of the legs, the lower part of the stone having suffered con- 
siderable mutilation. The figure is naked, with the exception of a sash girt round the waist. How 
shall we attempt to describe the curious crown which adorns without protecting the head? It is 
impossible to guess what may have been the design of the artist, but probably he intended to repre- 
sent a victim destined for sacrifice on the bloody altar of superstition and fanaticism. 

No. XIV. The other basso-relievo, sculptured in a yellow stone, is probably historical. Besides 
the two principal figures that constitute the group, hieroglyphics are distributed in different parts 
of it, of which the drawing will convey a more perfect idea than any description that I could offer. 
I shall therefore confine my remarks to the former. One of these beardless figures is standing, 
and the other sitting; while the artist evidently designed to represent both personages as engaged 
in animated conversation. Each is presenting to the other some gift. The figure which is sitting 
holds in its left hand a globe surmounted by a crown: the other holds something likewise in its 
hand, but the sculpture is too much defaced to enable me to judge what it resembles. The dress, 
fashioned after nature’s simplest pattern, is disposed, as is usual in their representations of the human 
form, with a strict regard to decency. Their helmets are of very complicated workmanship. That 
of the upright figure is composed of the head and tail of some bird, probably the eagle, on the top of 
which is a circle decorated with plumes, whilst the expanded feathers of the tail hang down grace- 
fully behind : to these are added other ornaments. The helmet of the seated figure is not so elaborately 
adorned, but Iam unable to give a minute description of its parts. I have already observed that 
these figures appear to be engaged in amicable conference, in confirmation of which it may be re- 
marked that neither of them is furnished with any offensive weapon. This piece of sculpture, as 
well as that before mentioned, formed a part of the decorations of some ancient buildings situated 
two leagues eastward of the town, in a place called in the Zendal language Tonila, which signifies 
The Stone houses. 

No. XV. In our way thither, and in its immediate vicinity, we found several human figures carved 
in stone, all of them headless trunks, and scattered like rubbish over the surface of the plain. I shall 
describe the two which were in the best state of preservation. ‘The mutilated form of the first is one 
yard and half an inch in height, and of proportionate breadth. This statue is affixed to a pedestal 
of a prismatic shape, measuring two yards in length. The material is a hard ash-coloured stone ; 
and from the excellence of the workmanship, I cannot help regretting its present imperfect state, 
which also renders any conjecture as to its original design almost fruitless. The arms are folded over 
the breast, the feet are in contact with each other, and the long robe which covers the whole figure, 
with the exception of the hands, resembles a scapulary. The fixed attitude of devotion, and the 
dress, render it more probable that this was the statue of a heathen priest, than an image to which 
vows were accustomed to be addressed. It bears some resemblance, either by chance or imitation, 
to the ancient statues of the Egyptians. ; 

No. XVI. This statue, the material of which is similar to that last mentioned, is equally well 
executed. It is the mutilated figure of a female (the mere trunk being all that remains) dressed in a 
robe, covered by a sort of vest, which divides in front like a curtain drawn aside. An apron, tastefully 
ornamented, is fastened to the waist, and descends to the feet of the figure. The remains of this statue 

are sufficient to indicate the regular symmetry of its original form, although it is impossible to say 

A472 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

what might have been its destination when new from the hands of the sculptor. It is probable that 
the Indians had their female as well as their male divinities, and that both were equally invoked by 
them in seasons of calamity. ; 

No. XVII. Having spent some time in contemplating these mutilated statues, I proceeded to 
examine the remains of their temples, which were situated in a sultry and woody spot, at the distance 
of a cannon-shot, on the slope of a gently rising eminence terminating in a flight of steps, which 
(though now in a state of dilapidation) formed the entrance to the building. Five of these temples 
are still in existence; three of which are roofed, and two open to the air. The perspective view of 
these ruins presents three points of elevation: on the first stand two small oratories, then the large 
temple, occupying the centre of the second elevation, while the two artificial hills are ranged upon 
the third. 

The three covered oratories have many points of resemblance in their structure. They are built 
in the same style, with the same materials, and the same ornaments: their porches are paved with 
large square’slabs of free-stone ; the walls and roofs are coated with a cement of lime and sand; and 
the doors and vaulted ceilings terminate in an acute angle. The four sides are decorated with a 
frieze, and the interior is divided into several different apartments. The principal building stands in 
the centre, and was formerly occupied by the idol and its altar. 

The artificial hills, which are about twenty yards in height, and which bound the perspective just 
mentioned, are built of stone and mortar, the whole occupying a space of about two hundred yards. 

These two pyramidical structures differ in one respect from all the buildings of a similar kind that 
Ihave met with. Their roofs, which are entire, terminate in an acute angle, and are destitute of 
the round or square area, usually appropriated to the celebration of their religious rites. The prin- 
cipal entrance to the largest temple fronts the west; the sides of the smaller ones face the cardinal 
points. 

No. XVIII. This plate contains a vertical section and ground plan of the buildings mentioned 

above. 

Having fully investigated these ancient edifices I returned to the town of Ocotzingo, intending 

to proceed thence to Palenque. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. ang: 

ANTIQUITIES OF PALENQUE. 

AFTER a journey of eight days we reached the city of Palenque. The space which we had to 
traverse is scarcely passable for any other animal than a bird; the road winding through mountains 
and over precipices, which we crossed sometimes on the backs of mules and sometimes on foot. 
Our only vehicle was a litter or a hammock, and we were compelled to pass the streams which 
intersected our route by bridges rudely formed of trees. The country through which we travelled, 
though fertile, is uncultivated and unpeopled, except by the inhabitants of a few scattered huts: 
hence we had no other bed than the earth, nor covering than the heavens. Our baggage was trans- 
ported by the help of some Indians of extraordinary strength and agility. Loaded with a weight of 
two hundred and fifty pounds, enough for the back of a mule, they proceeded on with unslackened 
pace, and climbed like deer the passes of the mountains. 

After having encountered every kind of difficulty during this toilsome journey, we arrived, thanks 
to God! in safety at New Palenque, the principal object of this our third expedition. This city 
belongs to the diocese of Chiapa, and the principal magistrate is also Deputy Governor of Ciudad 
Real, a city distant about eighty leagues to the westward. The population is large; composed of 
natives, Europeans, and their joint offspring. It stands on an uneven site of ground, in a climate 
which, though hot, appears to be healthy and favourable to vegetation, situated in the latitude of 
sixteen degrees north. Plantations of achote, rice, cacao, and other productions peculiar to this 
climate are found here, and the pine-apple grows wild. 

The surrounding country is mountainous, interspersed with fruitful plains, which are watered by 
rivers and brooks, and produce in great abundance a lofty tree with a trunk of proportionate 
magnitude, the bark of which, naturally dry, is powdered and used as a perfume in the churches. 
It is odoriferous in the extreme, and its name in the Zendal language is Ticconti. 

As soon as the weather permitted I hastened to explore the neighbouring ruins. The name of 
the celebrated city, of which they are the remains, has not survived the oblivion in which that of 
its founders is equally involved, and the Spaniards have improperly called it Old Palenque. 
Nothing remains of this powerful nation but the mighty skeleton of those works of art which time 
has not been able to destroy. 

It was built on the brow of a chain of rugged mountains, and situated to the south-west of the 
new city occupied a space of ground seven miles and a half in extent. A situation so elevated 
rendered it easily defensible against any hostile attack, while the woods which diversified the face of 
the wide and beautiful landscape lying around it, contributed to make it an equally desirable resi- 
dence in time of peace. 

The copious streams which still pour their rich treasures through the neighbouring valleys, fall 
upon the ear with soft and gentle murmurs; and while they give beauty and variety to the lovely 
face of the surrounding scenery, adorn it yet further by nourishing a thousand gay flowers, which 

(6£) 

474 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

fill the air with the most delightful fragrance. A spot so favoured by nature abounds with birds and 
beasts of various tribes, which here propagate their species unmolested and secure. 

Having contemplated and admired the beauties which nature has so lavishly bestowed upon this 
solitary place, I proceeded to examine those monuments of man’s skill and industry which attach 
still greater interest to it. The dimensions of these various buildings may be ascertained by the 
scales annexed to their several drawings, and the reader will be assisted by consulting the ichno- 
graphical surveys, in which it is to be observed that the arrow always indicates the north. 

I shall confine myself to the description of the ground-plans, elevations, and materials of each 
structure, reserving for the future any remarks connected with their architectural merit, and the 
figures and hieroglyphics sculptured on their walls, in order that the thread of my narrative may be 
unbroken. 

In front of the ancient palace was a spacious open square, commanding a noble view of the greater 
temple. Here we encamped, building our huts with stakes, and covering them with the leaves of 
a tree (somewhat resembling those of the tobacco plant) of more than three feet in length, and pro- 
portionably wide, but destitute of smell. 

No. XIX. The stupendous pile which supports the intricate fabric I am going to describe is of a 
pyramidical shape: its oblong base is about three hundred and sixty yards in circumference, gra- 
dually decreasing towards the summit. On the front, which faces the East, is an ample staircase 
of hewn stone, forming the principal entrance to the building. The basement story is built of square 
blocks of stone, and enriched with a very bold cornice. 

No. XX. This number represents the ground plan of this vast edifice, whence its dimensions may 
be accurately ascertained, as well as the distribution of its various apartments. The summit of the 
artificial pyramid forms a spacious platform, which served for its foundation; and the excellence of 
the materials which were employed in its structure, is apparent in the durability and strength of its 
walls. The oblong area, on which the building is situated, projects six feet on every side beyond it, 
its circumference being about three hundred and twenty-four yards. ‘The elevation is about ninety 
feet from the surface of the ground; the principal walls are four feet in thickness, the inner walls 
less. The galleries are constructed so as to admit light into the several apartments, by the vacant 
spaces which are left alternately in the walls. The door-ways vary from twelve feet to one foot and 
a half in breadth, and from fifteen feet to four feet and a half in height. They are for the most part 
without lintels. The windows also differ considerably both in size and form, as may be seen in the 
drawing; and the apartments are of very limited dimensions. 

The floors are composed of loose stones, firmly united with sand and cement, and covered with a 
thick coat of hard and polished stucco. The ceilings are curiously constructed, all of them termi- 
nating in angular vaults, closed above with slabs of stone, each a yard in length. 

The roofs are of a corresponding shape with the ceilings, on which were placed, instead of tiles, 
large slabs of stone regularly disposed, and forming a covering of great durability. The whole of 
this vast structure was plastered both within and without with shining stucco, and enriched with a 
plain deep cornice inclosed within two double mouldings. 

No. XXI. This plate represents the interior or vertical section of the corridors, saloons, and 
chambers, as well as the buildings which stand in the large quadrangle. ‘Two flights of steps, facing 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 475 

each other, descend into the grand area. They are formed of blocks of hewn stone half a yard in 
height, the same in breadth, and one yard in length. 

No. XXII. On the first flight of steps appear two rows of gigantic figures (as shown in the annexed 
drawing), placed somewhat obliquely side by side. ‘They are carved in alto-relievo out of blocks of 
granite ; some are standing, some kneeling in different attitudes. The heads are all sculptured in 
profile; the mouths, half-open, show part of the upper teeth, and all appear absorbed in admiration, 
their eyes fixed on the same elevated point. ‘Their chins are beardless, and their hair falls in tresses 
from the head, which is covered by a kind of turban, of a different fashion in each figure. The ears 
are ornamented, the wrists encircled with ruffles, and they wear girdles, two of which are of con- 
siderable breadth and covered with hieroglyphics. ‘The size of each figure is portly, and the aspect 
grave: they are all mitred, and to the neck of each is suspended a collar studded with precious 
stones, to which is fastened a locket containing some device. Nakedness among these people was 
not the effect of poverty, but of habit caused by residence in a sultry climate; neither was it con- 
nected with any feeling of indecorum. They were content with merely studying decency in their 
apparel, a due regard to which is sufficiently discernible in all the representations of the human 
figure which have fallen under my notice. 

These statues, notwithstanding the solidity of the material in which they are executed, have suf- 
fered considerably from the unrelenting hand of time. It is vain to inquire who they were originally 
intended to represent, or why they were placed in their present situation. My ignorance on these 
points obliges me to view them merely in the light of ornaments, not unworthy of a sumptuous temple. 

No. XXIII. This drawing represents a building of singular beauty and proportion. It is a square 
pyramidical tower, remarkable for its symmetry and the elegance of its construction, of which there 
remain four stories, gradually decreasing in size, and separated by deep stone mouldings covered 
with a coat of bright cement. ‘The jambs and lintels of the door-way are of chaste and finished exe- 
‘ cution. To every story there are windows on each of the four sides. The circumference of the 
tower measures one hundred and twenty feet at its base, each side being thirty feet in breadth, and its 
whole exterior has an air of simple grandeur. 

No. XXIV. This plate shows the vertical section of the tower, with the staircases leading diagonally 
to each story. The upper story being in ruins, its original height cannot be ascertained. 

No. XXV. This drawing represents an isolated interior building, which, except the roof, is in very 
good preservation. It differs in its construction from those I have already mentioned, the architrave 
being of an uncommon form, and composed of solid blocks of stone obliquely placed, forming an 
obtuse angle, and thus serving as a penthouse fit to afford shelter from the heat or rain, as well as a 
support to a broad frieze with two mouldings, the lower of which is wider than the upper one. The 
upper story of this building (if another existed) is destroyed. . 

No. XXVI. The walls of the saloon which you enter on the northern side of this isolated edifice 
are not wholly divested of their ancient ornaments. A stucco moulding tastefully executed encircles 
a tablet of stone, on the surface of which are two figures carved in alto-relievo; its lower extremity 
rests upon a square block of stone, probably an altar, whichis also ornamented with figures and 
symbols. The subject of this piece of sculpture is most rare and curious. Two female figures are 
represented as seated; the one seems to be a goddess or personage of distinction, to whom the other 

476 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

is offering a gift, which the former is in the act of gracefully declining. This personage is seated on 
a throne carved in the form of a monstrous animal, with a head at each end of its body looking in 
opposite directions, having its two necks decorated with collars of pearls, to which other ornaments 
are appended. ‘This group was perhaps designed by the artist as an allegorical illustration of some 
part of the law or fabulous history of his countrymen. The principal figure, which is naked, is pro- 
bably emblematical of Nature. Her head is adorned with a very light and curious cap: a string of 
pearls and precious stones hangs round her neck, to which is attached an ornament surrounding a 
device resembling somewhat in form the letter T; and her arms are also decorated with bracelets. 
The other figure, represented in a sitting posture, is dressed in the usual attire of the country, a 
mantle and petticoat, which are of a pattern resembling net-work, adorned with pearls and a fes- 
tooned border. She also wears a curious cap and ear-rings. The mouth of each figure is open, as 
if they were engaged in actual conversation. The hieroglyphics which are engraved on the surface 
of the stone were doubtless intended to explain the subject of this composition. The stone itself is 
of a durable quality and dark-coloured. On the south side of this saloon is the staircase which leads 
to the subterraneous apartments. 

No. XXVII. In our descent to these apartments we remarked, over the first door-way, some plain 
yet elegant ornaments executed in stucco; the first two mouldings being in remarkably good taste. 
It is probable that they had some relation to the rites which were practised in these gloomy abodes. 

On one side we observed the body of a man joined to the head of a quadruped, resembling that 
of a wild dog, or Osiris, celebrated in ancient mythology, whose neck was surrounded by a collar 
formed of leaves arranged like feathers. On the opposite side is a corresponding figure of a naked 
man, whose head is covered with a cap of leaves; he holds in his mouth a kind of pipe. These 
hieroglyphical figures face each other, and support with their hands a table or altar resting upon two 
feet, over which is placed an ornament also formed of leaves. Under these figures are two dis- 
membered arms, two skulls, and several smaller hieroglyphical figures. 

The design of this enigmatical device was probably to awaken a feeling of awe and fear in the 
minds of all who entered these sacred precincts. It is not surprising that on approaching these 
gloomy vaults, the scenes of human sacrifice, we should encounter such emblems. The skulls and 
mangled limbs are fit devices for the portals of such a temple. 

No. XXVIII. The ornaments of the second door-way are less complicated, but of a more graceful 
character than those of the first. They consist of some curious Arabesque foliage diverging from a 
central point, whence also a human figure appears to descend. Half only of the body is revealed 
to view; the neck is encircled with a necklace, and the wrists with bracelets. We may suppose this 
figure to represent one of the aerial messengers so frequently described in the Arabian Nights as 
descending from a superior region on some important mission to the world below. The head is 
covered with a sort of cap, analogous to that with which the heathen mythology has attired the god 
Mercury. Curiosity in vain attempts to discover the meaning of these mysterious symbols. 

No. XXIX. This plate contains a ground plan of three subterraneous vaults. They are built 
with solidity, and their structure is perfectly regular. Their roofs are angular, and they are furnished 
with staircases, doors of communication, and tables or altars resting upon the floor, or built into the 

wall. The first impression, which further examination tended to confirm, led me to suppose that 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. M7 

these were chambers dedicated to the service of the dead, and that the altars were intended for the 
reception of offerings or the immolation of victims. ‘They differ in size, being from two yards 
to two yards and a half in length, and one yard and a half in breadth. Some are of smaller di- 
mensions, but all are formed of a single stone, sculptured in a simple style without any ornamental 
relievos. They are of proportionate thickness, and rest upon four square stone legs. 

It was impossible to explore the remainder of these gloomy vaults, the north end having fallen in 
and being choked up with rubbish; and we feared that an attempt to make any excavation might 
bury us in the ruins. We therefore ascended by a different staircase, affording an egress near an 
angle of the building, on the landing-place of which I discovered a stone, which I have preserved 
as a curious relic. 

No. XXX. This stone being strongly imbedded in the wall was removed with great difficulty. It 
is of calcareous substance, and is in very good preservation. ‘The surface is covered with various 
hieroglyphics, which, like the relievos placed over the door-ways before mentioned, might have been 
intended to convey a tacit admonition to persons who descended into these vaults. My only motive 
for removing this stone from its place, was the desire of possessing. some memorial of my journey, 
as well as a testimonial of the correctness of my draughtsman, whose uniform accuracy and fidelity 
I am bound to commend. 

No. XXXI. This plate exhibits some ornamental mouldings in stucco, which are executed in alto- 
relievo, with such a regard to symmetrical arrangement, that a line drawn vertically through the 
centre divides the whole into two equal and similar parts. They consist of various Arabesque 
ornaments and designs, to which are added the fanciful and symbolical figures of two birds exactly 
similar to each other, standing upon a base formed of regular geometrical figures that appear to 
have been drawn with a compass. This ornament in stucco was found in a room of inconsiderable 
size, on the wall facing the entrance; in the centre of which is a window or opening in the form of 
a cross, or rather of the letter 'T, communicating with an adjoining room, which forms part of the 
same great edifice. 

No. XXXII. This number comprises a drawing of one of the tables which were found in the 
subterranean apartments above mentioned, formed of a single slab of the same kind of stone as 
that employed in the erection of the building; and likewise specimens of the different shapes of the 
_ various windows and small recesses which this vast labyrinth contained. 

No. XX XIII. On the left side of the staircase which leads from the great court to the saloon 
above the vaults, there is a statue resembling the colossal ones which I have described above, and 
probably placed there with the same intention. The kneeling posture is similar, and the coun- 
tenance gazes upwards with an air of admiration. The head is covered with a cap of strange and 
curious fashion, and the chin is beardless. Its neck is adorned with a necklace, which is partly 
concealed by the arms folded over the breast. The ear-rings consist of long tassels, and the dress 
is merely a curiously wrought sash which reaches to the knees. This statue is carved only in 
front, its back being a tablet inserted in the wall. In material and colour it resembles the colossal 
statues before referred to. As it is a small and solitary figure, a place has been allotted to it in the 
plate which contains representations of the windows. 

(65) 

478 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

Thus far I have described what presented itself to my observation; but vain would be the attempt 
to explain the meaning of these mysterious relievos: the national deities or kings may perhaps be 
represented by the statues which crowd the avenues of this vast temple, or the laws of some ancient 
legislator may be recorded on the tables of granite ranged along its mouldering walls. - 

The air of authority distinguishable in most of the figures, the crown or diadem encircling their 
brows, the sceptre, the collar and the badge suspended to their necks, render it not improbable 
that they were intended to represent kings, with vassals prostrate at their feet in sunihant attitudes, 
either paying homage or imploring protection. . 

Their costume though simple is varied. Their caps, helmets, and girdles differ: and this variety 
in the dress of the kneeling and recumbent pares may be characteristic of different vanquished 
cities and states. . 

T am aware how short and unsatisfactory this explanation must appear, and that it can afford 
but little real information to the inquirer; it nevertheless must supply the place of more certain 
information. | ; 

OF THE ART OF MOULDING IN STUCCO. 

The subject at which we now arrive is so mysterious, that its elucidation would require the art of 
the diviner. Surrounded as I am with what amazes and perplexes me, I shall begin by describing 
the large historical alto-relievos which still exist in perfect preservation, although the greater part 
of those that once ornamented or illustrated these temples have mouldered beneath the hand of time. 
With the exception of a few which were carved in stone, they were all uniform in size, colour, and 
material, and were disposed at regular intervals in compartments, which occupy the inside and out- 
side walls of their respective temples. . 

No. XXXIV. Like the structures which contain them, these relievos are fast hastening to decay. 
Already their remains, mixed with dilapidated fragments of the walls to which they were attached, 
strew the surface of the ground; and if they were of an historical nature, the chain of events which 
they record is now for ever broken. All that I could do was to cause those which were still perfect 
to be copied with the utmost fidelity, the greater part having left merely an impression on the wall. 
There are many circumstances connected with these relievos worthy of attention. ‘The situations 
which they occupied, more especially in the greater temple, were happily selected; ranged in regular 
order, and filling the vacant panels between the portals on the outside of the corridor of that vast 
edifice, they invested it with an air of imposing and regal splendour. Each compartment contained 
some mysterious group of figures and hieroglyphics surrounded by a border. . 

They executed their figures in stucco in two different ways: one of which, it appears, was by 
first drawing the outline on the wall, and afterwards spreading the cement over it. ‘Traces of these 
black outlines yet remain. By the other mode a rude imitation of the human figure in stone was 
substituted for the outline, to which shape and proportion were added by moulding the limbs into 
proper form with moist stucco. This operation is called in our academies, making the skeleton of 
the statue, a practice which likewise obtained among the Indians. They afterwards painted these 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 479 

statues with vermilion, minute particles of which, as well as occasional patches, are still visible in the 
narrow folds of the drapery. The stucco employed in the composition of them was admirable in 
quality. I term it natural stucco, for it does not appear to contain either sand, powdered marble, or 
any sort of adulteration : it is hard in the extreme, besides being beautifully white. With this substance 
all the relievos which enriched the walls of these buildings and splendid monuments were executed. 

Most of the figures are erect and well proportioned: all of them are in profile, portly, and 
almost colossal, their height exceeding six feet; while their attitudes display great freedom of limb, 
with a certain expression of dignity. Their dress, though sumptuous, never wholly covers the body : 
their heads are decorated with helmets, crests, and spreading plumes; and they wear necklaces, from 
which are suspended medallions. Many of the figures hold a kind of rod or staff in one hand; at 
the feet of others smaller figures are placed in reverential postures, and some are surrounded with 
rows of hieroglyphics. 

I feel persuaded that these alto-relievos were historical representations. ‘Each compartment con- 
tains from one to three figures, tastefully grouped, and standing upon pedestals ornamented with 
hieroglyphics and other curious devices. 

The plates included under the present number are copies of the figures which are ranged along 
the principal front of the greater temple. Notwithstanding the general correctness of design which 
they discover, it is impossible to regard without surprize a striking peculiarity exhibited in the 
physiognomy of these statues, the nose and the forehead forming by their junction a perfect curve ; 
and as if to render this peculiarity more apparent, the nose is made unusually large. It is generally 
allowed that the profile of the human countenance is of more easy representation than the full face ; 
but refraining at present from indulging in conjecture, I shall content myself with remarking that 
the intelligent will view with deep interest the features of a race of men which appear to have been 
unknown either to ancient or modern historians. 

No. XXXV. Ata short distance to the south of the greater temple is another, which has received 
the vulgar appellation of “ Las Lajas,” (The Slabs) a name probably given to it from the massy slabs 
of stone of which it is built. It stands on the summit of an artificial hill, and its front faces the 
north : its elevation is well proportioned, and (like all other buildings of a similar kind) the en- 
tablatures of its walls are adorned with allegorical figures, enclosed within parallel mouldings, and 
surmounted by a broad frieze. The roof is in ruins, but the stone floor still remains. 

No. XXXVI. The four colossal figures referred to by this number are placed in the panels 
between each door-way on the principal side of the last-mentioned temple; they are apparently 
absorbed in devotion, and the faces of all are turned towards the centre of the sanctuary. ‘Two are 
placed on each side, holding in one hand a gift, and with the other supporting a child, offering it as 
it were to the Law; for it does not appear that these children were offered to any deity, since no 
statue or image of any kind is placed in this temple, its only contents being massive blocks of stone, 
full of hieroglyphics, which doubtless were tables on which were engraved their laws and ritual ob- 
servances. I regretted extremely to find that it was utterly impossible to copy these hieroglyphics : 
the rain having so injured and decayed the surface of the stones, that a fragment which we en- 
deavoured to clean for the purpose crumbled in the attempt. Each of the figures is in the act of 
presenting a branch, as well as a child, at the temple, which might either have been fo entreat 

A480 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

fruitfulness, or some symbol explanatory of the nature of the offering. Considerable variety is 
displayed in their dress. The chin of one of them is not wholly destitute of beard: another is a 
female figure attired in a short petticoat, elegantly adorned with net-work, pearls, and fringes, and 
wearing a rich girdle. The other two represent men, plainly and uniformly habited, in a dress which 
I am inclined to think must have been their national costume. They are all standing upon pedestals, 
decorated as usual with fanciful embellishments These emblematical relievos, formed like the 
others of stucco, are in a state of similar decay; being exposed to the open air, they have suffered 
much from the changes of the atmosphere. ‘The head of the woman, as well as those of the children, 
has completely mouldered away. ‘ 

No. XXXVII. I shall now proceed to describe a human figure executed in stucco in bold relief, 
which owing to its situation is in excellent preservation. It was discovered in an interior covered 
temple, the architecture of which scarcely differs from that of the temples in its immediate vicinity. 
It faces the east, and its subterraneous vaults are also on that side. It stands at a short distance 
to the south of the Presentation Temple, or the Temple of the Children, upon the verdant summit 
of a natural hill, to which the hand of man would seem to have given a certain regularity of form. 

This image is placed on a throne or altar; its attitude is graceful, expressive, and commanding, 
and it appears to be in the act of delivering oracles either true or false to the people. It is seated 
on a richly adorned cushion, with one leg crossed under its body: the cushion is elevated upon a 
pedestal or table of curious shape, the feet of which resemble the claws of an eagle, and serve as 
pilasters to a massy square slab, well wrought and finished. At the extremities of the table are carved 
the heads of two monstrous animals, surmounted by fanciful ornaments: their open mouths display 
the eagerness with which they are prepared to defend or to enforce due respect to the image and its 
temple. A knotted collar encircles their necks. The head of the image is not decorated in exactly 
the same style as those of the preceding figures, as will be immediately perceived on referring to 
the drawing. Its arms are ornamented with bracelets, and it wears a short vest, apron, and drawers ; 
sandals are fastened with ribbon tied in bows to its feet. On its right hand appears a row of hiero- 
glyphics ranged vertically. Complete oblivion veils its history, but it may still be presumed that 
this image represents some distinguished and extraordinary personage. 

No. XXXVIII. This temple differs from the one last mentioned, the edifice built upon its upper 
area consisting of two stories ornamented with their respective cornices; its principal side faces the 
north. Unlike other structures of this kind, there is no appearance of its ever having contained any 
figures or hieroglyphical inscriptions, either in its interior, or ranged along the outer compartments 
of its walls. It stands on the summit of a pyramid, one hundred and eighty feet high, and resting 
upon a square base. This pyramid was ascended by a staircase, of which scarcely any vestiges 
remain; it was constructed of excellent materials, and displays skilful masonry. The ground-plan of 
the temple is annexed to the plate. 

No. XXXIX. This temple, which has received the appellation of La Cruz, from the Cross which 
occupies the centre of its shrine, is likewise famed for the beauty of its architecture. It nearly re- 
sembles the former structure, though consisting only of a single story. Situated on the upper area 
of a steep and lofty pyramid, the ascent to it is difficult, and its principal side faces the north. It is 
built on the plan of the last-mentioned temple. I have remarked that no trace was there discoverable 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 481 

of any figures, either carved in stone or executed in stucco; here on the contrary we found many. 
This temple is aptly named The Sanctuary of the Cross, since it contains a representation of that 
symbol, carved in stone, and resting upon a pedestal. Beside it stand four grave personages, who 
contemplate it with an air of deep veneration. The two figures nearest to the Cross are habited in 
dresses which differ from any that I had hitherto beheld, and seem more deserving of minute atten- 
tion. The tallest of them (probably a priest) is offering to it with upraised hands a child of singular 
shape, apparently a new-born infant.: admiration is depicted in the countenance of the other. Of 
the two figures placed in the back ground, one appears to be that of a man bending under the weight 
of years, apparently in the act of blowing a musical instrument, which he holds with both hands to his 
mouth. It is a sort of trumpet, composed of different pieces longitudinally united by rings placed 
at regular intervals: from the tube of the instrument proceed three leaves or feathers; probably 
feathers, as they were a favourite ornament of the Indians. The last personage in this group is a 
grave and majestic figure, apparently an admiring spectator of the scene. 

It is impossible adequately to describe the interior decorations of this sumptuous temple; the 
sculptor and the painter seem here to have embodied the most exalted conceptions of their art. The 
hieroglyphics which adorn this mysterious shrine are innumerable; not only do they surround the 
Cross in its centre, but present themselves on all sides. They are carved on the surface of marble 
slabs, of a fine grain and of a deep buff colour, ranged in horizontal rows; they occupy the centre 
of the building, as in the sanctuary of the Presentation Temple above described. 

Our surprise was great on suddenly beholding this cross; but closer examination of it convinced 
me that it was not the holy Latin Cross which we adore, but a Greek Cross disfigured with various 
fantastical ornaments ; since the former consists of a perpendicular line intersecting a horizontal one 
rather shorter, thus forming four right angles. Neither do these whimsical embellishments corre- 
spond with the venerable simplicity and the sublime mysteries of the true Cross; we must therefore 
refer this allegorical symbol to the religion of the country, and being totally ignorant of its ritual, 
it is vain to reason about its destination. I wish that it were in my power to explain the signification 
of the historical figures which so conspicuously adorn the walls of these temples, a task less difficult 
than to decypher the meaning of the hieroglyphics. It would appear that this nation had two 
methods of expressing its ideas, the one by letters or alphabetical signs, the other by obscure and 
mysterious symbols. These symbols, infinitely diversified in form, were disposed in parallel rows, 
both vertically and horizontally on the same stone, so as frequently to form right but never acute 
angles: this peculiarity in their arrangement .is not unworthy of attention. In each kind of line 
the same symbols often occur; and the human heads, which are always in profile, are uniformly 
turned to the left; a circumstance which leads me to suppose, that like Hebrew writings, these 
inscriptions were read from right to left. It is much to be regretted that their complicated form 
would in itself render the attempt to analyze them almost wholly useless; since characters of various 
colours and substances are here glued over each other, which firmly coalescing have become as it 

were incorporated with the stone*. 

. * The nature of these characters will be better understood by comparing them with the hieroglyphics contained in the Dresden MS. 
The human head with the profile turned to the left is frequently represented in that MS.; but the hand amputated at the wrist, which 
enters into the composition of four of the symbols surrounding the Cross described by M. Dupaisx, is of rarer occurrence; in those cha- 
racters, of which it forms a part, it points to the right; as is also the case in the symbols referred to. 

(Se) 

4.82 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW’SPAIN. - 

The path on which I have entered is so difficult and obscure, that I would willingly quit it for the 
wider field of conjecture, were I not convinced that the result would be fruitless, the scientific key 
to these hieroglyphics having been for ever lost. It would be wrong indiscriminately to attach im- 
portance to all the relievos discovered in these: temples:. on the contrary, many of them may have 
been mere ornaments, in no wise connected with religious mysteries. Private edifices of. any con- 
siderable size or beauty I imagine could never have been numerous in Palenque; but it requires 
much ‘practical knowledge on the part of the observer to enable him to classify ancient monuments, 
and to assign to each its proper place. 

Having treated of the sister arts, Sculpture and Architecture, I must not omit to make mention 
of Painting. The skill which this nation displayed in sculpture affords the most satisfactory proof 
that they must have been proficients in the art of painting. It is therefore only necessary for me 
to remark, that the colours which they employed were mineral. Notwithstanding the lapse of ages 
and the corrosive moisture of the atmosphere, I discovered some paintings in the greater temple, 
representing animals, birds, fruits, and flowers, which cr both taste and correctness in their 
design. 

No. XL. Under this number are included two stucco tablets. They are copies taken indiscrimi- 
nately from that numerous class of relievos, which in a sort of language of their own appear to 
address the stranger... The antiquarian will view with deep interest the unknown characters which 
cover their surface: their disposition into horizontal and vertical lines is remarkable, and their form 
is quite original, since they bear not the least resemblance either to Egyptian hieroglyphics, or to 
the symbols in use amongst the ancient Mexicans. 

No. XLI. This circular stone was taken from the foundation story of the greater temple. «It, is 
perfectly plain, and without any kind of ornament or device. We found several stones similar to it 
in the vicinity of that temple, but were unable to ascertain their onigial destination. ‘They might 
have been used either as tables or altars for sacrifice. ite 

No. XLII. We discovered amongst these ruins chafing-dishes site censers, of a cylindrical shane 
and fluted, with oval covers, containing an aperture apparently for the purpose of allowing a passage 
to the smoke, when incense was burning before the idols or on their altars.: 

No. XLIIT. At a short distance to the north of the greater temple there is a bridge, built of stones 
so evenly united, that no cement is visible in their interstices: no traces of any parapet can be 
discerned. The arch, if it may be so called, is of a very peculiar construction ; being curvilinear 
below and flat above, as represented in the drawing. Although the river over which it affords a 
passage is at some seasons of the year shallow, it isat others deep and dangerous to ford. It flows 
in an eastward course, and its cold and limpid stream nourishes a shell-fish somewhat resembling a 
snail, and exceedingly palatable. | tf mid 

No. XLIV. Westward of the greater temple, at the distance of a league, we found the remains st 
a structure, which possibly served for the public execution of criminals. It consists of a lofty square 
column, resting upon an oblong granite base. We could neither ascertain its original height, nor 
make any excavations about its foundations, the upper part having been mutilated, and the site 
which it occupies being extremely rocky. Its sides face the cardinal points of the compass. ‘Two 
cylindrical blocks of stone are placed beside it, which might have been pedestals upon which cri- 

minals were obliged to stand, to render their punishment more conspicuous. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW. SPAIN. 483 

Now Sve A league to the westward of this spot runs a rapid stream, in which we found some 
petrified shells, and others in their natural state. It flows in a southerly direction through an aque- 
duct, built of stones, united together by a cement so fine as to be scarcely visible: the roof is formed 
of massy stone slabs. 

We were at a loss to conjecture the use of this aqueduct, which might either have answered the 
purpose of a cistern to convey water to some bath or public reservoir, or have been intended to 
preserve that element in a pure and salubrious state; or finally, have connected together the 
straggling suburbs of this city at the period of its greatest population. These immense ruins, scat- 
tered over a vast tract of country, and the greater portion of them buried beneath the soil, awaken 
in the mind of the spectator the liveliest feelings of curiosity and interest. 

484 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

DESCRIPTION OF THE TRIUMPHAL STONE PRESERVED IN THE 
UNIVERSITY OF MEXICO. 

THIS monument, which is still preserved in the University of Mexico, is remarkable for the rich- 
ness of its hieroglyphical sculpture. It is a cylindrical block, vulgarly but erroneously called “ The 
Sacrificial Stone,” or ‘The Stone of the Dance,” since doubtless it records victories obtained by 
the Mexicans over fifteen different provinces or states, and therefore should be regarded in the light 
of a valuable historical monument. In order to transmit the fame of these victories to distant ages, 
the Mexicans caused the representation of them to be engraved on a cylindrical stone of the hardest 
grain. The upper surface of this stone is likewise carved with devices, either merely fanciful, or 
which may have some connexion with astronomical science, since they are not unlike those sculp- 
tured upon the Mexican calendar* ; but it would be impossible for me to determine this point. It 
is evident that this stone was intended to be placed in a horizontal position, with its flat surface 
resting on the ground; and it probably occupied the centre of some open court, as the most ad- 
vantageous situation for a monument consecrated to national glory. 

The ancient Romans were accustomed to erect columns and triumphal arches in honour of their 
Emperors, and the Mexicans sought in a similar manner to eternalize the fame of their martial 
monarchs. It would be a difficult task to assign any dates to the victories emblazoned on this 
triumphal stone: nor is it possible to ascertain where the series commences, since a cylindrical 
surface has no defined beginning or end. Although thirty figures are sculptured upon it, they may 
be reduced to fifteen pairs, as there are only sixteen different warriors; one of whom, who in all 
probability is the King of Mexico, is represented fifteen several times, while the remaining figures, 
symbolical of the various conquered nations, differ from each other in their dresses, arms, and 
devices. Some of the latter are represented with beards, but the attitude of each is expressive of 
the deepest reverence and submission. There is a general resemblance in their apparel, but their 
head-dresses and sandals exhibit some variety. There is some difference also in their warlike 
weapons, though in most cases they are similar; but each subjugated state is distinguished by its 
peculiar symbol or device. It is probable that the artist, having reduced the block of stone to 
proper shape and dimensions, and given it the requisite polish, sketched upon its surface the out- 
lines of his work, which he afterwards executed in basso-relievo with a metallic or stone chisel. 
The figures are all represented in profile, and exhibit a uniformly flat, and not a convex basso- 
relievo, their outlines principally consisting of straight lines. It is impossible not to admire the 
symmetrical distribution of the thirty figures into fifteen distinct groups, and the relative equality of 

* The Mexican Calendar to which M. Dupaix alludes was dug up not many years ago in the plaza mayor of Mexico, the site for- 
merly occupied by the principal temple of the Mexicans. Baron de Humboldt has given a minute description of this enormous block 
of sculptured granite, to which the name of The Mexican Calendar has been given from the astrological symbols carved upon its surface, 

and an engraving of it will be found in his Monumens De L’Amérique. 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 485 

their proportions. Two parallel borders with different designs inclose and adorn this valuable 
ancient monument. 

The position of the principal figure, which I have already observed is fifteen times repeated, is 
such that the Mexican monarch, as I shall designate him, is only represented in profile; neither 
have we a full view of his person: the style of the sculpture is nevertheless bold and energetic. He 
is attired as a warrior, and wears a crown adorned with beautiful and spreading plumes: his vest is 
confined with a rich and broad girdle. On his feet are sandals, and that on his left foot is 
remarkable for the singularity of its shape, and unlike the other rises in the air with a high and 
graceful curve. His air and demeanour are those of a conqueror: with his left hand he grasps the 
crest of his vanquished foe, and compels him to an act of submission, while his right holds a circular 
shield, from beneath which projects a quiver of arrows in a vertical position. 

_ The second figure, which is also in profile, is shorter in stature than the first, and is habited in a 

plainer military costume, consisting of a helmet or crown of feathers, sandals, a girdle, &c. He 
seems to be in the act of presenting with his right hand some flowers as a mark of homage to the 
conqueror. It would certainly be difficult to explain the reason why mankind prefer the right 
hand to the left; but this appears to be the case amongst nations the furthest removed from each 
other. The left hand of this figure grasps some warlike weapons which differ from those of the 
other figures. 

Two things are particularly deserving of notice in the figures which represent the conquered 
nations; the one, that their eyes are either covered with a bandage or concealed by a shade*, 
probably to mark the respect due to their conqueror ; the other, that two of them have long beards 
and mustachios, a fact which would seem to indicate a diversity of national character. 

The hieroglyphical devices, or, as they may be more properly styled, the arms of the several 
states, provinces, or cities vanquished by the Mexicans, remain to be noticed. 'To each of the 
latter was assigned its distinguishing symbol; the emblem of its jurisdiction, situation, and natural 
productions. I know not whether it was intended to register on the surface of this cylindrical stone 
(as represented in the preceding plate) the dates of these memorable triumphs, but its first appearance 
certainly resembles that of the Mexican calendar. The area of the circle is divided into thirty-two 
equal parts, exhibiting a number of concentric circles exactly parallel, and eight very acute angles, 
the points of which intersect the outer circle and divide it into eight equal parts; while in like 
manner eight parallelograms and some oval figures occupy the intervening spaces between the 
angles. Immediately below these ornaments is a border divided into squares, in each of which are 
five small circles, one at each angle and one in the centre. ‘This stone in shape also resembles the 
calendar ; but its position must always have been horizontal, with its flat surface resting on the 
ground: in other respects the difference between these two Mexican monuments is sufficiently 
apparent. 

A human countenance symbolically representing the Sun is carved on the former. What a striking 
contrast does this representation of the effulgent Author of light present, when compared with the 

* The Mexicans seem to have been the only nation who invented and used defensive armour for the nose; their helmets being 
without vizors, that expedient might have suggested itself to them to remedy the defect. It would appear from some plaster casts of 
the figures surrounding the sacrificial stone, that the noses of many of them are provided with that species of defence, ’ 

(6H) 

486 THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN. 

sculptured divinities of Grecian mythology. Let us turn from their young and graceful Apollo, with 
his long and golden tresses, and compare him with the Mexican god of light. His face, of which a 
front view is given, is represented with mustachios, but destitute of beard, and his tongue pro- 
truding from his mouth: various ornaments are fastened to his ears, some of which are circular, 
others pendant like purses: the collar which adorns his neck is composed of six pearls or gems of 
different sizes: his head is covered with a sort of mitre, divided by three horizontal lines, with the 
addition of two circles on the sides: his hair is gracefully arranged. Such is the exact portraiture 
which the Mexicans drew of the Father of light. 

The horizontal surface of the monument above described is sculptured in basso-relievo, with much 
elegance and correctness of proportion, being ornamented with a series of concentric circles, dis- 
playing great regularity, and studded with rows of round and even rings. ‘The outer circle is 
intersected by eight acute angles and eight parallelograms.—This explanation, though brief, may 
convey some idea of the merit of this ancient piece of sculpture. The accuracy of its proportions 
renders it difficult to conceive how it could have been executed without a compass. It is probable 
that the carving was not merely ornamental, but intended to mark, according to the calculations of 
the Mexican calendar, the precise period of the erection of this monument*. 

* The plate representing the sacrificial stone has been intentionally executed in a coarse style, that the similarity to the original 
drawing might be more faithfully preserved. It may be proper to remark, that M. Dupaix’s Dissertation on the Architecture of Pa- 
lenque, and the four supplementary chapters which immediately follow it, have been omitted in the translation, because their contents 
were judged unnecessary for the illustration of the plates, and they are printed in Spanish in the fifth volume. 

Ne OF hes: 

Nore I. 

M. DE HUMBOLDT has described in his American Monuments the Temalacatl, or stone for the gladiatorial 
sacrifices which the Mexicans celebrated in the month Panquetzaliztli. This stone was dug up in the Plaza Mayor 
of Mexico, not many years before the baron’s visit to that city; and since a representation of it will be found in the 
fourth volume of the present work, it is only necessary to remark here, that the Mexican paintings serve to 
illustrate the ornamental figures sculptured in relievo around it. It has generally been supposed that these figures 
commemorate the triumphs of some Mexican king, who is there represented as a warrior leading to execution or 
into captivity his vanquished foe, and that the symbols placed behind the head of each prisoner denote a different 
conquered city or state. The latter part of the supposition alone appears to be correct; since in the person of the 
presumed king may be recognized, by the symbol of the smoking mirror worn as an ornament at the back of his head, 
the priest of Tezcatlipoca or Huitzilopuchtli, the supreme deity of the Mexicans, to whom prisoners taken in war 
were sacrificed as devoted victims. It was customary with the Mexican priests to dress themselves in the same 
costume as that worn by the deity whose festival they celebrated; and hence it may be inferred that this stone for 
gladiatorial sacrifices was dedicated to Tezcatlipoca:. which supposition will also serve to explain the nature of the 
ornament or symbol worn on the advanced foot of the principal figure; since the Mexicans, in allusion to their belief 
that that god had appeared to them in fire and smoke on Mount Tezca (the Mountain of the Mrror),—whence the 
proper name which they bestowed upon him of Tezcatlipoca, compounded of Tezca, the name of the mountain, 
tlil dark, and poca smoke, in reference to the manner of bis manifestation,—always represented him with the symbol 
of a smoking mirror, which was placed either on his head or his foot, and sometimes on both, as in the eighteenth 
and twenty-second pages of the Borgian MS. This god was also named by the Mexicans Yao; and the smoking 
mirror on his foot reminds us of Habakkuk’s description of the presence of Jehovah in the fifth verse of the third 
chapter of his Prophecies: “ Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet :” whilst the 
proper name Tezcatlipoca recalls to our recollection the eighteenth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Exodus, 
descriptive of the descent of God upon Mount Sinai: “And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the 
Lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount 
quaked greatly.” So important an event in Hebrew history as the promulgation of the Mosaic code of laws might, it 
may readily be conceived, have disposed the Jews, who were fond of bestowing many names upon God, either to 
use at first, or to invent i later ages, an epithet in his honour commemorative of the time when he conversed with 
Moses in the mount. They likewise emphatically styled the laws that were then given to them, the mirror of God, 
declaring that they beheld in them, as in a mirror, his will clearly revealed: and hence they argue that the old law 
has never been repealed, because the will of God must needs be wmmutable. This being the opinion of the Jews, 
it would be interesting to learn from them whether they believe that a remnant of the Canaanites, who were 
sentenced to utter destruction by Moses, exists in any corner of the earth; and whether, if they had the power, 
they would feel it to be a duty imposed upon them by Moses, to force idolaters under pain of death to become 
proselytes, and to wage war against idolatrous nations to bring them over to their faith? These questions may 
appear to be invidious; but they are intimately connected with the present subject of inquiry, the object of which is 
to discover the real origin of human sacrifices in the New World, and who were the authors of them. It is the 
spirit of Judaism, however, rather than the Jews, that we would interrogate upon these two points; since it was the 
former persuading the latter that they were the chosen people of God, whilst the rest of mankind of a different creed 
were his enemies, that constituted them the haters of nearly all their species, and too frequently made them the 

488 NOTES, ( 

cruel avengers of the pretended honour of Jehovah. Can it for a moment be doubted, whether, if any tribe or race 
of men could be impressed with the belief that some other tribe were the enemies of their god, they would not deem 
it to be a meritorious thing to make war on and to exterminate them, and consider the field of battle on which they 
fought them as a sort of table or altar of sacrifice destined to receive the blood of victims most acceptable to the 
deity? which would naturally lead to the custom of reserving prisoners taken in an engagement for a still more 
holy sacrifice at the hallowed shrine of his temple,—a custom which was common amongst the Mexicans, and which 
cannot fail to bring to mind what is recorded in the Old Testament, of Samuel hewing Agag in pieces before the 
Lord in Gilgal; which words unequivocally declare that the high priest of the Lord acted on that occasion the 
part of the Mexican Topiltzin, and stained, if he did mot profane, the shrine of Jehovah with the blood of a human 
victim. This is the only example, it is true, which-is recorded in the Old Testament of the solemn immolation of 
a prisoner of war by the hand of a Jewish high priest: but who can venture to affirm that later high priests might 
not have imitated the zeal of Samuel, although Hebrew history is silent respecting them? The ordinance in the 
last chapter of Leviticus, which expressly commands that all of man devoted by men to the Lord should surely be 
put to death, not only proves that the custom of devoting men to the Lord did exist amongst the Jews, but that it 
was approved by Moses, who no where forbids the Jews in the Pentateuch to devote men to the Lord, but only after 
having devoted them to save them alive; whilst the condition annexed to the act, implied in the first instance 
permission granted to it, since what is absolutely forbidden by the law is never made conditional. The history, 
indeed, of Jephthah offering up his own daughter as a burnt sacrifice to God, as related in the eleventh chapter of 
Judges, and the reason which he assigns for carrying his fatal vow into execution, “I have opened my mouth unto 
the Lord, and I cannot go back,” fully prove what the Jews believed to be the spirit of this ordinance, which was 
no less killing than was its letter, which is as follows: “ Notwithstanding, no devoted thing that a man shall devote 
unto the Lord of ail that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed ; 
every devoted thing is most holy unto the Lord. None devoted which shall be devoted of men shall be redeemed, 
but shall surely be put to death.” To understand more clearly the force of this ordinance, it may be proper to observe, 
that there were two kinds of devoted victims of men amongst the Jews which they were bound to put to death; the 
former class comprehended those whom God himself, speaking through the mouth of Moses, had devoted to de- 
struction, who were all the original inhabitants of the land of Canaan: the latter were those who were devoted by 
men to him. The question may well be asked, Who were these? If we may venture to offer an opinion, it would 
be, that they were either Hebrew slaves descended from Canaanitish parents, or prisoners of war captured by the 
Jews from those distant nations which were not doomed to utter destruction by Moses, whom the Hebrew soldiers 
were permitted before a battle to devote, in case they should take them prisoners in the engagement, as a sacrifice (for 
by what other name can the deed be called?) to Jehovah. The probability of this conjecture having been admitted, 
it will not be unreasonable to suppose, that the Mexican custom of sacrificing prisoners taken in war to Tezcatlipoca 
originated amongst the Jews who colonized America. If the interpretation which is here put upon the above- 
mentioned ordinance of Leviticus be disagreeable to the Rabbis, they will oblige the world by explaining its true 

signification, confining themselves strictly to the letter of the sacred text, and bearing in mind that the words “of | 

all that he hath, both of man and beast,” render it clearly impossible that the Canaanites can be alluded to. This 
doubtless is one of those many passages of Scripture that the early Fathers put without the pale of discussion, desiring 
their simple flocks to hold those who would indulge in an inquisitive train of reasoning upon them in the light of 
excommunicated persons, and to make no reply to their objections; and hence it happens that a great portion of the 
Old Testament is even at the present day but ill understood, because its contents have never yet been freely discussed 
by all classes of the community. 

In reference to a remark made above, that human sacrifices to the Deity probably originated in the notion that 
certain tribes or nations of mankind were his enemies, whose blood would be a most acceptable offering to him 
(which likewise supposes the existence of some chosen or favourite people, the executors of his will; and in fact 
every early nation were in their own estimation the chosen people of God, differing only from the Jews in not 
imagining that the rest of mankind were objects of his aversion), we shall cite some passages from the Old 
Testament, in which the field of battle is very unequivocally named a place of sacrifice. Hzekiel in the following 
passage of the thirty-ninth chapter of his Prophecies thus describes the defeat of Gog, under which name is 

NOTES. ee 489 

signified some powerful enemy of the Jews. “And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God; Speak unto every 
feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to 
my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, 
and drink blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of 
lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan. And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood 
till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you. Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses 
and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord God. And I will set my glory among the 
heathen, and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them. 
So the house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God from that day and forward.” Isaiah in the sixth 
verse of the thirty-fourth chapter of his Prophecies, applies the term ‘sacrifice’ to the slaughter of God’s enemies, 
which being there said to be accomplished by the sword, it is to be supposed refers to the field of battle. “The 
sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the 
fat of the kidneys of rams: for the Lord hath a@ sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.” 
The precise meaning of the word sacrifice in the eighth verse of the first chapter of Zephaniah, is less obvious. 
“ And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lord’s sacrifice, that I will punish the princes, and the king’s children, 
and all such as are clothed with strange apparel.” The sacrifice of prisoners taken in war, it may be presumed, 
soon led to the sacrifice of slaves ; since when once it had become an established usage to celebrate solemn festivals 
with the blood of human victims, a fanatic multitude would have been likely to deem it more criminal to let the 
festival want its accustomed rites, than to put to death some unoffending slaves. The direst of all human sacrifices 
was, however, that of children by their parents, at which extreme goal the Jews in very early ages had arrived ; 
since Scripture informs us that the valley of Tophet, which was close to the gates of Jerusalem, had acquired an 
infamous celebrity by reason of such rites. The apologists of the ancient Jews are here placed in a dilemma from which 
they will find it difficult to extricate themselves; since if they will not allow that these sacrifices were performed 
in imitation of the example of Abraham, who offered up his son Isaac to God, they must admit that the Jews, be- 
ginning with animals, waded through the blood of all kinds of sacrifices, until they finally imbrued their hands in 
the innocent blood of their own children ;—and then with what sentiments will the future perusal of many books of 
the Old Testament inspire them! The representation of human sacrifices so frequently occurs in the Mexican 
paintings, that it is unnecessary in this place to enter into any particular description of them: three things, however, 
deserve to be noticed respecting them; of which the first is, that the victim was not sacrificed at but upon the altar 
of smooth stone which stood on the upper area of the temple: secondly, that the sacrifice was performed by dividing 
him 2 the middle; and thirdly, that the Mexicans declared that Huitzilopuchtli taught them that mode of sacrifice 
when he led their ancestors forth on their pilgrimage from Aztlan, the occasion of which is more fully explained in 
the 241st page of the present volume. There was a peculiarity in the Mexican mode of laying the living victim 
upon the altar and sacrificing him there; since the general practice of ancient nations was to immolate animals 
near the altar, and afterwards to place certain parts of them as an offering upon the altar. We are informed, 
however, in the ninth and tenth verses of the twenty-second chapter of Genesis, that Abraham, when about to 
sacrifice his son Isaac, laid him upon the altar. “And they came to the place which God had told him of; and 
Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood im order; and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon 
the wood. And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.” The precise manner in 
which Abraham would have killed his son cannot be known, because he did not complete his intended sacrifice ; 
but that patriarch had on a former occasion divided the victims in the middle, when by the express command of 
God he sacrificed to him on entering into the covenant with him. The obvious interpretation, however, of the fol- 
lowing passage of the fifteenth chapter of Genesis, certainly is, that Abraham divided the victims in the middle after 
he had sacrificed them; but still fanaticism might have understood it in another sense. “And he said unto him, I 
am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it. And he said, Lord 
God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? And he said unto him, take me an heifer of three years old, and 
a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon. And he took 
unto him all these, and divided them én the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided 
he not.” In conclusion to this note we shall only observe, that the instrument with which the Mexicans’ performed 

(61) 

\ 

AO NOTES. 

their human sacrifices was a stone knife, which perhaps resembled the sharp-edged Ethiopian stone with which the 
Egyptian embalmers opened bodies, in the manner described by Herodotus in his second book: “Mera Se, Ady 
Aibtomixy ofet mapacyicavres mapa tHv NaTapny, GE wv ciLov THv KoLAm wacav.” The Jews would probably have con- 
sidered such knives as well adapted for the purposes of sacrifices, from the holy use which their ancestors had in 
the earliest ages made of them in circumcision. 

Nore II. 

It has been already remarked, page 377, that the words of Ezekiel, “And fire is gone out of a rod of her 
branches which hath devoured her fruit,” afford grounds for supposing that the Jews were acquainted with the 
Mexican method of kindling fire from two pieces of wood. This supposition would likewise serve to explain another 
passage in the twenty-first chapter of Ezekiel, which is thus translated in the Septuagint: “ Zrnoera Bacthevg Bav- 
Awvosg émt THY apyaay ooop, én apyne TWY dvo odwy, TOU pavrevoasbat PayvTetayv, TOU avaBpacat passoy, Kat émepwrnoar év TOLG 
yAurroug”” which Selden says that he does not clearly comprehend ; observing that he cannot see how the words rov 
avaBpaca padsoy can refer to paSouavrera, or that kind of divination which Hosea, in the twelfth verse of the 
fourth chapter of his Prophecies, says that the Jews practised by means of their staves: “My people ask counsel at 
their stocks, and their stag declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to err, and they have 
gone a whoring from under their God.” If that learned man had known the Mexican method of kindling fire by 
means of two pieces of wood, and that one of those pieces was a staff, the rapid rotation of which between the hands 
produced ignition in the other piece, he would not have hesitated to refer the divination practised by the king of 
Babylon to zvpouavrea, or divination by fire, when the propriety of the choice of the verb dvaBpaca, to express the 
mode in which the flame proceeded from the wood, becomes apparent; and the entire passage may be translated, 
“The king of Babylon will take his station at the cross road, where an old road branches off in two directions, to 
have recourse to divination, and to kindle fire with the staff, and to interrogate images.” The object of the king of 
Babylon in using divination was, that he might thereby be guided in the choice of his captains and the operations 
of the war which he was about to undertake. It is singular that the Mexican priests,—who, as it were in obedience 
to the precept contained in the second verse of the twentieth chapter of Deuteronomy, “ And it shall be when ye are 
come nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people,” accompanied the Mexican 
armies, and encouraged the soldiers to battle by exhortations and by the blowing of trumpets, as the Levites are said to 
have done in the sixth chapter of Joshua, when the walls of Jericho fell down at the sound,—should likewise, either 
as a mode of divination, which is very probable from the superstitious reverence which the Mexicans felt for fire 
kindled by the hands of their priests, or as a propitious omen, have drawn new fire from a piece of wood on the eve 
of an engagement, that ceremony serving as a signal for the battle to begin, as Sahagun informs us in the first section 
of the seventeenth chapter of the eighth book of his History of New Spain. We may observe, in reference to a very 
barbarous and superstitious rite practised by the Mexicans on their year of jubilee, at the commencement of every 
new cycle of fifty-two years,—that of drawing fire from the body of a sacrificed prisoner by kindling it in a piece of 
wood placed in the wound in his breast, a representation of which occurs in the fifth and sixty-ninth pages of the 
Borgian MS., although in the latter painting some miraculous circumstances appear to accompany the ceremony, 
and the painter perhaps intended to represent a living sacrifice,—that if the Jews were the institutors of this rite 
in the New World, it was probably from a fanatical desire that the denunciation contained in the twentieth verse of 
the ninth chapter of Judges should appear to be fulfilled against their enemies ; “ Let fire come out from Abimelech 
and devour the men of Shechem and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from 
the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech.” This denunciation was pronounced by Jotham the son of Gideon, 
who delivered the Israelites from the Midianitish yoke, against his brother Abimelech, who had usurped the title of 
king over Israel; and against the men of Shechem, who had conspired with him to deprive the Israelites of their 
liberty, and who were consequently regarded by them in the light of their bitterest enemies. Sahagun and Torquemada 
both describe the ceremonies which accompanied the above-mentioned cruel Mexican rite; the former in the tenth 

NOTES. 491 

and thirteenth chapters of the seventh book of his History, and the latter in the thirty-third chapter of the tenth book 
of his Indian Monarchy. The remarkable passage in the Book of Judges referred to, which corrupted by tradition 
possibly laid the foundation of that rite amongst the Mexicans, is thus translated in the Septuagint: “’Efed@ou zvp 
ato ABipedey, Kar Katapayou Tove avdpac Sukywwy, Kar Tov dixov BnOuaarw. Kar e£eAOoe mvp aro avopwv Likwy, Kat €k Tov 
otkov Bybuaadw, kat karaayo. tov “ABimedey.” It is not a little surprising to find, from the fifth and eighteenth verses 
of the same chapter of Judges, that Abimelech slew seventy sons of Gideon, his own brothers, wpon one stone; since 
we here have an example of the Mexican mode of immolating victims upon a stone (the piedra or tajon so often 
mentioned by Sahagun) having been practised in very early ages by the Jews. But it is even more surprising that 
after such conduct the Israelites should have allowed Abimelech to reign over them for three years, as we are 
informed was the case in the twenty-second verse of the above-mentioned chapter; and that at the expiration of that 
period it should have been the men of Shechem, and not his Hebrew subjects, who dealt treacherously with him. 
The precise manner in which Abimelech put his brothers to death upon one stone, it is impossible to know; he must 
have had a reason for causing so many as seventy persons to be led to the same place of execution, which was 
probably founded either upon the intended mode itself of their death, or upon the propriety of slaying them upon 
that particular stone. But if his conduct was on that occasion influenced by mere caprice, and if in the face of day, 
the children of Israel looking patiently on, he ventured so to act in the full confidence that the nation would not avenge 
so great a wrong, it can only be said that a people who could be guilty of such base ingratitude to their deliverer, 
well deserved so worthless a king. Whether the Jews ever immolated victims in the Mexican manner, by making 
an incision in their breasts and tearing out the heart through the wound, is no where recorded in Scripture. 
On the authority however of Maimonides, their most famous Rabbi, we affirm that they were acquainted with 
such a mode of sacrifice, since the following passage occurs in the seventh chapter of his Treatise concerning 
Idolatry. ANIA Tox IT AY) N72) APP) Pps Aw IPN ANI. pox 7D OD AMA) ManpAw mon 
DoT pes dA Dy yap pyypw Poy ow PID NNT OD MaMPN yA Aw A yw j}D Ty2 WT ON Jp 
M2 NBD 9D 1D) ANI PON JD Ww Myr ys 9D 7 which has been thus translated by Dionysius Vossius : 
“De juramento quod obtulerunt ad questum quicquam lucrifacere prohibitum est: etiam de stercore, ossibus, cor- 
nibus, ungulis, pelleque ejus; de omnibus, inquam, istis questum facere vetamur. Quod si in pelle nota foret, et 
indicatum pellem eam idolis esse oblatam; ut fiebat, cum rotundo foramine ex adverso cordis facto, cor per illud 
extrahebant: ex pelle hujusmodi inconcessum erat lucrum, ut et ceteris talibus.” The learned translator, com- 
menting upon the concluding portion of this paragraph “ But if there should be a mark in the skin, and it be plain 
that it is a skin which has been offered to idols, as is the case when, a round hole having been made opposite to the 
heart, the heart has been torn out through it; it is unlawful to turn such a skin to profit,” makes the following curious 
remarks: “ Tradit Maimonides in notis ad Misnajot, hunc fuisse cultum gentilium, est ‘species idololatria.’ Vi- 
dentur gentiles (st Hebreos audimus, qui tamen, unde illud hauserint mescio,) ad extrahendum cor animantis foramen, 
circuli aut potius cordis forma fecisse; et si foramen illud per errorem in longum disruptum fuisset, illam pecudem 
pro inutili ad sacrificia habuisse. Habes idem in Aboda Zara, cap. 11. sec. 4: ‘Raban Simeon Ben Gamliel ait, 
quando incisura est orbicularis, prohibitas esse (pelles) ; ubi oblonga, licitas.’ Pelles ex, quibus incisura rotunda est, 
vocantur ibidem ‘pelles cordium’.” ‘“ Maimonides observes in his notes upon Misnajot, that this was a heathen 
practice, ‘a kind of idolatry’. It would appear that the Gentiles (if the Jews are to be credited, whose sources of 
information are wholly unknown to me,) made an aperture of a round shape, or rather in the form of a heart, through 
which they tore out the heart of the victim; but if the aperture from want of dexterity (on the part of the sacrificer) 
assumed the appearance of a lengthened rent, the animal was deemed useless for the purposes of sacrifice. The 
same thing is said in Aboda Zara, chap. 11. sec. 4: ‘Rabi Simeon Ben Gamliel affirms, that when the incision is 
orbicular, the skins are forbidden ; when it is oblong, that they are lawful.’ Skins, the incision in which was oval, 
are there named ‘heart skins’.” These, however, are not the only skins which have supplied Jewish and even 
Christian writers with matter for controversy ; since the ‘ tunice pelliceze’ which God gave Adam in Paradise after 
he had discovered that he was naked, have given rise to the most absurd theories; and the question that was asked 
nearly two thousand years ago, namely, Where did these skins come from? has not yet been satisfactorily answered. 
The Rabbis, who have not scrupled to declare (in order, no doubt, to add still greater sanctity to sacrifice,) that God, 
on the occasion of having created the moon less than the sun, offered a sacrifice of atonement for himself, as it were 

492 NOTES. 

in‘confession of error, will perhaps contend that these were the skins of the victims then killed. It certainly must 
cause some surprise to find that not Maimonides alone, but a whole string of Rabbis were acquainted with a mode 
of sacrifice almost the same as that practised by the Mexicans, which had escaped the notice of the most diligent 
antiquarians. The distinction likewise which they attempt to draw between wounds made of an oval shape in the 
breasts of sacrificed animals, and longitudinal incisions, is very nice, and might induce some persons. to suppose that 
the Jews themselves occasionally sacrificed in the latter manner, and therefore that such skins were lawful. It may 
be proper to observe, that by longitudinal incisions are signified transverse wounds across the breast; since if the 
incision had been made in a straight line down the abdomen, it would have been impossible to recognize any holes 
in the hide after the animal was skinned. In the nineteenth section of the eighth chapter of Maimonides’s Treatise 
concerning Idolatry, we are informed that the Jews were not forbidden to use altars consisting of a single stone, even 
though they had previously been consecrated to idols, provided their tops were mutilated: from which permission, 
as well as from the Hebrew language assigning to such altars the peculiar name of bimos, pra, it may be inferred 
that altars of single stones were very common amongst the Jews, as they were also amongst the Mexicans; since it 
requires little study of the philosophy of language to know that words which are not proper names are the record 
of things which have had specific existence in nature, or which man has fashioned in numbers after a common 

prototype. 

Nore III. 

Whether America was known to the ancients, is a question which probably will never be satisfactorily solved : 
it may, however, confidently be said, that the assumption of the negative implies the petitio principiu, that modern 
ayes, knowing exactly what was comprised within the sphere of ancient knowledge, are qualified to judge of what 
they were ignorant. It is evident that in proportion as naval enterprise was encouraged by the most ancient states, 
the chances of the inhabitants of the Old Continent becoming acquainted with the existence of those of the New 
were increased; and it would be wrong, from the silence of Classical authors, to draw conclusive arguments justly 
liable to the charge of latitude of inference, that because the Greeks and Romans were ignorant of the existence of 
the continent of America, it must necessarily have been unknown in the elder ages of the world to the Egyptians, 
the Phcenicians, or other powerful maritime states. Referring to the page of history, we find that not only did the 
Jews and the Tyrians in the reigns of Solomon and Hiram trade to Ophir and the isles, but that the Carthaginians 
and the Tyrrhenians prosecuted their discoveries at a very remote epoch beyond the Pillars of Hercules; and that 
the Egyptians, so early as in the reign of Sesostris, possessed a powerful and numerous navy, which fact is recorded 
by Diodorus Siculus; and is the more deserving of attention, since it was the Egyptian priests of Sais who com- 
municated to Solon the tradition of the existence of the island of Atlantis, as we learn from the Timzeus and Critias 
of Plato, which, although pronounced by many persons to be merely a fiction invented by Plato, it still should be 
recollected has never been judged to be so by the greatest scholars who have been most familiar with the writings of 
that philosopher, who with a few exceptions have all been disposed to believe that at least it is founded on Egyptian 
tradition. To the objection which may be urged against the authenticity of the account of that island, as given by 
Plato in his two above-mentioned dialogues,—viz. that its extreme improbability divests it of all appearance of truth, 
whilst the compliments paid to the Athenians in the part ascribed to them in the war with the inhabitants of the 
island of Atlantis, too clearly betray a Greek and not an Egyptian origin,—it may be replied that Solon was a poet 
of transcendent genius as well as a famous legislator; and that having visited Egypt and become acquainted with 
the tradition of the Egyptians respecting the island of Atlantis, he determined to raise a poetical superstructure on 
so extraordinary a rumour, and, being eminently distinguished for the love which he bore his native country, to make 
the existence of that island redound to the glory of the Athenian name. And on this supposition the entire of the 
unfinished dialogue of Plato, entitled Critias, would appear to be merely the Argument of the epic poem which Solon 
intended to compose, and of which Plato makes express mention in the following passage of his Timeeus: “ IloAAwy pev 

: ; 
ovv 8n kat woAXa eAeyOn romTov rompara’ are Se vea kar ékelwov Tov Ypovoy ovra Ta LoAwvoG TOAAOL TwY TALdwWY Yoaper. Elmer 

NOTES. 493 

ow 716 Tov hparopwy, cire Sn Soxovy adty Tore, cite Kat yapw twa Ty Kprtia Pepww, SoKew oi ra TE adda cohwraroy yeyovevar 
SoAwva, kar kata Thy Tomow av Tov TomTev Tavtwy ehevlepwwraror’ o Se yepwv (cPodpa yap ovv pepynuar) para re HoOn, Kar 
Saperdtacac, evrer, Eiye, w “Apvvavdpe, un Tapepyy Ty Tomoet Katexpnoaro, add’ éorrovdaker, Kabarep aAXo1, Tov Te Noyov ov ar’ 
Atyurrov Sevpo iveykaro amereeoe, Kat pn Ola TAG oTAGELG, UTO KaKwY TE adAwy oa evpev evOade Hwy, nvayKacOn KatameAncat, 
kara Thy éuny So€ay ovre Hotodoc, ovre ‘Opnpoc, ovre addog ovdee Tw ToT, EvdoKiwwrEepos eyeveTo av wore.avrov. “ Nu- 
merous were the poetical compositions which were recited on that occasion; but many of us, who were boys, sang the 
verses of Solon, which were then new, when a fellow citizen remarked, either being really at the time of the opinion, or 
because he knew that what he said would gratify Critias, that Solon appeared to him not only to bear away the palm 
of every other kind of excellence, but also to be the most spirited of the poets; on which the old man, well I recollect 
the time, seemed greatly pleased, and smiling replied, If at least, O Amynander, poetry had been to him more than 
the recreation of a leisure hour, and he had ever applied seriously to the cultivation of it, as is the case with others, 
and had matured the argument which he brought hither from Egypt, and had not been compelled on his return home 
by civil commotions and other evils, to consign to oblivion what he had already written; according to my judgment 
neither Hesiod, nor Homer, nor any other poet whatever, would have been more esteemed than him.” The reason- 
ableness of the above conjecture having been admitted, as well might it be contended that the improbable scenes and 
episodes of the Iliad furnish conclusive evidence against the existence of Troy, as that the argument of Solon’s 
intended poem, embellished by the poetical imagination of Plato, affords proof that the Egyptian tradition respecting 
the island of Atlantis was a mere fable: at the same time it must be confessed that the account of that island in the 
dialogues of Plato, and the testimony of the priests of Sais, would be infinitely less deserving of attention, if the 
former did not indicate a much greater knowledge of the geography of the earth than can be discovered in the 
Pentateuch, and the latter had not been men of acknowledged wisdom and erudition, the subjects of the most ancient 
and civilized state on the globe, which preserved with a sort of religious care historical traditions, and which ages 
before had made discoveries in navigation. The following is Plato’s account of the situation of the island of 
Atlantis in the ocean beyond the Pillars of Hercules, by which name the Straits of Gibraltar were formerly desig- 
nated; which would almost imply (if the agreement between his description and the physical distribution of the 
earth’s surface be not wholly accidental) an acquaintance on the part of the Egyptians with the West Indian islands, 
the continent of America, and the junction of the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. “Tore yap wopevomov nv ro exer 
medayos. VNoOOV y*p i exe) TOU OTOMATOG elyev, ry KaAeure (ag bare pete) “HpaA cous ornaAac. n de VNCOOG apa AtBune nv Kae *Actac 
pew, e& NG émiParov éme TaG adda vyoovEG TOLG ToT éyryvero TOPEVOMEVOLG, ék de TWV VNUOWY én THY KaTavTikpv TACAY nTrELpor, 
TH EPL TOV aAdnbwoy éxewvov TOVTOV. vase bev yeep ooa évr0¢ TOU OTOMATOG ov Aeyouer, awera Ayunv OTEVOY TIA elom@Aouy eywr. 
éxewo Se meayoG OvTwe, TE TeEpleyouod auto yn TAVTEAWG aAnOwe, opborar av Aeyerro nTelos. “ The sea in that quarter 
was then navigable, for it contained an island which fronted those straits, which you call, as you affirm, the Pillars 
of Hercules. This island was larger than Africa and Asia united, and from it there was a passage to other islands 
which was practicable to voyagers of that age; and from the latter to an entire continent, which was situated 
opposite to them, being skirted by that which is the true sea; for the portion inclosed within the straits, of which 
we have been speaking, resembles a lake, to which admission is afforded by a narrow inlet; but the other is 
in reality a sea, and the land which encompasses it may with the greatest truth and justice be designated a con- 
tinent.” 

It is unnecessary to refer to the authority of any particular historian, to prove that the Egyptian priests in the age 
of Solon were an enlightened class of men, since the visits which they received from Pythagoras, Lycurgus, Solon; 
and Plato, are sufficiently confirmatory of the fact: but since the naval skill of the ancient Egyptians (which would 
suggest a reason for the origin of the tradition of the existence of the island of Atlantis amongst the priests of Sais, 
making if at the same time probable, that under an allegory of the sea ceasing to be navigable for ships was signified 
the extinction of Egyptian naval enterprise) is passed over unnoticed by many modern writers, who still profess to 
draw important political maxims from reasoning on the power and greatness of ancient states, we shall quote two 
passages from Diodorus Siculus, which are decisive upon that subject; remarking, at the same time, that the navi- 
gation of the Nile in boats and larger vessels would have been likely to have tempted the Egyptians in the earliest 
ages to have ventured to sea in ships. “ Karackevacac de rv Suvapuy, or patevoey én TPWTOUG AOtorac, TOUG TPOG THY [E- 

S) ? 
-onpSpiav Karoucouvras, Kat KaTamoA\eunoac, nvayKace To €Ovog opove Tedew, éBevov Kat Xpvoov, Kat Twv eAePavrwy Tove dSovrac. 

(6x) 

494, NOTES. 

ever’ €lc Bev Tny épv0pav Oadaccay ameor eine otoXoy VeWy TETPAKOOLWY, TPWTOG TWY éyXwpioy fakpa oxagn YaUTNynoamevog’ 
Kat Tag TE YNOOUEG TAG ev TOLG TOTOLG KaTEKTN SATO, Kat TNC nTeLpov ra mapa Yadarray_pepn KareotpeWaro, jrexpu Tne "IW8uens, avroc 
Se pera THC Suvapews mel THY TOpelav TOLNOAMEVOG, kateotpeparo TACAY THV *Actay. ou oveoyv yep THnV vorepoy on “AdeEavdpov 
cov Maxedovoc karaxriPeoay Xwpav éwnAOev, ada Kat twa TeV eOvwr, wy éxewvoc ov mapeBadev eg rv Xwpay. kav yap voy Dayynv 
morapov dveBn, Kae Tny “Ivducny éndOe wacav éwe Qxeavov, kat ra tTwv VvOwv eOvy pexpu Tavaidoc zorapov, Tov StopiZovrog env 
Evpemny ato rn¢ Actac. ore Sn act Twv Aiyurtiwy twa katareplevrag wept tny Mawrw Atpwyny ovoernoacbar To Twv Kodyov 
éOvoc. ort Se TOUTO TO YEvoG Atyurrtiakoy éort, onpetov ewat TO mepireuveodar TOUG avOpwrroue TapaTrAnoiws TOLG kar ‘Avyurrov. 
duapevorToc TOV VOMLLOU Tapa TOLC amotKowc, cabarep Kat wapa TOLG *Tovdatotc. Omowws de Kal THV Aourny *Actay amacapy umnkoov 
éromnoaro, kat rw KuxXadwy vyowy rac mAeiorac. StaBag 8 et¢ ryv Evpwmny, Kar dveEwy amacay rnv Opaxny, éxwouveucev 
avroBad eww THY Suva, ova OT AaVLY Tpodne Kat TOTWY Suoywptac. Stomep opta TNG OT PATELAG TOLNOAMEVOG éy ™m7 Opakn, ornAac 
kateskevacer €v ToAAOLC ToTOLG TwY UT avTOV KaTaKTnVEerTwr’ adrar de cn emvypagny elyov Alyurrioig ypampact, ToWG tepous 
Aeyouevors, THE THY Ywpay oTADIG KaTEoTpEP~aTO ToLG EavTOV Bactreve Bacttewy kar Seorworns Seomorwy Secoworc.’ Diodorus 
Siculus, lib. 1. “Sesoosis, having collected his forces, made his first expedition against the southern Ethiopians, and 
having conquered them, compelled the nation to pay him tribute of ebony, gold, and ivory: he next sent a fleet of 
four hundred ships to the Red Sea, being the first of his countrymen who caused long vessels to be built, and acquired 
possession of various islands, and subjugated that portion of the continent which bordered on the sea coast as far as 
India; and marching himself with his land forces, reduced to obedience all Asia; for he not only invaded the 
territory comprised within the later conquests of the Macedonian Alexander, but even other nations whose country 
the latter had not approached ; for he passed the river Ganges, and traversed all India till he arrived at the ocean, 
and the region of the Scythians as far as the river Tanais, which divides Europe from Asia; on which occasion it’ is 
said a certain number of the Egyptians having been left behind near the lake Mceotis, became the founders of the 
Colchian state. That the Colchians are descended from the Egyptians may be inferred from the men of that nation 
being circumcised like the Egyptians, that custom having been preserved by this colony, as it has likewise amongst 
the Jews. He subjugated in the same manner all the rest of Asia, and most of the islands named the Cyclades, and 
passing over to Europe scoured the whole of Thrace, where he ran the risk of losing his army from famine and the 
natural difficulties of the soil; wherefore having made Thrace the boundaries of his expedition, he prepared to erect 
pillars in many places which he had conquered. These pillars bore an inscription in the sacred character of the 
Egyptians : ‘Sesoosis, the king of kings and lord of lords, conquered this country with his own arms.” 
Egyptian hero flourished long before the time of Abraham, being the second of the twelfth dynasty of the Diospolitan 
kings, according to Manetho; whilst Eusebius in his Chronological Canons makes that patriarch contemporary with 
the sixteenth dynasty of Egyptian sovereigns, likewise named Diospolitan. If Egypt therefore so early as in the 
reign of Sesostris became a naval power, it is but reasonable to suppose that in later ages its maritime strength 
would have received great accessions from the attention which a wise government would have thought it necessary 
to pay to means so obviously calculated to increase national greatness. History accordingly informs us that the 
Egyptians became distinguished for their naval enterprize, and at last acquired the sovereignty of the seas, as 
Eusebius informs us in his catalogue of ancient states, to which the possession of that distinction was by general 
consent allowed, making mention of them there the eighth in order immediately after the Phcenicians. The Egyptian 
naval power was probably at its height in the reign of Apries, a short period before the invasion of Egypt by 
Cambyses, to which it even might have given rise, by causing jealousies between the Persians and the Egyptians ; 
since Diodorus Siculus asserts in the following passage of his first book, that that monarch defeated the Phcenicians 
both by sea and land, and captured Sidon. “ Mera Se Vappnriyov VorEepoy TETTAPGL yeveatc “Ampine éBactAevoev én Suot 

? 

This famous 

mew TwWV elKoct. OTPATEUGAG de Suvapecw adpate TeCIKALG TE KAL VAVTIKALG ere Kumpov Kat Downy, VwWwva fev Kata KpavoG etre, 
zac 8 dAdac rn¢ Powicne roderc KaramAn€apevoc mpoonyayero. evucnoe Oe Kat vavpayia peyady Dourkag re Kav Kuzprovg. ka 
Aadvpwv aDpowac wAnBog emavnOev cig Aiytrov.” “The reign of Apries, which lasted two and thirty years, was four 
generations later than that of Psammetichus. Having undertaken an expedition with a numerous land and sea force 
against Cyprus and Pheenicia, he took Sidon by storm, and striking terror into the other cities of Pheenicia, com- 
pelled them to court his friendship. He obtained likewise a great naval victory over both the Phoenicians and the 
Cyprians, and returned to Egypt loaded with rich spoils.” Enough has been said to show the possibility of the 
tradition of the island of Atlantis having originated in the discovery in very remote ages of a portion of the con- 

NOTES. 495 

tinent of America by the Egyptians, an event which is here only presumed not to be beyond the range of probability, 
from the naval enterprise of the early Egyptians, of which another indication is found in the votive offering of a 
ship, which. Diodorus Siculus relates that Sesostris presented in the principal tempie of Thebes. “’Evavrnynoato Se 
Kat wAoLoy Keopwoy, TO MEV [LNKOG TNX wv Suakocwwy Kat oySonkorra, THY o emupavetav éyov THY PEV eEabev ery pucoy, THY 3S évdo0ev 
KaTnpyupwuerny, Kat TovTO fev aveOnke zw Oem Tw padtora év OnBate TyLWpevy.” “He also made a ship of cedar two 
hundred and eighty cubits long, which he caused to be gilded on the outside, and overlaid with silver within; this 
he presented to the god who is held in the greatest reverence at Thebes.” The ship here mentioned, the value of 
which must have been very great, was probably preserved for many ages in the temple, where it was dedicated ; and 
the safe return of an Egyptian expedition from a long and successful voyage of discovery, might have induced 
Sesostris to present such an offering. It need scarcely be remarked, that the Red or Erythrean Sea, whither that 
monarch dispatched his fleet, was the name by which the Indian Ocean was properly distinguished, and that 
the Red Sea which the Israelites crossed, usually so designated, is more generally named in profane history the 
Arabian Gulf. Some confusion indeed has originated from the great difference of names which sacred and profane 
history apply to the same persons and places; and the geographical description given by Moses in the second 
chapter of Genesis of the site of the terrestrial paradise, and of the four great rivers, the sources of which were the 
stream that watered the garden of Eden, whilst it has given rise to many curious problems in geography, does not 
serve to solve any. All that can with certainty be inferred from it is, that the Euphrates continued to flow after the 
Deluge in the same channel as it had done before it, and that the garden of Eden was situated a little beyond where 
it parted from the other three rivers. Doctor Robertson, remarking, in his notes to his History of America, that the 
ancients entertained very confused notions about geography, instances the curious fact, that when Alexander the 
Great, prosecuting his conquests in Asia, arrived at the Indus, some of those who composed his expedition imagined 
that they must be near the sources of the Nile from perceiving crocodiles in that river, an animal which they believed 
was peculiar to the Nile. Moses, however, cannot be supposed under the name of the river Gihon to mean the Nile. 
The following is the passage in the second chapter of Genesis alluded to. “And a river went out of Eden to water 
the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads. The name of the first is Pison: that is it 
which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold; and the gold of that land is good: there is 
bdellium and the onyx stone. And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the 
whole land of Ethzopia. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of 
Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.” . 

Norte IV. 

The chapter of Gomara, entitled, The Possibility of a Shorter Passage to the Maluccas, of which the subjoined is 
the translation, is interesting, from showing that scarcely twenty years after the discovery of the continent of 
America, the best informed men in Spain, of whom Gomara certainly was one, judged that the junction of the At 
lantic with the Pacific Ocean by an artificial passage across the Isthmus of Panama, would be by no means an im- 
practicable task. 

“The voyage from Spain to the Maluccas by the Straits of Magellan is so long and hazardous, that having had 
frequent occasions to discuss the subject with men well acquainted with the Indies, as well as with other persons 
conversant with history and of an inquiring turn of mind, I have heard of another good although an expensive 
passage, which, if it were made, would be no less honourable than profitable to the maker. This passage would have 
to be opened across the main land from the one sea to the other, by whichever might appear preferable of these 
four lines ; either by the river of Lagartos, which rising in Chagre at the distance of four leagues from Panama, over 
which space of territory they proceed in cars, flows to the sea coast of Nombre de Dios; or by the channel through 
which the lake of Nicaragua empties itself into the sea, up and down which large vessels sail, and the lake is only 
distant three or four leagues from the sea; by either of these two rivers the passage is already traced and half 
made. ‘There is likewise another river which flows from Vera Cruz to Tecoantepec, along which the inhabitants of 

496 NOTES. 

New Spain tow and drag barks from the one sea to the other. The distance from Nombre de Dios to Panama is 
seventeen leagues, and from the Gulf of Urava to the Gulf of San Miguel twenty-five, which are the other two more 
difficult lines. There are mountains, it is true, but there are likewise hands; let but the wish be formed to make 
the passage, and it can be made. If inclination be not wanting, there will be no want of means: the Indies 
where the passage is to be made will supply them. To a king of Spain, with the wealth of the Indies at his 
command, when the object to be obtained is the spice trade, that which is possible is in fact easy. It appeared an 
impossibility, and really was one, to unite Brindez to Belona by a causeway over twenty leagues of the sea; yet 
Pyrrhus and Marcus Varro wished and attempted it, in order to go by land from Italy to Greece. Nicanor began to 
open a canal of more than a hundred leagues extent by land, without reckoning rivers, for the sake of transporting 
spices and other merchandize from the Caspian to the Pontic or Black Sea; but having been put to death by 
Ptolemy Ceraunus, his generous and princely design was abandoned. Nitocris, Sesostris, Psammetichus, Darius, 
Ptolemy, and other kings, projected the junction of the Red Sea with the Nile by means of a canal, in order that 
spices, perfumes, and medicines might be conveyed straight from the ocean to the Mediterranean; but being 
apprehensive lest the sea should inundate Egypt either by bursting the aqueducts, or by an over supply of water, 
they were deterred from the undertaking; and likewise because the sea might have been detrimental to the river, 
without which Egypt would be nothing. If the passage of which I have been speaking was accomplished, the 
navigation to the Maluccas would be shortened by a third of the distance, since ships proceeding thither would 
always sail by the Canaries under the equator, in a warm latitude, within the dominions of Spain, and without fear of 
meeting with a foe: nor would our Indies derive less advantage from it, since merchandize would be conveyed to 
Peru and other provinces in the same ships that brought it from Spain, and much expense and trouble would thus be 
saved.”—La Istoria de las Indias, fol. lviii. 

Note V, page 250. 

M. Chiarini, speaking of the Talmud, says, “Son génie malfaisant porte des coups funestes et invisibles au genre 
humain du milieu des ténébres epaisses qui l’environnent: qui pourrait calculer combien il a contribué et contribue 
encore & multiplier les malheurs qui affligent la terre?” “Its malignant genius aims invisible blows at the human 
race from the midst of the dense darkness in which it is enveloped: who can calculate how much it has contributed 
and still contributes to multiply the evils which afflict the earth?” The Talmud is, however, as the Rabbis contend, 
Judaism embodied into a perfect system: it contains the decisions of the greatest Jewish doctors upon difficult and 
disputed points of their law; and although it has been proscribed by many Popes and sentenced to the flames, it 
should not be forgotten that the voice of the same nation, whose veracity is fully relied upon and whose testimony is 
admitted to prove the Old Testament to be the word of God, declares that the traditions and the oral laws consigned 
to the Talmud were likewise delivered by God to Moses from Mount Sinai, and that their claim to inspiration cannot 
be affected by the circumstance of their not having been then written down; since it might as reasonably be contended 
that the written law was a forgery, as the oral Jaw an invention of the Jews; for that the national credit must be 
compromised, if at all, in both instances. This is the style in which the Jews reply to the objections of Christians. 
It must certainly be admitted that their Talmud is the development of the principles of law laid down by Moses, and 
by the sages of the nation for which his code was expressly framed; in lopping off the branches of the tree, it will 
therefore be very necessary to be careful not to injure the trunk; and to the Hebrew proverb, that “ the tree is to be 
judged of by its fruit,” none but the Jews will in this case feel inclined to yield assent. But what, it may be in- 
quired, are the doctrines of a book which Popes have so often anathematized, kings caused to be seized and burnt in 
their respective dominions, universities condemned, and learned men denounced as dangerous to civil society? Are 
the obnoxious principles which it contains one or many, and to what source may they be traced? Those who have 
turned over the pages of the Talmud must confess that absurdity, fanaticism, and universal intolerance are its leading 
doctrines. Fortunate has it been for the world that the Jews have always been an insignificant and weak state ; the 
globe would have otherwise been desolated by religious wars. And fortunate also has it been for them that other 

NOTES. 497 

religions were more tolerant than their own; since, strange as it may appear, the perverted sense in which the Rabbis 
have chosen to understand so simple an injunction as that which forbade the Jews to worship idols, associated with 
the recollection of the command which their ancestors received to extirpate the Canaanites, has led them to attempt 
to induce their countrymen to become, in almost a literal sense, the enemies and persecutors of mankind. This 
truth may shock the ears of modern Judaism, but, nevertheless, reference to the writings of some of their most famous 
Rabbis, Maimonides for example, will bear it out; wherein it will be seen, from the passages which are cited in the 
original Hebrew, what hatred of idolatry and of idolators they have endeavoured to infuse into the minds of a people, 
who have ever been led blindfold to their own and others’ destruction, and who are taught to consider nearly all 
mankind in the light of idolators, and all religions except their own, idolatry. 

. The first passage is taken from the seventh chapter of Maimonides’s Treatise concerning Idolatry: Nm Mwy mxn 
myo dsw yas) on ond Wwyn 9D OND Mop 7D AN PIINN TIN ‘Now a >Iwl AwyI 9D) wow) ODD NNAy TIN? 
DD IND INS WIADW OPO ID NIN TIN ANTI DE DN PS YON? LIND FAN EIN 920 AMIN TINIw Jy TNS AT? 
PDINN ATID AYO INN ON] FPINN ATID d NN Daw yINA NAT pan yo Dow Ox on71N) ‘Nw aw oD Maly 
:yON) myina “In mandatis est, ut tollatur idololatria et huic inservientia, et quicquid ejus causa fit; quia dicitur 
‘ perdendo perdes omnia loca; sic enim facietis illis, &c.’ In terra autem Israelis persequi eos jubemur, donec ditione 
omni exegerimus. Extra vero terram nostram non jubemur eos persequi, preterguam ws in locis que armis nostris 
subjecimus!! Quia dicitur, ‘ et perdetis nomen eorum ex loco isto’; itaque tantum juberis idololatriam exscindere in 
terrA Israel, non item extra eam.” Hence it is evident that the Jews, wherever they might have the power, both zm 
and out of the land of Canaan, are in the opinion of Maimonides bound to persecute idolators. The latitude of 
meaning which he as well as al/ the Rabbis assign to the words ‘idolatry’ and ‘ idolators’, gives the rule here laid 
down a terrific character. The exception which he charitably makes of countries which the Jews had not subjected 
beneath their arms is truly ridiculous, since in the latter case the power and not the will would be the only thing 
wanting. 

The following passage is taken from the sixth section of the fourth chapter of the same Treatise: Nw NNT Wy 
OM. OMN Popo oy’Dy Tayw TM. INN) IMS 992 pve) pan on? Ow JST PNT ON NA 9D MMII A w"*pna 
PPM pooun paw dean 7”. mma oy mwyad Ty Tponw por Ana oy po oye + cmwy> onan Wayw 
os OUINA OWA? OMIT MAIN Iw On) pnw on DY’ay2 MIM TIN ON Uy 2D ANTTw TAIANA WwIw oy 
sy mondo omy pou oy pas wm Nay2 woy moy> Js 909 pon 7” ona Woy ON) Iw Mwn wy min 
Dw IS ant ans o7”Dy Tiyw oy ow Poy aw OD OMS OT prt ona yD paw TW ypanw> yy ypanw 
So pam or ow pron 7 7729 ims poy TIM Ny) D2 Dy Nw) ims pop mov OTT 7D INYO? INS 
Ms DDO FIN OTA INNO) ON) AD ANT ON own AO ANN )) 72 AWN OTN wb) 9D nN pod AYOA WAyw DN 
mom an Ox mbow 9D pyapa) aa Osx ppm ANAw ph AMD ATW pp 3°92 oy Iw OWI AUT DD 
Lm > pwiy am 7) ps. “ Quid de civitate ac seductoribus fiebat, ubi non omnes conditiones iste concurrerent ? 
Commonebant, obtestabantur quoque adversus quemque eorum qui servierant idolis, eosque lapidibus obruebant, 
velut privatos idolorum cultores: bona eorum heredibus (relicta). Quomodo autem civitas seducta, tempore sic 
exigente, condemnabatur desertae religionis? Senatus per delegatos suos inquirebat, scrutabatur, expendebat, usque 
dum certis comperisset indiciis, civitatem universam, vel majorem ejus partem, seductam ad idolorum cultum de- 
flexisse. Deinde missi duo sapientum discipuli, ut seductos commonerent ac converterent. Si ad saniorem mentem 
reyersi pcenitentiam agerent, bene erat: sin perseverarent in dementia, precipicbat Senatus toti Israeli, ut arma 
adversus eos caperet, eos obsideret et impugnaret donec perruptum civitatis vallum foret. Occupata urbe, crebra 
mox tribunalia constituebant, deque reis judicium ferebant. Omnes autem duorum testimonio convictos idololatrie, 
ubi eos prius admonuissent, separabant. Si minor civitatis pars idola coluisset, zis lapidibus obrutis, ceeteri periculo 
eximebantur. Sin autem major pars defecisset, sistebantur Senatui magno, usque dum re judicata idololatras omnes 
gladio occidissent. Omnes ejus civitatis, si tota fuerit seducta, gladio necant, non pueris, non muleribus exemtis. 
Quin etiam si major pars idololatrie adheserit, gladio itidem tam pueri quam mulieres necabantur. Sive autem civitas 
tota, sive pars ejus fuerit aversa 4 Deo, seductores lapidibus obruuntur, inque medio’ fori prada sive bona omnia 
coacervantur. Quod si eo destituitur civitas, forum paratur.” More odious maxims of intolerance than are to be 
found in this section of Maimonides can hardly be conceived. According to the doctrine of this “beau génie” of 
the Jews, the entire population of a city that proselyted from the Hebrew faith were to be put to death, men, women, 

(61) 

498 NOTES. 

and children ; the latter, because till they attained the age of thirteen they were reckoned amongst their parents’ 
goods: and to sum up all, animals are mentioned in the next section as also adjudged to death, the plea of not 
guilty of proselytism availing them as much as the answer of the lamb to the wolf in the fable. The fanatical 
interpretation which some of the Rabbis have put on the words of the Mosaic text, “percutient omnem animam 
hominis,” is thus noticed by Dionysius Vossius: ‘In Siphre de civitate seductd dicitur: Non morientur patres 
propter filios, neque filii propter patres: juxta quam sententiam verba Scriptures, percutiendo percuties omnes habita- 
tores illius civitatis acie gladi, de reis intelligenda sint, non item, quorum nulla hic culpa est, infantibus. Super 
eddem re disputarunt R. Hlihezer et R. Aquiba: quorum ille occidi omnes, hic parvulis parcendum contendebat. 
Autor noster (Maimonides) Elihezerum sequitur; quia peccatum deserte religionis usque adeo. grave est, ut omnem 
ejus memoriam aboleri Deus velit, qué ad reliquos terror et exemplum perveniret. Unde addunt qui hane senten- 
tiam tuentur, quod Dominus omnes facultates talium absumi jusserit: liberi autem, usque ad annum xur juxta 
Thalmudistas, znter parentum facultates numerentur. Et simile est, quod Deus etiam animalia, quibuscum peccatum 
commissum est, jusserit supplicio affici.” When we consider the bitterness which the Rabbis have always displayed 
against proselytes from Judaism, by their writings, by their example, and by their appeal to passages of holy writ, 
endeavouring to excite a spirit of exterminating vengeance in the breasts of their countrymen against them, we need 
not feel at all surprised that it is a dangerous thing even still to attempt to convert the Jews resident in the East, 
who live on a more equal footing with the rest of the population, and are more powerful as a body and more 
respected as individuals, than in this country: this perhaps Mr. Wolfe will confess, if he returns safe from. his 
charitable expedition to the Holy Land. It is a very well known fact in Constantinople, that a Jew who becomes a 
proselyte not only exposes his family to certain ruin and disgrace, but himself runs imminent danger of assassina- 
tion: nor, supposing that he were dragged before the secret tribunal of Judaism, would he have a word to reply 
against the seeming justice of a sentence, which condemned him to die for an alleged offence for which the popu- 
lation of whole cities, men, women, and children, had died before him. When we read in ancient history of 
persecutions which the Jews occasionally suffered from the Romans, and reflect at the same time that the religion of 
the latter was tolerant and indulgent in the extreme to those of other nations, how can we feel surprised that the 
emperors should have become indignant on hearing that the blood of their legions had streamed in Palestine merely 
to gratify Jewish fanaticism, or that they should have taken speedy and summary vengeance? Not to have resented 
so great an indignity might have been termed by some of the early Christian historians patience; but the Romans 
would not so have judged it, and it certainly would not have been human nature: the complaints, generally speak- 
ing, brought by the Jews against the Romans were vexatious and not unfrequently seditious; ‘To render unto Cesar 
the things that were Czsar’s’ was an injunction which they obeyed with a very ill grace, as the admonition itself 
would seem to imply, which would not have been given had it not been necessary. Maimonides having been 
eulogized by M. Beugnot as a Rabbi who was an ornament to his age and country, and whose enlightened views it 
would be well if the rest of his nation could be brought to adopt, we shall take the liberty of observing, with all due 
respect for his opinion, that the Jews have long adopted them to the very spirit and letter, and that the work to 
which they are consigned may justly be entitled the most odious birth of time, since the principles it advocates do 
really aim, from the midst of the dense darkness which envelops them, invisible blows at the human race: but we 
cannot concur in the eulogium which he pronounces on Maimonides, since the following passage occurs in the 
second chapter of his Treatise concerning Idolatry, from which a due estimate may be formed of the enlightened 
views which actuated that Rabbi, who applies the contemptuous epithet of books composed by idolators to works 
written by Christians on their religion, and attempts to distort the command given by Moses to the Jews in the 
fourth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, “Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourself molten gods,” into 
a positive and distinct prohibition to them against reading a particular class of books, which Moses never foresaw 
would be written. It is almost surprising that he did not go a little further, and declare to his simple flock that to 
learn to read was itself idolatrous and forbidden to all but Rabbis, who by the Lord’s special grace knew how to 
distinguish good from evil. ‘“ Multos libros composuerunt idololatre de cultu suo, quod sit fundamentum illius, 
quee opera, et qui ritus. Czeterum preecepit nobis Deus benedictus ne quidquam legeremus in libris istis, neque 
meditaremur in ea (idololatria), aut ullé re que huc pertineat. Quin etiam considerare formam imaginis vetitum 
est. q. d. ‘Ne defigas oculos tuos in idola’. Atque ideo dictum est, ‘Ne forte inquiras in deos eorum’, dicendo, quo- 

ee 

NOTES. : 499 

modo coluerunt? Ne roges de ratione colendi eos, etiamsi iis non servias ; quia hoc te impellit ut convertaris ad eos, 
ac facias quemadmodum illi faciunt: quo respiciunt verba, ‘Et faciam sic quoque ego’. Omnia autem precepta 
negativa sub hoc uno comprehenduntur; nimirum, ne quis se convertat ad stellas ac planetas. Quos qui attentius 
respicit, ita ut opus aliquod faciat, omnino vapulat.” The passage which follows in the original Hebrew is extracted 
from the tenth chapter of Maimonides’s Treatise concerning Idolatry ; and well may Vossius, the translator and com- 
mentator of the Hebrew text, on rendering such a passage into Latin, exclaim, “Maimonidem hic qui purgem, non 
satis video. Non eum de solis Cananzez gentibus, sed universe de gentilibus idola colentibus, locutum esse, vel illud 
fidem fecerit, quod initio sequentis paragraphi generatim dicat, Hac dicta sunt de idololatris.” How the ‘ eagle of the 
doctors’, as he is styled by his countrymen, ever dared to give utterance to such sentiments, may be matter of wonder; 
but they prove that fanaticism swayed his heart no less strongly than his head; and the reflection will occur to 
many, that if such a man had possessed power commensurate with his will to persecute, Moloch, and not Jehovah, 
would have been the name that would have resounded through the terrified nations of the earth. moa pnd PSX 
DM) NON) ITN ONTAyD MIM NON OMD MMM ND TONIw OTDy? OMN MIN ow Py AwyIw TD 07D shy? 
TAN) DaN bw NO nD wD ANT Woy) ND TT yaw IN TDN DD Ty 1) NT ON 729? ONIN 87) TONIw omy 
7TAND med ONIwD POP EN OMoIT Das DI’ya N’I2 : AND WAY MWY IDNW DD TON FT NYPD) INI IN 12 
DD TIDY mand TONw Tod TAN INDO “INN oy ON prDD) Daw) pe Aw ed nw AN2 Jy pA pa 
Ty TAN) ONT AwIN A - ON O72 DAN Tawa NAT ADS OwO wwIn Tw Ws TO NTO TT OND TDwl 1S 
: ON imN OKs inva 6“ Ne pasciscantur cum idololatris, ita ut iis concedant idola colendi licentiam: quia 
dicitur, ‘Non percuties cum eis,’ &c. Sed vel 4 cultu avertant, vel occidant: nec eorum misereri licet, quia dicitur, 
‘Nec misereberis eorum’. Idcirco, si quis viderit gentilem pereuntem, vel aquis demersum, ne opem ferat. Si eum 
morti proximum viderit, ne eripiat morti. Attamen manu sua eum perdere, precipitem in puteum dare, vel si quid 
huic simile, nefas est, quia nobiscum bellum non gerit. Hee dicta sunt de idololatris. Sed Israelitarum illos qui 
4 religione desciverint, vel Epicurei evaserint, trucidare, atque ad inferos usque persequa jubemur. Quippe affligunt 
Israelem, populumque & Deo avertunt. Hine discere est, prohibitum quoque esse me medicinam idololatris faciamus, 
utcunque mercedem reciperemus. Czeterum si quis sibi ab iis metuat, ac se propterea fore credat exosum, mercede 
sanabit, gratis vero non licet. Proselytum autem inter Israelitas degentem, quia incolumem eum servare jubentur, 
gratis etiam curabunt.” The preceding chapter of Maimonides breathes the same Jewish charity, as will more 
evidently appear from the following precept taken from the thirteenth section. M72) 7v 72 MN PN N? ONTW NI 
DN Apo Oxaw na as oto mpm aD ow 72wa Nm od JAN mm ms dan x) Oy) 1 ntaw BD 
:pyann Now TD AMwranD. 6“ Mulier Israelitica non lactabit filium idolis servientis ; quia is filium ad idololatriam 
educat. Itidem nec obstetricabitur pagane idola colenti. Sed licet pro mercede odi causé obstetricari. Paganz verd 
obstetricis opera uti mulieri Israeliticee licet : etiam ad lactandum filium suum uti ea licet; sed domi matris ne occidat 
eum.” What hateful suspicions against Christians are inculcated by Maimonides in the concluding sentence of the 
above paragraph! For the honour of human nature, however, we must hasten to explain away the apparent signification 
of “sed licet odii causa obstetricari,” by citing a note subjoined to the Hebrew text by Dionysius Vossius. ‘Cur ex 
odio permittit obstetricari? Num quia occasionem sic habitura interimendi foetus, vel etiam puerperz aut partu- 
rientis? Vix persuadere mihi possum, rem adeo detestabilem 4 Maimonide precipi. Vera proinde interpretatio est, 
odii causa posse obstetricari, hoc est, ad odium effugiendum, sive ne odium gliscat, sed potius occurratur iis, qui, si 
negetur hoc officium, pejus odissent, magisque malefacerent. Neque hic gratificari me Maimonide, sed revera 
hane ejus fuisse sententiam liquet ex capitis sequentis sectione secunda; ubi claré ait, si quis metuat ab iis qui 
religionis sunt disparis, posse ad odium evitandum medicam admovere manum; non gratis tamen, sed pro mercede.” 
It cannot be denied that the modern race of Jews are a charitable people, and possess, as a nation, many excellent 
qualities ; but this is owing to the inherent goodness of human nature, and not to Judaism, which strives from the 
cradle to make the Jews haters of those who are of a different creed from their own, but which never yet, we will 
venture to say, except partially and locally, has attained its end, since it is impossible for a religion, be it ever so 
‘intolerant, totally to pervert human nature; and even if it were possible for an entire generation of men to become 
the instruments of fanaticism, they would soon be succeeded by a new and innocent race, whom it would be most 
unjust even to reproach on account of the alleged crimes of their ancestors. That the charity of the modern Jews to 
strangers and persons professing a different faith does not, however, flow from the precepts of their religion as taught 

500 NOTES. 

and expounded by their greatest doctors, the Rabbis of days of yore, must be évident to those who peruse with 
attention the following and many other passages of the works of Maimonides. 8 9xnw) »y Dy On) “IY POMBO 
2 DW DTT BD OPN. OPI PDN) Dow] Pow) Ow DTT wD AND) oMaw wPyA OM MY MDA PROD PN oIbw DIT 
Nay A|T AWA Ow 1) IM) Pw2 wNYD ow 1D nn? wx Opa D2 dw oad oD xn odyd Obw md pop pw 
INWwW) Dw word AN INwW Jy APN OA Pwo MNT pad Sw aw jr NOS ONION ONT DITA 9D PN PWN 
ON] ANNO] DIP? DIO ADy Ww wy NIw) awy IPOS iya O49 Tay mM mm n> Tox odyA mon oy ABN 
mT my’t wy 7ap ON) AYWH? YON TEND Vw) ND TNIw M222 NOMIW myo yaw Poy Sapw oy wpEeIN~A Tay 
P7292 prs 72 NON poapO pe Day yd Nw Jax mM Yaymwy yor NON Iwin wa pape pr awn 1“ Susten- 
tabuntur egeni gentilium una cum egenis Israelis, pacis causé: nec obstandum quo minus gentium egeni in angulis 
relicta colligant, atque id guietis ergo. Cujus gratia etiam salutabunt eos festo illorum die. Nec tamen dis eos 
salutabunt, aut die festo salutandi ergo eorum ingredientur domos. Si quis in plateis offenderit, submiss4 voce et 
capite submisso salutem dicet. zc locum non habent, nisi Israelita 4 gentilibus detineatur captivus, vel ii 
Israelitis fuerint potentiores. At ubi Israelite viribus prevalent, nefas ullum inter nos relinquere idololatram ; etsi 
tantummodo forte fortuna inter nos commoretur, aut uno ex loco in alterum commeet mercature gratia. Imd nec 
pertransire terras sinemus, nisi anté receperit septem precepta Noachidis data. Quia dicitur, ‘Ne commorentur in 
terra tua’; ne hore quidem spatio. Si septem illa pracepta receperint, pro peregrinis ejusmodi habentur, quibus 
habitare in Israelitarum terra liceat. Nec habitare permittitur ejusmodi peregrino, nisi tempore jubilzi: extra id 
tempus nullus recipitur, nisi peregrinus justitia.” We shall quote, in conclusion, two passages from the sixth 
chapter of the same Treatise concerning Idolatry, which, if the saying be true that the perfection of law is the 
perfection of reason, which proposition, although affirmative, appears to be likewise true in its converse, if law and 
justice be, as they ought to be, synonymous terms, will prove that an admiration for the principles of Judaism, and a 
blind adherence to the literal interpretation of the Old Testament, had degraded the intellect of Maimonides in no 
less a degree than it had depraved his moral feeling; since what opinion can we pronounce on an author who, after 
recommending the butchery of the population of an entire town for proselytism from Judaism, without regard for 
either sex or age, becomes conscientiously scrupulous about the Jawfulness of putting to death a Jew who had sacri- 
ficed not one but all his children to Moloch, because the letter of the Mosaic ordinance declares “ that he who offers of 
his seed to Moloch shall die,” and of signifying some but not all, such a person could not be condemned by the 
letter of the law to death, ony. Mwy ON) MIP MNoM NAD IMwWA MID AM pT YI Fw? wom yun 
DA o> aya inn xD Jy) Toxaw pmo dw ots tom mor mi zo2 wore ym Twa) ‘x2w 2pp2 Tam 
: WNT IND) A ayo Ja xx ND ‘ON NIM “Qui de semine suo offert sciens volensque, exscinditur: sz errore, 
sacrificium preefinitum ad expiationem sui adducit. Quod si testibus fecerit presentibus, et post admonitionem sui, 
lapidatur juxta illud, ‘Et qui de semine suo offert Molocho, moriendo morietur.’ Interdictum autem hac de re inve- 
nitur his in verbis: ‘Et de semine tuo ne des ad transducendum Molocho.’ Alio etiam loco dicitur: ‘Ne reperiatur 
inter vos, qui filium, aut filiam suam, per ignem traducat’”. way) 701) WA Toow Ty APO IN MD IN IN 
’yod TDW AY IMT IPN) “NOD My TID Now Taye Toow IN ToD Nay Way ND) Dd say IT wea p92 
2 87 NYpa J) WTI Warm °D AMNIw AxpO mm Ia “Neque vel exscindebatur, vel lapidabatur quisquam, nisi 
prius tradidisset filium suum Molocho, et adegisset ad eo modo transeundum pedibus per ignem. Si tradidit, nec 
fecit ut transiret; vel ut transiret fecit, non autem obtulit; denique si causa est transitus, sed non recepto transierit 
modo; liber pronunciabatur. Neque reus peragitur, nisi partem seminis tradiderit, partem retinuerit: quippe 
dicitur, ‘Qui de semine suo dederit Molocho’: quasi dicas, Qui partem dederit, non totum.” Dionysius Vossius thus 
comments on this pretty quibbling of the learned Maimonides: “Mira conclusio! reus est, qui filiorum aliquem 
obtulerit Molocho; qui verd omnes, liber est. Aiunt Hebrei, ideo hoc institutum, quia si quis unum tantum filium 
obtulerit, morte sud expiaret peccatum illud: at si omnes obtulerit, gravius esse delictum quam ut morte expiari 
possit. Ideoque hominem illum hic quidem effugere peenam; sed 4 Deo vita eterna orbari. Alii obtinuisse morem 
volunt, ut unus tantummodo filius offerretur ; cujus oblatione pro omnibus offerentis liberis satzsfieret: eoque, si non 
unus, sed universi offerrentur, recedi 4 cultu qui Molocho prestari solet: edque de causa talem esse immunem & 
peend qua afficitur, qui Molocho filium suum obtulisset. Sed magis mihi probatur sententia Isaaci Abravanelis, qui 
existimat eo dicere Scripturam, ‘ Qui dederit de semine suo’; quia parum verisimile foret, repertum iri quemquam qui 
universam sobolem suam offerret Molocho. Tantum igitur abest, ut trium liberorum pater, si tres obtulerit, liber sit 

NOTES. 501 

& poena, ut tanto magis pene sit obnoxius. Sed si, ut Maimonides ait, de semzne significat partem, non totum; quid 
statuendum si filius offeratur unigenitus, ubi idem unica et universa soboles? Hic unigenitum dixeris seminis partem 
ratione totius, ut vocant, pofentialis. Nam ut actu filium habuerit unum, potestate tamen habuit plures.” We fear 
that Solomon himself would be unable to extricate the Rabbis from this latter dilemma: here is a Gordian knot 
which even he would vainly essay to cut in two. 

Nore VI. p. 384. 

The following passage from the first chapter of the twenty-eighth book of Montesquieu’s “Esprit des Lois”, may 
be quoted to show that the clergy introduced into the barbarous codes of the dark ages many legislative enactments 
tending materially to affect the condition of the Jews. “Les évéques eurent une autorité immense a la cour des rois 
Visigoths ; les affaires les plus importantes étoient décidées dans les Conciles. Nous devons aux codes des Visigoths 
toutes les maximes, tous les principes, et toutes les vues de Inquisition @aujour@hui; et les moines wont fait que 
copier contre les Juifs des lois faites autrefois par les évéques.” “The bishops possessed immense influence in the 
court of the Visigoth kings; the most important matters were decided in Councils. To the codes of the Visigoths 
we are indebted for all the maxims, all the principles, and all the views of the modern Inquisition; and the monks 
have only copied the laws made formerly by the bishops against the Jews.” The remark made by Montesquieu 
respecting the power of Councils even in civil matters amongst the Visigoths, is generally true of all the early 
Councils ; and that power may be accounted for by the extreme bigotry of the age in which they were convened. 
As regards the present dispersed state of the Jews, it may be contended, in opposition to those who would fain dis- 
cern the fulfilment of prophecy in an event which must have had other causes than prophecy, that habits engrafted 
by time are of long duration, that a dispersed people must at last become naturalized in those countries which they 
have chosen as an asylum, even although the law does not recognize them, by language, by prejudices, or by property, 
especially in land; which latter kind the framers of the old law of Europe, as if conscious that land attaches the 
owners of it to the soil, did not allow the Jews to acquire, by kindred, by local attachments and friendships; which 
was the reason, perhaps, why the regulations of most European states excluded the Jews from becoming members of 
corporations, and assigned to them, in the several towns and cities where they resided, separate quarters from the 
other citizens, encouraging them at the same time, by forbidding them to enter into honourable professions and 
respectable trades, to seek sordid gains from following the lowest and vilest occupations, which of itself would have 
been sufficient to draw a line of demarcation between them and the other members of the community; and, finally, 
by the sepulchres of their ancestors, which the Jews have ever been accustomed so highly to revere, it is not 
unlikely that when they colonized America they carried the bones of some of their supposed patriarchs thither, 
confiding in the protection which they expected to receive from these talismans, for such they might be called, since 
a relic to which superstition ascribes occult virtues differs scarcely or at all from a talisman, although the term itself 
is not Hebrew, but Arabic. It has been already remarked that the dispersion of the Jews is no where alluded to in 
the Old Testament as a judgment with which God threatened to visit that people on account of the crucifixion of bis 
Son: those who may choose to maintain that it is, will do well to point out the passage in Scripture in which the 
allusion is contained.. But ifa nation has a right to be heard in its own defence, which the Jews certainly have, the 
argument by which they attempt to prove that their present dispersion is not owing to the cause above referred to, 
will be found to possess considerable weight with every unprejudiced mind ; since, arguing from the justice of God, 
they contend that he would not have punished a whole nation for a crime committed only by a few; the principal 
actors in which, Herod and Pontius Pilate, were not Jews of the seed of Abraham, although the former was sprung 
from a family of Jewish proselytes ; and that, even on the supposition that the whole nation were equally guilty of it 
then, their posterity eighteen hundred years afterwards must be as innocent of it as were their forefathers eighteen 
hundred years before, possessing even an advantage over them, in not being doomed to be the progenitors of so evil 
a generation. 

(6m) 

GR 
oS 
aS) 

NOTES. 

Note VII. page 385. 

Those who seriously consider the multitudinous sects into which religion is divided in the isle which the poet, 
dipping his pen in truth, has described in the lines beginning 

“Behold yon isle, by palmers, pilgrims trod,” 

must feel surprised at the question which is not unfrequently asked, namely, what right an old East Indian (for by 
that appellation a man who has spent some twenty years of his life in the East is not unfrequently designated,) 
has to turn liberal in religious matters, and if he gains admission to the councils of his country, to advocate in 
a sort of plain matter-of-fact style of eloquence the claims of Christians, Jews, Pagans, Turks, and Infidels, to 
equal protection from the laws of this country, which, like Rome of old, is too great, and casts the shade of 
her sceptre over too many lands, to choose for herself another motto than ‘‘ Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine 
agetur.” Nothing would benefit Great Britain, or the individuals themselves more, than to send, if it were pos- 
sible, the narrow-minded few who ask this question, and who, clinging to intolerance, would prefer to drive the 
vessel of the state itself on a rock or dangerous quicksand, to steering out of the old course ona voyage to the shores 
of Hindostan, that like Ulysses they might gain wisdom by seeing the manners of many men and many cities; nor 
can it be doubted that they would return with enlarged political views, and would feel less disposed, after behold- 
ing the state of British India, mighty in numbers, but comparatively weak in effective force, from the division of its 
native population into castes, which, “for ever separate, yet for ever near,” exhibit a moral phenomenon that far 
eclipses that of Judaism in Europe, to question the right of others to disbelieve and deny the fact, that the dispersion 
of the Jews is the accomplishment of prophecy; which the Jews themselves, in reference to the particular prophecies 
which they adduce, have always denied by an appeal to arguments which have never yet been satisfactorily refuted. 
In addition to the many causes which have already been noticed in the course of these pages as conspiring to keep 
the Jews wherever they may reside a separate people, we shall mention another, which those will duly appreciate 
who have been in India, and have observed how powerfully the Hindoo laws, which prohibit some castes of. Hindoos 
from eating or even tasting the provisions of others, contribute to preserve amongst them the distinction of castes ; 
—and that is the prejudice and inflexible aversion which the Jews, of former ages at least, entertained to parta- 
king of the same fare with Christians, or those of any other sect: and this aversion, which was instilled into them 
by the Rabbis, who well knew that their own interests were inseparable from their: nation: being a distinct people, 
was grounded on the charitable sense in which they chose to understand beasts in the following ordinance of the 
twenty-second chapter of Exodus, applying the term to all those that were without the pale of Judaism: “ And 
ye shall be holy men unto me; neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to 
the dogs.” But since to rest this prohibition on a single verse of the Old Testament, interpreted moreover so con- 
temptuously of Christians, might in some places have been attended with consequences inconvenient: to the Jews, 
their Rabbis have judged it more prudent to seek a pretext from their oral laws and from the Talmud, for forbidding 
their countrymen to eat with Christians, which might be more intelligible to the former and less’offensive to the 
latter: and hence the stress which they laid on the Jews not eating the flesh of any animal which had not been killed 
by a butcher of their own nation, and the origin of the constitutions contained in the Schechitos Ubedikos, or Book 
of the Art of Killing, as well as the necessity, in former days at least, of a butcher receiving a licence’or diploma 
from the Rabbi before he could practise a trade which amongst the Jews was a learned profession. 

Nore VIII. page 356. 

The following extract is taken from Selden’s Treatise respecting the Gods worshipped by the Syrians. It relates to 
the famous brazen serpent adored by the Jews, to which a place was assigned in their temple, where it was treated 
with little less reverence than was shown by the Mexicans to the figure of the serpent which they carried in proces- 

NOTES. 503 

sion on the festival of Huitzilopuchtli, and afterwards deposited in a particular place in his temple; an account of 
which will be found in page 415 of the present volume. In the ninety-first and four succeeding pages of the 
lesser Vatican MS., a serpent is represented in the hand of a deity, who was perhaps Maozim or the robust God 
mentioned by Daniel, whom the brazen serpent seems to have suggested mention of to Selden in the same passage. 
“Sunt autem que consulto hactenus omisimus. Neque enim locum dedimus eneo serpenti a Judzis adorato, quippe 
qui jussu Dei Optimi Maximi conflatus est. Neque restat quod ad rem de eo dici posset, preter ea que in Ezechia 
historia scripta relinquuntur. Somnia que de eo et columnis nescio quas incisis junxit Philastrius, uti pluria ejus- 
dem figmenta fastidit stomachus noster. Neque si Hesychii presbyteri Constantinopolitani libri quatuor, fictis ad 
- Deum Optimum Maximum Mosis de eo orationibus, Dei vicissim ad Mosem, turgescentes, ad manus nostras perve- 
nissent, inde quid opere nostre sperandum fuisse existimamus. Memoratur ille Hesychius in Photii Myriobiblo 
Cod. 11. deum Maozim seu robustum et potentem, quod Doyyn Danielis capite undecimo, com. 38. et MawZew Seni- 
oribus dicitur, preetermisimus ut plane ignotum, aliter ac locus ille Sacre Historie indicat.”—Seldenus de Diis Syris. 
Syntagma 11. cap. xvii. 

Selden makes a curious remark in the second chapter of the Introduction to his Treatise, that the names of the idols 
designated by the Jews ‘the Gods of the Assyrians and the Babylonians’ are really Hebrew, from which he would infer 
the primitive nature of the Hebrew tongue, and its wide diffusion over the provinces of Asia. Other persons 
may be tempted to draw a different conclusion from the following confession of that learned man. “ Pracipui 
etiam Deorum quos collegimus, Ebreeis, non Arameis, aut Babyloniis vocabulis, aut adscititid aliquaé dialecto me- 
morantur: ut Gad, Baal, Baal Peor, Baal Berith, Baalim, Baalzebub, Ashtaroth, que mere sunt Ebrea. Imo idem. 
dicendum de Teraphim, et Succoth Benoth, quorum tamen Babylonicum est hoc numen, illud Arameum ; quod nec 
leve sane est argumentum omnia illa haud recentioris fuisse evi, quam illud est quo Ebrea apud Arameos viguit et 
Babylonios pura dialectus. Religione, ni fallor, ducti, deorum ante alia inviolata nomina retinere volebant.” The 
rule of ‘audi alteram partem’ is so strictly accordant with justice, that it is to be regretted that the Syrians and the 
Babylonians cannot be heard in their own defence in reply to the charges brought against them by the Jews. What 
recrimination of idolatry and human sacrifices would undoubtedly follow, with the denial that they were the tutors, 
and the Jews merely their pupils in these atrocities! In the absence of further evidence it must however be con- 
fessed, that the Jews are most entitled to receive judgment from posterity, since their prophets bear witness against 
them, whilst the history of the Babylonians presents a blank page. 

Nore IX. page 389. 

Sahagun, in the Appendix to the second book of his History of New Spain, at page 101 of the seventh volume of 
the present work, says that the form of a Mexican oath was as follows. “ ‘ Por vida del Sol y de nuestra Sefiora la 
Tierra, que no falte en lo que tengo dicho; y para mayor seguridad como esta tierra :’ y luego tocaba con los dedos en 
la tierra y llegabalos 4 la boca y lamialos; y asi comia tierra haciendo juramento.” “‘I swear by the life of the Sun 
and by our sovereign mistress the Earth, that nothing which I affirm is false; and in confirmation of my oath I eat 
this earth :’ when immediately touching the earth with his hand, he raised it to his mouth and licked it, and in this 
manner ate earth on occasion of taking an oath.” The adjuration of Moses in the nineteenth verse of the thirtieth 
chapter of Deuteronomy, “TI call heaven and earth to record this day against you that I have set before you life and 
death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life that both thou and thy seed may live;” considered in connection 
with what is said in the first verse of the twenty-third chapter of Exodus, of a false witness making use of his hand 
when giving evidence, renders it not improbable that the form of the Mexican oath was borrowed from the Jews. 
The passage referred to in Exodus is the following: “Thou shalt not raise a false report; put not thine hand with the 
wicked to be an unrighteous witness.” 

504, NOTES. 

Nore X. page 334. 

We are informed by Sahagun in the thirty-seventh chapter of the second book of his History, that the Mexicans 
on the festival of Yzcalli bored the ears of their children for the purpose of putting ear-rings into them, when certain 
persons stood godfathers and godmothers to them; whence it would appear that ear-rings amongst the Mexicans 
were connected with idolatrous rites, which may serve to illustrate the fourth verse of the thirty-fifth chapter of 

Genesis, which has perplexed commentators, who have not been able to understand why Jacob should have deprived . 

his household of their ear-rings as well as of their strange gods: “And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods 
which were in their hands, and all their ear-rings which were in their ears, and Jacob hid them under the oak which 
was by Shechem.” Another custom which the Mexicans may have borrowed from the Jews, was their solemn 
repasts on bread at the celebration of some of their greater festivals; since we learn from the fifty-fourth verse of the 
thirty-first chapter of Genesis, that Jacob, whose descendants naturally would have been inclined to imitate the 
example of the father of the house of Israel, called his brethren to eat bread when he offered a sacrifice to God upon 
the mount. “Then Jacob offered sacrifice wpon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread, and they did eat 
bread, and tarried all night in the mount.” It is not improbable that the Mexicans circumcised their sons on the 
above-mentioned festival of Yzcalli, and the incisions which they superstitiously cut in the American aloe, when their 
object was not to obtain from it the liquor of which they made wine, might have been originally derived from the 
following passage of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus: “And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have 
planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised. Three years shall it be as 
uncircumcised unto you: it shall not be eaten of. But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to praise 
the Lord withal. And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you the increase 
thereof. Iam the Lord your God.” The expression ‘ uncircumcised’, here used metaphorically in reference to 
trees, may with great probability be judged to have given rise in the long course of ages to some unmeaning rite 
amongst the Jews, who, besides their proneness to multiply rites, were equally addicted with the Mexicans to seek luck 
or good fortune from omens ; and they might have imagined that if fruit, which was counted as uncircumcised, was 
unlucky and not proper to be eaten, that which could be counted as circumcised would be wholesome and good to 
eat, and accordingly have made incisions in the bark of fruit trees. It further deserves to be remarked, that the Jews, 
dividing time like the Mexicans into larger chronological cycles of fifty years, might likewise have divided it as the 
latter did into lesser periods of four years, of which some indication seems to be afforded in the provision contained 
in the twenty-fifth verse of the chapter of Leviticus referred to, permitting the Jews to eat in the fifth year the fruit 
which they were not allowed to taste during the four preceding years, since a reason for the permission then granted 
might be found in the commencement of a new cycle. It is proper however to add, that the Old Testament declares 
that both five and seven were numbers dedicated by the Jews to the holding solemn assemblies; and perhaps at the 
period of the Babylonian captivity, the number five had grown into greater public estimation. Sahagun has observed 
that the Mexicans, like the Jews, divided their months into four equal portions or weeks ; but the month of the former 
not being lunar and consisting of no more than twenty days, their week contained only five days: the people of 
Chiapa, however, whose month was lunar, counted seven days to their week. 

On the supposition that the Jews colonized America, various reasons might be assigned for their changing the 
lunar reckoning of their year soon after their arrival in that continent into a vicesimal computation of days; but the 
principal motive was probably a wish to equalize the number of days contained in each month, and to simplify their 
calendar by not regarding the changes of the moon. All the Mexican months being religious festivals, and dedicated 
to the performance of sacrifices and rites, the priest or astrologer who distributed them into twenty days each might 
moreover have wished to typify in them the greatest and most solemn Jewish festival, that of the Passover, which 
terminated on the twenty-first day of the first Hebrew month Nisan (which probably began at evening), as was ordained 
in the eighteenth verse of the twelfth chapter of Exodus: “ In the first month on the fourteenth day of the month 
at even ye shall eat unleavened bread until the one and twentieth day of the month at evening.” The Mexicans seem 
even to have borrowed some superstitious practices from the Hebrew ordinances relating to the celebration of the 
feast of the Passover. They generally performed their sacrifices in the evening or at night, and the Jews were com- 

eee 

NOTES. 505 

manded in the sixth verse of the twelfth chapter of Exodus, to kill the paschal lamb in the evening: “ And ye shall 
keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month, and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall 
kill it in the evening.” The Mexican merchants were fearful of stirring out of their houses on certain days of the 
year; and the Jews were specially enjoined by Moses not to go out of their doors on the night of the feast of the 
Passover until morning, lest the destroyer should smite them. The Mexicans likewise computed the period of a day 
from the noon or middle of one day to that of another, as we are informed by the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano- 
Remensis, in page 152 of the present volume; and this computation assigning to the night a sort of priority over the 
day, probably induced them to keep the vigils of festivals as a part of the festival itself. Another remarkable proof 
of the predilection which the Jews and Mexicans manifested for the employment of similar numbers in their calcula- 
tions and divisions of time, is found in the former celebrating a year of jubilee at the expiration of every period of 
fifty years, and the latter at the expiration of every fifty-two years, and in both nations reckoning time and keeping a 
chronological account of historical events by cycles, so nearly agreeing in duration with each other as the Mexican 
and Hebrew jubilees. That the Mexicans preserved the recollection of the exact time when past events happened, by 
referring them to a particular year contained within a particular cycle of fifty-two years, is evident from their historical 
paintings; and that the Jews made use of an analogous method before the captivity, must clearly be understood from 
the following passage of Eusebius’s Chronological Canons: “Apud Hebraos, usque ad nativitatem Abraham, com- 
putantur anni mille nongenti quinquaginta. Usque ad diluvium enim ab Adam habent annos mpctv1, et inde 
usque ad Abraham ccxciit. Et ideo xu jobelai 4 nativitate Abraham computantur. Unus enim jobelzus quin- 
quaginta anni sunt.”—Eusebii Chronicorum Canonum, pag. 1. It is likewise the general opinion of the learned. 

In reference to an observation in a preceding paragraph respecting the number five, and the estimation in which 
that number seems to have been held by the Jews at the period of the Babylonian captivity, it may be proper to 
quote the words of Zechariah, in the fourth and fifth verses of the seventh chapter of his prophecies: “Then came the 
word of the Lord of Hosts unto me, saying, Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When 
ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years did ye at all fast unto me, even to 
me?” Serious attention to the grave charge which God himself brings in this passage against the Jews, might 
dispose some people to wonder less, that the lost tribes cannot be discovered at the present day, than that all the 
tribes had not been lost long ago. If however it were of any real importance, as corroborative of the truth of Scrip- 
ture history, that these lost tribes should be discovered, the fact of their not having been yet discovered must also 
appear important; except in the eyes of that class of persons, who, freely admitting that if the old law had forbidden 
sacrifices they would have drawn from that circumstance an argument in proof of the divine legation of Moses, 
find on the other hand an equally strong argument in favour of it in the old law having ordained them. 

Nore XI. page 125. 

‘ Viler than sea-weed ’ appears to have been a Latin proverb ; nor is it likely that the Romans held this useless marine 
production in less esteem than other nations: it is therefore the more surprising that the Peruvians, who surpassed 
every ancient and modern people in the 7zchness of the offerings which they made to the Deity, should have offered 
sea-weed with all their offerings, as Acosta expressly declares, “alge wniversis fere sacrificiis inferuntur.” This ano- 
maly in their sacrifices might perhaps have originated in the necessity imposed upon the Jews to offer salt with all 
their sacrifices, in compliance with the injunction contained in the thirteenth verse of the second chapter of Leviticus, 
* And every oblation of thy meat-offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the cove- 
nant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat-offering ; with a// thine offerings thou shalt offer salt:” since on their 
arrival in the New World, where the revival of the sacrifices prescribed by Moses probably engrossed all their atten- 
tion, they must have been at a great loss for salt; and some Rabbi might have been advised in a dream, that sea- 
weed, the taste of which is very salt, as the derivation of the Latin name implies, would be a proper substitute for 

that indispensable article. 

(On) 

re 

506 NOTES. 

Note XII. page 83. 

The following passage of the sixteenth chapter of the Gospel of Saint Matthew affords strong grounds for suppos- 
ing, that the Jews in the days of Christ believed in the doctrine of a metempsychosis: “When Jesus came into the 
coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the son of man am? And they 
said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets.” Had this no- 
tion prevailed amongst them at an earlier epoch of their history, it might have caused the rabble (for Rabbis and doctors 
we here put out of the question,) to expect the coming of a future Messiah or deliverer in the person of Moses himself, 
who would re-appear to rescue the Jews from another and more oppressive bondage than the Egyptian: and then the 
proper name Mw might with great propriety be considered as the derivation of mwo. Many nations have cherished 
the idea, that the souls of those who had earned the lasting gratitude of their country, by services performed at the 
time of her greatest need, might, if the salvation of future generations was at stake, re-animate mortal bodies for the 
sake of those who were once dear to them. Thus the Chinese expect that their famous deified warrior, who has been 
dead for many centuries, will re-appear on earth: and the return of godlike mortals, rather than of immortal gods, 
may be alluded to in the line, 

“ Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia reena:” 

which supposes happiness once more to flourish on earth under the reign of Astrea, and when Saturn should again 
sway the sceptre over the golden plains of Italy ; which country, at the time that the poet imagined to himself the com- 
mencement of a brighter era, was torn by civil wars and dissensions. The assumption of several divines, whose names 
for their own credit we shall pass over in silence, that “Virgo” means in the verse alluded to the Virgin Mary, is 
so unreasonable that it does not deserve refutation. It may be not unworthy of notice, that a philosopher so justly 
esteemed and venerated as was Pythagoras, believed in the metempsychosis ; and laying claim to the possession of 
an extraordinary memory, asserted that he recollected having been Euphorbus, and that he was killed at the time of the 
Trojan war. The doctrine of the metempsychosis is a refinement on the creed of the ancient Egyptians respecting the 
transmigration of the soul, but it is founded on the assumption, that the soul of man can only migrate into another 
rational body. Pythagoras however strictly forbade his followers to kill or to eat animals; and he only did not for- 
bid cruelty to them, because he thought it was unnecessary for Philosophy to teach what all ought to know, and that 
it would be vain for him to attempt to instil a principle, where Nature herself had been faulty in her work, and the 
soil was evil and corrupt. As the doctrine of the metempsychosis seems to have originated in the Egyptian notion 
of the soul's transmigration after death into some other body, so in its turn it appears to have given rise to the more 
mystical idea of an incarnation, or of God becoming man, or rather being born in a human form. The many incar- 
nations of Vishnou, who dignified even other species of animals by becoming one of them, is still the theme of 
exultation among Hindoo poets and philosophers. But Thibet presents a moral and political phenomenon of a nature 
truly extraordinary. That ecclesiastical state has been governed for perhaps nearly eighteen centuries by the deity 
supposed to animate, some say to become incarnate in, the body of an infant, and to inspire the person invested 
with the dignity of Grand Lama. It was either during Lord Minto’s or the Marquis of Wellesley’s government 
in India, that an embassy was sent to the Teshoo Lama, an interesting account of which will be found in the 
Annual Register. The Lama happened at that time to be an infant in arms; and the envoy, under these peculiar 
circumstances, felt at a loss respecting the forms to be observed on the ceremony of his introduction, and was at last 
ushered into the presence of a pleasing and intelligent-looking infant, quite too young to be able to speak, before 
whom, nevertheless, many Tartar Khans were prostrating themselves and doing homage; when the father of the Lama 
observed to the representative of the Governor-General of India, that although he was too young to speak, it would 
be wrong to suppose that reason. in him had not arrived at maturity. 

It certainly would be interesting to trace the history of Nestorianism in the East, since some learned men have 
supposed that the Nestorians in early ages penetrated to Thibet, and proselyted to their faith an extensive territory. 

NO 4S: 507 

it is probable that many superstitions have, in the course of revolving ages, passed from Asia to America ; but how 
truly surprising it is to find that the Mexicans, who seem to have been quite unacquainted with the doctrines of the 
migration of the soul and the metempsychosis, should have believed in the incarnation of the only son of their supreme 
god Tonacatecutle. For Mexican mythology speaking of no other son of that god except Quecalcoatle, who was born 
of Chimalman the virgin of Tula, without connection with man, and by his breath alone, (by which may be signified 
his word or his will, announced to Chimalman by word of mouth of the celestial messenger, whom he dispatched to 
inform her that she should conceive a son,) it must be presumed that Quecalcoatle was his only son. Other argu- 
ments might be adduced to show, that the Mexicans believed that Quecalcoatle was both god and man, that he had 
previously to his incarnation existed from all eternity, that he had created both the world and man, that he descended 
from heaven to reform the world by penance, that he was born with the perfect use of reason, that he preached a new 
law, and, being king of Tula, was crucified for the sins of mankind, as is obscurely insinuated by the interpreter of the 
Vatican Codex, plainly declared in the traditions of Yucatan, and mysteriously represented in the Mexican paintings. 
It would be a useless repetition of facts already stated in the preceding pages of the present volume, to undertake 
separately to prove all these points; and we shall confine ourselves in this place to the three first very important 
articles. The reflection must have suggested itself to those who have perused the New Testament, that Christ is as fre- 
quently distinguished there by the appellation of the Son of Man, as by that of the Son of God, in reference no doubt 
to his humanity, and to the famous prophecy contained in the ninth verse of the ninth chapter of Isaiah: “ For unto 

29 

us a child is born, unto us a son is given:” which Christians, on the authority of many passages in the four Gospels, 
apply to Christ, although the Jews sometimes interpret it of the Messiah, and sometimes of king Hezekiah. The 
Mexicans bestowed the appellation of Topiltzin on Quecalcoatle, the literal signification of which is ‘our son’ or ‘our 
child,’ that proper name being compounded of fo ‘our’, and pilizin, defined by Alonso de Molina in his rare and 
copious vocabulary of the Mexican and Spanish languages to be nifto 6 nifia, ‘a boy or a girl,’ and associated by him 
with the cognate terms of piltonth and piltzintia ; and it may not be unreasonably assumed, since analogies, which are 
numerous and not isolated, as their number increases increase also in their ratio of probability, not only that the Mex- 
icans were acquainted with Isaiah’s famous prophecy, but to mark their belief of the accomplishment of that prophecy 
in the person of Quecalcoatle, that they named him Topiltzin ; no less on account ot his having been born from a virgin 
of the daughters of men, than because another equally celebrated prediction of the same prophet declared, that he 
should receive a name from that very circumstance: “Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, Behold a 
virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.” And the proper name Topiltzin does in fact 
bear a signification corresponding, if not literally, yet entirely in substance with that of Immanuel: since ‘God with 
us, which is the interpretation of the Hebrew name, means God domiciliated amongst men; and the full force of the 
expression is preserved in the term Topiltzin, which might be interpreted the Son of Man, or God on a level with men f 
for the Mexicans believed that Quecalcoatle took human nature upon him, partaking of all the infirmities of man, and 
was not exempt from sorrow, pain, or death, and that he suffered voluntarily to atone for the sins of mankind. They 
also believed that he alone of all the gods had a human body, and was of a corporeal essence; a notion which we can 
only wonder whence it could have been derived. Las Casas and Torquemada both assert that Quecalcoatle had been 
in Yucatan; and there can be little doubt, when we reflect on the mysterious history of Bacab, that the Cross discovered 
by M. Dupaix in the ancient temple of Palenque was connected with the tradition of his crucifixion. The four female 
figures, each holding in her arms an infant, which adorn the walls of another temple in the immediate vicinity of that 
just mentioned, probably represent Chimalman and the infant Quecalcoatle; which the two units conspicuously sculp- 
tured on the body of the second infant, the constant concomitants of the cane which was his sign, seem further to indi- 
cate. Smoke may perhaps also be intended to be represented as proceeding from the left foot of the female figure in 
the same plate. The prophecies contained in the Old Testament relating to the Messiah being so frequently only 
obliquely alluded to in the New, and this class being extremely difficult to trace, we must leave to others the task of 
ascertaining whether the promise of the angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, as recorded in the thirty-fifth verse of the 
first chapter of Saint Luke,-—“ The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow 
thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God,’—be couched in the 
language of ancient prophecy; since, should this be the case, it is not improbable that the head of the dragon which 
forms the crest of three of the female figures, as it may also be presumed that it did of the fourth when entire, (if it be 

508 NOTES. 

not a symbol which Chimalman borrowed from her son’s zame,) was intended to denote that she had been overshadowed 
by the power of Huitzilopuchtli, whose device, as we are informed by Sahagun in the first chapter of the first book of 
his History of New Spain, was the head of a dragon. Representations of the female figures here referred to, as well 
as of the Cross, will be found in the fifth volume of the present work, Part III. of the Monuments of New Spain ; and 
we shall only further observe in reference to the Cross, that similar ornaments to those sculptured on its two arms de- 
corate the symbol borne aloft by the principal figure in the twenty-eighth plate of the same Part; before whom there 
is another figure in a kneeling attitude, which may suggest the idea of that symbol being intended to represent a 
cross, although nearly as unlike one as the devices, consisting of broken lines, with which the ancient Mexicans fre- 
quently decorated their shields, and as those painted on the earthenware vases discovered by Lieutenant Hardy 
among the ruins of Las Casas Grandes. 

It is singular that the Mexicans should have viewed Quecalcoatle in the light of a god and of a man, of a father 
and of a son, of the creator of the world and of him by whom the world was finally doomed to be destroyed, since it 
is hard to reconcile such conflicting notions with each other. That they did so, will be apparent from the following 
passages extracted from the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, which contains the prayers addressed by 
by the ancient Mexicans to their gods, as well as from what has already been said of the probable derivation of the 
proper name Topiltzin, and from what remains to be said of the belief which the Mexicans entertained, that the world 
would be destroyed when the Sun should be im the sign of four earthquakes. Quecalcoatle is emphatically styled 
Father in the exhortation which the Mexican priest addresses to the penitent who had come to make confession to him 
of his sins, whose entire speech will be found at page 359 of the fifth volume of the Antiquities of Mexico. “Quando 
fuistes criado y enviado 4 este mundo, limpio y bueno fuistes criado y enviado, y tu padre y madre Quetzalcoatl te 
form6d como una piedra preciosa y como una joya rica de oro muy resplandeciente y muy pulida; pero por tu propia 
voluntad y albedrio te ensuciastes, y te amancillastes, y te revolcastes en el estiercol y en las suciedades de los 
pecados y maldades que cometistes, y ahora has confesado.” “When thou wert created and sent into this world, thou 
wast created and sent into it pure and good, and thy father and mother Quetzalcoatl formed thee like a precious 
stone, like a rich jewel of gold, beautiful to look upon and well pclished; but thou by thine own free will and choice 
hast defiled and polluted thyself, and hast wallowed in the mire of the sins and iniquities which thou hast committed, 
and now thou hast confessed.” From this passage it is plain that the doctrine of free will, as-cpposed to absolute 
predestination, was a fundamental article of the religion of the Mexicans, although in some degree qualified by 
their notions on judicial astrology, as we learn from the following passage of the same chapter of the sixth book of 
Sahagun; where the Mexican priest or confessor, supplicating Tezcatlipoca on the behalf of the repentant sinner, 
addresses him in the following language : “En presencia de Vuestra Magestad hablo, que sabe todas las cosas, y 
sabeis que este pobre no pecé con libertad entera del libre albedrio, porque fué ayudado é inclinado de la condicion 
natural del signo en que nacid.” “I am speaking in the presence of Your Majesty who knowest all things, and 
knowest that this miserable man did not sin with the entire liberty of his free will, since he partly acted under the 
influence of the sign in which he was born.” The notion of original sin, in the acceptation in which the term is 
understood by Christians, which was totally different both in cause and quality from the frailty of human nature, 
which the ancient philosophers were all prepared to admit, was quite familiar to the minds of the Mexicans, who 
ascribed it to Suchiquecal, and to her disobedience in plucking fruit in the garden of ‘Tamoanchan; and hence a 
difficulty may arise in understanding the construction which ought to be put on that part of the speech of the 
Mexican priest to the penitent, where he says to him “when thou wert created and sent into this world, thou 
wast created and sent into it pure and good ;” which seems merely to allude to what is said in the first chapter of 
Genesis, of man having been created in the image of God, and of the works of his hands being all good, and to 
contain no denial of the doctrine of original sin, the Mexican belief in which is unequivocally declared in the 
thirty-second and thirty-seventh chapters of the same book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, in the speeches 
which the midwife there addresses to the infant on baptizing it and washing it with water. That the Mexicans knew 
that man had been created in the image of God, may be inferred from the following passage of Sahagun, which de- 
serves to be considered in connection with the Peruvian tradition of men having been created by Viracocha after the 
likeness of images made by himself, which is perhaps after all only a sample of the artifices to which the Spanish 
clergy had recourse in order to consign to oblivion all knowledge of the ancient religion of Peru; which could more 

Be 

NOTES. 509 

easily and with less suspicion be effected by substituting fables of their own for those of the Peruvians, and modify- 
ing the latter as the occasion required, so as to impose even on the recollection of the Indians, than by a rude attempt 
to banish them wholly from their memory. “Tendras cargo de ofrecer papel y copal, y tambien de hacer limosnas 4 
los hambrientos menesterosos, que no tienen que coman, ni que beban, ni que vistan, aunque sepas quitartelo de tu 
comida para se lo dar; y procura de vestir 4 los que andan desnudos, y desarropados; mira que su carne és como la 
tuya, y que son hombres como tu; mayormente 4 los enfermos porque son imagen de Dios.” These words are addressed 
by the Mexican priest to the penitent whose confession he has just received; and since he enjoins him ¢o reconcile 
himself to Tezcatlipoca by charity to the poor, as well as by the performance of penance, it may be inferred that the 
Mexicans believed that charity diminished sin, which is also a Roman Catholic doctrine, and is noted as such in 
page 415 of the present volume; in reference to which particular passage it may be observed, that to offer charitable 
donations at the Temple was a Jewish custom, as we learn from the account of the widow’s mite contained in the 
twelfth chapter of Saint Mark. The subjoined is the translation of the above Spanish passage: “ You must make an 
offering of paper and copal, and likewise give alms to the hungry and needy, who have neither meat nor drink, nor 
wherewithal to clothe themselves, and this you must do although you deprive yourself of food to give it to them; do 
your best also to clothe the ragged and naked ; consider that their flesh is as thine, and that they are men like thee, 
and especially the sick, for they are the image of God.” It is surprising to what fanciful theories the twenty-ninth 
verse of the first chapter of Genesis, ‘So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, 
male and female created he them,” has given rise among the Jewish Cabalists*. The transition from the singular to 
the plural in the above-mentioned verse, and the mention of the subsequent creation of Eve from Adam’s rib in the 
twenty-second verse of the following chapter of Genesis, has greatly perplexed both them and the Rabbis, who have 
vainly taken counsel together to reconcile the former with the latter verse, deducing conclusions which have excited 
the laughter of many Christian commentators; which at least ought to be tempered, when it is recollected that the 
transition from the singular to the plural, in the twenty-sixth verse of the former of these chapters, has been con- 
sidered by themselves a departure from the ordinary rules of grammar, of such importance and so full of meaning, 
as to be appealed to by them as an argument in proof of the Trinity. It is a remark of Selden, the truth of 
which the rites of the Mexicans and Peruvians abundantly testify, ‘“‘ Neque novum est ut impietatis initia ex 
Sacris Literis seu cabala sacra (quee idem sunt) depromantur; quod znumeris illustrari posset et firmari exemplis :” 
and he afterwards, as it were in illustration of this passage, in his prolegomena, when discussing the nature of the 
Hebrew Teraphim in the second chapter of his Treatise De Diis Syris, refers the origin of that idolatry to the twenty- 
seventh verse of the first chapter of Genesis, as must reasonably be inferred from the association of ideas which his 
quotation from Hermes is necessarily calculated to produce in the minds of his readers. “Propius autem ad rw 
Teraphim naturam accedunt imagines, que non solum a siderum positura, verum etiam azo twv zpoceyyioewy dee- 
moniorum, et oracula reddere et mala depellere simul putabantur: zpoceyyiweg vero momoacPa dicuntur deemones 
Michaéli Psello, cum invocati simulacra sibi dicata ingrediantur. Hujusmodi statuarum vetustissima memoria. 
Hermes ille Ter Maximus in Asclepio: ‘Ita humanitas semper memor humane nature et originis sue in illd divini- 
tatis imitatione perseverat, ut sicut Pater ac Dominus, ut sui similes essent, deos fecit zternos ; ita humanitas deos suos 
ee sui vultus similitudine figuraret. Ascu. Statuas dicis, O Trismegiste? Tris. Statuas, O Asclepi; videsne quatenus 
tuipse diffidas? Statuas animatas sensu et spiritu plenas, tantaque facientes et talia. Statuas futurorum prescias, ea 
quze forté omnis vates ignoret, in multis et variis rebus predicentes, imbecillitates hominibus facientes, easque cu- 
rantes, tristitiam leetitiamque pro meritis.’” Selden proceeds to observe in a succeeding passage of the same chapter, 
“Plurima occurrunt (i. e. angelorum nomina) in apocryphis Enochi, que ab illustrissimo Scaligero in Notis Euse- 
bianis transcripta. Kexpupperny etiam elowAoAaTpetav vocat Synodus Laodicensis ayyeAous ovomaew Kar ouvakerc Tole, 
quemadmodum legimus Codice Canonum cap. cxxxix. Et sub persona impiorum, qui Salvatoris Jesu miracula 
calumniabantur, Arnobius adversus Gentes, lib. 1. ‘Magus fuit, clandestinis artibus omnia illa perfecit. Higyp- 

tiorum ex adytis angelorum potentium nomina et remotas furatus est disciplinas’. Quin nomina angelorum 

* A name borrowed from the term Cabala, which is thus defined by Selden in the prolegomena to his treatise concerning the Gods 

of the Syrians; “ Quicquid arcano volumine condidit postea Moses, id Cabala antea erat, sive naxpomepadoroy, quod velut jus sacrum 
et hereditarium ad posteros continua generationum serie transmittebatur’. 

(60) 

510 NOTES. 

observare yurejurando obstringebantur Essenorum secte olim initiati, uti scriptum reliquit Flavius Josephus ; quos 
perstrinxit forsan D. Paulus ad Coloss. cap. 11. comm. 18. ubi wepe Opnoxeag tw ayyeAwy agit.” It is certainly sur- 
prising to find that every thing that was dreadful in the religious rites. of the New World when first discovered 
by the Spaniards, or immane, if we may be permitted to use a Latin epithet which is still more expressive, was 
well known to the Jews of the Old Continent: the writings of the Rabbis, where the Bible is silent, prove this 
fact, and are evidence from which there can be no appeal: but will the force of prejudice, the particular views or 
private interests of any order of men, or the egotism of the Jews, maintain that it was the prerogative of the 
Hebrew nation, as being the chosen people of God, to know these things? and to teach them to others would be the 
sure and bitter retort of their enemies; and that inspiration—but here the divine altars would burn pale, and religion 
would avert and veil her face. Selden, in a preceding page, notices the curious opinions entertained by some cele- 
brated Rabbis respecting the Teraphim, or idols worshiped by Laban, and which were stolen from him by his 
daughter Rachel, the wife of the patriarch Jacob: “ Utrum autem ut dii colerentur Teraphim, utcunque dii dicti, 
an vero divinationis tantum instrumenta haberentur, vetus est inter magistros controversia, quod liquet ex Rabbi 
Simeone Ben Joachi in libro Zohar, fol. 94. b. ad Genesin. Modum autem feralem quo fiebant, ex Capitulis Rabbi 
Eleazaris adfert Elias in Thisbi. ‘Mactabant,’ ait ille, ‘hominem primogenitum, cujus caput torquendo prescin- 
debant (ita transtulit P. Faginus; Eliz autem, seu Eleazaris, verba sunt 1wN7 MN ppd, id est, wngue secabant, aut 
manibus discerpebant, caput ejus. Nam pox hoc sensu usurpatur Levit. i. com. 15, et v. com. 8. ubi de avibus 
offerendis agit Moses, quorum capita hoc ritu divellenda): caput vero abscissum sale et aromatibus condiebant, 
scribebantque super laminam auream nomen spiritus immundi, qua supposita capiti ejus, ponebant illud in pariete, 
incendentes coram eo candelas, et adorantes coram eo. Atgue cum istiusmodi loquutus fuit Laban’. Eadem feré para- 
phrastes ille qui Ben Uzielis nomen in Pentateuchum falsd gerit: sed suam illi prestent fidem.” “Whether the 
Teraphim were worshiped as gods, although called gods, or whether they were simply instruments of divination, 
has been the subject of ancient controversy amongst the Masters, as may be proved out of Rabbi Simeon Ben Joachi, 
in the book Zohar, page 94. b. on Genesis. Elias declares in Thisbi, on the authority of Rabbi Eleazar, the dire 
method of fabricating them. They killed, says he, some first-born of man, whose head they cut off, twisting it when 
performing that act (so P. Faginus translates the passage, but the words of Elias or Eleazar are wN7 mx ppd, which 
signify divided with the nails, or tore off the head from the body with the hands; for p70 is used in this sense in the 
fifteenth verse of the first chapter of Leviticus, and in the eighth verse of the fifth chapter, in which Moses directs 
how birds should be offered, the heads of which were to be torn off in this manner): and they preserved the head, 
after it had been cut off, with salt and spices, and wrote upon a plate of gold the name of some unclean spirit, which 
they put under the head and placed it in a wall, burning torches before it and performing adoration. And this 
was the sort of instrument of divination which Laban consulted. That paraphraser of the Pentateuch, who goes by 
the false name of Ben Uziel, writes nearly to the same effect; but let those who please give credit to him.” Those 
who peruse the curious passage which has been just quoted from Selden, whose veracity was certainly as great 
as his learning, must confess, that if the horrid superstition of immolating human victims and converting their em- 
balmed heads into Teraphim was pagan, at least some notions appear to have been borrowed from the Hebrew 
ritual; for example, attaching superior importance to the first-born of man was eminently characteristic of the Jews, 
and grounded amongst them on the declaration contained in the thirteenth chapter of Exodus, that all the first- 
born of man should be set apart unto God; and the mode of twisting or tearing off the head from the body of the 
victim was such as was prescribed by Moses in Leviticus in the case of birds, in order not to cause death by strangu- 
lation, and similar to that practised by the Mexicans in their daily sacrifices, not of young pigeons, but of quails, as we 
learn from Sahagun in the Appendix to the second book of his History of New Spain, page 100 of the seventh volume 
of the present work, where the phrase “arrancandolas la cabeza,” tearing off their heads, occurs; but if the Rabbis 
choose to. understand pp in the sense of dividing with the nails, it cannot apply to the separation of the head from 
the body, but must merely signify the division of the skin of the neck of the victim; but whether such a thought 
could ever have been likely to have associated itself in the mind of a Jew with religion, we leave to an expert 
Hebrew Mohel to decide. The Jews, ever since the age of Tobit, the sixth chapter of whose book may be found in 
many editions of the Old Testament, have believed in unclean spirits, and beginning with Asmodeus have succeeded 
in forming rather an extensive nomenclature of them; they have likewise not scrupled to make use of the divine 

NO OUTLETS. 511 

name, or the tetragram, in magical incantations; and the thirty-sixth verse of the twenty-eighth chapter of Exodus 
proves, that the custom of writing upon a plate of gold existed in very early ages among them. Maimonides likewise 
forbade his countrymen to seek divination from skulls, knowing that the twenty-eighth chapter of the first book of 
Samuel disposed them to believe in necromancy. It is singular that M. Dupaix should have discovered circular 
niches in the walls of the palace of Mitlan, described at page 449, which, according to Indian tradition, were made 
for the reception of askull; he also found skulls placed in separate bowls or chargers, in excavating the interior 
of another ancient monument in the vicinity of Zachila; but it would perhaps be setting no reasonable limits to 
conjecture, to suppose that this mode of interment might have been to commemorate the death of John the Baptist, 
although Europe has witnessed far greater extravagancies in the posthumous honours decreed to saints, who, like 
Saint Ignatius Loyola, deserved no other honour than that of martyrdom. The fiftieth plate of the second Part 
of the Monuments of New Spain contains a representation of one of the wooden skulls, which was placed along with 
the real one in the same dish, as a substitute perhaps for the latter when it should have mouldered away through 
time. Selden, in illustration of the hypothesis unhesitatingly advanced in the third chapter of the prolegomena to 
his treatise De Diis Syris, “ neque novum est ut impietatis initia ex Sacris Literis seu cabala sacra (que idem sunt) 
depromantur,” which partakes rather of the nature of an axiom than of a postulate, and which if true of the Jews, the 
Egyptians, and the Persians, it certainly will not be making a camel pass through the eye of a needle to apply to the 
Mexicans, proceeds to remark: “ Mgyptiis quotannis in Judaico Paschate greges et arbores, minio, velut alexeterio, 
illinere solenne erat. Id ex depravato traditionis sacree de Ebreeorum superliminaribus sanguine illitis intellectu 
manavit; quod fusius narrat Epiphanius in Heresi Nazareenorum. Perperam accepta Mosis de neo serpente historia, 
ut thymiamata ei incenderentur, effecit. Thoth et Bau in Phcenicum sanctuariis ex 72) WN in Geneseos initio petunt 
docti. Id quod toties occurrit, 0 Seog “ABpaap, 0 Seog ‘Icaax, o Seoc laxwB, jamdiu est cum in carmina transmigravit 
magica; atque ita est sumptum, ut nec Abraham, nec Isaac, nec Jacob alius quam Deus ob amphiboliam censeretur; 
de qua re, si placet, consulendus Origenes adversus Celsum, lib. iv. et ejusmodi alia habet lib. i. et v. uti etiam Tral- 
lianus medicus, lib. xi. Quin et umbre in horologio Achazi regis mystica erat Persarum sacerdotibus memoria in 
Mithree tprrAaciov sacris, qua Mynuoovva nuncupabant, si autori fides. Is est Dionysius Areopagita dictus, qui 
Epist. vii.ad Polycarpum verba faciens de recessu illo, ‘ Touro,’ inquit ‘rate Mepowy icparixaig eupeperat pnpace, Kar eioert 
Mayou ra Mynpocuva rov TertAaciov Mifpou zedovsw. Ad quem locum Georgius Pachymerius, ‘Perse’, inquit, ‘ro Tap- 
exrapa TnG Nmepag exewne Sia THE TeA|eTHG Tor Mynuoovywy Tov TervTAacL0ov onpawovow, hoc est, extensionem illius diei in 
sacris que mnemosyna, seu memoria, Triplasii, id est, triplicis Mithree appellantur, denotant: ita et Maximus 
Scholiastes. Cum enim priscis xii. essent artificialis, quem vocant, diei hore, quas ineequales seu planetarias nuncu- 
pant, et per decem gradus rediret in ortum umbra, supputant Dionysii sequaces (qui nec pauci sunt), quasi sol, 
superatis jam decem diei horis seu horologii gradibus, par remensus spatium horizontem revisisset, dein vero abso- 
lutum xii. horis diem ita terminasset, ut continua illa lux xxxii. horis inequalibus constaret, que synecdochicws 
triduum, horas nempe bis xii. et viii. conficiunt; unde tprmdaciov nomen aiunt fictum. Czterum suam hic liberent 
fidem, nec in Greculorum verba juravi. Alia longé erant triplicis Mithre mysteria, et, si fas sit dicere, sanctiora 
quam quee hujusmodi peterent exordia; et sacram multo aliter merito intelligunt veteres historiam. Attamen non 
piguit et hee adjecisse, ut id genus errorum origines olim agnitas amplius patefaceremus; quas co libentius, etiam 
luculentius, memorare visum est, quod non alia est ansa tam frequenter arrepta, unde impia in woAvJew wavy sacra 
conflarentur ; teste Justino in Apologia imep Xpioriaywv ii. ubi Bacchi fabulas, Bellerophontis item, Herculis, Aiscu- 
lapii, totius ferme gentium theologie, ex depravato Sacrarum Literarum sensu elicitas et vulgo obtrusas esse docere 
conatur; uti et alii patrum alibi. Unde nam Jupiter Sabazius? nonne a Jehovah Sabaoth, quod inculcante szepius 
Jeremia proprium Dei Opt. Max. nomen?” Undoubtedly if those Fathers to whom Selden here alludes still flourished, 
they would, after pronouncing the opinion which they have done on Jupiter Sabazius, feel no small embarrassment at 
being requested to read the sixth book of Sahagun, and to return a categorical answer to the question, “Unde Tezca- 
tlipoca? nonne & monte Sina?” And, considering the many other questions to which this first one might lead, 
how often, blaming themselves for the unnecessary concession of a principle, would they not feel inclined to exclaim 
“sed revocare gradum,—hoe opus hic labor est”! The Deity is said in so many passages of the Old Testament to be 
jealous of his honour, and to work miracles for his name’s sake, that many persons may feel it hard to reconcile that 
professed jealousy with the desecration of his name so common among the Jews, the profanation of his temple, and 

512 NOTES. 

the human sacrifices which they offered to him; the corollary of all which is, that though Abraham received the 
covenant from God, and Moses promulgated his laws to the Jews, still Judaism was never under such special divine 
protection as to prevent its degenerating into most abominable rites in the Old World, nor consequently in the New; 
and therefore let it not be maintained that Jehovah could not have been worshiped under the name of Tezcatlipoca 
by the Mexicans, and human sacrifices offered to him in New Spain as in Palestine of old; but even on the assumption 
that this was the case, let not God impiously be made accountable for the crimes which men may haye committed in 
his name, for the cruelty or absurdity of the religious rites by which they may have sought to honour him, or for the 
fables which they may have ridiculously invented of him. If some of those misguided men, commonly named the 
Fathers, whose writings were revered in the ages which they were so instrumental in rendering dark, but which (such 
is the vicissitude of all earthly things,) are little read or esteemed in the present day, were living, they would find 
that Christianity itself might be overthrown by the same arguments, if admitted to be valid now, which they em- 
ployed so successfully nearly two thousand years ago against Paganism, which all resolve themselves into reasoning 
against the religions of antiquity from their abuses. Those reckless sophists scrupled not to hold up to ridicule every 
thing that preceding ages of mankind had held most sacred, they invented new crimes, but did not ameliorate their 
own age, they blasphemed the First Cause at the very time that they were pretending to teach the adoration which it 
was proper to pay to the God of the universe; for who will venture to maintain, that under the name of Jupiter the 
ancients did not worship the First Cause, who was, and is, and ever will be, as Saint Paul rightly declares, the unknown 
God ; for it is a vain boast of the Jews to say that the world knew more of God when it became acquainted with the 
history of their ancestors’ flight from Egypt, and their passage across the Red Sea, than it did before, since all that 
man can know of the Deity is, that he is excellent and incomprehensible: to write, therefore, in the style of invective 
and obscenity, which Clemens Alexandrinus has employed to destroy the reverence of the Greeks and Romans for 
Jupiter, was to blaspheme the First Cause. But if the last-mentioned Father had known that mm, Yaoua, would 
be adored by the Mexicans not under the title of Yao the God of Sabbath, but of Yao the terrible God and the God 
of battles ; and that the sacrifices of the old law, the seal of which was circumcision, which would still be retained 
amongst the Indians, would degenerate into the immolation of human victims at his shrine ; he, perhaps, would have 
triumphed less at finding that Jupiter (as the poets feigned) had sometimes forsaken the seats divine, confessing the 
power of mortal charms, and have thought it less advisable to feign thereat holy horror, when it would be so neces- 
sary to reserve the feeling for another and a better occasion which the future had in store for him. The Jews are 
accused of having corrupted the Old Testament with their traditions; and if this charge has been truly brought 
against them in the Old Continent, is it at all unreasonable to suppose that in the New they may not have profaned 
it with their paintings? and, indeed, the forty-eighth verse of the third chapter of the first book of Maccabees, which 
differs materially in the Roman edition from the passage as it is rendered in our English translation of the Bible, 
makes it very doubtful whether the Jews did not in early ages disfigure the Old Testament with frightful paintings 
of idols. The following is the verse alluded to: “‘xa é€ereracay ro (iBAtoy Tov vowov wept wy eEepevvey ra eOvy ra 
opowpata Twv eldwrwy avtwy:” “and they unfolded the book of the law (that they might know likewise) whence the 
heathen borrowed the patterns of their idols.” This is the probable signification of this very obscure passage, which 
is evidently elliptical, because ro i8dt0v cannot be the antecedent to wepc wv, and the ellipsis is here supplied in a 
manner which accords with the idiom of the Greek language. It may be proper to observe, that in the Spanish 
edition of the book of Maccabees the following material variation occurs in the reading of the passage in question : 
“ é£epevvwn ra On Tov emrypapew ér avrwy ra ouowwpara :” from which it would appear that the Gentiles took the pains 
of painting their idols on the leaves of the Pentateuch, with the intention, according to commentators, of shocking the 
pure eyes of the Jews with the contemplation of their law and idols at the same time. But where is the necessity of 
supposing that the Gentiles painted idols on the leaves of a book which contained the word of God, when the Jews 
covered the walls of the temples, in which they believed that he was continually present, with paintings of the most 
deformed idols that imagination can conceive, as Ezekiel himself informs us in the eighth chapter of his book of 
prophecies? The passage which has been already quoted from the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, 
proves that the Mexicans regarded Quecalcoatle in the light of a father; in the following, which is taken from 
the thirty-fourth chapter of the same book, it will be seen that they considered and named him their son: “O nieto. 
mio y sefior nuestro, persona de gran valor, y de gran precio, y de gran estima, O piedra preciosa, O esmeralda, O 

N JO 7D Hes. 513 

zafiro, O plumage rico, cabello y uha de alta generacion, seais muy bien venido, seais muy bien llegado; habeis sido 
formado en lugar mas alto donde habitan los dos supremos Dioses, que es sobre los nueve cielos; hanos hecho de 
vaciadizo como una cuenta de oro; hanos agujerado como una piedra preciosa muy rica y muy labrada vuestro padre 
y vuestra madre, el gran Sefor y la gran Sefiora, y juntamente con ellos nuestro hijo Quetzalcoatl.” “ O my son and 
lord, thou who art dear, estimable, and highly prized by us, precious gem, emerald, and saphire, rich feather, hair 
and nail of noble sires, welcome is your arrival amongst us, welcome hast thou come; thou wert formed in the highest 
heaven, which is above the mime heavens, where reside the two supreme Gods; they have fashioned thee like a bead 
of gold; thy father and mother, the great Lord and the great Lady, and together with them our son Quetzalcoatl, 
have pierced you like some rich and costly and highly polished jewel.” The Mexican lords were accustomed to 
send formal complimentary messages to each other on the occasion of the birth of an elder son, and an old man 
addressed a salutation in their name to the mother and the infant in the manner thus briefly described by Sahagun 
at the commencement of the chapter above referred to: “ Despues que ya se sabe que la Sefiora N. parid, luego los 
amigos y parientes de los pueblos circunstantes yan 4 visitar al nifio, y 4 la madre, y 4 los parientes; y primera- 
mente en la visitacion hablaban al nifio recien nacido, y para saludarle descubrele la madre, paraque esté patente al 
que le habla.” “As soon as it was known that a lady of distinction had given birth to.a child, the relations and 
friends of the family, who resided in towns in the neighbourhood, came to visit the infant, the mother, and her re- 
lations, and they paid the first salutation to the new-born infant, whom the mother uncovered that it might be seen by 
him who addressed it.” The custom of presenting gifts on such occasions is noticed by Sahagun in the thirty-fifth 
chapter of the same book, which deserves to be considered in connection with what is said in the second chapter of 
Saint Matthew of the wise men of the East following the star “till it came and stood over where the young child 
was,” since this custom was probably of Hebrew origin. ‘“ And when they were come into the house, they saw the 
young child with Mary his mother, and fell down and worshiped him; and when they had opened their treasures, 
they presented unto him gifts of gold and frankincense and myrrh.” “ En este negocio de saludar 4 los niflos que 
estan en la cuna y 4 sus padres, no tienen medida, porque dura diez y veinte dias el saludarlos, quando los que son 
saludados son principales y Seftores. Los que saludan dan los presentes de mantas ricas, y si la criatura és hembra, 
dan naoas y vipiles hasta veinte 6 cuarenta; y 4 esto llaman Yxquemitl, que quiere decir ropa para envolver al nifio. 
Entre los que no son Sefiores sino gente honrada 6 rica, llevan una manta y un maxtli, 6 una naoa y un vipil si és 
hembra la que nacid ; y los que son de baja suerte usan hacer esta salutacion presentando comida y bebida.” “The 
time employed in the single formality of saluting the infant in the cradle and its parents, exceeded all reasonable 
bounds, for the ceremony of the salutation lasted ten or twenty days, when those who were saluted were princes and 
lords. Those who came to salute presented gifts at the same time, consisting of rich mantles, and, if the infant was a 
girl, they presented as many as twenty or forty naoas and vipiles (under and upper garments) ; they named these gifts 
Yxquemitl, which signifies clothes to wrap the infant in. Those who were not lords, but rich and respectable 
persons, gave a single mantle and maxtle, or one naoa and vipil, if the infant was a girl; and the lower classes of the 
people performed the salutation by merely presenting provisions.” In the following passage of the thirty-fifth chapter 
of the above-mentioned book, children, which are elsewhere named the gift of Tezcatlipoca, appear to be ascribed to 
Quecalcoatle: “O Sefora nieta é hija mia, paloma y doncella muy tierna y muy amada, como estais? que sentis ? 
gran fatiga habeis padecido, gran trabajo habeis tenido; habeis os igualado, habeis imitado 4 vuestra madre la 
Sefiora Cioacatlquilahtli: muchas gracias haremos 4 nuestro Seftor al presente, porque ha tenido por bien que viniese 
y saliese 4 luz esta preciosa piedra y este rico Quetzatl, llegado a la ufta y cabello de nuestros Sefores que ya falle- 
cieron, que ya se fueron. Brotado ha, y florecido ha su planta y generacion de los Sefores, Consules, y Reyes; salido 
ha, manifestadose ha la espina de maguey y la caia de humo, la qual dejaron plantada profundamente nuestros 
Sefiores y Reyes pasados que fueron famosos y valerosos ; de vos, Sefiora, ha cogido una piedra preciosa; de vos ha 
tomado un plumage rico nuestro hijo Quetzalcoatl. Sea nuestro Sefior alabado, porque con prosperidad aparté de vos 
el peligro y la batalla con que peleastes contra la muerte en el parto; por ventura os sobrepujaré en dias el nifio 
recien nacido ; por ventura sera la voluntad de nuestro Sefior que viva, 6 por ventura morira el primero ; por ventura 
tierno como esta, hara pedazos el Sefor del mundo 4 esta piedra preciosa, 4 este sartal de piedras preciosas; por ven- 
tura nos le vendra 4 tomar y llevar el que le crid; por ventura pasara de repente delante los ojos de su reino 6 
Sefiorio, y nos dejara como burlados por nuestros pecados, que no le merecemos gozar. O! hagase la voluntad de 

(6r) 

514 NOTES. 

nuestro Sefior ; haga él lo que fuere servido; pongamos en él toda nuestra esperanza.” “O Lady, who art dear to 
me as my daughter or grandaughter, I am solicitous to be informed of your health; you have endured a long and 
severe trial, you have rivalled, you have imitated your mother the goddess Cioacatlquilahtli ; many thanks have we 
now to return to our Lord, because he has vouchsafed to send us this precious gem, this rich Quetzatl which has 
come to light, the image, hair, and nail of our Lords who are dead, who have long since been no more. The stock 
and scion of our Lords, Consuls, and Kings has budded, has bloomed; the thorn of the aloe and the odoriferous 
cane, which our Lords and departed Kings, who were valiant and renowned, planted deep in the earth, has sprung up, 
has appeared ; from you, Lady, our son Quetzalcoatl has received a precious gem, from you he has obtained a rich 
feather. May our Lord be praised, since he has happily preserved you from danger, and from the battle which you 
fought with death at the time of delivery; perhaps the days of the infant to which you have just given birth will 
outnumber yours; perhaps it will be the will of our Lord that he shall live, or perhaps he will die the first; perhaps, 
tender as he is, the Lord of the universe will break into atoms this precious gem, this chain of costly jewels ; perhaps 
he who made him will come and take him from us unto himself; perhaps he will pass him momentarily before the 
eyes of his kingdom and state, and deprive us of him, turning us into mockery on account of our sins, because we are 
unworthy of enjoying him. O! let the will of our Lord be done; let him do what seemeth good unto him; in him 
let us place all our hope.” It is evident from the concluding portion of this salutation, that the Mexican religion 
enjoined resignation and submission to the divine decrees, and hope in God, which after all is not an article con- 
fined to any particular creed, but a consolation that was poured into the cup of misfortune when first presented to 
man to taste, which if religion inculcates, reason nevertheless teaches without the aid of inspiration. We cannot 
omit carefully to point out here the phrase “your mother the goddess Cioacatlquilahtli,” since it is perfectly analo- 
gous to that of our mother Eve; Cioacatlquilahtli being the Eve of the New World, who, as the Mexicans believed, 
brought sin into the world, and entazled death on her posterity, as is distinctly stated in the thirty-third chapter of the 
sixth book of Sahagun. This goddess is more frequently named simply Cioacoatl or Quilahtli, she is also named 
Suchiquecal or Xochiquecal, and in the same manner as the first name seems to allude to her temptation by the 
serpent, so the last seems to refer to her having plucked the forbidden fruit, or the roses, in Xochitlicacan or the 
garden of Eden. There is also something rather equivocal in the allusion contained in the words “the stock and 
scion of our Lords, Consuls, and Kings:” the Hebrew patriarchs, judges, and kings may by possibility be here 
referred to, whose fame the Jews would speedily have spread abroad on their arrival in America. Having elsewhere 
made the observation that the Mexicans resembled the Jews in their frequent use of the same metaphors, of which 
the entire of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain furnishes abundant proof, we shall here remark that 
the ‘hair and nail of their forefathers’, under which simile the Mexicans represented posterity, is very like the 
Hebrew metaphor of ‘flesh of flesh’ and ‘bone of bone’, which the Jews applied to their near relations and descend- 
ants, as we learn from the fourteenth verse of the twenty-ninth chapter of Genesis, where Laban addressing Jacob 
says, “Surely thou art my bone and my flesh.”. The expression “cortados de vuestros entrahas y de vuestros lomos,” 
which is applied to children in the twenty-fifth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun, is in the pure Hebrew idiom, and 
might almost have been borrowed from the Psalms. Scripture phraseology, likewise, employing the latter term ‘loins’ 
in the famous prophecy relating to the birth of the Messiah, who was to be of the seed of David, it is probable that 
the Jews would have quickly incorporated that metaphor into the Mexican language. In the following passage of the 
thirty-third chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun, children, who are elsewhere named the gift of Tezcatlipoca, 
appear to be ascribed to Quecalcoatle. _‘ Aqui en vuestra presencia ha nacido la criatura de nuestro Sefior, que es 
como una piedra preciosa y una pluma rica, en cuya cara habeis ya puesto vuestros ojos. Es por cierto este nifio 
como una planta que dejaron echada sus abuelos; és como un pedazo de piedra preciosa que fué cortada de los anti- 
guos, y ha muchos dias que murieron. Hanos la dado nuestro Seftor 4 esta criatura, pero no tenemos certidumbre de 
su vida, sino como de un suefio que sofamos. Yd vén nuestros ojos lo que ha nacido; és como una piedra preciosa 
y pluma rica, que yé ha brotado en nuestra presencia. Lo que puedo ahora afirmar és, que nuestro Seftor Quetzal- 
coat], gue es Criador, ha puesto una piedra preciosa y una pluma rica suya en este polvo y en esta casa pobre hecha 
de cafias ; y puedo tambien decir, que y4 ha adornado vuestra garganta, y vuestro collo, y vuestras manos, con un 
joyel de piedras preciosas y de plumas ricas, y que raramente se hallan ni aun 4 comprar: puedo decir, que ha 
puesto en vuestras manos un manojito de plumas ricas que se llaman Quetzalli, de perfecta hechura y de perfecto 

NOTES. 515 

color. Y en agradecimiento de tan gran beneficio, conviene que respondais con Jloros y con oraciones de votos 4 
nuestro Sefior que esta en todo lugar: suspirad y llorad hasta saber su voluntad, si por ventura vivird esta piedra 
preciosa y esta pluma rica, de que ahora hablamos como softando; la qual no sabemos si creceré y se criara, y si 
vivird alounos dias 6 afios, 6 si sera imdgen, y retrato, y honra, y fama de los viejos y viejas que ya pasaron, de los 
quales desciende: no sabemos si por ventura resucitard la suerte y levantara la cabeza de sus abuelos y abuelas.” 
“ Here, in your presence, the infant of our Lord is born, which is like unto a precious gem or a rich feather, on whose 
face you have already fixed your eyes. This child does indeed resemble a plant set by his sires; he is, as it were, the 
fragment of a jewel cut by the ancients, who are long since no more. Our Lord has given this infant to us, but we 
cannot tell whether he will live, or be like a vision seen in a dream. Our eyes now contemplate the infant which 
has been born; he resembles a precious stone and a rich feather, which has already displayed itself to our view. 
That which I am at liberty to declare is, that our Lord Quetzalcoatl, who is the Creator, has placed a precious stone 
and one of fis rich feathers in the dust before us, and in this poor and cane-built hut; and I may likewise add, that 
he has ornamented your neck and wrists with costly gems and rich feathers, such as are rarely to be met with and 
difficult to be obtained even for a price ; and, further, that he has placed in your hands a handful of rich feathers, 
called Quetzalli, of perfect form and perfect colour. In return for so signal an act of grace, it is right that you 
should address yourself with tears, prayers, and vows to our Lord who is everywhere; sigh and weep until you 
know whether it be his will that this precious stone and rich feather, of which we are speaking like persons in a 
dream, shall live: we know not whether he will grow and arrive at maturity, or whether his term of life will be a 
few days or years, or whether he will be the image, likeness, glory, and renown of the elders, who have already passed 
away, from whom he descends: we know not whether, peradventure, he will resuscitate the fortune and raise the head 
of his forefathers.” The concluding sentence of this passage is very remarkable: proceeding from the lips of the 
Mexicans, it is enigmatical and unintelligible; since, if we reflect for a moment that the Mexican empire was, ac- 
cording to the testimony of all historians, at the height of its greatness in the reign of Montezuma, the wish here 
expressed must appear alike devoid of meaning and of application, except Mexican history was something very dif- 
ferent from what historians have represented it to be: but in the mouth of a Jew the allusion would be plain, and 
would strikingly illustrate the truth of a remark previously made in page 385 of the present volume, that the 
Jews, wherever residing, and however well off in their temporal concerns, have been accustomed to indulge in a tone 
of complaint ever since the fall of their empire. It has also a tincture of Hebrew rhetoric, since children are in many 
parts of the Old Testament named the ornaments of their parents, and Christ is called in the New the image of his 
Father’s glory. He likewise compares himself, apostrophizing Jerusalem in the thirty-fourth verse of the thirteenth 
chapter of Saint Luke, to a hen ready to protect her brood beneath her wings; which metaphor, as well as the analo- 
gous simile of shading like a tree of spreading foliage, under which type Nebuchadnezzar beheld himself in the 
dream described in the fourth chapter of the book of Daniel, was very familiar to the ancient Mexicans, and was fre- 
quently employed by them in their prayers to the gods. Quecalcoatle is emphatically styled ‘ Maker and Creator’ in 
the following passage of the twenty-fifth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun, into which brief space many Jewish 
notions are crowded: “ Nieta mia muy amada, y preciosa como piedra preciosa, como chalchiuitl y zafiro, noble y 
generosa, es cierto ahora que nuestro Sefior se ha acordado de vos, el qual esté en toda parte y hace mercedes 4 
quien quiere: ya esta claro que estds prefiada, y que nuestro Seftor os quiere dar fruto de generacion, y os quiere 
poner un joyel y daros una pluma rica. Por ventura lo han merecido vuestros suspiros y vuestras lagrimas, y el 
entendimiento de vuestras manos delante de nuestro Seftor Dios, y las peticiones y oraciones que habeis ofrecido en 
presencia de nuestro Seftor, llamado Tiniebla y Aire en las vigilias de la media noche ; por ventura habeis velado ; 
por ventura habeis trabajado en barrer y ofrecer incienso en su presencia; por ventura por estas buenas obras ha 
hecho con vos misericordia nuestro Seftor ; por ventura esta fue la causa, porque se determiné en los cielos y en los 
infiernos, antes del principio del mundo, que se os hiciese esta merced; por ventura és verdad, que nuestro Seftor 
Quetzaleoatl, gue es Criador y Hacedor, os ha hecho esta merced ; por ventura lo ha determinado el que reside en el 
cielo, un hombre y una muger que se Ilaman Ometecutli y Omecioatl; por ventura esto est4 ya asi determinado. 
Mirad, hija mia, que no os ensoberbezcais, por la merced que os ha hecho.” “My dear daughter, precious as a gem, 
and as a chalchiuitl or saphire, who art good and noble, it is now certain that our Lord, who is everywhere, and 
shows kindness to whom he will, has remembered you: it is plain that you have conceived, and that it is our Lord’s 

516 NOTES. 

pleasure that you should be fruitful: to whom it seems good to adorn you with a jewel, and to bestow a rich feather 
upon you. Perhaps your sighs, your tears, and the lifting up of your hands before the Lord our God, and the prayers 
and supplications which you have offered in the presence of our Lord, whose name is Obscurity and Air, in vigils at 
midnight, have merited this favour; perhaps you have watched; perhaps you have employed yourself in sweeping 
and in offering incense in his presence; perhaps for the sake of these good works our Lord hath dealt mercifully 
with you; perhaps on this very account it was determined, before the commencement of the world, in heaven and in 
hell, that this kindness should be shown to you; perhaps it is true that our Lord Quetzalcoatl, who is Maker and 
Creator, has shown you this kindness ; perhaps it had been decreed by the pair who inhabit heaven, the man and the 
woman named Ometecutli and Omecioatl ; perhaps it was long since so determined. Take care, O my daughter, not 
to allow yourself to feel proud on account of the favour which has been shown to you; take care that you say not 
inwardly to yourself, I have conceived ; take care that you attribute not this favour to your own deserts, for should you 
do so, you will not be able to hide your inward thoughts from our Lord, for nothing is hidden from him, be it within 
either rocks or trees; and thus you would excite his displeasure against you, and he would ‘send some chastisement 
upon you, so that we should lose that which is within you; our Lord slaying it in the womb, or causing it'to be born 
an idiot, or to die in its tender infancy; or perhaps our Lord would visit you with some disease of which you would 
die ; for the fulfilment of our wish to have children and posterity depends upon the sole mercy of God; and if our 
thoughts are at variance with this truth, imagining that it happens through our own deserts, we defraud ourselves of 
the boon which is vouchsafed to us. Perhaps, daughter, pride will render you unworthy of letting the light behold 
that which has begun and is now coming.” A Jewish tone of sentiment, it must be confessed, pervades the entire of 
this address; whilst Christian ethics, Scriptural allusions, and Hebrew customs seem all wonderfully mixed up in it. 
It was a Hebrew custom to lift up the hands in prayer, as we learn from the second verse of the hundred and forty- 
first Psalm: “Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacri- 
fices.” And David commemorates his midnight vigils in the sixty-second verse of the hundred and nineteenth Psalm : 
“ At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous judgments.” Children are named in va- 
rious parts of the Old Testament the ornaments of their parents, and compared to jewels about their necks: they were 
likewise believed by the Jews to be the gift of God, on the authority of many passages of Holy Writ; and they are 
so expressly stated to be in the third verse of the hundred and twenty-seventh Psalm, “Lo children are an heritage 
of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward.” Jacob, likewise, in the thirty-third chapter of Genesis, answers 
in reply to Esau’s question, “ Who are those with thee?” “The children which God hath graciously given thy ser- 
vant.” And Isaiah exclaims in the eighth chapter of his Prophecies, “ Behold, I and the children whom the Lord 
hath given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in Mount Zion.” The 
admonition towards the conclusion of the address might have suggested itself to the mind of the speaker, from the 
recollection of the example in the Old Testament of Sarah’s having incurred the displeasure of God, by laughing and 
commenting inwardly to herself on the promise made by him to Abraham, that she should bear a son; the occasion 
of which is thus described in the eighteenth chapter of Genesis: “And he said, I will certainly return unto thee 
according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent-door, which 
was behind him. Now Abraham and Sarah were old, and well stricken in age; and it had ceased to be with Sarah 
after the manner of women. Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After 1 am waxed old shall I have 
pleasure, my lord being old also? And the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of 
a surety bear a child, which am old? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed I will return unto 
thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have ason. Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not: for she 
was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.” It must have been Sarah’s fear that induced her on that 
occasion to contradict God, since, having been so long the wife of the patriarch Abraham, she could not have been 
ignorant that he knew what passed in her heart; and, except on this assumption, her want of faith would have been a 
lesser crime than her presumption; nor would a contradiction in return from God have been a punishment adequate 
to her temerity. A famous example however of pride of heart, venting itself in boastful language, and meeting with 
severe chastisement from God, is afforded in the case of king Nebuchadnezzar, who having exclaimed to himself, 
“Ts not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the 
honour of my majesty?” was driven from his throne and the habitations of men, “ had a deast’s heart given unto him,” 

NOTES. 517 

and did eat grass as oven: which expressions in the fourth chapter of Daniel have induced some of the Rabbis to 
maintain that he was changed into a real ox, asking at the same time the rational question, Whether a man could 
live on grass alone? Without pausing to reply to their query, we shall proceed to observe, that the New Testament 
affords an example in Herod of exultation of heart immediately drawing down Divine vengeance: “ And upon a set 
day Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them. And the people gave a 
shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of man. And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because 
he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.” The manner of Herod’s death, as 
recorded in the twenty-third verse of the twelfth chapter of the Acts, resembles that of Antiochus, who in the ninth 
verse of the ninth chapter of the Second Book of Maccabees is said to have been eaten by worms as a punishment for 
his pride. It is probable, therefore, that the extreme fear which the Mexicans entertained that God would severely 
punish them for the slightest degree of pride or presumption, was borrowed from the Jews, with whom, “Keep me, O 
Lord, from presumptuous sins” was a prayer. Their supposition, likewise, that Tezcatlipoca would punish the infant 
for the sin of its mother, was strictly in accordance with the doctrine inculcated throughout the Pentateuch; which 
induced the Jews to reproach the blind man, whose sight had been restored to him by Christ, with having been 
born in sins, as related in the thirty-fourth verse of the ninth chapter of the Gospel of Saint John: “They answered 
and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.” This prin- 
ciple of the Jewish religion is also asserted in the second commandment, where the threat, “I am a jealous God, and 
visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,” being denounced against the sz of idolatry, and not against intem- 
perance, does in fact require a very different explanation from that which most commentators have chosen to give to 
it. The notion of God not permitting children to arrive at perfection from displeasure against their parents for their 
sins, was Hebrew, as we learn from the sixteenth verse of the third chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon: “ As for the 
children of adulterers, they shall not come to their perfection; and the seed of an unrighteous bed shall be rooted 
out.” Other exceedingly curious notions respecting children were entertained by the Mexicans: they believed that 
they were dear to God, and that they interceded with him for the world and for men; that on their deaths they went 
to heaven, and were nourished by the tree distilling milk, which grew in the garden of Tonacaquahtitlan, where they 
ever abided in the presence of Tonacatecutli: the name of the tree was Chichiualquauitl, and a representation of it 
will be found in the fifth page of the larger Vatican MS. When we recollect what is said in the New Testament 
of little children, and the mysterious words of Christ in the tenth verse of the eighteenth chapter of Saint Matthew, 
“Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for l say unto you, that mm heaven ther angels do always 
behold the face of my Father which is in heaven,” coupled with the preceding ones in the sixth verse, “ But whoso 
shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his 
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea,” and compare them with other similar passages contained in 
the ninth chapter of Saint Mark and the seventeenth chapter of Saint Luke ;—considering at the same time that the 
signification of Tonacaquahtitlan is, ‘the place where grows the tree of our bodies or of life’, that word being com- 
pounded of tonacayo, defined by Molina in his Lexicon of the Mexican language to be “cuerpo humano 6 nuestra 
carne,” i. e. the human body or our flesh, and guauitl, which signifies, according to the same author, “arbol 6 palo,” a 
tree or a piece of wood (quauitl nepaniuhtoc, meaning ‘a wooden cross’), to which is added a particle of local refe- 
rence ;—can a doubt remain in our mind that the Mexicans borrowed some of their notions about children from the 
Scriptures, and had heard of the tree of life which grew in the garden of Eden, the fruit of which is said in the 
twenty-second verse of the third chapter of Genesis to confer smmortalty on the taster ; and which is again mentioned 
in the following terms in the last chapter of the Revelations by Saint John, in his description of his vision of New 
Jerusalem ; “In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare 
twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the /eaves of the tree were for the healing of the 
nations”? which passage might have been corrupted by course of time and tradition into the doctrine, that the tree 
of life bestowed immortality upon the souls of children who died before attaining the knowledge of good and evil, or, 
as the interpreter of the Vatican MS. expresses it, “‘ che muorono senza l’uso della ragione,” and who therefore could 
not have earned it by faith or good works. The god Tonacatecutli was believed by the Mexicans to reside in the 
garden of Tonacaquahtitlan: he was the father of Quecalcoatle, and was also named Ometecutli, which signifies, the 
Most High, that name being compounded of ome, ‘twice’, which particle when prefixed to an adjective has an intensive 

(6) 

518 NOTES. 

force like the Latin fer, and tecutli, ‘lord’ or ‘king’. This observation will serve to correct an erroneous explanation 
of the proper name Hometeuli, in the note subjoined to page 156 of the present volume. The meaning of the proper 
name Tonacatecutli, is ‘the lord of our bodies or of our flesh’; and it deserves to be remarked, that the Jews styled 
Jehovah the Lord of all flesh, or of all living things, the two expressions being synonymous, because animal life cannot 
exist without flesh, nor flesh enter on its first stage of existence without life, or remain flesh any length of time after 
death : hence it is apparent that the tree of life was named with the greatest propriety by the Mexicans, Tonacaquauitl 
or Tonacaquahuitl. And since the Jews believed that the life of the flesh was the blood, grounding that notion upon 
the fourth verse of the ninth chapter of Genesis, “ But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye 
not eat,” it is probable that the Mexicans represented the tree, described in page 127 of the present volume, bloody and 
cracked in the middle. This tree must have been very celebrated in Mexican mythology, since it has a distinct place 
assigned to it in the Tonalamatl or Mexican calendar; Suchiquecal also is recorded to have sinned by plucking its 
fruit. Having observed above that the Mexicans believed that the intercessions of children in behalf of men were effi- 
cacious with God, we shall quote a remarkable passage from the twenty-first chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s 
History, in confirmation of that curious fact: “ Decian, que por estos sustentaba Dios al mundo, y que ellos eran 
nuestros intercesores para con Dios.” ‘They say, that it is for their sake that God preserves the world, and that 
they (children) are our intercessors with God.” Which passage deserves to be considered in connection with what is 
said of children in the second verse of the eighth Psalm: ‘“ Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou or- 
dained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.” From the fifteenth 
and sixteenth verses of the hundred-and-thirty-ninth Psalm,—“ My substance was not hid from thee when I was made 
in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being im- 
perfect ; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was 
none of them ;”—as well as from other parts of Scripture, it would appear that it was a Jewish doctrine that children 
were fashioned by God’s eternal decree before they had any material existence in their mother’s womb, and that there 
they became the objects of his peculiar care and love ;—that this was precisely the belief of the Mexicans is evident 
from the passage last cited from Sahagun: in reference to a curious sentence which there occurs, “ perhaps on this 
very account it was determined, before the commencement of the world, zm heaven and im hell, that this kindness 
should be shown to you,” it may be proper to observe that the Mexicans believed, like the Jews, that God was omni- 
present both in heaven and in hell; and that, therefore, that which was decreed in the one place, must necessarily have 
been decreed in the other; the latter grounding their belief on the eighth verse of the hundred-and-thirty-ninth 
Psalm: “If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.” The omni- 
presence of the Deity is so often insisted upon in the prayers which the Mexicans addressed to Tezcatlipoca, that it is 
difficult to imagine but that they must have borrowed that notion from the Jews ; for the ancient philosophers did 
not imagine that their idea of the Deity was heightened by adding to omnipotence and omniscience the attribute of om- 
nipresence, but, on the contrary, that it was materialized and debased by it: and hence the Jews were accused, in 
very early ages, of being Ceelicole, or worshipers of the material heavens ; to which Juvenal alludes in the verse 

“ Nil preeter nubes et Coeli numen adorant,” 

in his fourteenth Satire; and Petronius, with more irony, in the line 

“Et Coeli summas advocet auriculas ;” 

and, indeed, ow,* the Hebrew name for heaven, being so often understood in Scripture to mean J ehovah, might have 

* From this Hebrew word some writers have imagined that the Indians of Haiti, or the island of Saint Domingo, named the phy- 
lacteries which they bound to their hair, zemes. Piedrahita, in the third chapter of the first book of his History of the Conquest of 
New Granada, describes the stranger who preached to the Mozcas, or Indians of Bogota,—whom some named Nemquetheba, others 
Bochicha, and others Zuhe,—as wearing a kind of phylactery on his forehead, in imitation of which the Indians of that province of South 
America continued to wear roses made of feathers hanging over their eyebrows, until the conquest of their territory by the Spaniards. 
“ Este tal, dizen, que tenia la barba muy crecida hasta la cintura, los cabellos recogidos con una cinta como trenga puesta @ la manera 
que los antiguos Fariseos usaban los philacterios 6 coronas con que se rodeaban las cabezas, trayendo colocados en mitad de la frente 
los preceptos del Decalogo. Pues 4 esse modo refieren le usaba, y en essa forma en los rodetes que se ponen los Indios en las cabezas, 
colocan una rosa de plumas, que les cae sobre las cejas. Andaba este hombre con las plantas desnudas, y traia una almalafa puesta, 

NOTES. 519 

disposed both the idolatrous amongst the Jews, who worshiped many gods, and the atheistical, like the Sadducees, 
who denied the existence of any, and were a most numerous sect in the days of Christ, to worship the material 

cuyas puntas juntaba con un nudo sobre el ombro; de donde afiaden aver tomado el traje, el uso del cabello, y de andar descalcos.” 
The Ingas of Peru wore a tassel hanging from the forehead as the insignia of royalty, which in the Peruvian language was named ¢ suntur- 
paucar’’, and by the Spaniards ‘borla’; which, considering that they accounted themselves the representatives of Viracocha, might have 
served to remind them to keep his laws, and, like the rose worn by the Mozcas, have been in imitation of the head-dress of Bochicha: 
a comparison of the royal costume of the Ingas, as represented in the plate inserted by Herrera in his General History of the Indies, 
with that of the Zippas, or sovereigns of Bogota, in the plate prefixed by Piedrahita to his History of the Conquest of the Kingdom of 
New Granada, will render this supposition more probable from the extreme similarity of the dress of the Ingas to that of the Zippas, who 
it is to be supposed imitated even more closely than their subjects the costume of Bochicha. The cleft or episcopal mitre upon the head 
of Sugamuxi, the founder of the empire of Bogota, and those upon the heads of Pachacuti Yupangui and Topaynga Yupangui, the 
tenth and eleventh Ingas of Peru, are very deserving of notice, and remind us that the Ingas of Peru and the Zippas of Bogota consi- 
dered a priest the founder of their respective dynasties. The mitre does in fact seem to have usurped the place of the crown in the New 
World, for the copilli worn by the Mexican monarch was a half-mitre; and the coincidence is curious, that all the native Indian 
monarchs, at the period of the discovery of America by the Spaniards, should have worn mitres as the ensign of royalty; for the only 
monarchies then existing worthy of the name were those of New Spain, of Peru, and of Bogota, which, though widely apart, had many 
things in common in their religion, laws, and institutions. An interesting account of the latter state, which was advanced in civilization, 
and the subjects of which made use of golden money in their dealings with each other, will be found in the Supplemental volume of this 
work; it is taken from an unpublished manuscript of the most authentic character. To an objection which may be urged against admitting 
the plates referred to in the Histories of Herrera and of Piedrahita in proof of what was the ancient costume of the Ingas, on the ground 
of the Spaniards being themselves ignorant of it, it may be observed that these plates are found in the works of two eminent historians, 
that they mutually confirm each other, and that the accuracy of another plate in Herrera, in which Acamapichtli, the first sovereign of 
Mexico, is represented in the true costume of the Mexican kings, tends further to that confirmation. A more reasonable exception may 
be taken to the crosses placed over the heads of each of the Zippas, since no such symbols are added to the portraits of the Ingas, al- 
though crosses, as Garcilaso de la Vega asserts in the second part of his Royal Commentaries, were adored in Cuzco, and found in the 
temples and the palaces of the Ingas® by the two Spaniards dispatched to that city by Pizarro. The cross being likewise immemorially 
the companion of the crozier, the acquaintance with the latter, implied by the question put by the Peruvians to the Spaniards on first 
seeing a bishop, whether he was the Guaca of the Christians? argued acquaintance on their part with the former symbol. Gomara 
incidentally records, in the following passage of his History of the Indies, this curious question of the Peruvians: ‘“ Entre sus muchas 
Guacas, assi llaman: los idolos, avia muchas con baculos y mitras de obispos.” “ Amongst their many Guacas, by which appellation 
they name their idols, there were many with bishops’ croziers and mitres.” But he immediately afterwards adds, with perhaps well 
feigned simplicity, ‘mas la causa dello aun no se sabe,” “ but the reason of this is not yet known ;” nor does it appear that the Spaniards 
took any great trouble to clear up this mystery. If, however, any proof were wanting to show that the crozier and the mitre were 
associated with the cross in the New World as well as in the Old, it would be found in the larger Vatican MS., the fifth page of which 
represents Quecalcoatle holding a crozier, and habited with a mitre, and a mantle covered with red crosses. The objection, however, that 
Spanish authors could not insert in their works plates representing the costume of the Ingas which their countrymen had never seen, 
although very futile, would be rendered in appearance even superfluous, regard being had to the weightier objection, that the portraits con- 
tained in the two plates referred to must be merely imaginary, because the sovereigns whom they represented had been dead many years 
before the arrival of the Spaniards. This is an objection that Dr. Robertson would have admitted, proceeding on his assumption that 
the Indians were barbarians in a sense almost unlimited, and that the arts of sculpture and painting were wholly unknown in America. 
That the contrary however was the case, is evident from original monuments still in existence. Neither was Europe so enlightened at the 
beginning of the sixteenth century as to justify Dr. Robertson in the parallel which he has been pleased to draw between the civilized 
population of his part of the world and the barbarous Indians. The Spaniards, it cannot be doubted, had the opportunity of seeing many 
statues and paintings of the Ingas which represented them attired in the royal costume; and embalming was carried to such perfection 
in Peru, that when they opened the tombs of the Ingas for the sake of plundering them of the gold and silver which they contained, they 
_ found the bodies of those princes preserved with such art, that, according to the testimony of Acosta and Garcilaso de la Vega, who saw 
them, they appeared to be alive ; their features were plain and distinct, and covered with a sort of varnish. Acosta remarks, that a golden 
plate was substituted for the eyes in each, shaped so as exactly to resemble them. Grarcilaso says, that the licentiate Polo Ondegardo 
showed him five of these royal bodies in a room in his house at Cuzco, observing to him, “Since you are going to Spain, come into 
this room, and you shall see some of your ancestors whom I have brought to light, that you may have something to tell when you arrive 

1 Balboa, in the eighteenth chapter of his inedited History of Peru, to which he has given the title of “ Miscellanea Antarctica,” men- 

tions, along with the tassel, a sceptre, mantle, and sandals, as composing the regalia of the Ingas, and assigns to them the names, in the 
order in which they stand, of Suntur-paucar, Topa-yauri, Tarco-gualca, and Oxotas. 

* Vide cap. xxxii. of the first book of the Second Part of the Royal Commentaries of Peru, entitled, “ Llegan los dos Espafioles al 
Cuzco, hallan Cruces en los Templos y en las Casas Reales.” 

520 NOTES. 

heavens, to all the host of which their forefathers offered up their vows. The Mexicans commended a lying-in 
woman to the care of the ticitl or midwife, to the goddess Yoaltigitl, and to Tezcatlipoca, who was otherwise named 

there.” And a MS. copied from the original in the archives of Simancas, with the simple title of “ A Report addressed to the Viceroy of 
Peru, Don Andres Hurtado de Mendoza, Marques de Cafiete,” but to which is added, in a note at the end, “El autor de este papel 
parece ser el Licenciado Polo de Ondegardo,” has the following curious passage, in which the writer, speaking of himself, mentions his 
discovery of the embalmed body of the Inga Yupangui, together with some knots, or quipus, recording the principal events of his reign, 
which it is singular should have been buried with him: « Yo hallé su estatua en el Cuzco en poder de su gente; la qual era de ciertas 
mantas muy gruesas: y hallé el cuerpo del Ynga Yupangi embalsamado en gran veneracion, y los hilos y cuenta de sus hazafas y fiestas 
e idolatrias que estatuy6, y la principal era que havia dado este renombre al Viracocha, y que con el havia subjetado todo el reyno, al 
qual el comun tenia en mucha mas veneracion que 4 Guainacapa, 4 lo que 4 mi me parecié, aunque no fue tan rico en joyas, aunque 
tuvo muchas; y dicen los Yndivs haverse pagado de ellas y de lo de Guainacapa el rescate de Cajamalca, y no se hizo mas averiguacion 
por no impedir el descubrimiento de los fdolos.” ‘The statue alluded to was that of Viracocha, to whom the Inga Yupangui gave the 
title of Pachayachachi, which signified, the creator of the universe, in consequence of his having appeared to him in a dream, and declared 
to him that he had created the sun and the universe, and that the sign of it should be, that the Inga should vanquish his enemies, which 
accordingly came to pass; the Peruvians dating the prosperity of their empire from the period when their Inga had his memorable dream. 
The same author accounts in the following manner for the appellation of Viracocha, which was given to the Spaniards by the Peruvians, 
respecting the origin of which name, he says, there was much diversity of opinion. ‘ When the generals of Atabalipa got possession of 
the person of Guascar by treachery, the Ingas, after they had carried him off, celebrated a great sacrifice to Viracocha, in order that he 
might liberate him, in which they burnt a great number of children, cattle, and a quantity of apparel; and the intelligence of Atabalipa’s 
having been taken prisoner by the Christians, happening to arrive immediately after the sacrifice, they believed that they were men sent 
by Viracocha in consequence of the sacrifice, and named them Viracochas; and this name originated in Cuzco, where it was given ; for 
in the camp of Atabalipa, both before and after his imprisonment, they only named them Zungazapa, which signifies ‘ men with beards’ ; 
and this is a true historical fact which ought to be known, although it has no connection with the question put by His Majesty.” 
“ Desta fabula que estos cuentan, se entendera la ocasion que tuvieron de llamar 4 los Cristianos Viracochas en que tantas opiniones 
hay, y es asi, que al tiempo que los capitanes de Tabalipa prendieron en el Cuzco 4 Guascar Ynga por engafios, despues que le llevaron, 
hicieron los Yngas un gran sacrificio al Viracocha para que le librase, en que quemaron gran suma de nifios y carneros y ropa; y como 
immediamente quando se acabé, vino nueva que los Cristianos havian prendido 4 Atabalipa, entendieron que fuese gente que huviese 
embiado el Viracocha por razon del sacrificio, y llamaron los Viracochas, y este nombre bajo del Cuzco donde se introdujo, porque en el 
campo de Tabalipa antes y despues que le prendieron, no los Ilamavan sino Zungazapa, que quiere decir barbudos; y esta es verdadera 
historia y es bien que se sepa, aunque no haga al proposito de lo que S. M. pregunta.” It would be wrong to infer utter ignorance on 
the part of the Peruvians of a bearded nation before the arrival of the Spaniards amongst them, from the name of Zungazapa which they 
gave to Pizarro and his army, since the ancient traditions of Peru, as well as those of Mexico, recorded the arrival ages before of white 
men with beards; and Cieza de Leon, and especially Balboa, in his Miscellanea Antarctica, mention the edifices which they constructed ; 
the latter author affirming, that in a progress which Topa Inga, the son and successor of the Inga Yupangui, made through his empire, 
he was shown, in Xauxa, monuments erected by white strangers. The following are the words of Balboa: “ Pasé 4 Xauxa, donde le 
fueron mostrados ciertos antiquisimos edificios que alli se ven, que dicen los naturales haver sido obra de unos valerosisimos estrangeros, 
blancos y de buena estatura, tan inumerables y valientes que solo el tiempo los pudo contrastar.” “The Inga passed on to Xauxa, where 
some most ancient edifices, which are there to be seen, were pointed out to his observation, which the natives say were constructed by 
strangers of white colour, tall stature, and extreme valour, so numerous and brave that time alone could withstand them.” We shall reserve 
for the Supplemental volume some further extracts from the MS. of Balboa relating to the appearance of certain holy men in Peru, who 
preached a new law to the natives, wore long beards and decent apparel, and left impressions of their hands and feet engraved upon rocks 
and stones; as also an account of the famous general council, convoked at Cuzco by the Inga Yupangui for the abolition of the undue 
homage which the people paid to the sun, and the promulgation of the decree that Ticci Viracocha Pachacamac was the supreme God 

and the creator of the universe, (“cosa notable y de admiracion,” as Balboa terms it,) to which all the religious orders in the state were 
9 y ’ & 

summoned, the Inga himself presiding at the solemn conclave. But we cannot refrain from inserting here the curious relation which the 

same author gives of the sea voyage, of a year’s duration, undertaken by Topa Inga Yupangui, the successor of the Inga Yupangui, 
and of his discovery of some islands situated far in the bosom of the South Sea, to which the Peruvians gave the appellation of Hagua- 
chumbi and Nina-chumbi, and which the Spaniards supposed might have been the islands of Solomon, the name which was first given 
to the islands of Otaheite ; which supposition is not so improbable, from the Deity being supposed by the natives of Huaheine to reside in 
an ark expressly named by them Ewharre no Eatua, ‘The House of God,’—from circumcision being practised in other islands, as Cap- 
tain Cook declares in the narrative of his Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, who says that the men of Tongataboo were all circumcised,— 
and from the Jewish doctrine of uncleanness! having been found amongst those islanders, as exemplified in the account which Captain 

1 This doctrine held among the Jews a middle state between positive sin and virtue: modern jurisprudence has, however, rejected 
it as little conducive to morals; time having shown, and indeed the history of the Jews, whose whole ceremonial law, although an in- 
spired code, was still only one of conventional virtue, having fully proved, that it is better that vices and virtues should be few in number, 

NOTES. 591 

Yoalliehecatl, which proper name signifies ‘ obscurity’ and ‘air, that epithet having been applied by them to the Deity 
for the reason contained in the ejaculation with which the first prayer in the sixth book of Sahagun commences: “O 

Cook gives of the rite of ‘taboo mattee,’ or ¢ purifying from uncleanness ’ eontracted by the touch of a dead body, which rite was strictly 
enjoined by Moses to the Jews in the nineteenth chapter of the Book of Numbers; and it is singular enough that the phrase ‘ taboo 
mattee’ should so nearly resemble the Hebrew expression no sd, in the eleventh verse of the above-mentioned chapter. If the Ingas, 
when in the height of their glory, had wished to imitate Solomon by undertaking naval expeditions, and the result of some voyage 
had been the discovery of the islands of Otaheite, it cannot be doubted that they would have introduced many of their customs amongst 
the natives. The question however deserves to be considered, Whether all the islands of the South Sea lying to the east of the Indian 
Archipelago may not have been originally culonized from America? Some interesting remarks respecting two supposed aboriginal races 
of men, the one black and woolly-haired, and the other of the brown complexion of the Peruvians, will be found in the first chapter of the 
first book of Crawfurd’s History of the Indian Archipelago. ‘ 

The following is Balboa’s account of the naval expedition of Topa Inga, which is extracted from the seventeenth chapter of his 
‘Miscellanea Antarctica’; a valuable history of Peru, which never has been published, and of which the MS. in our possession may be 
possibly that to which Solorzano refers!, in the fifth chapter of the first book of his treatise ‘De Indiarum Jure,’ as belonging to 
himself: which history Calancha, in the tenth chapter of the second book of his ‘Coronica de S. Augustin en el Peru,’ a work of the 
greatest rarity, belonging to that class of books which underwent proscription in Spain, seems to allude to in noticing the worship 
which the Jungas (a race of Indians inhabiting the sandy plains in the neighbourhood of Lima) offered to Pachacamac, although 
“Miguel Cabello Balboa, clerigo presbitero del Arzobispado de los Reyes en el Piru, Natural de la Villa de Archidona en Andaluzia,’ 
is the name which the author gives to himself in the title-page of the ‘ Miscellanea Antarctica’; which work he began in Quito in 
the year 1576, and completed on the 9th of June in 1586; professing in his preface to have conferred, when in New Granada, with 
the Adelantado Don Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada, upon the obscure question of the origin of the Indians, whose ancestor he supposes 
to have been the patriarch Ophir. “Tuvo noticia el Topa Ynga como muy cerca de alli (Apelope) avia buen puerto para poder 
sulcar, y ver sien la mar avia alguna empresa en que poder ganar con el mundo nombre y reputacion, y aviendo consultado con sus 
mayores su deliberacion y intento, se puso en camino con sus esquadrones (y casi innumerables) y se aposenté en Manta, y en Charapoto, 
y en Piguaca, porque en menos espacio no podia aloxarse, ni sustentarse tanta multitud de naciones como tras si traia. En este lugar fue 
donde la vez primera el rey Topa Ynga vié el mar, al qual como lo descubriese de un alto, hizo una muy profunda adoracion y le llamé 
Mamacocha, que quiere decir, madre de las lagunas: y hizo apercibir gran cantitad de las embarcaciones que los naturales usavan (que 
son ciertos palos livianos notablemente) y atando fuertemente unos con otros, y haciendo encima cierto tablado de cafiizos texidos, es muy 
segura y acomodada embarcacion, 4 las quales nosotros avemos llamado balsas: pues aviendose juntado de estas la copia que parecio 
bastante para la gente. que consigo determinava llevar, tomando de los naturales de aquellas costas los pilotos de mas experiencia que 
pudo hallar, se metio en el mar con el mismo brio y animo que si desde su nacimiento huviera esperimentado sus fortunas y truecos. De 
este viaje se alejé de tierra mas que se puede facilmente creer; mas cierto afirman los que sus cosas de este valeroso Ynga cuentan, que 
de este camino se detuvo por la mar duracion y espacio de un afio, y dicen mas, que descubrié ciertas Yslas, aquien llamaron Hagua~- 
Chumbi y Nina-Chumbi: que Yslas estas sean en el Mar de el Sur (en cuya costa el Ynga se embarco) no lo osare determinadamente 
afirmar, ni que tierra sea la que pueda presumirse ser hallada en esta navegacion. Las relaciones que de este viage nos dan los antiguos, 

and that mankind should strictly observe or avoid these, than invent a thousand new and imaginary crimes, the only effect of which is to 
lessen the respect to which virtues, coeval with human nature, are alone entitled; to make vices and virtues clash with each other; and to 
render it necessary, according to the views of many modern political economists, that some vices should not only be tolerated but pub- 
licly encouraged, to avoid what they are pleased to name greater. 

? Solorzano mentions the work of Balboa in the fifth chapter of his first book ‘ De Indiarum Jure,’ slightly changing the title which the 
author himself gave to it; “Tres libros non contemnendos scripserat Michael Balboa Cabello, Peruensis Presbyter, sub nomine ‘ Miscel- 
lanez Australis,’ qui apud me manuscripti servantur.” He also cites in a marginal note to the fifth chapter of the first book of his ¢ Politica 
Indiana’ the treatise of the celebrated Garcia, concerning the preaching of the Gospel in the New World, which like the ‘ Peruvian 
Monarchy’ of the same author has disappeared, and refers to page 20 of the fourth chapter of the first book of that treatise. Calancha, 
professing to give an account of the origin of the Peruvians from a MS. in his possession composed by Luis de Toruel a Jesuit, 
speaks likewise in high terms of commendation of Balboa: “ Prueva la fabula de su origen con la autoridad y trabajada informacion que 
hizo de todo el Dotor Juan de Balboa, Canonigo de la Catedral de Lima, varon muy docto i diligente investigador de las antiguas 
tradiciones destos Indios, Catedratico de su lengua en esta Universidad, cuyo libro dice que tiene en su poder; i la fabula del origen dellos 
ide sus guacas, tiene mas abilidad i similitud con lo que dice el Genesis de la creacion del mundo, i suceso del diluvio, que lo que 
fabularon Ovidio, i los poetas Griegos i Latinos, que creyeron los Espafioles antes que se convirtiesen 4 la Fé.” Coronica de S. Augustin 
en el Peru, cap. x. lib. 2. fol. 366.—Calancha’s Augustine Chronicle of Peru is a large folio volume, containing 922 pages: it was 
printed in Barcelona in the year 1638, and is a book full of the most curious information. Its scarcity may be estimated from the asser- 
tion of Pinelo, page 643 of his ¢ Bibliotheca Occidental,’ that the celebrated Spanish scholar Don Nicolas Antonio, who published the 
¢ Bibliotheca Hispana,’ doubted whether the Peruvian History of Brulius was not a translation of it. We are enabled, from possessing 
both works, to say that they are totally distinct; the latter is a book printed in Holland in the year 1652, which is also interesting, and 
_ seldom to be met with. 

(OR) 

590 NOTES, 

valeroso Sefior nuestro, debajo de cuyas alas nos amparamos, y defendemos, y hallamos abrigo; tu eres invisible y 
no palpable, bien asi como la noche y el aire.” “O valiant Lord, beneath whose wings we shelter and defend our- 

son que trujo de alla Yndios prisioneros de color negro, y mucho oro y plata, y mas una silla de laton y cueros de animales como caballos: 
y de parte donde se puedan traer las tales cosas, de todo punto se ignora en este Piru, y en el mar que lo va prolongando.” It must be 
admitted that this account of the voyage performed by Topa Inga is extremely curious, and it deserves to be considered in connection 
with a very remarkable passage in Gomara’s History of the Indies; where, describing at page cxvi. the province of Quivira, and the 
Spanish expedition thither in search of the seven cities reported in the first instance, by Brother Mark de Niza, to belong to a king who 
exhibited some conformity, in his adoration of the cross and homage to the Queen of Heaven, to the religion of the Spaniards, and whose 
history on that account might have been consigned to oblivion,—he observes, speaking of the coast of the Pacific Ocean, “ Vieron por la 
costa naos que trayan arcatrages de oro y de plata en las proas, con mercaderias ; y pensaron ser del Catayo y China, porque sefialavan 
aver navegado treynta dias.” But how much more curious will the following relation of Brother Antonio Tello be judged! taken from 
an original MS., which it would be wronging history to suffer to remain unpublished, in which mention is made of the north-west 
passage having been accidentally discovered in a remote century by two ships, to what nation belonging is unknown; one of which was 

2 

wrecked, while the crew of the other is recorded by native tradition to have colonized the north-west coast of America, and taught the 
Indians to adore the Cross, to wear scapularies, and to shave the crown of their heads; on which account the Spaniards, on first entering 
their province, and beholding the strange attire of the Indians, and their mode of wearing their hair, named it Provincia de los Frayles ; 
and the Indians themselves, Indios Coronados, from the round tonsure on the crown of their heads. The Indians, in confirmation of the 
truth of this tradition, which had been handed down to them from their ancestors, showed the Spaniards a large iron anchor (una ancora 
gastadisima de errumbre). ‘Tello himself supposes that these ships must have been either Dutch, English, or Spanish vessels, which, 
sailing through the Straits of Anian, entered by that route into the Pacific Ocean : and next follows, in order to render this supposition 
plausible, an assertion of an extraordinary fact unknown to the present age, which it may be proper to insert in the original Spanish.— 
“Como lo hicieron en nuestros tiempos ciertos estrangeros los quales llevados por las costas de los Bacallados y Tierra-nueva pasaron el 
Estrecho de Anian, y dieron con su navio en el Mar del Sur: y de su viage hicieron una relacion al Rey N.S. Felipe Segundo, y despues 
de su muerte el Rey N. S. Felipe Tercero viendola, mandé 4 su Virrey Conde de Monterey que 4 costa de sus reales haveres hiciese el 
descubrimiento de esta navegacion, lo qual se puso en execucion en cinco de Mayo del afio de 1602, que se hicieron 4 la vela dos naos, 
capitana y almiranta, y una fragata, y fue por General Sebastian Viscayno; y habiendo navegado y descubierto muchas yslas llegaron al 
Cabo Mendozino que esta en quarenta y dos grados de altura, y se pusieron en quarenta y tres en un cabo 6 punta que nombraron Cabo 
Blanco, junto 4 el qual se hallaron un rio caudaloso y hondable: procuraron sondearle y las corrientes no dieron lugar : entendiese que este 
rio és el que descubrieron los Holandeses viniendo derrotados, y que es el Estrechio de Anian por donde el navio que le descubrié atravesé 
y pasé del Mar del Norte al del Sur:”—the substance of which relation is briefly as follows; «That certain strangers (who, from 
the ardour displayed in Queen Elizabeth’s reign for prosecuting naval discoveries, and especially for exploring the North Pole, we must 
suppose were Englishmen), at a period not very remote from that in which Tello lived (for in this sense the phrase “en nuestros tiempos” 
must be understood, except it be opposed to the presumed antiquity of the period when the passage was first effected through the Straits 
of Anian by the two ships previously mentioned), had coasted the shores of Bacallaos and Newfoundland, and passing through the Straits 
of Anian, penetrated with their ships into the South Sea; information of which having been transmitted to Philip the Second, which was 
perused by Philip the Third, the latter monarch commanded his viceroy, the Count de Monterey, to fit out an expedition at the public 
expense to discover this passage, which was completed on the 5th of May in the year 1602, when two ships and a frigate sailed under 
the command of Sebastian Viscayno; which, having discovered many islands, arrived at Cape Mendozino in 42° north latitude, and 
prosecuted the voyage as far as a cape or point, to which they gave the name of Cabo Blanco, situated in latitude 43°, near which they 
found a great and deep river, unfathomable from the strength of the current. Tello is persuaded this was the river discovered by the Dutch, 
and the same as the Straits of Anian, through which the ships that discovered those straits sailed, and passed from the Northern into the 
Southern Ocean.” From this account it would appear that a north-west passage, of the existence of which little doubt has ever been 
entertained, but of the practicability of navigating it the greatest, has twice served as a channel of communication between the Atlantic 
and Pacific Oceans. Two reasons might be alleged for so important a fact having been buried in secresy, till it became finally forgotten ; 
but it could be only the effect of their combined action, and the jealousy which Spain must have naturally felt of the ambition of England, 
whose powerful navy in the reign of Elizabeth threatened, by effecting disembarkations in various parts of the southern continent of 
America, to revolutionize the Indian population, in the beginning but imperfectly subdued, and long impatient of the Spanish yoke. The 
reasons are these :—first, the unwillingness of Philip to cede to his rival, Queen Elizabeth, the honour of a discovery which he might have 
judged more properly belonged to himself; and, secondly, the cautious policy of that monarch, his regard to the mercantile interests of his 
kingdom, and perhaps erroneous anticipations respecting the utility which such a passage, when once declared practicable, would be of to 
the northern European powers, to the prejudice of Spanish commerce, which might have made him little eager that it should be disco- 
vered. A prince, moreover, even more inclined to protect philosophy and science than was Philip, might have deemed that one age at least 
should rest content with the great discoveries in geography which had so recently been made, and which it would be better to acquire a 
more perfect knowledge of, than to attempt new ones.— Before terminating this note we may be permitted to observe, that the only con- 
clusion which the relation of Tello seems to warrant, appealing as he does to Indian tradition and to the’ proceedings of the Spanish 
Government, in proof of ships having sailed through the northern straits into the Pacific, and thus uniting the testimony both of Spaniards 
and Indians in favour of the supposed passage, is, that there is an appearance of probability that the north-west passage has been found 

by experience to be practicable for ships. 

Fvses fe 

NOTES. 593 

selves and find protection, thou art invisible and impalpable, just in the manner of night and air.” And here we 
shall take occasion to observe, that Acosta’s not knowing that Yoalliehecatl, which proper name is compounded of 
yoalli, ‘night’, and ehecatl, ‘wind or air’, was an epithet belonging to Tezcatlipoca, led him into the error of asserting 
that the Mexicans adored night, wind, and darkness on the festival of Tezcatlipoca, imploring their succour and pro- 
tection; and he has fallen, in almost the next sentence, into the graver error of maintaining that the religion of the 
Mexicans did not hold out threats to the wicked of any punishment in a future state. The passage of Acosta referred 
to, will be found in the note subjoined to page 224 of this volume. The Mexicans styled Tezcatlipoca ‘ valiant 
Lord,’ because they considered him the god of battles, by which latter title he is expressly designated in the prayer 
which the Mexicans addressed to him, beseeching of him victory over their enemies; which prayer will be found 
entire in the third chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun,—a short extract from which is here inserted, not only because 
it contains the above-mentioned title, but on account of the Jewish tone of sentiment which pervades it, and its Scrip- 
tural phraseology, and likewise because it serves to illustrate an observation of Torquemada in the note annexed to 
page 245 of this volume. “Y por quanto és vuestra magestad Sefior de las batallas, y de cuya voluntad depende la 
victoria, y 4 quien quereis desamparais, y no teneis necesidad de que nadie os dé consejo; y pues que esto es asi, 
suplico 4 vuestra magestad, que desatineis y emborracheis 4 nuestros enemigos, para que se arrojen en nuestros 
manos, y sin hacernos dafio caigan todos en las manos de nuestros soldados y peleadores, que padecen pobreza y 
trabajos. O Seftor nuestro, tenga por bien vuestra magestad, pues que soys Dios, y lo podeis todo, y lo ordenais todo, 
y entendeis en disponer todas las cosas, y en ordenar y disponer a que esta vuestra republica sea rica y prospera, y 
ensalzada, y honrada, y afamada en los ejercicios y valentias de la guerra.” “ And inasmuch as your majesty is Lord 
of battles, on whose will depends victory, who forsakest whom thou wilt, and standest in no need of counsel from 
any one; since so it is, I supplicate your majesty to deprive our enemies of reason and to make them drunkards, in 
order that they may throw themselves into our hands, and, without doing us any harm, may all fall into the hands of 
our soldiers and men of war, who endure poverty and hardships. O Lord, may it please your majesty, since thou art 
God and can do all things, and ordainest all things, and art ever employed in directing the affairs of the universe, 
and in ordering and providing for the riches and prosperity and glory and honour and fame of this thy republic, in 
the deeds and achievements of war.” 

It is very remarkable that the Mexicans should have prayed to Tezcatlipoca to afflict their enemies with drunken- 
ness, since that prayer accords with what is said in the twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth verses of the twelfth chapter 
of Job: “ He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilder- 
ness where there is no way: they grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to stagger like a drunken 
man;” and with the threat pronounced by Jeremiah in the thirteenth verse of the thirteenth chapter of his Prophecies 
against the Jews themselves, who were very fond of denouncing against others the judgments which Moses, speaking 
in the name of God, uttered against them in case of disobedience to his laws. The passage of Jeremiah referred to is 
the following: “ Then shalt thou say unto them, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings 
that sit upon David’s throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.” 
A sort of spiritual drunkenness is certainly here signified, which in the case of the prophets, if compatible at all with 
inspiration, must nevertheless have rendered the predictions which they uttered very innocuous, and still more calcu- 
lated to excite the mirth than the fear of the Canaanites, and their other enemies, against whom they were chiefly 
directed, who would have felt inclined to pay little regard to the prophecies of these blind leaders of the blind. The 
notion of Tezcatlipoca protecting the people beneath his wings,—which metaphor was employed by the ancient Mex- 
icans, who emphatically styled themselves his people, and their kingdom God’s kingdom, and the throne of their 
kings God’s throne and the seat of judicature,—strongly assimilates itself to the language of David in the fourth verse 
of the ninety-first Psalm: “He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his truth 
shall be thy shield and buckler.” They likewise considered this supreme God their shield and buckler; and the 
proper name Chimalman, which is derived from chimalli the Mexican name for a shield, being compounded of that 
term with the elision of the final syllable %, and man devoid of signification, as is most probably here the case, and 
which perhaps would have been mar but that the Mexican language wants the letter 7, may not unreasonably be sup- 
posed to have been given to the Virgin of Tula, the mother of Quecalcoatle, on that account. In reference to two 
opinions of the ancient Mexicans which have already been noticed,—one of which seems related to Hebrew usages, 

5Q4, iy © Wi S, 

and the other to be strangely allied with a prejudice to which the second verse of the eighth Psalm might have given 
rise among the Jews,—we must observe, that it was customary for Hebrew women to seek the favour of Jehovah by 
ministering in the service of his temple, an example of which is recorded by Saint Luke of the prophetess Anna in 
the second chapter of his Gospel: “ And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of 
Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with a husband seven years from her virginity ; and she was a widow 
of about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night 
and day.” And hence perhaps the interrogation in the passage already quoted from Sahagun, “por ventura habeis 
velado ; por ventura habeis trabajado en barrer y ofrecer incienso en su presencia; por ventura por estas buenas obras 
ha hecho con vos misericordia nuestro Sefior.” The passage in the Psalms which in the English version of the Bible is 
rendered “out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies that thou 
mightest still the enemy and the avenger,” which is translated in the Septuagint “ é« crouaroc vytwwy Kar OnraZovtwy 
Katnptisw aivoy’ éveca twv €XOpwy cov, Tov katadvoat ex Opov Kar éxducntny,” might have induced the Mexicans, borrowing 
the notion from the Jews, to imagine that through the intercession of children with God the world was preserved ; 
since if the latter had understood the enemy and the avenger to mean Satan, which it is highly probable they 
would, because he is expressly named the adversary and the accuser in many places of the Old Testament, and more 
especially in the book of Job, here we might seek the origin of this extraordinary doctrine. The English translation of 
the Bible, which although generally formed on the Hebrew text of Scripture, sometimes, and not unfrequently when 
the translators were in doubt which was the word of God, prefers the Septuagint rendering of a passage involving 
difficulty or contradiction, has in this place ‘still the enemy and the avenger,’ to which the Greek phrase tov cara- 
Avoat €xPpov Kar éxducnrny corresponds ; and it must be confessed that the word ‘still’ would be very applicable to Satan, 
who is compared elsewhere in Scripture to a roaring lion going up and down the earth to seek whom he might devour. 
‘Enemy’ and ‘adversary’ are in English synonymous terms, and literally expressive of the signification of éy8pov, which 
was a name for Satan; but ‘accuser’ and ‘avenger’ are terms of which the meaning is materially different, although 
by both these names, taken in acceptations widely different from each other, Satan was known to the ancient Jews, 
who called him the avenger of blood, and when they killed cattle were careful to cover up the blood with dust, lest 
Satan beholding it should demand vengeance at the hands of God on account of their having put to death an in- 
nocent animal. The Mexicans likewise, who were probably well acquainted with what is said in the eleventh verse of 
the fourth chapter of Genesis, of the earth having opened her mouth to receive the blood of Abel from the hand of 
Cain, and with the Hebrew custom of covering blood with dust, entertained a superstitious notion about blood being 
the beverage of the earth, as has elsewhere been observed. It may be proper however to remark that the Greek word 
éxSuntne signifies both an ‘accuser’ and an ‘avenger’, undoubtedly because a legal accuser becomes in a manner an 
avenger; and Stephanus thus defines it in the former sense, “persequutor, cujus munus est judicio experiri contra 
eos qui aurum vel argentum vel pecuniam reipublice debent ;” from which it would appear that it signified the person 
who conducted ex-officio or state prosecutions on the part of the Crown or the public when money was concerned, 
but not blasphemy ; for that was a crime which even in the age of primitive simplicity, when Rome beheld her 
dictators’ guiding the plough, Roman lawyers disdained to meddle with, and “ qui secus faxit, Deus ipse vindex 
sit” became a maxim of their jurisprudence, which, rude as was the Latin of the Twelve Tables, could not have 
come adorned from the lips of Cicero. From the name of ‘the accuser’ which the Jews bestowed upon Satan, from 
believing that his chief function was that of an accuser of men to God,—which of itself would have suggested the idea 
of a mediator, (traces of both which doctrines may perhaps be recognized in the Mexican fable of Tonatiuh or the Sun, 
who was the same as Quecalcoatle, conducting with acclamations the souls of saints to heaven, and of Miquitlante- 
cutli the god of hell endeavouring to intercept them on the way,)—the Greek word AtaBoXog is derived. But although 
the New Testament, by bestowing the name of AvaBodoc¢ upon the devil, seems to lend the strongest sanction to the 
reasons which led the Jews to name him ‘the accuser, still when we reflect that it no where inculcates the Jewish 
doctrine upon that point, inferences from the proper name Ataodoc must be considered nugatory, or be condemned as 
opposed to the silence of the Evangelists. The Book of Job places Satan before us in the light of an accuser. But the 
same Book places God himself almost in the situation of a tempter, since he it was who, at least by sufferance, afflicted 
Job with all manner of diseases to try his patience; and hence the Mexicans might have derived the notion that 
Titlacaoa or Tezcatlipoca sometimes tempted them to sin to try their obedience to his commandments; nor can it 

NOTES. — 525 

be denied, if Moses has been named, on the authority of the sixteenth chapter of Numbers and the thirty-second 
chapter of Exodus, the first inquisitor*, that Satan has as fair a claim, on that of the Book of Job, to be styled the 
first who was zealous to take cognizance of blasphemy. Reasons for supposing that the Mexicans were acquainted 
with the Book of Job will be found at page 382 of this volume; and their custom of shaving their hair, sitting down 
upon the ground, and sprinkling dust upon their heads as a sign of humiliation, closely resembles what is said in the 
first and second chapters of that Book, of the mourning of Job and his three friends. 

To add another remark to those which we have already made on the passage in the Psalms, which might have in- 
duced the Mexicans to suppose that Tezcatlipoca spared the world at the intercession of children, we may observe, 
that the wicked are perpetually named in Scripture God’s enemies, and that éveca twv éyfpwr, in the second verse 
of the eighth Psalm, being understood to mean them, the literal translation of the entire passage would be, “ Out of 
the mouth of infants and sucklings thou hast perfected praise, for the sake of the wicked, that thou mightest confound 
the adversary and the accuser.” The propriety of understanding the verb caraAvoa in the signification here assigned 
to it, will be evident to those who consider, that to dissolve the strength or to unnerve the limbs of an adversary, is to 
confound him; and the omission of the article before éy@pov is not of the least importance, and might be justified by 
reference to innumerable passages in Scripture: the sense even of the verse as it is here translated becomes more ob- 
vious than before, and is strictly accordant with the Jewish notion, that prayers which were acceptable to God con- 
founded Satan when he presented himself before him to accuse them of sin; which was more reasonable than the 
Rabbinical doctrine that the accusations of Satan were confounded by the noise of the trumpets which Moses com- 
manded the priests to blow on their solemn festivals; and which the Mexicans,—as it were in compliance with the 
precept contained in the eighth verse of the tenth chapter of Numbers, “ And the sons of Aaron the priests shall 
blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your generations,”—continually 
sounded in the courts of their temple; a custom which the interpreter of the Vatican Codex believed that they borrowed 
Srom the Jews, as he unequivocally declares at page 224 of the present volume. It has been already observed, 
that the Mexicans imagined that children were the gift of Tezcatlipoca, and that he fashioned and watched over 
them in their mothers’ womb ; and itis wonderful to find how conformable their customs, as well as their opinions, in 
every thing relating to the treatment of mothers and their children, were to those of the Jews. Sahagun, in the 24th, 
34th, and 35th chapters of the sixth book of his History of New Spain, informs us, that married women amongst the 
Mexicans received two salutations from their friends and kindred, the first on their becoming pregnant, and the 
second on their safe delivery, when the mother and the infant were both saluted, and gifts were presented to the latter. 
And that this accorded with Hebrew usage is evident from what Saint Luke says, in the first chapter of his Gospel, 

* The following panegyric upon the Inquisition, Moses being placed first on the list of inquisitors, is pronounced by Betancurt in his 
Treatise concerning the City of Mexico, p. 29. “ El Tribunal del Santo Officio es el joyel de la Santissima Trinidad, arbol que planté 
Dios, para que cada rama estendida por la Christiandad fuesse la vara de justicia con flores de misericordia, y frutos de escarmi- 
ento. El primero que exercité este oficio fue el mismo Dios quando al primer herege que fue Cain, como dice la traslacion Caldaica, 
donde se dice, que maté 4 su hermano Abel porque le contradijo sus heregias, que decia no haver juez ni justicia, ni otro siglo, ni premio 
para los buenos y pena para los malos (como dice S. Geronymo), y Dios le hizo Auto publico condenandole 4 traer una sefial en la frente 
impressa como habito de afrenta, y en su contumacion le sentencio el Cielo 4 que Lamec le diesse muerte,—Lamec que quiere decir pobre 
y humilde, que para la sobervia de un Herisiarca le bastan 4 Dios ministros humildes y sacerdotes pobres que defienden su honra. El primer 
Inquisidor que substituy6 por Dios fue Moyses, que condend & muerte en un dia veinte y tres mil Heneges Apostatas, que adoraron el bezerro 
que deshizo, y dio 4 beber en agua sus cenizas. El segundo fue Elias, que valiendose del auxilio real que el Rey Acab le dio, passé 4 
cuchillo todos los Hereges de Samaria, haziendo Auto dela Fe en el torrente Cison. Elias fue el primero @ quien Dios subdelegé el quemar 
4 los Apostatos con fuego, como se vio en dos vezes en que el Rey Ocozias le embié 4 prender, que en cada una quem cinquenta soldados 
con su capitan, sentenciandolo Elias, y al pronunciarlo se executava por los Angeles (que & este Santo Tribunal le sirven Angeles y le 
obedece el Cielo) en el se vio la misericordia como la justicia, pues el tercer capitan que la pidid le perdond, que mas tardan en pedir mise- 

ricordia los reos, que en concedersela los ministros.” When we consider the enormities which the Inquisition has perpetrated in the name 
of religion, and recollect how many victims of all ages— 

aE Gove eo ieilees “ Pueri, innupteque puelle, 
Impositique rogis juvenes ante ora parentum ”— 

have expetical imaginary crimes in the flames, it is impossible not to rejoice that the dungeons of that horrid tribunal are at last pervious 
to the pure light of ane sun, that its portals are for ever open, its “ bridge of sighs” broken, and that pilgrims can now seek repose in those 
mouldering courts which once blazed bright with funeral piles. 

(6s) 

526 NOTES. 

of the Virgin Mary going to salute Elisabeth the mother of John the Baptist: “ And Mary arose in those days, and 
went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Juda; and entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Eli- 
sabeth. And it came to pass, that when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and 
Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost.”—and from what Saint Matthew and Saint Luke both record of the salu- 
tations which the Virgin Mary herself received from the angels, the shepherds, and the wise men of the East, after she 
had given birth to the Messiah, to whom the magi presented an offering of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. The second 
salutation which Elisabeth received from her friends and kindred is likewise mentioned by Saint Luke in the fifty- 
seventh and fifty-eighth verses of the first chapter of his Gospel : “ Now Elisabeth’s full time came that she should be 
delivered ; and she brought forth ason. And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had showed great 
mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.” 

The deference with which women who officiated as midwives were treated by the ancient Mexicans, the appella- 
tion which they gave them of spiritual mothers, and the belief which they entertained that they were under the 
immediate inspiration of Tezcatlipoca, are so closely allied to habits and a mode of thinking’ which, with the greatest 
show of probability, may be presumed to have been Hebrew, that it is only necessary to refer to what is said in the 
first chapter of Exodus of the meritorious conduct of the Hebrew midwives, who had been commanded by Pharaoh to 
destroy the male children of the Israelites at the moment of their birth, and to the declaration contained in the twen- 
tieth verse of the same chapter, “ Therefore God dealt well with the midwives,” to render it probable that the Mexican 
usages were founded on Hebrew traditions. The treatment of lying-in women amongst the Mexicans seems likewise 
to have been the same as amongst the ancient Jews; since a comparison of the sixteenth verse of the first chapter of 
Exodus with the following passage, taken from the speech of the mother of the young married woman to the midwife 
to whose care she had been entrusted, shows that the bath was resorted to as the chief means of promoting a safe 
- delivery by both nations: ‘“ ‘Muy amada Sefiora, y madre nuestra espiritual, haced, Sefiora, vuestro oficio, responded a 
la Sefiora y Diosa nuestra que se llama Quilaztli, y comenzad 4 bailar 4 esta mucacha ; metedla en el bafio, que és la 
floresta de nuestro Seftor, que le llamamos Temazcalli, en donde esta y de donde cura y ayuda la abuela que és Diosa 
del Temazcalli, que se llama Yoalticitl’. Oido esto, la partera luego ella misma comienza 4 encender fuego para ca- 
lentar el bafio, y luego metia en el bafio la moza prefiada.” “ ‘Highly esteemed madam, who art our spiritual mother, 
perform your office, aid our Lady, the Goddess who is named Quilaztli, and begin to bathe this young woman; put 
her into the bath, which is the nursery garden of our Lord, and is called the Temazcalli, where is ever present, to 
relieve and to lend assistance, our grandmother, who is the Goddess of the Temazcalli, whose name is Yoalticitl’. This 
address having been delivered, the midwife immediately began herself to light the fire to heat the bath, and next pro- 
ceeded to put her charge into it.” The verse of the first chapter of Exodus, above referred to, is translated in the 
Septuagint, “ Ka etmev, Orav patovobe rac “EBpaac, kat wor TpoG TH GED ay Mev apoev y, aToKTeware aro’ éav Se OndAv, 
mepumoveisOe avro.” “ And he said, When ye officiate as midwives to the Hebrew women, and the period of their deli- 
very has arrived, if it be a male child, kill it; but if it be a female, preserve it.” A material difference will be observed 
between the translation here given of this passage of Scripture, and that which is found in our English version of the 
Bible; whence it is evident that the old translators into English preferred in this place the original Hebrew to the 
Greek text; since there is no mention of stools in the latter, but in the former the word 21» occurs, which Parkhurst 
understands in this place to mean ‘baths,’ and contends that they have erroneously and even absurdly explained to 
signify ‘stools’; assigning himself, in his Hebrew Lexicon, the definition of vessels made of stone, troughs or cisterns 
to hold water, to the Hebrew word ON, and referring to the nineteenth verse of the seventh chapter of Exodus, in 
which the same translators have understood the same word in the sense of vessels of stone made for the purpose of 
holding water. From all which it follows, that it is extremely probable that the warm bath was resorted to as a means 
of promoting safe delivery in the earliest ages by the Jews, and that its use was continued, and efficacy extolled, in 
later centuries, on account of mention of it having been made by Moses in the Pentateuch ; and that, finally, they in- 
troduced the knowledge of it to the Mexicans. The chief objection to understanding O))1N in the sense of ‘a stool’ or 
‘seat’ in the abovementioned passage is, that the proper signification of its singular, }2N, is ‘a stone’ ; which, although 
a very proper material for baths which were to be heated with fire, would have been in the other case a strange sub- 
stitute for wood, as Parkhurst himself observes. Clavigero, in section Lx11. of the seventh book of his History of 
Mexico, describes the structure and use of the Mexican temazcalli, of which he says there were several kinds ; 

N OT & &. 527 

and he has accompanied his description with a plate, which shows that an arch was employed in their construction : 
which curious fact he notices more particularly in the following passage of the third section of the Dissertations an- 
nexed to his History: “ The remains of the ancient palaces of Tezcuco, and still more their temazcall: or vapour baths, 
show us the ancient use of arches and vaults among the Mexicans and the other nations of Anahuac.” The twentieth 
plate of the Collection of Mendoza presents us with what may not improperly be named an original painting of a 
temazcalli; it varies considerably in form from that described by Clavigero, but its component parts are essentially 
the same, and it is evidently constructed on the same principle: the bath itself is there represented with a flat roof, 
but the stove attached to it is arched above: it occurs in the abovementioned plate (No. 16.) as the symbol of the 
tributary city Temazcalapan, which was probably so named on account of the number of its baths. It deserves also 
to be remarked, that in the plate representing Cuzco, the capital of the Ingas, which Ramusio has inserted in the 
third volume of the Italian edition of his Voyages, published at Venice in the year 1565, the entrance to that city is 
through arched gates; and its famous temple is covered with a dome or cupola, which, with its square walls flanked 
with high and narrow towers, assimilates it in some measure to the temple carved upon the box represented in the 
fourth volume of the present work, and supposed to contain a collection of quipus*; whence it may be inferred that 

* This box is formed out of a solid piece of wood of the colour of mahogany. Its cover consists of a sliding lid, which is ingeniously 
fastened by turning to the left the human figure in the centre of the planetary system represented on its side; its exterior has been gilt ; 
the carvings upon its sides have been executed with great care, and the subject of them all appears to be connected with the ancient re- 
ligion of the Peruvians and their mythological traditions. The principal side represents (most probably) Pacachama, the supreme: God 
of the Peruvians and the first person in their trinity, riding through the universe upon some unknown animal partaking of the nature of 
the Hebrew cherub, whilst the universe itself may be not inaptly typified by the figures of animals belonging to each of the four elements 
carved around. The Hebrew metaphor “he rzde¢h upon the cherubim” seems almost to have been present to the imagination of the 
Peruvian artist when carving the lid of the box; and, at least, it must be admitted that the rather singular choice of the metaphorical 
expression ‘ride’ to express the motion of an incorporeal spirit, (for such the Peruvians. believed Pacachama to be,) argues some identity 
in Peruvian and Hebrew taste, or some acquaintance on the part of the former with the language of the Psalms. All Spanish authors 
describe the temple dedicated to the sun at Cuzco, as one of the most magnificent structures that man ever consecrated to religious 
worship; but while they notice the immense size of the stones of which it was built, and the incalculable riches of which Pizarro and his 
soldiers plundered it, they say little of its outward appearance or the style of its architecture, which perhaps was owing to their never having 
seen more of it than its ruins. The representation, therefore, of this temple in its perfect state, on one of the sides of this box, is very 
curious: and its Gothic look, the pointed arches of its windows, doors, and roof, resembling that of the Pantheon at Rome, with 
an aperture at the top of the cupola for the admission of light, cannot fail to interest those who may have leisure to peruse the con- 
cluding note of this volume; from which it will appear, that it is not impossible that monks of the order of Saint Columba were the 
founders of it, whom an accidental shipwreck, when returning from a pilgrimage to the Holy Land to their monastery at Iona, had 
cast on the shores of the southern continent of America. That Greenland became in early ages the resort of Christians, and that a 
flourishing monastery existed there during several ages, which probably sent forth missionaries to many parts both of North and South 
America, (which would account for the tradition, which was general throughout the New World, that Saint Thomas had preached the 
Gospel to the Indians, since the monastery in Greenland was dedicated to Saint Thomas, and the monks would have taken care to preach 
that Saint unto them,) will be apparent from the perusal of the note subjoined to page 190 of this volume. ‘The coincidence is curious, 
that the habitations of the monks should have been vaulted above and lighted from an aperture in the roof, their church in all probability 
being lighted in the same manner, and the simple vault of their dwellings changed into a cupola,—since the temple of Cuzco was built on 
this plan. Nor is it less worthy of observation, that the Mexican temazcallis, small as was their scale, must have nearly resembled, both in 
structure and appearance, the houses built by the Greenland monks, who would have been the most likely people in the world to dis- 
cover the salutary nature of steam baths, such as were the temazcallis, which were arched buildings with an aperture above for the exit 
of smoke and the admission of air, as the representation of one of them in Plate XV. of Clavigero’s History of Mexico clearly shows. 
If those monks had been animated with a spirit of enterprise, two reasons for a portion of America having been possibly long known to 
them, and their concealing all knowledge of it from the rest of the world, might be found in the jealousy which they would naturally have 
felt of all foreign interference,—a feeling which in later centuries actuated the Jesuits of Paraguay,—and in the profitable monopoly of trade 
which they might have carried on with the Indians, which would account for the lavish payments which they were able to give for arti- 
cles of mere luxury, and for the concourse of barks which came to them from Trondon (probably Drontheim) in Norway. The discovery 
of arches in America, although not so mysterious, is quite as unexplained a fact as that of crosses ; neither can their existence be accounted 
for by recurring to the old solution of all the doubts and difficulties to which the Patriarchal institutions, Mosaic laws, and Hebrew rites 
of the Mexicans and Peruvians gave rise, which proceeded on the assumption that Satan counterfeited in the New World whatever God 
had ordained in the Old and New Testament amongst Jews and Christians ; since an arch is no where mentioned in Scripture: neither 
did Moses command his countrymen to build their public or private edifices with arches, as he did with battlements, with which latter 
injunction the Mexicans seem to have been acquainted, since battlements on houses and fringes on garments were as common in Mexico 
as they were in Jerusalem. The supposition being as reasonable that America was colonized in early ages by Christians as by Jews, from 

598 NOTES. 

the Peruvians were acquainted with the arch as well as the Mexicans: and although the plate in Ramusio is coarsely 
executed, still, agreeing as it does with the accounts contained in the earliest Spanish authors of the magnificence of 

the reverence in which the Indians held the sign of the cross, both parties may consider that they have an equally fair claim to the honour of 
having introduced the arch into that continent; but “non nobis est tantas componere lites” would be the only reply which the result of our 
inquiries on this interesting subject would enable us to return to either. It has been already observed, that the temple represented upon 
the side of the Peruvian box has a Gothic appearance; and a sort of mixed style of architecture, combining Gothic with Indian taste, 
- seems to be displayed in the temple of Palenque: a church or monastery appears there to occupy the summit of a teocalli, and the roofs 
of its spacious and double cloisters invariably terminate in a pointed arch, whilst the height of the pyramid afforded security to its inmates 
from any sudden hostile attack. M. Dupaix has observed, that stones of vast size were employed in the construction of the palaces of 
Mitlan; and Acosta likewise notices the prodigious size of those which he observed in the ruins of the temple of Cuzco: but, although 
the style of architecture of the former edifices is as unlike as possible to Gothic, Greek, or Roman, and displays no vestige of the pointed 
arch, while the mosaic decorations of the walls of that which is in the best state of preservation, like the devices sculptured upon the walls of 
the fortress of Xochicalco, would seem mysteriously to refer to the worship of Quecalcoatle; still the discovery of some pillars which once 
supported the roof of those palaces shows that they had something in common with the temple of Cuzco which the temple of Palenque 
was without. The use of pillars in the architecture of the New World is certainly deserving of attention; and it is extremely probable 
that the Tultecas taught the Mexicans and the Peruvians the method of fabricating them, and of afterwards raising and fixing them on 
their pedestals. The Jews employed them at the earliest period of their history, as we are informed in the twenty-sixth and twenty- 
seventh chapters of Exodus, where mention is made of the wooden pillars which supported the sides and hangings, not only of the taber- 
nacle, but of the tent of the tabernacle, otherwise named the tent of the congregation, and of the court of the tabernacle: and Acosta, 
in the twelfth chapter of his Natural History of the Indies, after noticing the rich temple of Pacachama, situated at the short distance of 
one league from Lima, proceeds to mention the still more sumptuous one of Cuzco, a pillar of which was entire, and perhaps standing in 
his time: “ Alterum in Peru templum priore mult} augustius et sanctius habebatur. Ilud olim in civitatis Cusco eo loco positum erat, 
quo nunc ceenobium S. Dominici erectum visitur. Inter ejus rudera cetera, columnam adhuc salvam et inconfractam videre licet, ex 
qua de templi magnitudine, prestantid et eminentia certissima documenta desumi possunt liquidissima. Delubrum hoc Romanorum 
Pantheo, deorum omnium domicilio, quadam tenus simile erat.” The resemblance of the temple of the Sun at Cuzco to the Roman 
Pantheon is not pointed out by Acosta in reference to the style of any portion of its architecture, but to the images of the gods of the 
conquered nations which were placed in it, asin the Pantheon. And this remark, whatever might have been the association of ideas which 
led to it, could scarcely have been expected from Acosta, who, evidently not caring how many gods the Peruvians had, provided they had 
more.than one, says, in the thirteenth chapter of the fifth book of his Natural History of the Indies, “Si universa Indice lingue nomina 
evolvamus, ex omnibus tamen ne unicum inveniemus, quod Deo genuinum sit equé ac apud Hebreos El, apud Arabes, Ala: idque tam in 
Cusco, quam in Mexico. Ideoque hodie Hispanicum vocabulum Dios imitantur, illud definiunt ac explicant per proprietates Indicorum 
idiomatum, quorum frequentia et varia sunt.” In venturing to use a tone of levity in speaking of an author whose wilful errors on some 
material points do not entitle him to unqualified praise, it is by no means our intention to disparage the merits of so justly celebrated an 
historian, who still, it should be recollected, had a theory to support, and became, later in life, rector of the college of Salamanca,—a proof 
that his writings were not disagreeable to the age in which he lived. A concession, however, in the very passage in which he intended 
to demonstrate that the Indians had no idea of one supreme God, and that the Peruvians did not adore him under the names of Paca- 
chama and Viracocha, paves the way to the important question, whether, if the Saracens, the bitter enemies of the Christian name, wor- 
shiped Jehovah under the name of yn?" (or Allah), the Mexicans might not equally have adored him under that of mm (or Yao); and if 
the former epithet, which many pious persons associate with the notion that the doctrine of the Trinity was in the earliest ages revealed to the 
Jews, and believed (for of what use would revelation be without belief ?) by the more ancient patriarchs, became the war-cry of Mahometan 
hosts, bent on the slaughter of unbelievers in the Koran,—why the latter may not have been equally profaned in the New World in hymns 
responsive to the dying groans of victims immolated at the shrine of Tezcatlipoca. Having already referred to the authority of Acosta in 
proof of what has been observed of the size of the stones employed in the structure of the temple at Cuzco, we shall here quote the words 
of that writer, as cited by Garcilaso de la Vega in the twenty-seventh chapter of the seventh book of his Royal Commentaries of the Ingas ; 
a work which, though highly deserving of praise, has tended more than any other, from the partiality of the author for his countrymen, to 
the dissemination in Europe of the most erroneous opinions respecting the religion of the ancient Peruvians, which was quite as cruel 
as that of the Mexicans: “ Dice, pues, el P. Acosta, lib. 6, cap. 14. ‘En Tiaguanaco, medi yo una piedra de treinta y ocho pies de 

1 A very curious dissertation upon the name ‘7s occurs in Parkhurst’s Hebrew Lexicon; where, deriving it from Mx, «a denouncing 
of a curse’, that learned author defines it to be ‘a name usually given in the Hebrew Scriptures to the ever-blessed Trinity, by which 
they represent themselves as under the obligation of an oath to perform certain conditions, and as having denounced a curse on all, men 
and devils, who do not conform to them.” The absurdity of the idea of the Trinity binding theinselves by an oath to man can scarcely 
be surpassed ! since, if seeming propriety in the mere utterance of words, where the relative situations of persons imply superiority and 
inferiority in one of them, was so scrupulously regarded by the ancient Jews that David could not be understood to have called his son 
his Lord, how infinitely derogatory to the majesty of God it must appear, that man should receive an oath from those lips that with their 
word created the universe! 

NOTES. | 529 

that imperial city, and the great estimation in which Ramusio has always been held on account of the discrimination 
which he exercised in selecting and admitting into his work only what was authentic, being further considered, it ought 
not to be judged of no authority. That the Mexicans were acquainted with the cupola, is evident from several of their 
ancient ruins discovered by M. Dupaix, and especially from that represented in the twenty-fourth plate of the Second 
Part of his Monuments of New Spain; and that they employed the arch in their temples, as well as in their baths, is 
stated by Diego Valades, an author whom Clavigero makes casual mention of, but whose work belongs to that class 
of books which have disappeared. The fact of the existence of arches in American buildings having been proved, the 
question which naturally arises is, Who were the inventors of them amongst the Indians? and assuming that they 
were not the Mexicans or the Peruvians,—not on the ground of either of those nations wanting capacity to invent 
an arch, as some writers have pretended, since the quipus of the latter were a more ingenious invention, if reliance 
can be placed on Acosta’s account of them, but because it is more probable that the New World was indebted for that 
invention to the Old,—it becomes extremely likely that both those nations derived their knowledge of the arch* from 
the Jews, whose descendants, the Tultecas, were famous architects and skilful workmen, as were also their forefathers 
in the days of David, who in the passage of the Psalms, “If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, may my right hand forget 
her cunning,” can only allude to a mechanical quality in which his countrymen excelled, which, considered as a 
mental one, he would have disapproved even in Jacob. 

largo, y de diez y ocho de ancho, y el grueso seria de seis pies; y en la muralla de la fortalega del Cuzco, que es de mamposteria, ay 
muchas piedras de mucha major grandega; y lo que mas admiro es, que no siendo cortadas estas que digo de la muralla, por regla, sino 
>” « T myself measured in 
Tiaguanaco a stone thirty-eight feet long and eighteen broad, and about six feet in thickness; and there are many stones of much greater 

entre si mui desiguales en el tamafio, y en la faccion, encajan unas con otras con increible juntura, sin mezcla. 

magnitude in the wall of the fortress of Cuzco, which is of masonry; but it is even more wonderful that the stones of the wall which I 
have mentioned, which are not cut by rule, but of very dissimilar shapes and dimensions, should be inlaid with each other with incredible 
nicety and without cement.” M. Dupaix remarks that no cement was employed in the mosaic ornaments of the palaces of Mitlan, and 
that their durability was owing to the exact correspondence of the stones with each other, and to the tenacious composition in which they 
were inlaid. It has elsewhere been observed that Scripture seems to declare that Solomon’s temple was adorned with stones set in 
mosaic, and Sahagun intimates by the comparison with which he closes the thirty-ninth chapter of his fourth book that the Mexicans cul- 
tivated that art. Some remarks having already been made upon the temple carved upon the principal side of the Peruvian box, we shall 
add to them by observing that a garden is evidently represented in the back-ground of that temple, and the garden of the temple of the 
Sun at Cuzco was one of the most famous things belonging to it. The most respectable Spanish historians, including Garcilaso de la 
Vega, declare that there, as well as in the garden of the Ingas in the island of Puna, the plants, trees, and shrubs were of gold, made so as 
to exactly counterfeit nature; and the excessive richness of the Peruvian mines divest the accounts of these Spanish authors of the appear- 
ance of falsehood. Over the middle gate of the temple is an animal, the erect tail and head of which assimilate it to a lion, the ancient 
armorial bearing of the tribe of Judah: on another of the sides are the planets, and it is very remarkable that Saturn should be represented 
witha ring. The ancient Jews seem to have reckoned eleven the number of the planets ; since Joseph, declaring in the thirty-seventh chapter 
of Genesis his dream to his brethren, says: ‘ Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun, and the moon, and the 
eleven stars, made obeisance to me.” ‘The aggregate number of these signs it may be remarked was thirteen, a number highly esteemed 
by the Mexicans. At the four angles of the box are figures, as it has been presumed, of the Ingas, and the dress of one of them cor- 
responds exactly with the costume of the Jewish high-priest, as described in the twenty-eighth and thirty-fifth chapters of Exodus; the 
girdle, the breast-plate, the ephod, the band round the neck, the four rows of stones in the breast-plate, even the chains fastening it at the 
shoulders to the ephod, appear to be accurately represented ; but it deserves to be remarked that the stones are set vertically and not hori- 
zontally, which was perhaps the Hebrew fashion; and the bells to make a tinkling sound are wholly wanting, although the Mexican 
paintings afford evidence that a tinkling sound was considered by the Mexicans a matter of religious moment, and accordingly their 
priests occasionally wore bells on their ancles. In the thirty-ninth page of the Mexican painting preserved in the Royal Library at 
Dresden a figure occurs, with a vestment to the fringe of which are fastened bells. 

* The language of the ancient Mexicans, which was one of the most copious in the world, (an argument in favour both of the antiquity 
and civilization of their state,) had four different names for an arch in architecture : vitoliuhqui, tecululli, tenoll, and tequiauatl. The 
Mexicans named the rainbow ayauhcogamalotl and cocamalotl, and a bow for shooting arrows tlauitolli.’ 

(67 ) 

530 NOTES. 

Nore XIII. page 224. 

Yoalliehecatl, the signification of which proper name is ‘night and wind, was an epithet which the Mexicans 
bestowed upon their supreme deity Tezcatlipoca, denoting thereby the obscurity and subtilty of the divine essence. 
Acosta has been led into the mistake, through not considering that this compound term formed a proper name, of 
asserting that the Mexicans adored, on one of their principal festivals, the winds and darkness ; but Sahagun no where 
says that they attributed divinity to the elementary portions of nature. Fire and water were in no other manner con- 
sidered sacred by them, than as being the symbols of Xiuhtecutli and of Chalchiuitlicue. 

Nore XIV. page 215. 

Gomara says, that Guaca, the name which signified in the language of the Peruvians ‘a temple’, properly meant a 
place of sorrow or affliction ; being derived from guai, a Peruvian exclamation expressive of grief, which nearly re- 
sembles ova, of such frequent occurrence in the New Testament. 

Nore XV. page 215. 

The trophy of a hand borne upon the top of a staff was used by the ancient Mexicans, and is sometimes represented 
in their mythological paintings. It is singular that a hand elevated aloft should also have been a Hebrew trophy, as 
Parkhurst informs us in his Lexicon ; who assigns, as a fourth signification to the Hebrew word 7) ‘a hand,’ that of 
atrophy. “7 is used for a trophy or monument of victory, probably because made in the shape of a large hand, the 
emblem of power, erected on a pillar. Thus Saul, after smiting the Amalekites, in the pride of his heart, 7 1) 2x0, 
erected to or for himself, not for Jehovah, a hand, 1 Sam. xv. 12; where, LXX, yea ‘a hand.’ ‘And David smote 
Hadadezer, king of Zobah, when he was going 17) 1"), to erect his hand or trophy by the river Euphrates,’ 2 Sam. 
viii. 3; 1 Chron. xviii. 3. And this appears to be the most ancient use of these memorial hands; whence Absalom 
seems to have taken the hint of erecting one merely to keep his name in remembrance, 2 Sam. xviii. 18; where 
observe that this monument is expressly called not only 7» ‘a hand’, but 72x ‘a pillar’; which, together with the 
use of the verb 2x7 in the above texts, shows that the hand was wont to be put on a pillar. See more in Bate’s 
Crit. Heb., and compare Josephus, Ant. lib. vii. cap. 10. s. 3.” 

Nore XVI. 

The Mexicans, according to Sahagun, were accustomed to carry their mirrors about their persons, when they 
celebrated their solemn dances in the court-yard of their greater temple; and from the eighth verse of the thirty- 
eighth chapter of Exodus, it may be inferred that the same custom prevailed at least amongst the Jewish women.— 
“And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the looking-glasses of the women assembling, which 
assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.” This vanity on the part of the Jewish women who 
assembled at the door of the tabernacle, seems to have led to the consequences described in the twenty-second verse 
of the second chapter of the First Book of Samuel : “ Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all 
Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.” 

NOTES. 531 

Note XVII. page 293. 

Bishop Cumberland estimates the value of the gold which David prepared for the House of the Lord at 507,575,000/. 
sterling, and of the silver at 353,500,000/. sterling ; the two sums added together amounting to 861,075,000). sterling. 
It may be proper to add, that the learned prelate grounds his calculation upon the following passage of the twenty- 
second chapter of the First Book of Chronicles: “ Now, behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the House of the 
Lord an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver, and of brass and iron without 
weight.” How great must have been the wealth of Jerusalem in the ensuing prosperous reign of Solomon, when 
David in his trouble was able to amass such vast riches! And where is the absurdity of understanding in a literal 
sense, what most persons are inclined to consider an hyperbole, viz. that silver was really as common in Jefusalem, as 
stones in the days of the former king; which would serve to explain how the Jews could have maintained, in their 
small territory of Palestine, so large an army as that described at page 49 of this volume. 

Nore XVIII. page 191. 

It has been remarked in a preceding note, that superstitious nations are too ready to ascribe to prophetic inspiration 
things which have been foretold, merely because they were highly probable, and which accordingly afterwards came 
to pass. A fictitious case has also been recurred to at page 368, to show that true prophecies need not be always 
either miraculous or accidental in their nature. Having already quoted a passage in the chorus of one of the tragedies 
of Seneca, which, had it occurred in the Old Testament, would have been accounted a famous prophecy, we shall here 
introduce a beautiful passage of Pope’s Windsor Forest, which contains a number of accidental prophecies, and amongst 
others one the accomplishment of which we trust will be late. The greatest of poets could little have foreseen, when 
writing that admired poem, how many of his predictions time would verify ; nor would it perhaps have pleased him 
to have known, that the period would arrive when his favourite villa, and the grotto in which “St. John sat and thought,” 
would no longer be the chosen resort of the muses, but would be comprised within the suburbs of the gay metropolis. 
But who will contend that Pope, by inspiration, knew that London would be doubled in size in the course of a century ; 
that parliament would grant millions to build new churches; that the Burmese war would take place; that an expe- 
dition would be sent to the North Pole; that the ports of South America would be open to British commerce ; that 
Englishmen with capital would embark extensively in mining speculations; and that Mr. Huskisson would advocate 
the principles of free trade: yet the perusal of the following lines will convince the most sceptical, that he saw all 
these things as through a glass darkly which we now behold in the clear light of day. 

“ Hail, sacred peace! hail, long expected days 
That Thames’s glory to the stars shall raise, 
Though Tiber’s streams immortal Rome behold, 
Though foaming Hermus swells with tides of gold, 
From heaven itself though sevenfold Nilus flows, 
And harvests on a hundred realms bestows ; 
These now no more:shall be the Muse’s themes, 
Lost in my fame, as in the sea their streams. 

Let Volgas banks with iron squadrons shine, 
And groves of lances glitter on the Rhine, 
Let barbarous Ganges arm a servile train,— 
Be mine the blessings of a peaceful reign. 

532 NOTES. 

No more my sons shall dye with British blood 
Red Iber’s sands, or Ister’s foaming flood; 

Safe on my shore each unmolested swain 

Shall tend the flocks, or reap the bearded grain ; 
The shady empire shall retain no trace 

Of war or blood, but in the sylvan chace; 

The trumpet sleep, while cheerful horns are blown, 
And arms employed on birds and beasts alone. 
Behold! the ascending villas on my side 

Project long shadows o’er the crystal tide. 
Behold! Augusta’s glittering spires increase, 
And temples rise, the beauteous works of peace. 
I see, I see, where two fair cities bend 

Their ample bow, a new Whitehall ascend ! 
There mighty nations shall inquire their doom, 
The world’s great oracle in times to come ; 
There kings shall sue, and suppliant states be seen 
Once more to bend before a British Queen. 

Thy trees, fair Windsor! now shall leave their woods, 
And half thy forests rush into the floods, 

Bear Britain’s thunder, and her cross display 

To the bright regions of the rising day ; 

Tempt icy seas where scarce the waters roll, 
Where clearer flames glow round the frozen pole ; 
Or under southern shies exalt their sails, 

Led by new stars, and borne by spicy gales! 

For me the balm shall bleed, and amber flow, 
The coral redden, and the ruby glow, 

The pearly shell its lucid globe unfold, 

And Phebus warm the ripening ore to gold. 

The time shall come, when, free as seas or wind, 
Unbounded Thames shall flow for all mankind.” 

Nore XIX. page 419. 

Nieremberg affirms, in the following passage of his Historia Naturee, that the tradition of St. Thomas having 
preached the gospel to the Indians was common in various parts of South America: “ Apud Iaiaobz Indos in Occi- 
denti tradita per avos viget memoria S. Apostoli Thome, quam retinent a transitu ejus per illas plagas, cujus non levia 
extant indicia: precipué quedam semita in illis solitudinibus hactenus perseverat, in qua non oritur herba nisi valdé 
humilis et parvula, cum utrumque latus herbescat ultra modum; eo itinere dicunt Apostolum incessisse, et inde pro- 
fectum in Peruana regna. Apud Brasilienses quoque traditio est, ibi preedicasse. Apud alios barbaros, etiam in 
regionem Paraguay venisse, postquam descendit per fluvium Iguazu, deinde in Paranam per Aracaium, ubi observatur 
locus in quo sedit defessus Apostolus, et fertur predixisse, ut a majoribus acceptum est, post se illuc adventuros 
homines qui posteris eorum annuntiarent fidem veri Dei, quod non leve solatium et animos facit nostre religionis 
predicatoribus, ingentes labores inter illos barbaros pro dilatione Ecclesiz perpetientibus.”—Joannis Eusebii Nierem- 
bergii Historize Nature, lib. xiv. cap.cxvii. _Nieremberg’s Historia Naturee was printed at Antwerp in folio in the 
year 1635: it is valuable from containing copious extracts from the inedited MSS. of the celebrated Spanish naturalist 
Hernandez, chiefly relating to the plants and animals of New Spain. 

ie 

NOTES. 533 

Nore XX. page 269. 

Clavigero, in the account of the writers on the ancient history of Mexico which he has prefixed to his own work, 
mentions the name of Doctor Carlos de Siguenza é Gongora in the highest terms of commendation ; praising him as 
an author of the greatest diligence and research, and expressing at the same time his deep regret that only some 
fragments of his writings should have been preserved, which he thinks was owing to the negligence of his heirs, not 
suspecting that other causes might have consigned to intentional oblivion the fruits of Siguenza’s learned labours. In 
the list of his unpublished MSS. inserted by Eguiara in the first volume of his Bibliotheca Mexicana, one occurs of 
peculiar interest, from the title of which it might be inferred that Siguenza had discovered clear proofs, in the 
traditions and paintings of the Mexicans, that Christianity had once been established in New Spain. The title is 
as follows: “Occidentis Phenix S. Thomas Apostolus, nomine Quetzalcoatl, inter antiquarum cineres traditionum 
inventus, conservatus in lapidibus et carminibus Tultecorum, et Theochichimecorum ac Mewxicanorum canticis.” The 
brief account given by so grave and learned an author as Eguiara of the subject-matter of Siguenza’s curious treatise 
is deserving of the most serious attention ; and we therefore transcribe it from page 481 of his Bibliotheca Mexicana, 
observing at the same time that the hymns of the ancient Mexicans, which Sahagun translated into Spanish, and 
inserted in the Appendix to the second book of his History of New Spain, which might possibly have contained 
traditions of Quecalcoatl, were destroyed by order of the Inquisition, as a note in the original MS. expressly states. 
Nor is it unlikely that the Phenix of Siguenza perished in a pile lighted by the same hands. “ Ejus argumentum 
in predicationem $8. Thome Apostoli ad Septentrionalem usque Americam nostram productam inquirebat, atque 
multis undique conquisitis monumentis, primum Apostolos per omnem, qua laté patet, orbem effusos author probabat. 
Mox Americam nostram non perinde antiquis incognitam penitus fuisse agebat. Denique S. Thomam, é duodecim 
Apostolis unum, in eam migrasse, quem nomine Quetzalcoatl Indi signaverant, collatione utriusque facta, nominis, 
vestimenti, doctrine, vaticiniorum, concludebat; expensis que peragravit locis, rimatis relictis 4 se vestigiis, porten- 
tisque in lumen eductis é discipulis, wé minimum quatuor in hisce regionibus Christiane institutis.” 

Nore XXI. page 465. 

The Teponaztli, or hollow Mexican drum, might have borne some resemblance to the Hebrew musical instrument. 
$5010, mentioned by Parkhurst in page 507 of his Hebrew Lexicon. 

Nore XXII. page 331. 

The Mexican women were accustomed to anoint their faces with a yellow ointment named tecocauitl ; and we learn 
from the third verse of the third chapter of Ruth, that Naomi desired her daughter-in-law to anoint herself and put on 
raiment before she introduced herself to Boaz, in order to request him to perform the part of her near kinsman, by taking 
her for a wife. In the fourth chapter of the Fourth Book of Kings, or Second Book of Chronicles as it is more usually 
designated, the widow’s oil which was multiplied by the prophet Elisha is said to have been that which she used for 
anointing herself: “ Ovx core Ty Sovdy cov ovdev év Tw olKw, ore GAN’ 7) 0 GAerbouat éXaov.” * Thy servant hath nothing 
in the house save the oil with which I anoint myself.” Hence it would appear that the Jewish as well as the Mexican 
women were accustomed to anoint their bodies or faces, either for the sake of health or ornament. 

(Ou) 

534. NOTES. 

Nore XXIII. 

In the nineteenth chapter of the fourth book of his History of New Spain Sahagun says, that the family of a Mexi- 
can merchant who had been killed in a foreign country, immediately on receiving the intelligence of his death, made 
a wooden image of him, which they adorned with paper, and carried to the temple, where it remained a short time 
previously to being burnt. The author of the Apocryphal book of Scripture entitled the Wisdom of Solomon seems 
to allude, in the fifteenth verse of the fourteenth chapter, to an analogous custom, whether existing amongst the Jews 
or Gentiles is immaterial, since the latter invented no idolatrous custom which the former did not immediately adopt: 
“ For a father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he hath made an image of his child soon taken away, now 
honoured him as a god, which was then a dead man, and delivered to those that were under him ceremonies and 
sacrifices.” 

Notr XXIV. page 227. 

“ Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints,” is an exclamation of David in the ninety-sixth 
Psalm, which occurred to the recollection of the interpreter of the Vatican MS. when explaining the meaning of 
‘Tlatzolli Tzonpantli,’ who does not appear to have recollected equally well the ejaculation with which the Book of 
Psalms may be almost said to close, where David eloquently invokes the saints to sing the praises of God with a two- 
edged sword in their hand: “Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds : let the high 
praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and 
punishments upon the people; to bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; to execute 
upon them the judgment written : this honour have al/ his saints. Praise ye the Lord.” The royal bard could never 
have contemplated Sicilian vespers when pronouncing this ejaculation; yet we shudder at the remembrance of the 
atrocities perpetrated in a recent age by the Anabaptists, who, applying to themselves the prophecy contained in the 
eighteenth verse of the seventh chapter of Daniel,—*“ But the saints of the Most High shall take the kingdom, and 
possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever,”—thought to establish the fifth monarchy, and to begin the 
millennium, by first wading through a sea of blood. The language of truth being so often mistaken for that of 
exaggeration, we cannot but entreat modern Anabaptists, who may feel disposed to doubt the fact above mentioned, 
to consult the annals of Germany; which having done, it will not be at all surprising if they should be induced to 
abandon their creed. It cannot be denied that the ancient Jews were cruel beyond belief to their vanquished enemies : 
the innocence of childhood, the sweetness of youth, admiration for valour, or respect for age, never stayed their mur- 
dering swords; and the faults of the father were too frequently visited upon his poor and unoffending babes. In 
reading the seventh and following verses of the hundred and thirty-seventh Psalm, strongly significant though 
equivocally worded, at the same time recollecting the latitude of meaning which the Rabbis assign to the phrase “the 
children of Edom,” and the great regard which the Jews have always manifested for ancient precedent, a doubt may 
reasonably be entertained whether David's apostrophe to Babylon, “Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy 
little ones against the stones,” may not have led the Ingas to view with indifference the crime of infanticide, when 
the children slaughtered were those of their enemies. It is an old observation, that the code of the Pentateuch no- 
where inculeates patriotism as a virtue, which Christ appears to have had in contemplation when he uttered the words, 

2 

“ A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another ;” which could only have referred to the Mosaic law, 
since the laws and maxims of antiquity, which have been preserved to the present time, afford the most convincing 
proof that they inculcated patriotism and humanity. It is however even more surprising that clemency and pity for 
a fallen enemy should have found no place amongst the Levitical enactments; which strengthens our conviction that 
the ancient Jews, believing it to be impious in other nations to go to war with God’s chosen people, considered it 
virtuous to execute vengeance upon their enemies, and to show no mercy to prisoners taken in battle. Their example 

was imitated by the Mexicans, who in massacreing their captive enemies only followed the rules of Jewish warfare. 

NOTES. 535 

Note XXV. page 226. 

The following curious passage occurs in the first book of Leo Africanus: “ Hujus mali (venerei) ne nomen quidem 
ipsis Africanis notum erat antequam Hispaniarum Rex Ferdinandus Judzos omnes ex Hispania profligasset: qui ubi 
in patriam jam rediissent, coeperunt miseri quidam ac sceleratissimi AAthiopes cum illorum mulieribus habere com- 
mercium, ac sic tandem veluti per manus pestis heec per totam se sparsit regionem, ita ut vix sit familia que ab hoc 
malo remanserit libera. Id autem sibi firmissimé atque indubitaté persuaserunt, ex Hispania ad illos transmigrasse : 
quamobrem et illi morbo Malum Hispanicum, ne nomine destitueretur, indiderunt.” 

Nore XXVI. page 202. 

Reference to the seventh page of the Dresden Codex, and to an analogous painting contained in the forty-first page 
of the MS. of Archbishop Laud, representing a bird inserting its bill into the mouth of some personage, perhaps a 
Mexican diviner, may render the following obscure passage of Maimonides more intelligible : m9 “ny Mwy ID 
TaN) wT O43 0 os Sy end onpnyw oT YI 4279 mp2 |W IY OMS OwWYD Mwy) TOPO YHA yr Tow APY Oxy 
MDNT ON VN ON wo Dw“ Quod est opus arioli? Os avis, cui nomen Jaduah, znserit ori suo, et suffitum aliaque 
facit, donec fiat mente commotus, et loquatur que videntur eventura. Universa hac sunt idololatrici generis; atque 
eorum interdictum habemus, cum dicitur, Ne vos convertatis ad Pythones."—Maimonides de Idololatria, cap. vi. 
Divination by a skull, another Jewish superstition noticed by Maimonides, is perhaps represented in the twentieth 
page of the Mexican painting in the possession of M. de Fejervary; and in that painting some regard seems to be 
manifested for the number twelve, by those who appear to be employed in weaving the spell. Maimonides, in the 
ninth section of the third chapter of his treatise concerning Idolatry, declares, “ Qui amplectitur idolum aut osculatur ; 
qui verrit vel aguam effundit coram eo; qui illud davat, vestit, calceat, aut simili afficit honore, transgreditur inter- 
dictum: quia dictum est, Nec servies eis.” It is hence evident that he was well acquainted with these various 
superstitions ; and from his mention of them in that place, coupled with a prohibition to his countrymen against the 
practice of them, it is to be presumed that the Jews were acquainted with them likewise; but it is very remarkable 
that they should all be represented in the Mexican paintings. 

Nore XXVII. page 294. 

Sahagun, describing in the first paragraph of the twenty-ninth chapter of the tenth book of his History of New 
Spain the manners of the Tultecas, says, “La manera de cortarse el cabello era segun su uso pulido que traian los 
cabellos desde la media cabeza atras.” “They cut their hair in such a manner as to wear it, agreeably to their refined 
fashion, only on the hinder half of the head.” That precisely the same custom prevailed amongst the Jews, we learn 
from the following verse of the poet Nonnus’s Paraphrase of the Gospel of St. John: 

“Xpworog orio0oxopwy pepotwy Oownropr Aaw 
KAnroe ény ovyoopmosg.” 
“ Christ, an invited guest, sat in company with the revelling crew, who were bald except at the back of their heads.” 
The Galileans are here alluded to; and the epithet dio@oxouwy applied to them would seem to signify that they used 
that particular kind of tonsure which the Greeks named éxropiog Koupa, it is to be presumed after Hector, as they also 
named it Ononic, according to Plutarch, from Theseus, on account of that hero having cut off the hair which grew on 
the fore part of his head for an offering at Delphos. The Rabbis have denied that either the epithet of dmo0oxopwy, 
or that of zpoyoovpwec, could be applicable to the ancient Jews, because they would both necessarily imply a breach 

536 NOTES. 

of the Mosaic law. Josephus, however, was of a different opinion, and did apply the latter to his countrymen : and as 
for the modern Jews, having long since done away with phylacteries, they have at last prudently thought proper to 
do away with that part of the Mosaic law which relates to beards. 

Note XXVIII. page 402. 

The Mexican goddess Cihuacohuatl, or Suchiquecal, was also named Quilaztli, as we learn from the twenty-eighth 
chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, who there expressly declares that she was Eve: “ Esta 
és Eva, que és la muger que primero parid.” The probability of the Mexicans having been acquainted with the 
history of Cain and Abel is pointed out in page 221 of the present volume; and it seems only necessary, in order 
fully to identify Suchiquecal with the Eve of Scripture, to show that the Mexicans believed that she brought death 
into the world, which involves the supposition that they were not ignorant of the doctrine of original sin. From the 
following passage of page 469 of the preceding volume, which contains the address of the midwife to the relatives 
of a woman who had lately been delivered of a son, it may confidently be inferred that such was their belief: “Por 
cierto este negocio és una batalla en que peligramos las mugeres, porque este negocio és como tributo de muerte que 
nos echa nuestra madre Cioacoatl y Quilahtli.” “This necessity (of giving birth to children) is, indeed, a battle in 
which we who are women are exposed to great dangers, for it is as it were the tribute of death bequeathed to us by our 
mother Cioacoatl and Quilahtli.” It is singular that the Peruvians should have believed, as well as the Mexicans, that 
twins were unlucky; they, perhaps, had also a tradition that Cain had murdered his brother Abel. Cieca de Leon 
says of the former people, “Tenian por mal aguero estos Indios que una muger pariesse dos criaturas de un vientre, 
6 quando alguna criatura nasce con algun defecto natural, como es en una mano seys dedos, 6 otra cosa semejante. 
Y si, como digo, alguna muger paria de un vientre dos criaturas, 6 con algun defecto, se entristecian ella y su marido, 
y ayunavan sin comer agi, ni bever chicha que es el vino que ellos beven, y hazian otras cosas 4 su uso y como lo 
aprendieron de sus padres.”—Parte Primera de la Chronica del Peru, cap. lxv. Amongst the Jews, persons born 
with any natural defect were forbidden to discharge the Levitical functions, and Hebrew parents would probably have 
felt compunction, as well as sorrow, when such misfortunes befell their children, from the erroneous belief, which 
even some of Christ’s disciples shared, that the sins of the father were frequently visited by God upon the child; and 
hence they might, like the Peruvians, have fasted on the occasion of the birth of deformed children. 

Nore XXIX. page 449. 

M. Dupaix, in describing the palace of Mitlan, observes, that not only the inner walls, but even the pillars which 
supported the roof of that edifice, had once been painted with vermilion. That this was a Jewish custom, is evident 
from the following passage of the twenty-second chapter of Jeremiah: “Woe unto him that buildeth his house by 
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbour's service without wages, and giveth him not 
for his work ; that saith, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows ; and it 
is ceiled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.” Selden, in a passage of the Introduction to his treatise De Diis 
Syris, says, on the authority of Epiphanius, that it was an Egyptian custom to dye the trees and cattle red on the 
anniversary of the Jewish passover, in commemoration of the sprinkling of the door-posts with the blood of the 
Hebrew lamb. The ancient ecclesiastical writers were so credulous, and so prone to indulge in pious frauds in their 
narrations, that it may reasonably be doubted whether such a custom ever existed amongst the Egyptians; it is at the 
same time, however, highly probable that the Jews might have dyed the pillars and walls of their houses with ver- 
milion in commemoration of the flight of their ancestors from Egypt. The following is the passage of Selden alluded 
to: “ JAoyptiis quotannis in Judaico Paschate greges et arbores minio, velut alexeterio, illinere solenne erat: id ex 
depravato traditionis sacree de Ebreeorum superliminaribus sanguine illitis intellectu manavit, quod fusius narrat Epi- 

NOTES. 53ST. 

phanius in heresi Nazareorum. Perperam accepta Mosis de aneo serpente historia ut thymiamata ei incenderentur 
effecit.” The supposition that the miracles which Moses performed, by holding up his rod that became a serpent, 
inclined his superstitious countrymen in later ages to pay adoration to that reptile, and to regard it in the light of a 
tutelary genius, has here the sanction of high authority ; and if Selden has judged it not unreasonable to refer to this 
example in Jewish history, to show the probability of Epiphanius’s narrative, who will deny the validity of the argu- 
ment by which an attempt is here made to prove that the adoption of the serpent as a sacred symbol by the Mexicans 
was in commemoration of the brazen serpent which Moses set up in the wilderness? It may be proper to add, that 
although the Mexicans carried the figure of a serpent in their religious processions, and wore it on their persons as a 
sacerdotal ornament, not scrupling to invest the image of Tezcatlipoca with a symbol so appropriate to Tetzauhteotle, 
or the terrible god, they did not adore it except as the type of Quecalcoatle. 

Nore XXX. 

The account which Gomara gives of the Spanish expedition in search of the seven cities of Sibola, and the causes 
that led to it, is interesting, not only because it records the earliest attempt made by the Spaniards to investigate the 
provinces situated to the north of Mexico, but likewise because much mystery attaches to the relation of the friars, 
from whom the intelligence of the existence of those cities was first received, who seem either themselves to have 
discovered traces of Christianity in that part of America, or to have heard rumours to that effect which they judged 
to be worthy of credit. The probability that their relation was a mere forgery, is counterbalanced by the much 
greater improbability, that, if that had been the case, they would have ventured to have stated a deliberate falsehood, 
likely to involve such serious consequences as an expedition disastrous to the Spaniards, to Cortes, and the Viceroy 
of Mexico ; or that they would have been able to deceive two persons of such great penetration as were Cortes and 
Don Antonio de Mendoza; or, finally, that those persons would have quarrelled with each other about the right which 
each claimed, Mendoza as Viceroy of Mexico, and Cortes as Captain-general of New Spain, to undertake the conquest 
of Sibola, the former of whom fitted out a numerous army of Spaniards and Indians, with a regiment of four hundred 
cavalry, to take possession of that province, and the latter retired from motives of disgust to Spain. The unfortu- 
nate result, however, of the enterprize, which did not, as was usual in such cases, lead even to the establishment of a 
settlement in the provinces which the Spanish army had traversed, furnished Gomara with the opportunity of indul- 
ging in a jest against Brother Mark de Nica, who was the friar who in the year 1539 returned to Mexico, “ diziendo 
maravillas de siete ciudades de Sibola:” which cities he proceeds thus briefly to describe; ‘“ Las famosas siete ciu- 
dades de Fray Marcos de Nica, que estan en espacio de seys leguas, ternan obra de quatro mil ombres. Las riquezas 
de su reyno es no tener que comer, ny que vestir, durando la nieve siete meses.” ‘The famous seven cities of Bro- 
ther Mark de Nica, which occupy six leagues of country, may contain a population of about four thousand men, whose 
only wealth is to have nothing to eat, and to go naked during seven winter months.” Gomara is, however, obliged 
to own that the courage of the Indians opposed a most vigorous resistance to the Spaniards, who were much disap- 
pointed on taking a town, after a siege of forty-five days, at finding that they had burnt all their turquoise-stones and 
property of value in a blazing pile which they had kindled for the purpose. It cannot be doubted that Gomara 
represents the provinces of Quivira and Sibola such as he believed them to be; but the following description, by 
Lieutenant Hardy, of the ruins which still cover a vast extent of country in the neighbourhood of Las Casas Grandes 
may induce some persons to suppose that king Tatarrax did really “adore a cross of gold, and pray to the image of 
a woman who was queen of heaven.” “Casas Grandes is one of the few ruins existing in Mexico, the original 
owners of which are said to have come from the north, and I therefore determined to devote a couple of hours on the 
morrow to its investigation. On the thirteenth I examined a ruin about half a mile from my last night’s lodgings. 
Only a portion of the external walls is standing; the building is square, and of very considerable extent; the sides 
stand accurately north and south, which gives reason to suppose that the builder was not unversed in the science of 
astronomy, having determined so precisely the cardinal points. The roof has long lain in the area of the building, 
and there are several excavations, said to have been made by the Apache Indians, to discover earthenware jars and 

(6x) 

538 NOTES. 

shells. A specimen of the jars I was so fortunate as to procure, and it is in excellent preservation. There were also 
good specimens of earthern images in the Egyptian style, which are to me at least so perfectly uninteresting that I 
was at no pains to procure any of them, The country here for the extent of several leagues is covered with the ruins 
of buildings capable of containing a population of at least twenty thousand or thirty thousand souls. Casas Grandes is 
indeed particularly favourable for maintaining so many inhabitants. Situated by the side of a large river which periodi- 
cally inundates a great part of the low surrounding lands, the verdure is perpetual. There are ruins also of aqueducts, 
and in short every indication that its former inhabitants were men who knew how to avail themselves of the advantages 
of nature and to improve them by art; but who they were and what has become of them there is no chronicle to tell, 
and conjecture is left to build as many theories respecting them, as of other extinct nations as little known. On the 
south bank of the Rio Gila there is another specimen of these singular ruins; and it may be observed that wherever 
these traces are found, the surrounding country invariably possesses great fertility of soil, water, and wood. About half 
a league to the north-west of Casas Grandes is an old convent built by the Jesuits, who were equally careful to avail 
themselves of similar advantages. It is in ruins also, and stands on an eminence; it appears to have been a very large 
building.” —Travels in the Interior of Mexico, page 465. We have availed ourselves with greater pleasure of this 
extract from Lieut. Hardy’s Travels, because the ruins of Las Casas Grandes, situated nearly a thousand miles to the 
north of Mexico, have been known rather by rumour than in any other manner to Spanish authors who have men- 
tioned them in their writings, and their existence has often been considered problematical. In a note subjoined to 
page 183 of the present volume will be found the opinion of Cardinal Lorenzana, that these ruins were the deserted 
habitations of the Mexicans; but in the same page reasons are assigned for not attaching much weight to that learned 
prelate’s opinion, whose certainty on so obscure a matter of history, resting wholly unsupported by any evidence, cannot be 
shared by the reader of his edition of the Letters of Cortes. It is to be regretted that Lieut. Hardy should not have been 
at the pains of procuring any of the little earthen images in the Egyptian style, of which he says good specimens were 
to be found in the neighbourhood of Las Casas Grandes, since it is evident, from the terms in which he mentions them, 

that disappointment at their loss would not have caused him to exclaim with Boturini, “no las trocara por oro y plata 

por diamantes y perlas;” and the comparison of them with the Mexican Penates or images of baked clay of a similar 
description, which a well-informed traveller says are still frequently found in the vicinity of Mexico, Cholula, and 
other ancient cities of New Spain, might have enabled intelligent persons to judge whether the religion of the popula- 
tion of Las Casas Grandes, and their taste for the arts, resembled that of the Mexicans. The jar, an engraving of which 
is given in page 465 of his work, is interesting, because the symmetrical lines that ornament its surface are not 
unlike those traced in mosaic on the walls of the palace of Mitlan. In Honduras, stone vases have been found em- 
bellished in a more simple manner with broken lines, representations of which will be found in the American Monu- 
ments of Baron de Humboldt. Itis probable that the town of Chihuahua, with its extensive plains, described by Lieut. 
Hardy as entirely destitute of wood, and lying on the route to Las Casas Grandes, is that to which Gomara gave the 
appellation of Cicuic.- The numerous herds of cattle grazing upon its neighbouring plains were by no means indicative 
of the poverty of the subjects of king Tatarrax : they are thus described by that historian; “De Tiguex fueron en 
quatro jornadas a Cicuic, lugar pequefio, y a quatro leguas del toparon un nuevo genero de vacas fieras y bravas, de 
las quales mataron el primer dia ochenta que bastecieron el exercito de carne. Fueron de Cicuic a Quivira, que a 
su cuenta ay casi trezientas leguas, por grandisimos llanos y arenales tan rasos y pelados que hizieron mojones de 
bofiigas, a falta de piedras y de arboles, para no perderse a la buelta, ca se les perdieron en aquella llanura tres 
cavallos y un Espafiol que se desvio a caca. Todo aquel camino y anos estan Ilenos de vacas corcobadas como la 
Serena de ovejas, pero no ay mas gente de la que los guardan; fueron gran remedio para la hambre y falta de pan que 
llevavan. Cayo les un dia por aquel Ilano mucha piedra como naranjas ; y uvo hartas lagrimas, flaqueza, y votos : 
Hegaron en fin a Quivira, y hallaron al Tatarrax que buscavan, ombre ya cano desnudo, y con una joya de cobre al 
cuello, que era toda su riqueza.”’—La Istoria de las Indias, fol. cxvz. In the first edition of Gomara’s History of the 
Indies, printed at Saragoza in 1553, from which the above extract is taken, a wood-cut is given representing a Quivira 
ox which appears to have been a real buffalo ; another domestic animal with which the Indians of that province of 
America were acquainted, and for which they might have been indebted to the Greenland monks, was a large kind of 
dog which they employed in carrying burthens. “ Ay tambien grandes perros que lidian con un toro, y que llevan 
dos arrobas de carga sobre salmas quando van a caca o quando se mudan con el ganado y hato.”——La Istoria de las 

NOTES. 539 

Indias, fol. cxvi. A very small species of dog, less than a guinea-pig, inhabits the plains of Quivira, and burrows in 
the ground like a rabbit; and here we shall take occasion to observe, that various species of dogs being known in the 
New World, it is probable that the Indians were acquainted with the hydrophobia, and perhaps with a cure for it, 
since accident frequently reveals what the greatest sagacity has failed to discover, and the medicinal properties of 
American plants which the Mexicans so well understood, many of which they used as antidotes against the bites of 
the most poisonous serpents, are yet but very imperfectly known. The account therefore which Lieut. Hardy has 
given of the mode by which an Indian woman professed to cure the hydrophobia is not undeserving of attention, and 
her notion that the complaint began with an affection of the mouth and tongue, which if removed in time, before the 
disease had extended itself through the system, would not prove fatal, acquires some plausibility from the conside- 
ration that the nerves of the mouth as well as those situated about the eye are exquisitely sensitive, and that their 
derangement or vitiated action would be likely to produce the most violent disorders. In the relation above, Lieut. 
Hardy has compared the ruins of Las Casas Grandes to others situated on the bank of the Rio Gila, a plan and de- 
scription of which we subjoin from the MS. relation of the New Discovery of the Port of Monte Rey, composed by 
the missionary Pedro Font, who accompanied the expedition which was dispatched thither from Queretaro for the 
purpose of colonization in the year 1775. In the eighth volume of the Antiquities of Mexico will be found extracts 
from valuable ancient MSS. which will throw new light on the history of the provinces situated to the north of 
Mexico, of which so very little is as yet known. 

“Salimos del picacho de Facca 4 las ocho de la ma- 
ana y 4 las cinco y media de la tarde llegamos cerca del 
Rio Gila, y paramos en una laguna algo distante de él, 
haviendo caminado unas doce leguas con el rumbo, como 
seis al Noroeste, tres al Nornoroeste, y al ultimo unas tres 
quasi al Norte. Con el recado que ayer se embio salieron 
al camino 4 recibirnos el gobernador de las rancherias de 
Papagos Aquituni, y Cuytoa, y el gobernador de Uturituc, 
pueblo del Rio Gila, con su alcalde, acompafiado del gober- 
nador de Sutaquison, y otros Indios, todos 4 caballo, los 
quales se apearon para saludarnos, y presentaron 4 los solda- 
dos dos cabelleras de Apaches que mataron el dia antecedente con quienes tienen guerra continua, y luego montaron 4 
caballo, y nos acompafiaron hasta el parage. Preguntaban si veniamos yé 4 vivir con ellos, y bautizar la gente, lo 
que parece desean mucho, y se manifestaron muy alegres por nuestra Ilegada. 

“ Determiné el Sefior Comandante que descansara oi la gente, y con esto tubimos lugar de ir 4 registrar la casa 
grande que llaman de Moctezuma, situada 4 una legua del Rio Gila, y distante del parage de la laguna unas tres 
leguas al Estsudeste 4 donde fuimos acompanados de algunos Indios, y del gobernador de Uturituc, quien en el 
camino nos cont6 una historia y tradicion que conservan de sus pasados sobre dicha casa, que toda se reduce 4 patrafias 
mescladas confusamente con algunas verdadades Catolicas. Observé este parage de la casa grande, y es sefialada en el 
mapa con la letra A. y lo hallé en 38°. 3!. y asi digo: en la casa grande del Rio Gila, dia 31 de Octubre de 1775, 
altura meridiana del bordo inferior del Sol, 42°. 25'. Registramos con todo cuidado este edificio, y sus vestigios, 
cuya planta ichnographica es la que aqui pongo; y para su mejor inteligencia doi la descripcion, y esplicacion 
siguiente. La casa grande, 6 palacio de Moctezuma, tendr4 de fundacion unos 500 afios segun las historias, y esca- 
sas noticias que hai de ello, y dn los Indios ; porque segun parece esta fundacion la hicieron los Mejicanos quando 
en su transmigracion los Ilevaba el Demonio por varias tierras, hasta llegar 4 la tierra prometida de Mexico, y en sus 
mansiones que eran largas, formaban poblacion, y edificios. El sitio donde se halla esta casa es Ilano por todas 
partes, y apartado del Rio Gila como una legua, y las ruinas de las casas que formaban la poblazion se estienden 
mas de una legua para el Oriente, y demas vientos ; y todo es de terreno : esta sembrado de pedazos de ollas, tarros, 
platos, &*., unos ordinarios, y otros pintados de varios colores, blanco, azul, colorado, &*., indicio que fué pobla- 
cion crecida, y de distinta gente de los Pimas Gilefios, pues estos no saben hacer semejante losa. Hicimos exacta 
inspeccion del edificio y de su situacion, y lo medimos con una lanza por lo prompto; cuya medida reduje despues 
& pies geométricos, y 4 poco mas 6 menos es la siguiente. 

540 NOTES. 

“Esta la casa quadrilonga, y perfectamente @ los quatro vientos cardinales, Este, Oeste, Norte, y Sur, y al rededor 
estan unas ruinas que indican algun cerco, 6 muralla, que encerraba 4 la casa, y otros edificios particularmente en las 
esquinas en donde parece habia alguna fabrica como castillo interior, 6 atalaya, pues en el esquina que cae al Sud- 
oeste hai un pedazo de pie con sus divisiones, y un alto. La cerca exterior tiene de Norte 4 Sur 420 pies*, y de 
Este 4 Oeste 260. Lo interior de la casa se compone de cinco salas; las tres iguales en medio, y una en cada 
extremo mas largas. Las tres salas tienen de Norte 4 Sur 26 pies, y de Este 4 Oeste 10. Las dos salas de los ex- 
tremos tienen de Norte 4 Sur 12 pies, y de Este 4 Oeste 38. Las salas tienen de alto 11 pies, y todas son iguales. 
Las puertas de comunicacion tienen de alto 5 pies, y de ancho 2, y son casi iguales todas, excepto las quatro primeras 
de las quatro entradas, que parece eran otro tanto anchas. Lo grueso de las paredes interiores quatro pies, y estan 
bien ensaradas, y de las externas 6 pies. La casa tiene por lo exterior de Norte 4 Sur 70 pies, y de Este 4 Oeste 50. 
Las paredes estan escarpadas por de fuera. Delante de la puerta del Oriente separada de la casa, hai otra pieza 
que tiene de Norte 4 Sur 26 pies, y de Este 4 Oeste 18, sin el grueso de las paredes. El madera era de pino por lo 
que se vé, y la sierra mas cercana que tiene pinos dista unas 25 leguas; y tambien tiene algo de mesquite. Todo 
el edificio es de tierra, y segun las senales es tapia fabricada con cajones de varios tamaftos. Viene del Rio, y de 
bien lejos, una acequia bien grande con que se socorria de agua la poblazion y esta ya mui cegada. Por-fin se 
conoce que tenia el edificio tres altos ; y si es verdad lo que se pudo rastrear de los Indios, y por los indicios que se 
vieron tenia quatro, profundizado el piso de la casa 4 modo de pieza subterranea. Para dar luz las piezas no se vén 
mas que las puertas, y unos agujeros redondos en medio de las paredes que miran al Oriente, y Poniente ; y dijeron 
los Indios que por aquellos agujeros (que sen algo grandes) miraba el Principe, que ellos llaman el hombre amargo, 
al Sol quando salia, y se ponia para saludarlo. No se hallaron rastros de escaleras, por lo que juzgamos que eran 
de madera, y se destruyeron con la quemazon que padecio el edificio por los Apaches. 

“Dia | de Noviembre salimos de la laguna 4 Jas 93 de la manaiia, y 4 la una de la tarde Ilegamos al pueblo de San 
Juan Capistrano de Uturituc haviendo caminado 4 leguas con el rumbo al Oest Noroeste. Nos recibieron los Indios, 
que regulé como mil almas puestos en dos filas, los hombres de un lado, y las mugeres del otro, y haviendonos apeado 
vinieron todos por su torno 4 saludarnos, y darnos la mano, primero los hombres, y luego las hombres digo mugeres, 
manifestando mucho contento de vernos, y nos hospedaron en una gran ramada que hicieron para este fin ; delante la 
qual plantaron una cruz grande aunque gentiles, y luego trajeron agua al real para la gente. Son estos Pimas Gilefios 
Indios mansos, y de buen corazon.”—Plan. Geo. Hist. del Nuevo Descr. de‘el Puerto del Monte Rey. 

* The East and West sides of this outer wall are, in the annexed plan, less extensive than the North and South; an inaccuracy which 

the description serves to rectify. 

END OF THE SIXTH VOLUME. 

RICHARD TAYLOR, 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON, 
RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET. 

Peau 

hen 

| 

ees