Clothed with the Sun
========================================
Anna Kingsford; ed. Edward Maitland (1889) — Kingsford's posthumous book of illuminations — the visionary record of esoteric Christianity's 19th-century prophetess. Source: https://archive.org/details/clothedwithsunbe00king. Public domain.

"CLOTHED  WITH  THE  SUN"

BEING  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  ILLUMINATIONS

OF

ANNA  (BONUS)  KINGSFORD

EDITED  BY

-V

EDWARD  MAITLAND

"Illumination  is  the  Light  of  Wisdom,  whereby  a  man  perceiveth  heavenlj
secrets.

"  Which  Light  is  the  Spirit  of  God  within  the  man,  showing  unto  him  the
things  of  God.*  ^"*"T,  ^c  ^T^*^       Illumination  No.  ii.

NEW  YORK :

FRANK  F.   LOVELL  &  COMPANY

142  and  144  Worth  Street.


Copyrighted  by
John  W.  Lovell  Compa.v

2>eMcatfott

To  the  numerous  and  world-wide  circle  of  genuine  students  of  Divine
things,  who  recognised  in  Anna  Kingsford  a  Seer,  an  Interpreter,
and  a  Prophet  of  the  rarest  lucidity  and  inspiration,  and  a  foremost
herald  of  the  dawning  better  age  ;  and  especially  to  the  Friend  whose
instant  and  enthusiastic  appreciation  proved  an  invaluable  support
in  a  position  of  peculiar  difficulty,  and  beneath  whose  roof  some  of
the  illuminations  herein  contained  were  received,  but  who  desires  to
remain  unnamed ;  and  also  to  the  "  friend,  disciple,  and  literary  heir
of  the  renowned  magian,  the  late  Abbe-  Constant  ("  Eliphas  Levi")"—
namely,  to  the  Baron  Guiseppe  Spedalieri,  for  manifold  tokens  of
high  approbation  and  devoted  friendship,— this  book  is  affectionately
inscribed.

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

Dedication
Preface

PAGES
V

PART  THE  FIRST.

Illumination
No.
I.   Concerning  the  three  Veils  between  Man  and  God

II.   Part  I.   Concerning  Inspiration  and  Prophesying

Part  2.  A  prophecy  of  the   Kingdom  of  the    Soul
mystically  called  the  Day  of  the  Woman  .

III.  Concerning  the  prophecy  of  the  Immaculate  Concep

tion  ...  .  .

IV.  Concerning  Revelation  .
V.   Concerning  the  Interpretation  of  the  Mystical  Scrip-
tures         ....  — Part  I

Do.  Do.  — Part  2

VI.  Concerning  the  Mosaic  Cosmogony      .  •  •

VII.   Concerning  the  Fall      .  .  .  .  •

VIII.   Concerning  the  prophecy  of  the  Deluge  .  •

IX.   Concerning  the  prophecy  of  the  Book  of  Esther  .

X.   Concerning  the  prophecy  of  the  vision  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar       ......

XI.  Concerning  the  prophecy  of  the  time  of  the  End
XII.   Concerning  the  Soul:  its  origin,  nature,  and  potentiali-
ties ......

XIII.  Concerning  Persephone,   or   the   Soul's   descent   into
matter       ......

i-5

5-7

8-9

10-13
1315

16-19
19-21
22-25
25-28
29-30
3o-32

33-35
35-41

41-52

52-55

Vlll

Contents.

[tLUMINATION

No.

XIV.  Concerning  the  Genius  or  Daimon — Part  I

Do.  Do.  —Part  2

XV.   Concerning  the  "  Powers  of  the  Air" — Part  I

Do.  Do.  —Part  2

XVI.   Concerning  the  Devil  and  devils  .

XVII.   Concerning  the  Gods       .  .  .

XVIII.   Concerning  the  Greek  Mysteries

XIX.   Concerning  the  origin  of  Evil,  and  the  Tree  as

the  type  of  Creation  .  — Part  I

Do.  Do.  .  —Part  2

XX.   Concerning  the  Great  Pyramid,  and   the  Initia

tions  therein
XXI.   Concerning  the  "  Man  of  Power  "
XXII.   Concerning  the  "  Work  of  Power"

XXIII.  Concerning  Regeneration

XXIV.  Concerning  the  Man  Regenerate  .
XXV.  Concerning  the  Christ  and  the  Logos

XXVI.   Concerning  the  perfectionment  of  the  Christ
XXVII.  Concerning  Christian  Pantheism  .

XXVIII.   Concerning  the  "  Blood  of  Christ "
XXIX.   Concerning  "  Vicarious  Atonement"       .

XXX.   Concerning  Paul  and  the  Disciples  of  Jesus
XXXI.  Concerning  the  Manichxanism  of  Paul   .
XXXII.  Concerning  the  Gospels  :  their  origin  and  com
position         ....

XXXIII.  Concerning  the  actual  Jesus        .  .

XXXIV.  Concerning  the  previous  lives  of  Jesus    .
XXXV.   Concerning  the  Holy  Family

XXXVI.  Concerning  the  Metempsychosis  or  Avatar
XXXVII.  Concerning  the  ^Iion  of  the  Christ
XXXVIII.   Concerning  the  doctrine  of  Grace  •

XXXIX.   Concerning  the  "  Four  Atmospheres  "    .
XL.  Concerning  the  Hereafter  •  •

PAGES
55-61

6i-66
66-70
70-71
72-73
7374
74-81

82-83
8385

85-S9

90-94

94-98

99-102

102-107

107  109

109-111

in-112

112-115

116-122

122-125

126

127

131

136-
139
141
144
146-
147
ISO

131
136

13S
140
144
146
147
i49
i55

Contents.  ix

Illumination

NO.  PAGES

XLI.  Concerning  the  true  Ego    .  •  •  .156-158

XLII.  Concerning  God      .  .  .  .  .159-163

XLIII.   Concerning  Psyche,  or  the  Superior  Human  Soul  164-170
XLIV.   Concerning   the    Poet,    as   type   of  the   heavenly

personality       .....  170-174

XLV.  Concerning  Psyche  (continued  from  No.  XLIII.)  174-177
XLVI.  Concerning  Consciousness  and  Memory  in  relation

to  Personality   .             .             .             .              .  17S-183
XLVII.   Concerning  the  Substantial  Ego  as  the  true  Sub-
ject      ....             —Part  I  183-187
Do.                         Do.                           —Part  2  187-189
XLVIII.  Concerning  the  Christian  Mysteries— Part  I            .  189-191
Do.                     Do.                 — Part  2           .  191-193
XLIX.  Concerning  D>ing                ....  194- *97
L.  Concerning  the  One  Life,  being  a  recapitulation    .  197-205

PART  THE  SECOND.

THE   BOOK   OF   THE    MYSTERIES    OF   GOD.

I.  The  Credo  ;  being  a  summary  of  the  spiritual  his-
tory of  the  Sons  of  God,  and  the  mysteries  of
the  kingdoms  of  the  Seven  Spheres     .  .  210

II.  The    "Lord's    Prayer;"   being   a   prayer   of  the

Elect  for  interior  pcrfectionment  .  .  211

III.  Concerning  Holy  Writ        ....     212-213

IV.  Concerning  Sin  and  Death  .  .  .     213-215
V.   Concerning  the  "Great  Work,"  the  Redemption,

and  the  share  of  Christ  Jesus  therein   .  .  215  221

VI.   Concerning    Original     Being,     or      "Before    the

Beginning"       .....  221-223

VII.   Alpha,  or  "  In  the  Beginning"       •  •  •  223-224

VIII.   Beta,  or  Adonai  the  Manifestor       .    .         .  ,  224-225

IX.  Gamma,  or  the  Mystery  of  Redemption     .  .  225-227

x  Contents,

Illumination

No.  PAGES

X.  Delta,  or  the  Mystery  of  Generation     .             %            „  227-230

XL  Epsilon,  or  the  First  of  the  Gods — Proem       •             •  231

Hymn  to  Phoibos         .....  232  233

XII.  Zeta,  or  the  Second  of  the  Gods— Part  I.   Proem,       .  234235

Hymn  to  Hermes          .....  236-237

Part  2.  An  exhortation  of  Hermes  to  his  Neophytes  23S-240

XIII.  Eta,  or  (mystically)  the  Third  of  the  Gods— Part   I.

Proem        ......  240

Hymn  to  the  Planet  God  ....     240-249

Part  2. — Hymns  to  the  Elemental  Divinities —

(a)  To  Hephaistos  ;     250-252

(/3)  To  Demeter    .....

(7)  To  Poseidon    .....

(5)  To  Pallas  Athena         ....

Epode        ......     254-255

XIV.  Theta,    or    (mystically)    the    Fourth    of    the    G

Parti.   The  Hymn  of  Aphrodite
Part  2.  A  Discourse   of  the  Communion   of  Souks,
and  of  the  Uses  of  Love  between  Creature  and
Creature  ;    being  part  of  the  Goldene  Booke  of
Venus         .  .  .  .  .  .258-269

XV.  Lambda,  or  the  Last  of  the  Gods  ;  being  the  Secret

of  Satan     ......      263-269

XVI.   The  Seven  Spirits  of  God  and  their  Corresponds  269

XVII.  The    Mysteries    of    the    Kingdoms    of    the    Seven

Spheres     .  .  .  .  .  .     2;

PART  THE  THIRD.
Concerning  the  Divine  Image  ;   or  the  Vision  of  Adonai        .     S75-284

APPENDIX.

Notes  .  .  .  .  .  ,  ,    a*

Definitions  and  Explanations  .  »  .  .     304-314

PREFACE.

TN  the  preface  to  "Dreams  and  Dream-Stories  "  Mrs  Kings-
-*-  ford  speaks  of  the  "  priceless  insights  and  illuminations,
acquired  by  means  of  dreams,  which  had  elucidated  for  her
many  difficulties  and  enigmas  of  life,  and  even  of  religion,
by  throwing  on  them  a  light  which  penetrated  to  their  very
springs  and  causes."  By  far  the  greater  number  of  the
insights  and  illuminations  thus  referred  to  were  received
during  the  period  of  some  fourteen  years,  in  which  it  was
my  high  privilege  to  collaborate  with  her  in  the  work  princi-
pally represented  by  our  joint  book,  "  The  Perfect  Way  ;  or,
the  Finding  of  Christ,"  having  been  expressly  vouchsafed,
first,  to  bring  about  our  association  in  that  work,  and,  next,
to  aid  us  in  its  accomplishment.  Many  of  them  were  accord-
ingly used,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  in  our  book, — those
that  were  not  so  used  being  reserved  either  as  not  coming
within  its  assigned  scope,  or  because  their  publication  at
that  time  would,  we  were  instructed,  be  premature.  The
present  volume  comprises  both  those  which  were  so  used,
— such  of  them  as  were  there  given  in  part  being  here  given
in  full, — and  those  also  which  were  withheld, — the  motive
for  their  reservation  being  no  longer  operative  ;  together  with
others,  some  of  which  have  appeared  elsewhere,  and  some
were  received  subsequently.  And  the  publication  is  made
in  fulfilment  of  the  twofold  purpose  of  separating  Mrs
Kingsford's  illuminations  alike  from  her  ordinary  writings
and  from  mine  as  her  collaborator ;  and  in  accordance  with
her  express  injunctions,  emphatically  renewed  on  finding

xii  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim"

her  departure  imminent.  The  present  volume,  however,
does  not  exhaust  the  store  of  similar  treasures  left  by  her,
but  only  such  portion  as  comports  with  the  form  of  publi-
cation here  'adopted.  There  still  remain  sundry  lectures
and  occasional  papers,  and  the  majority  of  her  conversations
with  her  Genius  ; — for,  as  is  shown  in  this  book,  she  was
privileged  in  this  respect  far  in  excess  of  any  instance  known
to  history  ; — conversations  which,  while  also  constituting
illuminations,  were  of  too  personal  a  character  for  inclusion
in  these  pages,  comprising  as  they  did  not  only  instructions
for  guidance  in  circumstances  of  difficulty,  but  also  intima-
tions—  fully  borne  out  by  evidence  —  respecting  her  own
previous  existences.  For  in  this  respect  also  Anna  Kings-
ford  was  a  demonstration  of  the  great  doctrine,  the  reha-
bilitation of  which  was  an  important  part  of  her  mission, —
the  doctrine  of  the  pre-existence  of  the  soul  or  Ego ;  of  its
persistence  through  all  changes  of  form  and  conditions,  and
of  its  power  while  still  in  the  body,  to  recover  and  com-
municate to  its  exterior  selfhood,  its  recollections  of  its  past
existences.  Belonging,  however,  to  the  category  of  the
biographical  rather  than  of  the  exegetical,  all  precise
references  in  this  relation  are  withheld  from  these  \
■  such  allusions  only  being  retained  as  are  necessitated  by
the  context.

Although  the  questions  of  the  derivation  and  significance
of  the  matter  herein  contained,  have  been  treated  with  con-
siderable fulness  in  "  The  Perfect  Way," — particularly  in  the
preface  to  the  revised  and  enlarged  edition, — some  account
is  not  the  less  called  for  here  ,  and  this,  not  only  for  the
sake  of  those  readers  who  may  not  have  prior  acquaintance
.with  that  book;  but  also  because  the  removal  of  the  per-
T  sonality  concerned  has  made  it  possible  to  speak  with
greater  explicitness  than  was  fitting  in  her  lifetime.

Preface.  xiii

A  comparatively  brief  statement,  however,  will  suffice,
since  the  questions  to  be  satisfied  are  but  two  in  number,
and  the  answers  to  them  will  be  addressed  to  such  persons
only  as  are  already  sufficiently  developed  in  respect  of  the
consciousness  of  things  spiritual,  as  at  the  least  to  be  capable
of  entertaining  propositions  involving  the  reality  of  the
region  and  experiences  concerned.  For  this  is  a  restriction
which  obviates  the  necessity  of  arguments  and  explanations,
which  could  not  be  other  than  protracted,  conceived  in
deference  to  those  who,  being  totally  devoid  of  the  spiritual
consciousness,  are  wont  to  make  their  own  defect  of  sensi-
bility an  argument  against  such  reality,  and  to  regard  denials
based  upon  non-experience  as  effectually  disposing  of
affirmations  based  upon  experience.

The  two  questions  to  be  elucidated  are — (i)  The  source
and  method  of  these  illuminations;  and  (2)  the  nature  and
import  of  the  revelation  contained  in  them,  supposing  it  to
be,  as  confidently  regarded  by  ourselves,  a  new  and  divine
revelation.  And  this,  whether  judged  by  the  method  of  its
communication,  or  by  its  intrinsic  nature.  For  the  test,  no
less  than  the  testimony,  is  twofold.

As  respects  the  first  head.  These  illuminations  are  in  no
way  due  to  artificial  stimulation  of  faculty,  whether  by  means
of  drugs,  or  by  "  animal  magnetism,"  "  mesmerism,"  or
"  hypnotism,"  or  to  the  induction  of  any  abnormal  state
through  the  act  of  the  recipient  herself  or  of  some  other
person ;  all  that  was  or  could  be  done  on  this  behalf  being
the  promotion  of  the  interior  conditions  favourable  to  the
reception  of  them.  And  these  conditions  consisted,  not
in  the  search  for  phenomenal  experiences — though  these
would  sometimes  occur — but  in  the  intense  direction  of  the
will  and  desire  towards  the  highest,  and  an  unchanging
resolve  to  be  satisfied  with  nothing  less  than  the  highest,

xl  xiv                "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

ne  namely,  the  inmost  and  central  idea  of  the  fact  or  doctrine

^c  to   be    interpreted  ;    the    motive    also    being    the    highest,

°u  namely,    the    emancipation,    satisfaction,    and    benediction

ca  of  souls,  our  own   and  those  of  others.     As  will   be  seen

an  from    this    book,   the    majority  of   her    illuminations   were

W1  received  during  natural  sleep,  some  in  satisfaction  of  their

PT  recipient's  own  difficulties,  and  some  in  immediate  response

t0  to  needs  and  mental  requests  of  mine,  of  which  she  had

J"1  no  cognisance  and  surpassing  her  ability  to  have  satisfied.

in  And  not  (infrequently  the  responses  surpassed  the  ability

fQ1  of  either  of  us  to  comprehend  them  at  the  time, — tl.

t10  invariably  coming    through    the    consciousness, — and  only

Pn  on  our  subsequent  advance  in  perceptivity  did  they   fully

,01  disclose  their  significance,  thereby  proving  their  independence

u1^  of  our  own  limitations.     They  nc                              cr,  sooner

tm  or  later,  to  demonstrate  thei               to  us  as  I              \  and

Pe  self-evident  truths,  founded   indefeasibly  in  the  very  nature

°f  of  existence  ;  and  never  did  we  finally  accept  and

mi  until   thus    demonstrated    to  and   K                                  >oth.

cx  And  such,  precisely,   is   the   authority  to  which   .

bK  made  on  their  behalf,  and  in  no  waj    to  book,  person  or

re*  institution — howei               I  or  venerable— or  even  to  the

SU(  manner  of  their  communication,  veritably  miraculous  tl.

tn<  this  was,  as  the  term  miracle  is  wont  to  be  understood.

•  to  cite  the  preface  to  "  The  Perfect  \V                  .Id  it  to  be

°}  "contrary  to  the  nature  of  truth  I                             ofautho-

^sid  rity,  or  of  aught  other  than  the  understanding;  since  truth,

Pr€  how  transcendent  soever  it  be,  has  r.               s  in  the  mind,

1S  !  and  no  other  testimony  can  avail  it.     .     .     .     What  is  indis-

sak  pensable  is,  that  appeal  be  made  tot'                mind,  and  not

r^ut  to  one  department  of  it  only."     Now,  that  mind  or.

Is01  had  learnt  to  account  a  whole  mind  which  comprises  the

Sie  two  modes  of  the  mind,  the  intellect  and  the  intuition   and

these  duly  trained  and  developed.

Preface.  xv

Having  such  derivation  and  character,  these  illuminations
are  the  product,  simply  and  purely,  of  the  process  which  has
ever,  by  those  versed  in  Divine  things,  been  recognised  as
that  whereby  Divine  communication  occurs, — namely,  the
spontaneous  operation  of  the  Spirit  in  a  soul  duly  luminous
and  responsive.  Through  such  operation  the  perceptive
point  of  the  mind  is  indrawn  and  uplifted  to  a  sphere  tran-
scending both  the  physical  and  the  astral  or  magnetic,  and
one  altogether  superior — because  interior — to  those  access-
ible to  the  mere  lucid,  sensitive,  or  clairvoyant ;  in  that  it
is  the  inmost  and  highest  sphere  of  man's  manifold  nature,
the  celestial,  or  "kingdom  within."  Attaining  to  this
degree  of  inwardness,  the  soul  is  "clothed  with  the  sun"1
of  full  intelligence,  recovering  all  memories  and  discerning
all  principles  and  significations,  in  measure  according  to  its
capacity  as  developed  by  the  experiences  gained  in  its  many
earth-lives  and  in  the  intervals  between,  and  is  enabled  also
to  communicate  of  them  to  its  superficial  personality.  The
condition  is,  moreover,  one  to  enter  which  is  to  hold
direct  communion  with  the  "spirits  of  the  Just  made
perfect,"  and  to  be  qualified  to  become  the  mouthpiece
of  the  Church  invisible  and  triumphant.  So  many  and
of  such  kind  were  the  experiences  received  by  Mrs  Kings-
ford  that  when,  after  conjecture  had  been  exhausted
in  the  endeavour  to  frame  a  satisfactory  hypothesis  con-
cerning them,  assurance  at  length  came  from  her  own
angel-genius,  declaring  the  method  of  this  revelation  to  be
entirely  interior,  in  that  his  "client"  was  a  "soul  of  vast
experience,  knowing  all  things  of  herself  and  needing  not  to

1  The  "  woman  "  of  the  Apocalypse  and  all  other  mystical  Scriptures
is  never  a  person,  but  always  the  soul.  Hence  the  significanc  of  the
present  title.  Any  such  exaltation  of  a  person  would  be  act  of
idolatry.

b

xvi  "  Clothed  with  the  S?m."

be  told  ;  who  was  being  divinely  enabled  to  recover  hi  this
incarnation  the  memory  of  all  that  was  in  the  past,  expressly
in  order  to  give  the  world  the  benefit  of  the  holy  and  inner
truth  of  which  she  was  the  depositary ;  " — so  far  from  the
statement — extraordinary  and  remote  from  anticipation  as  it
was — being  found  difficult  of  credence,  it  was  at  once  re  _
nised  as  affording  the  only  solution  which  reconciled  all  the
difficulties  and  accounted  for  all  the  facts.

And  so  far,  it  may  be  well  to  add,  from  these  experiences
occurring  in  the  first  instance  to  persons  predisposed  to
accept  them,  we  were— both  of  us— at  their  commencement
utterly  sceptical  as  to  their  possibility,  or  as  to  there  being
any  basis  of  reality  for  any  spiritual  phenomena  whatsoever.
Not  that  we  were  materialists.  In  neither  of  us  had  percep-
tion ever  been  at  that  low  ebb.  Rather  were  we  idealists,
but  idealists  who  had  yet  to  learn  that  the  ideal  is  the  real,
and  that  the  ideal  world  is  a  spiritual  and  personal  world.
They  came,  too — as  already  said — in  course  of  a  quest,
not  for  phenomena,  but  for  truth  ;  and  were  possible  only
because  the  veil  of  matter  interposed  between  the  worlds
of  sense  and  of  reality  had  already,  by  dint  of  persistent
earnest  seeking  inwards,  and  by  the  adoption  of  the  mode
of  life  which  has  always,  by  proficients  in  spiritual  science,
been  insisted  on  as  essential  to  the  higher  percept
become  for  us  so  rare  and  tenuous  as  to  be  readily  pene-
trable. The  period,  moreover,  was  anterior  to  that  of  the
recent  impulse  given  to  such  studies  by  the  importation  o\
kindred  knowledges  from  the  East  And  from  first  t<
our  work  was  carried  on  in  complete  independence  oi
extraneous  sources  and  influences,  such  recour-v
had  to  books  or  to  persons  being  on  behalf  of  parallels,
correspondences,  and  confirmations  in  regard  to  our  own
experiences  and  results.

Preface.  xvii

The  search  for  such  parallels  and  confirmations  in  the
records  of  the  remote  past,  proved  satisfactory  in  a  measure
far  surpassing  aught  that  we  had  ventured  to  anticipate.
For,  over  and  above  the  full  recognition  of  our  methods,
facts,  and  doctrines  in  quarters  worthy  the  highest  respect,
we  discovered  clear  and  positive  announcements,  both
Biblical  and  extra-Biblical,  of  precisely  such  an  illumination
to  take  place  at  the  exact  time  of  its  occurrence  to  us,
and  possessing  exactly  the  features  by  which  it  was  char-
acterised for  us, — the  event  itself  being  variously  described
as  constituting  a  new  illumination,  the  return  of  the  Gods,
the  reign  of  Michael,  the  breaking  of  the  seals  and  opening
of  the  Book,  the  Second  Advent,  the  "number" — or  period
— of  the  "  Beast " ;  and  the  end  of  the  World, — each  alike
implying  the  downfall  of  the  world's  materialistic  system,
both  in  philosophy  and  in  religion,  through  the  demon-
stration of  the  falsity  of  the  materialistic  hypothesis.  The
period  assigned  was  that  from  1878  to  1882,  and  it  was
precisely  the  period  of  our  reception  of  the  chief  part  of  our
doctrine  and  of  its  first  promulgation,  "  The  Perfect  Way  "
— which  consists  of  lectures  delivered  in  1881 — having
been  published  in  the  winter  of  1881-2.  So  that  whether
judged  by  the  dates,  or  by  the  world's  condition,  nothing
was  wanting  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  predictions.
And  of  these  we  knew  only  after  the  event.

To  come  to  our  second  head — the  nature  and  import  of
that  which  was  thus  received.  It  was  from  the  very  outset
made  clear  to  us — and  every  fresh  accession  of  experience,
perception,  and  knowledge  served  but  to  confirm  the
intimation — that  the  event  constituted  nothing  less  than  the
re-delivery,  from  the  source  and  by  the  method  to  which  it
was  originally  due,  of  the  ancient  revelation  which,  under
the  name  of  the  Hermetic  or  Kabalistic  Gnosis,  constituted

xviii  " Clothed  with  the  Sun"

the  Sacred  Mysteries,  and  underlay  and  controlled  the
expression  of  all  the  sacred  religions  and  Scriptures,  of
antiquity,  and  formed  at  once  a  perfect  system  of  thought
and  rule  of  life,  in  that  it  was  founded  in  the  very  nature  of
existence  as  uniformly  discerned  under  Divine  illumination
by  the  advanced  souls  of  all  times  and  places.  From  which
it  will  be  seen  that  the  claim  to  be  a  new  revelation  does
not  imply  a  claim  to  be  a  new  gospel,  but  a  gospel  only  of
interpretation,  and  therein  of  restoration  and  reconciliation.
For  the  position  maintained  is  that  Christianity  has  failed,
not  because  it  was  false,  but  because  it  has  been  falsified  ;
its  official  guardians  having,  after  the  wont  of  their  order,
"taken  away  the  key  of  knowledge  (Gnosis),  and  not  only
not  entered  in  themselves,  but  hindered  those  who  would
have  entered  in."

The  following  remarks  on  the  chief  points  in  this  indict-
ment of  the  Church  visible  on  behalf  of  the  Church  invisi-
ble, will  serve  to  facilitate  the  comprehension  of  this  book.

Christianity — which  is  rightly  definable  as  a  symbolic
synthesis  of  the  fu  .damental  truths  contained  in  all  re-
ligions— early  fell  into  bad  hands.  Like  its  Founder,  it  was
crucified  between  two  thieves,  who  were  no  other  than  the
types  of  its  crucifiers.  These  were,  on  the  one  hand,
Superstition,  which  is  the  distortion  of  spiritual  perception;
and  on  the  other  hand,  Materialism,  which  is  the  privation
of  spiritual  perception.  These  are  the  "  two  beasts "  oi
mystical  Scripture,  which  come  up,  respectively,  from  the
"sea"  and  the  "earth,"'  to  ravage  the  hopes  of  humanity.
And  the  two  are  one  under  the  name  of  Sacerdotalism,
being  but  varied  modes  of  its  manifestation.  It
Sacerdotalism  that  crucified  both  Christ  and  the  doctrine
of  Christ  with  its  two  hands  Superstition  and  Materialism.

For,  operating  as  Superstition,  Sacerdotalism  perverted

Preface,  xix

into  mystery,  and  rendered  not  merely  unintelligible  but
irrational,  a  gospel  which  in  itself  was  absolutely  simple,
obvious,  and  reasonable.  This  is  the  doctrine  that  the  true  life
and  substance  of  Humanity  are  not  material  and  created,  but
spiritual  and  divine ;  and  that  it  is  possible  for  man,  by  co-
operating with  the  spirit  within  him,  and  subordinating  his
lower  nature  to  his  higher,  to  rise  wholly  into  and  be  reconsti-
tuted— which  is  "regenerated" — of  his  higher,  and  become
thereby  divine,  having  in  himself  the  power  of  life  eternal.
And  that  whereby  this  is  effected — namely,  inward  purification
— is  the  sole  secret  of  the  Christs.  Wherefore  he  in  whom
this  process  finds  full  accomplishment,  has  and  is  Christ,
and  attains  the  summit  of  human  evolution,  the  point  of
junction  between  Humanity  and  Divinity.  Thus  demonstrat-
ing to  men  in  his  own  person  their  divine  potentialities,  and
the  manner  of  the  realisation  thereof,  and  by  his  loving
self-devotion  on  their  behalf  softening  their  hearts  and  win-
ning them  to  follow  in  his  steps,  he  becomes  their  "  Saviour."
And  that  he  is  said  to  save  them  by  his  blood,  is  because
"  the  blood  is  the  life,"  and  the  true  life-blood  of  the
Christ  is  a  spirit  absolutely  pure, — the  inward  God  in  the
man, — and  by  the  attainment  of  this  pure  spirit  man  is  re-
deemed. And  that  the  Christ  is  said  to  suffer  and  die  for
others,  is  because  through  his  abounding  sympathy  he  suffers
even  to  death  in  and  with  them ; — not  instead  of  them — ■
"for"  does  not  here  mean  "  instead  of" — for  that  would  be
to  deprive  them  of  their  means  of  redemption,  since  only
through  his  own  suffering  can  anyone  repent  and  become
perfected.

This  doctrine,  so  reasonable  and  obvious,  and  satisfying
alike  to  head  and  heart,  Sacerdotalism,  operating  as  Super-
stition, superseded  by  shifting  the  whole  edifice  of  Chris-
tianity from  its  proper— because  its  only  intelligible  and

xx  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

consistent  basis  in  Pantheism,  or  the  doctrine  that  God  is  all
and  in  all — to  that  of  an  impossible  Manichaeanism — or  the
doctrine  of  two  eternal,  self-subsistent  opposing  principles  of
good  and  evil, — a  doctrine  which  by  making  evil  a  positive
thing,  and  thus  exalting  it  to  an  equal  rank  with  God,  at
once  dethrones  God  and  eternises  evil.  It  deprives  God
also  of  His  supreme  quality  of  Justice,  by  representing
Him  as  accepting  physical  suffering  as  an  equivalent  for
moral  guilt,  and  the  punishment  of  the  innocent  in  lieu  of
that  of  the  guilty.  While  by  removing  Christ  from  the
category  of  the  highest  human  to  that  of  the  superhuman,
it  robs  all  of  their  potential  divinity  in  favour  of  the  exclusive
divinity  of  one;  and  thereby  effectually  neutralises  the
significance  and  value  of  his  mission,  the  express  purpose
of  which  was  to  show  his  fellow-men,  not  what  could  be
achieved  by  some  great  supernatural  personage,  with  whom
they  could  have  nothing  in  common,  but  what  they  them-
selves have  it  in  them  in  due  time  to  become,  simply  by
giving  fair  play  to  their  own  best,  namely,  the  ideal  of  per-
fection disclosed  to  them  by  their  own  intuition.  For  the
fulfilment  of  the  intuition  is  the  realisation  of  the  ideal;  and
the  realisation  of  the  ideal  is  the  "Finding  of  Christ."

Operating  as  Materialism,  and  prelerring  the  letter  to  the
spirit,  the  symbol  to  the  verity,  the  form  to  the  substance,
Sacerdotalism  ignored  and  suppressed  the  real,  because  the
mystical  and  spiritual,  import  of  Christianity,  by  means  of
the  idolatruus  exaltation,  as  the  agents  of  salvation,  of  its
persons,  events,  forms,  and  other  things  physical,  in  place  of
its  spiritual  realities,  the  principles,  processes,  and  states
implied  by  these  and  of  which  they  were  the  symbolic  repre-
sentatives. The  obvious  truth  that  religion,  as  a  thing
relating  not  to  the  senses  but  to  the  soul,  and  appea
therefore,  only  to  the  soul,  must  consist  in  things  cognate

Preface.  xxi

to  the  soul,  in  that  they  are  of  like  nature  with  the  soul,
and  not  in  things  material  and  physical, —was  altogether
set  aside,  all  logical  proprieties  being  violated,  as  just  shown,
by  positing  physical  bloodshed  and  suffering  as  the  compen-
sation for  moral  guilt,  and  these,  too,  of  another  than  the
guilty — instead  of  the  repentance  and  amendment  to  which
they  are  ordained  to  minister.  While  every  expression  in
Scriptures  avowedly  mystical  and  parabolical,  was  enforced
in  its  literal  sense,  in  defiance  of  repeated  injunctions  in
Scripture  to  the  contrary.  And  that  which  was  really  "an
eternal  gospel"  by  virtue  of  its  being  founded  in  the  un-
changing nature  of  things,  and  everlastingly  demonstrable
to  the  mind  and  verifiable  by  inward  experience,  was  made
dependent  on  the  perishable  records  of  physical  events  in
themselves  exceptional,  and  liable — whatever  the  testimony
— sooner  or  later  to  be  called  into  question.

Christianity  was  further  mutilated,  dwarfed,  and  distorted  s
by  the  exclusion  from  recognition  and  worship  due,  of
those  Divine  Principles  or  modes  of  Deity,  variously  desig-
nated the  Gods  and  the  Spirits  of  God,  by  whose  immediate
operation  in  the  soul  the  man  regenerate  and  made  perfect
is  built  up,  the  spiritual  chaos  is  transformed  into  a  kosmos,
and  Christ  becomes  Christ.  The  very  process  of  Re-
generation, moreover,  although  emphatically  declared  by
Jesus  to  be  the  sole  condition  of  Salvation, — a  process
wholly  spiritual  and  interior  to  the  individual, — came  to  be
either  altogether  ignored  or  thrust  into  the  background,  in
favour  of  that  of  atonement  by  vicarious  physical  bloodshed,
through  the  loss  of  the  knowledge  of  the  meaning  alike  of
regeneration  and  of  atonement,  and  the  consequent  failure
to  recognise  those  terms  as  denoting  one  and  the  same  pro-
cess, and  this  a  process,  as  just  said,  wholly  spiritual  and
interior  to  the  individual

xxii  "  Clothed  with  the  S?in.r9

While,  as  presented  by  Sacerdotalism,  or — to  adopt  the
modern  equivalent  of  this  term  as  more  appropriate  to:
rest  of  these  remarks — Ecclesiasticism,  Christianity  is  thus
but  a  congeries  of  arbitrary  and  unintelligible  propositions,
bearing  no  discernible  relation  to  the  needs,  aspirations,  or
perceptions,  whether  of  the  mind  or  of  the  soul  ;  as  pre-
sented in  the  recovered  Gnosis,  it  is  at  once  intelligible  and
irrefragable,  constituting  a  perfect  system  of  thought  and  rule
of  life,  and  satisfying  alike  the  demands  of  the  keenest  mind,
the  longings  of  the  tenderest  heart,  and  the  aspirations  of
the  most  ardent  soul.  These  are  characteristics  which  not
the  most  hardy  champions  of  Ecclesiasticism  venture  to
claim  for  the  orthodox  presentation;  but  on  the  con
they  freely  acknowledge  it  to  be  a  problem  insoluble  by
reason,  and  one  to  be  accepted  on  authority  of  Church  or
Book,  even  at  the  cost  of  intellectual  suicide  Said  one  of
them  recently — a  dignitary  of  the  Anglican  Church — speak-
ing, apparently,  not  alone  for  his  order,  but  for  mankind  at
large,  "  We  weary  ourselves  vainly  in  endeavouring  to  shape
these  truths  in#o  a  system.  We  have  no  faculties  for  such
speculation.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  rest  in  the  language  of
the  Apostles."1  Such  is  the  frank  admission  of  the  official
guardians  of  the  faith  according  to  E<  *  ism,  and  the

admission  is  one  in  respect  of  which  it  is  hard  to  determine
whether  its  candour  or  its  courage  is  the  most  conspicuous.
Its  candour,  because  of  its  complete  indifference  to  the  con-
sequences to  their  order  which  can  hardly  fail  to  follow  the
confession  that  it  does  not  understand  its  own  teaching  ;  and
its  courage,  because  of  its  palpable  disregard  of  the  emphatic
injunctions  wherein  Scripture  expressly  reprobates  such
"resting  in  its  language,"  affirming  that  the  "letter  kills," —
as  indeed  it  has  killed  the  very  faculty  of  the  perception  of

1  Canon  Westcott  on  the  Atonement-

Preface.  xxiii

things  spiritual  in  all  who have  "rested  in"  it,— and  strenuously
repudiating  meanwhile  the  notion  of  the  incomprehensibility
of  its  doctrines,  as  when  it  calls  on  men  to  "  prove  all
things"  and  to  render  a  "reasonable  service,"  and  insists
on  the  necessity  of  "  hearing  ears  and  seeing  eyes,"  that  is,
of  a  "  spirit  of  understanding  "  in  respect  of  divine  things,
as  the  indispensable  basis  of  the  faith  that  saves.  But  to
this  it  has  come,  that  after  having  rendered  the  doctrine  of
Scripture  unintelligible  by  insisting,  against  the  express  in-
junctions of  Scripture,  on  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words
of  Scripture,  Ecclesiasticism  now  complains  that  owing  to
the  limitations  of  human  faculty,  there  is  no  alternative  but
to  rest  in  the  letter  of  Scripture  !  Obviously  it  is  not
Ecclesiasticism  that  is  entitled  to  resent  the  advent  of  an
interpretation  which,  by  restoring  the  Spirit  to  the  letter  of
Scripture,  shall  restore  the  doctrine  and  rehabilitate  the
credit  of  Scripture.

But  whatever  may  be  the  attitude  of  Ecclesiasticism
towards  the  new — or  rather  the  recovered — interpretation,
that  of  the  world  at  large  is  scarcely  doubtful  The  world,
it  is  true,  has  followed  the  Church  in  its  fall  into  materiality
in  respect  of  things  spiritual — a  fall  which,  but  for  the
Church's  initiative,  the  world  had  not  undergone.  But
there  are  tokens  manifold  and  indisputable  to  prove  that
the  heart  of  the  world  is,  nevertheless,  in  the  main  right ;
and,  consequently,  that — like  the  Prodigal  of  the  parable —
having  once  eaten  of  the  husks  of  mere  materiality — whether
religious  or  scientific — it  has  learned  to  loathe  them,  and  is
already  coming  to  its  proper,  because  better,  self,  and  turning
wistful  thoughts  homewards.  And  hence  it  is  that  for  those
who  in  virtue  of  their  "  ploughing  with  the  heifer "  of  the
spiritual  consciousness,  are  able  to  "expound  the  riddle" 1  of
1  Judges  xiv.  12- 18.

xxiv  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

the  age,  the  epoch  is  no  other  than  "  Othniel " — God's  good
time;  the  world  is  "Caleb" — one  whose  heart  is  right;
"  Kirjath-sepher  " — the  city  of  the  letter — has  already  sur-
rendered ;  and  "  Achsah  " — the  rending  of  the  veil  (that  hid
the  Spirit),  is  about  to  become  the  bride  of  the  victor,
bringing  to  him  as  her  dowry  the  "upper  and  nether
springs"  of  those  blessed  results  in  soul  and  mind  and  heart
and  life  which  ever  flow  from  the  lull  understanding  of
Divine  things.1  From  which  it  may  be  surely  inferred  that
unless  Ecclesiasticism  also  accept  the  new  interpreta-
tion, which  also  is  the  old,  and  like  a  living  garment
participate  in  the  growth  of  its  wearer,  it  will  find  itself
discarded  as  obsolete;  while  the  new  humanity — to  which
it  will  thus  have  served  but  for  matrix — will  constitute
itself  a  new,  and  more  than  ever  a  true,  Church,  and  one
that  can  never  fail  and  fall,  inasmuch  as  it  will  have  for
foundation,  not  the  incohesive  sands  of  authority  and
the  letter,  but  the  indefeasible  Rock  of  the  Spirit  and  the
Understanding.

The  chief  means  proposed  in  this  book  in  furtherance  of
its  ends,  may  be  summarised  as  follows  : —

i.  The  re-establishment  of  the  Understanding  as  the
basis  of  Faith.

2.  The  restoration  to  its  true  place  as  the  object  of
veneration,  of  the  thing  signified — that  is,  of  the  spirit,
substance,  verity,  or  reality— instead  of  the  symbol  or
appearance  of  it ;  and  therein  the  abolition  of  idolatry
both  in  religion  and  science,  whether  the  object  be  a
person,  a  book,  or  an  institution,  the  form,  the  letter,  or
the  rite,  or  matter  itself, — to  the  end  that  God  only  may  be
worshipped-

1  Joshua  xv.  16-19.

Preface.  xxv

3.  The  restoration  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Duality  of  the
Divine  Unity,  or  Original  Being ;  and  therein  the  recog-
nition of  the  essential  divinity  of  both  constituents  of  exist-
ence, its  life,  or  force,  and  its  substance;  with  the  result  of
removing  matter  from  its  wrongful  position  as  an  inde-
pendent, self-subsistent  entity,  to  its  proper  rank  as  a  mode
of  the  Divine  Being,  wherein  it  represents  Spirit,  by  the
power  of  the  Divine  Will  projected  into  conditions  and
limitations,  and  made  exteriorly  cognisable.

The  restoration  of  this  doctrine  involves  the  deposition
alike  of  Materialism,  and  the  no  less  atheistic  Manichaeanism
also  widely  in  vogue,  in  favour  of  that  true  Pantheism  which,
while  it  regards  God  as  the  all  in  all  of  Being,  does  not
regard  all  Being  as  in  the  condition  of  God.

4.  The  restoration  of  the  true  doctrine  of  Creation  and
Redemption  by  means  of  Evolution,  (1)  by  re-establishing
the  doctrine  of  the  permanence  of  the  true  Ego  of  the
individual,  and  its  persistence  through  all  changes  of
exterior  form  and  condition,  thus  positing  as  the  subject  of
Evolution,  an  entity  competent  to  retain  the  impressions,
and  to  progress  by  means,  of  its  experiences;  and  (2)  by
exhibiting  one  and  the  same  method  as  that  both  of  Crea-
tion and  of  Redemption,  the  difference  being  only  ot
medium — or  "vehicle" — and  of  direction  ;  inasmuch  as
the  former  occurs  by  a  centrifugal  operation  in  matter;
and  the  latter  by  a  centripetal  operation  in  substance  (or
spirit), — a  process  which  constitutes  z/zvolutional  evolution,
both  processes  occurring  in  the  same  individual.  Herein
consists  the  reconciliation  of  science  and  religion,  inasmuch
as  Redemption  is  thus  the  logical  complement  of  Creation
and  outcome  of  Evolution,  in  that  the  process  whereby  it
occurs-  "hich  is  mystically  called  Regeneration — consists
in  the  ^constitution  of  the  individual  by  and  of  the  higher

xx vi  u  Clothed  with  the  Sttn."

elements  of  his  own  system,  the  Soul  and  Spirit,  and —
instead  of  dispensing  with  experience — is  accomplished  by
means  of  the  experiences  acquired  in  a  multiplicity  of
earth-lives,  the  number  of  which  is  determined  by  the
exigencies  of  the  individual  case,  their  purpose  being  to
afford  the  requisite  opportunities  for  the  "  suffering" — which
is  felt  experience — through  which  alone  perfection,  and
thereby  salvation,  are  attainable.

The  restoration  of  the  doctrine  of  a  multiplicity  of  earth-
lives  involves  as  its  corollary  that  of  the  doctrine  of  acquired
destiny,  called  by  the  Hindus  "Karma."1

5.  The  interpretation  of  Christianity  and  of  religion  gener-
ally, in  such  manner  as  to  exhibit  the  identity  of  the  r.
and  perceptions  of  the  soul  in  all  ages  ;  as  well  also  as  the
identity  of  the  theological  doctrine  of  salvation  by  "  vicarious
atonement "  with  the  mystical,  but  none  the  less  scientific,
doctrine  of  redemption  by  regeneration  as  defined  in  the
foregoing  paragraph.

6.  The  solution  of  the  problems  of  inspiration,  prop]-
and  miracles,  and  the  practical  demonstration  of  the  so-called
supernatural  as  natural  to  man.  in  that  it  appertains,  not  to
the  superhuman,  but  to  the  higher  human.

7.  The  disclosure  of  the  Christian  engines  as  regards  both
the  person  of  Jesus  and  the  composition  of  the  Gospels.

8.  The  enlargement  of  Christian  faith  and  practice  by
means  of  the  restoration  of  the  Gods  to  their  due  place  in
man's  recognition  and  veneration  ;  and  the  combination  of
the  Greek  and  Buddhist  with  the  Christian  ideals,  thereby
restoring  to  man  the  sense  of  beauty,  joy,  and  hopefulness
which  comes  of  tfre  recognition  of  the  universal  indwelling
Divinity — (which  is  Greek) ;  and  providing  a  perk

and  rule  in  respect  of  things  physical,  intellectual,  and  moral
1  See  Appendix,  "  Definitions  and  Explanations."

Preface.  xxvii

—(which    is   Buddhist),  as  the  foundation  for  the  higher,
because  more  interior,  spirituality  (which  is  Christian).

Going  so  far  as  do  the  illuminations  in  this  book  to
realise  the  most  sanguine  anticipations  of  that  "new  birth
of  Esoteric  Christianity,  or  new  and  higher  religion  in  which
philosophy,  religion,  and  poetry  shall  be  fused  into  a  unity,"1
to  the  full  satisfaction  of  man's  highest  needs  and  aspira-
tions, their  lamented  recipient,  Anna  Kingsford,  must,
sooner  or  later,  be  recognised  by  all  competent  judges,  as
having  made  at  once  to  science,  philosophy,  morality,
religion,  and  literature  at  large,  and  especially  to  that  of
our  own  country  and  language,  a  contribution  of  an  order
unique,  unsurpassed,  and  in  certain  respects  of  supreme
moment,  unequalled  and  even  unapproached.

In  the  arrangement  of  the  contents  of  this  volume,  the
method  followed  is  that  of  subordinating  the  chronological
to  the  logical,  and  regulating  the  sequence  in  accordance
with  the  mutual  dependence  of  the  subjects  treated.  It  is
on  this  principle  that  precedence  is  given  to  those  illumina-
tions which  may  best  serve  as  the  writer's  personal  credentials
in  respect  of  her  mission.  The  second  place  is  assigned
to  those  which,  in  virtue  of  their  being  derived  from  Scrip-
ture, and  prophetic  of  precisely  such  an  event  in  the  world's
spiritual  history  as  to  occur  at  this  time,  serve — at  least  for
the  faithful — to  relieve  the  idea  of  a  new  revelation  of  any
a  priori  improbability.  The  others — with  the  exception  of
Part  II.,  which  is  arranged  according  to  express  instructions
— follow  in  an  order  the  rationale  of  which  will  be  obvious
to  the  intelligent  reader.  And  all  of  the  in  are  given  as
originally  written  down  either  by  their  recipient  herself,
or  by  myself  acting  as  amanuensis, — a  function  which —
1  Schelling.

xxviii  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

as  her  sole  associate  in  the  spiritual  task  with  which  we
were  jointly  charged — I  alone  exercised.  It  need  hardly  be
added  that,  regarding  as  we  did  that  task  as  a  sacred  one,
and  the  highest  that  could  devolve  upon  mortals,  no  pains
were  spared  either  to  observe  the  conditions  necessary  for
it,  or  to  secure  absolute  accuracy  in  our  relation  of  the
"  things  seen  and  heard  "  in  the  prosecution  of  it.  For  the
annotations  and  explanations— which  are  in  accordance
with  the  teaching  received — I  alone  am  responsible,  that  is,
restricting  the  term  "alone"  to  its  ordinary  acceptation.

Concerning  the  hiatus  in  the  "Hymns  of  the  Gods ';  in
Part  II.,  Mrs  Kingsford  wrote  in  her  diary  under  date
August  23,  1887,  being  the  eleventh  month  of  her  last
illness,  and  the  seventh  before  its  termination  : —

"I  wish  I  knew  whether  I  am  to  recover  or  not.  It
seems,  judging  from  physical  signs,  as  if  I  could  not  live
long;  but  then  strange  things  hap  where  prophetesses  are
concerned  !  I  am  so  sure  that  the  prophecy  is  not  finished,
and  that  a  vast  amount  of  work  remains  to  do  which  must
be  done  by  me  or  not  at  all,  that  I  cannot  but  think  the
Gods  will  restore  me  in  time.  .  .  .

"  Why  do  not  the  Gods  give  me  the  three  hymns  which
are  yet  wanting  to  their  series?  I  have  the  hymns  of
Phoibos,  of  Hermes,  of  Aphrodite,  of  Dionysos,  of  Saturn.
I  yet  want  the  hymns  of  Ares,  Zeus,  and  Artemis.  If
these  hymns  be  not  given  to  me,  they  will  never  be  given
to  any  other.  .   .  .

'•  I  had  hoped  to  have  been  one  of  the  pioneers  of  the
new  awakening  of  the  world.  I  had  thought  to  have  helped
in  the  overthrow  of  the  idolatrous  altars  and  the  purging
of  the  temple ;  and  now  I  must  die  just  as  the  day  of  battle
dawns  and  the  sound  of  the  chariot  wheels  is  heard.  Is
it,  perhaps,   all  premature  ?      Have  we   thought    the    time

Preface,  xxix

nearer  than  it  really  is  ?     Must  I  go,  and  sleep,  and  come
again  before  the  hour  sounds?  '"  2

It  remains  only  to  add  in  regard  to  Part  III.  and  the
Appendix,  that  the  references  to  my  own  experiences  are
admitted  with  great  reluctance,,  and  in  spite  of  every  effort
to  deprive  the  book,  not  merely  of  a  biographical  character,
but  far  more  so  of  an  autobiographical  character.  It  was
only  on  finding  that  the  omission  of  such  references  would
operate  disadvantageously  by  mutilating  or  weakening  the
record — (as  by  leaving  it  to  appear  as  if  I  were  unable  of
my  own  knowledge  to  testify  to  the  possibility  of  such
experiences) — that  I  consented  to  renounce  my  design  and
strong  preference  in  the  matter.

Edward  Maitland.

London,  Whitsuntide,  1889.

1  I  cite  this  last  paragraph  as  showing  how  small  in  her  own  view
appeared  the  work  which  she  accomplished  as  compared  to  that  which
remained,  and  which  she  felt  she  had  it  in  her  to  accomplish  were  only
time  and  strength  allowed  ;  and  also  as  showing  the  intensity  of  her
realisation  of  its  importance,  as  well  as  her  conviction  of  the  truth  of  the
doctrine  of  a  multiplicity  of  earth-lives.

ILLUMINATIONS,

PART  THE  FIRST.

NO.  I.

CONCERNING    THE    THREE    VEILS    BETWEEN    MAN
AND   GOD.1

A  GOLDEN  chalice,  like  those  used  in  Catholic
rites,  but  having  three  linings,  was  given  to  me
in  my  sleep  by  an  Angel.  These  linings,  he  told  me,
signified  the  three  degrees  of  the  heavens, — purity  of
life,  purity  of  heart,  and  purity  of  doctrine.  Im-
mediately afterwards  there  appeared  to  me  a  great
dome-covered  temple,  Moslem  in  style,  and  on  the
threshold  of  it  a  tall  angel  clad  in  white  linen,  who
with  an  air  of  command  was  directing  a  party  of  men
engaged  in  destroying  and  throwing  into  the  street
numerous  crucifixes,  bibles,  prayer-books,  altar-
utensils,  and  other  sacred  emblems.  As  I  stood
watching,  somewhat  scandalised  at  the  apparent
sacrilege,  a  voice  at  a  great  height  in  the  air,  cried
1  London,  March  1881.
A

2  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

with  startling  distinctness,  "  All  the  idols  He  shall
utterly  destroy ! "  Then  the  same  voice,  seeming
to  ascend  still  higher,  cried  to  me,  "Come  hither  and
see!"  Immediately  it  appeared  to  me  that  I  was
lifted  up  by  my  hair  and  carried  above  the  earth.
And  suddenly  there  arose  in  mid-air  the  apparition
of  a  man  of  majestic  aspect,  in  an  antique  garb,  and
surrounded  by  a  throng  of  prostrate  worshippers.
At  first  the  appearance  of  this  figure  was  strange
to  me  ;  but  while  I  looked  intently  at  it,  a  change
came  over  the  face  and  dress,  and  I  thought  I
recognised  Buddha, — the  Messiah  of  India.  But
scarcely  had  I  convinced  myself  of  this,  when  a  great
voice,  like  a  thousand  voices  shouting  in  unison,
cried  to  the  worshippers  :  "  Stand  upright  on  your
feet : — Worship  God  only  !  "  And  again  the  figure
changed,  as  though  a  cloud  had  passed  before  it,  and
now  it  seemed  to  assume  the  shape  of  Jesus.  Again
I  saw  the  kneeling  adorers,  and  again  the  mighty
voice  cried,  "Arise!  Worship  God  only!"  The
sound  of  this  voice  was  like  thunder,  and  I  noted
that  it  had  seven  echoes.  Seven  times  the  cry  re-
verberated, ascending  with  each  utterance  as  though
mounting  from  sphere  to  sphere.  Then  suddenly  I
fell  through  the  air,  as  though  a  hand  had  been  with-
drawn  from  sustaining  me  :  and  again  touching  the
earth,  I  stood  within  the  temple  I  had  seen  in  the
first  part  of  my  vision.  At  its  east  end  was  a  great
altar,  from  above  and  behind  which  came  faintly  a
white  and  beautiful  light,  the  radiance  of  which  was
arrested  and  obscured  by  a  dark  curtain  suspen

The  TJwee  Veils  between  Man  and  God.      3

from  the  dome  before  the  altar.  And  the  body  of
the  temple,  which,  but  for  the  curtain,  would  have
been  fully  illumined,  was  plunged  in  gloom,  broken
only  by  the  fitful  gleams  of  a  few  half-expiring  oil-
lamps,  hanging  here  and  there  from  the  vast  cupola.
At  the  right  of  the  altar  stood  the  same  tall  angel  I
had  before  seen  on  the  temple  threshold,  holding  in
his  hand  a  smoking  censer.  Then,  observing  that  he
was  looking  earnestly  at  me,  I  said  to  him  :  "  Tell  me,
what  curtain  is  this  before  the  light,  and  why  is  the
temple  in  darkness  ?  "  And  he  answered,  "  This  veil
is  not  One,  but  Three  ;  and  the  Three  are  Blood,
Idolatry,  and  the  Curse  of  Eve.  And  to  you  it  is
given  t.)  withdraw  them  ;  be  faithful  and  courageous  ;
the  time  has  come."  Now  the  first  curtain  was  red,
and  very  heavy ;  and  with  a  great  effort  I  drew  it
aside,  and  said,  "  I  have  put  away  the  veil  of  blood
from  before  Thy  Face.  Shine,  O  Lord  God  !  "  But
a  voice  from  behind  the  folds  of  the  two  remaining
coverings  answered  me,  "  I  cannot  shine,  because  of
the  idols."  And  lo,  before  mc  a  curtain  of  many
colours,  woven  about  with  all  manner  of  images,
crucifixes,  madonnas,  Old  and  New  Testaments,
prayer-books,  and  other  religious  symbols,  some
strange  and  hideous  like  the  idols  of  China  and  Japan,
some  beautiful  like  those  of  the  Greeks  and  Christians.
And  the  weight  of  the  curtain  was  like  lead,  for  it
was  thick  with  gold  and  silver  embroideries.  But
with  both  hands  I  tore  it  away,  and  cried,  "  I  have
put  away  the  idols  from  before  Thy  Face.  Shine,  O
Lord   God!"     And   now  the   light  was   clearer  and

4  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

brighter.  But  yet  before  me  hung  a  third  veil,  all  of
black  ;  and  upon  it  was  traced  in  outline  the  figure  of
four  lilies  on  a  single  stem  inverted,  their  cups
opening  downwards.  And  from  behind  this  veil  the
voice  answered  me  again,  "  I  cannot  shine,  because  of
the  curse  of  Eve."  Then  I  put  forth  all  my  strength,
and  with  a  great  will  rent  away  the  curtain,  crying,
"  I  have  put  away  her  curse  from  before  Thee.  Shine,
0  Lord  God  !"

And  there  was  no  more  a  veil,  but  a  landscape,
more  glorious  and  perfect  than  words  can  paint,  a
garden  of  absolute  beauty,  filled  with  trees  of  palm,
and  olive,  and  fig,  rivers  of  clear  water  and  lawns  of
tender  green  ;  and  distant  groves  and  forests  framed
about  by  mountains  crowned  with  snow  ;  and  on  the
brow  of  their  shining  peaks  a  rising  sun,  whose  light
it  was  I  had  seen  behind  the  veils.  And  about  the
sun,  in  mid-air  hung  white  misty  shapes  of  great
angels,  as  clouds  at  morning  float  above  the  place  of
dawn.  And  beneath,  under  a  mighty  tree  of  cedar,
stood  a  white  elephant,  bearing  in  his  golden  houdah
a  beautiful  woman  robed  as  a  queen,  and  wearing  a
crown.  But  while  I  looked,  entranced,  and  longing
to  look  for  ever,  the  garden,  the  altar,  and  the  temple
were  carried  up  from  me  into  Heaven.  Then  as  I
stood  gazing  upwards,  came  again  the  voice,  at  first
high  in  the  air,  but  falling  earthwards  as  I  listened.
And  behold,  before  me  appeared  the  white  pinnacle
of  a  minaret,  and  around  and  beneath  it  the  sky  was
all  gold  and  red  with  the  glory  of  the  rising  sun.
And   I  perceived  that   now  the  voice  was  that  of  a

Concerning  Inspiration  and  Prophesying.      5

solitary  Muezzin   standing  on  the  minaret  with  up-
lifted hands  and  crying  : —

"  Put  away  Blood  from  among  you  !
Destroy  your  Idols  !
Restore  your  Queen  !  "

And  straightway  a  voice,  like  that  of  an  infinite  multi-
tude, coming  as  though  from  above  and  around  and
beneath  my  feet, — a  voice  like  a  wind  rising  upwards
from  caverns  under  the  hills  to  their  loftiest  far-off
heights  among  the  stars, — responded — ■
u  Worship  God  alone  1"

No.  II.

Part    i.

concerning  inspiration  and  prophesying.1

I    HEARD  last  night  in  my  sleep  a  voice  speaking
to  me,  and  saying —

1.  You  ask  the  method  and  nature  of  Inspiration,
and  the  means  whereby  God  revealeth  the  Truth.

2.  Know  that  there  is  no  enlightenment  from  with-
out :  the  secret  of  things  is  revealed  from  within.

3.  From    without  cometh    no    Divine    Revelation:
but  the  Spirit  within  beareth  witness.

4.  Think  not  I  tell  you  that  which  you  know  not :
for  except  you  know  it,  it  cannot  be  given  to  you.

5.  To  him  that  hath  it  is  given,  and  he  hath  the
more  abundantly.

1  Paris,  February  7,  1880-.

6  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun.n

6.  None  is  a  prophet  save  he  who  knoweth  :  the
instructor  of  the  people  is  a  man  of  many  lives.

7.  Inborn  knowledge  and  the  perception  of  things,
these  are  the  sources  of  revelation  :  the  soul  of  the  man
instructeth  him,  having  already  learned  by  experience.

8.  Intuition  is  inborn  experience  ;  that  which  the
soul  knoweth  of  old  and  of  former  years.

9.  And  Illumination  is  the  Light  of  Wisdom,
whereby  a  man  perceiveth  heavenly  secrets.

10.  Which  Light  is  the  Spirit  of  God  within  the
man,  showing  unto  him  the  things  of  God.

11.  Do  not  think  that  I  tell  you  anything  you  know
not;  all  cometh  from  within:  the  Spirit  that  in-
formeth  is  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  prophet.

12.  What,  then,  you  ask,  is  the  Medium  ;  and  how
are  to  be  regarded  the  utterances  of  one  speaking  in
trance  ?

13.  God  speakcth  through  no  man  in  the  way  you
suppose  ;  for  the  Spirit  of  the  Prophet  beholdeth  God
with  open  eyes.      If  he   fall    into   a  trance,  his   1
are    open,    and    his    interior    man    knoweth    what    is
spoken  by  him.

14.  But  when  a  man  speakcth  that  which  he
knoweth  not,  he  is  obsessed  :  an  impure  spirit,  or  one
that  is  bound,  hath  entered  into  him.

15.  There  are  many  such,  but  their  words  are  as
the  words  of  men  who  know  not  :  these  are  not
prophets  nor  inspired.

16.  God  obsesseth  no  mail  ;  God  is  revealed  :  and
he  to  whom  God  is  revealed  speaketh  that  which  he
knoweth.

Concerning  Inspiration  and  Prophesying.      J

17.  Christ  Jesus  *  understandeth  God:  he  knoweth
that  of  which  he  beareth  witness.

18.  But  they  who,  being  mediums,  utter  in  trance
things  of  which  they  have  no  knowledge,  and  of  which
their  own  spirit  is  uninformed  :  these  are  obsessed
with  a  spirit  of  divination,  a  strange  spirit,  not  their
own.

19.  Of  such  beware,  for  they  speak  many  lies,  and
are  deceivers,  working  often  for  gain  or  for  pleasure
sake  :  and  they  are  a  grief  and  a  snare  to  the  faithful.

20.  Inspiration  may  indeed  be  mediumship,  but  it
is  conscious  ;  and  the  knowledge  of  the  prophet  in-
structed him.

21.  Even  though  he  speak  in  an  ecstasy,  he  uttereth
nothing  that  he  knoweth  not.

22.  Thou  who  art  a  prophet  hast  had  many  lives :
yea,  thou  hast  taught  many  nations,  and  hast  stood
before  kings.

23.  And  God  hath  instructed  thee  in  the  years  that
are  past ;  and  in  the  former  times  of  the  earth.

24.  By  prayer,  by  fasting,  by  meditation,  by  painful
seeking,  hast  thou  attained  that  thou  knowest.

25.  There  is  no  knowledge  but  by  labour;  there  is
no  intuition  but  by  experience.

26.  I  have  seen  thee  on  the  hills  of  the  East :  I
have  followed  thy  steps  in  the  wilderness :  I  have
seen  thee  adore  at  sunrise  :  I  have  marked  thy  night
watches  in  the  caves  of  the  mountains.

27.  Thou  hast  attained  with  patience,  O  prophet!
God  hath  revealed  the  truth  to  thee  from  within.

1  Here  implying  the  Christ  Jesus  within,  or  the  regenerated  human
nature,  in  whomsoever  occurring.

"  ClotJied  with  the  Suit!9

Part  2.

A   PropJiecy  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  So?/ 1,  mystically
called  the  Day  of  the  Woman.

1.  And  now  I  show  you  a  mystery  and  a  new
thing,  which  is  part  of  the  mystery  of  the  fourth
day  of  creation.

2.  The  word  which  shall  come  to  save  the  world,
shall  be  uttered  by  a  woman.

3.  A  woman  shall  conceive,  and  shall  bring  forth
the  tidings  of  salvation.

4.  For  the  reign  of  Adam  is  at  its  last  hour  ;  and
God  shall  crown  all  things  by  the  creation  of  Eve.

5.  Hitherto  the  man  hath  been  alone,  and  hath
had  dominion  over  the  earth.

6.  But  when  the  woman  shall  be  created,  God  shall
give  unto  her  the  kingdom  ;  and  she  shall  be  first  in
rule  and  highest  in  dignity.

7.  Yea,  the  last  shall  be  first  ;  and  the  elder  shall
serve  the  younger.

8.  So  that  women  shall  no  more  lament  for  their
womanhood:  but  men  shall  rather  say,"0  that  we
had  been  born  women  !  "

9.  For  the  strong  shall  be  put  down  from  their
seat  ;   and  the  meek  shall  be  exalted  to  their  place.

10.  The  days  of  the  covenant  of  manifestation
are  passing  away :  the  gospel  of  interpretation
cometh.

11.  There  shall  nothing  new  be  told;  but  that
which  is  ancient  shall  be  interpreted.

A  Prophecy.  9

12.  So  that  man  the  manifestor  shall  resign  his
office  ;  and  woman  the  interpreter  shall  give  light  to
the  world.

13.  Hers  is  the  fourth  office  :  she  revealeth  that
which  the  Lord  hath  manifested.

14.  Hers  is  the  light  of  the  heavens,  and  the
brightest  of  the  planets  of  the  holy  seven.

15.  She  is  the  fourth  dimension  ;  the  eyes  which
enlighten  ;  the  power  which  draweth  inward  to  God.

16.  And  her  kingdom  cometh ;  the  day  of  the
exaltation  of  woman.

17.  And  her  reign  shall  be  greater  than  the  reign
of  the  man  :  for  Adam  shall  be  put  down  from  his
place  ;   and  she  shall  have  dominion  for  ever.

18.  And  she  who  is  alone  shall  bring  forth  more
children  to  God,  than  she  who  hath  a  husband.

19.  There  shall  no  more  be  a  reproach  against
women  :  but  against  men  shall  be  the  reproach.

20.  For  the  woman  is  the  crown  of  man,  and  the
final  manifestation  of  humanity.

21.  She  is  the  nearest  to  the  throne  of  God,  when
she  shall  be  revealed.

22.  But  the  creation  of  woman  is  not  yet  complete:
but  it  shall  be  complete  in  the  time  which  is  at
hand.

23.  All  things  are  thine,  O  Mother  of  God  :  all
things  are  thine,  O  Thou  who  risest  from  the  sea  ;
and  Thou  shalt  have  dominion  over  all  the  worlds.

to  "  Clot lud  with  the  Sim."

No.  III.

CONCERNING  THE    PROPHECY  OF   THE   IMMACU-
LATE CONCEPTION.1

I  ST  AND  upon  the  sea-shore.  The  moon  overhead
is  at  the  full.  A  soft  and  warm  breath,  like  that  of
the  summer  wind,  blows  in  my  face.  The  aroma  of
it  is  salt  with  the  breath  of  the  sea.  O  Sea  !  O  Moon !
from  you  I  shall  gather  what  I  seek !  You  shall  re-
count to  me  the  story  of  the  Immaculate  Conception
of  Maria,  whose  symbols  ye  are !

Allegory  of  stupendous  significance!  with  which
the  Church  of  God  has  so  long  been  familiar,  but
which  yet  never  penetrated  its  understanding,  like  the
holy  fire  which  enveloped  the  sacred  Bush,  but  which
nevertheless,  the  Bush  withstood  and  resisted.

Yet  has  there  been  one  who  comprehended,  and
who  interpreted  aright  the  parable  of  the  Immaculate
Conception  ;  and  he  found  it  through  US,  by  the  light
of  his  own  intense  love,  for  he  was  the  disciple  of  love,
and  his  name  is  still — the  Beloved  ; — John,  the  S
of  the  Apocalypse.  For  he,  in  the  vision  of  the
woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  set  forth  the  true  signifi-
cance of  the  Immaculate  Conception.     For  the  Im-

1  Paris,  July  26,  1S77.  Received  in  the  night  and  written  down
under  trance,  the  seeress  being  transported  in  spirit  to  the  sea-side,  but
maintaining  with  the  body  a  connection  sufficient  to  enable  her  to
write.  The  changes  ol~  person  from  singular  to  plural  are  due  to  the
overshadowing  influence  speaking  at  one  time  as  a  unity,  and  at  another
as  a  plurality.

The  Immaculate  Conception.  1 1

maculate  Conception  is  none  other  than  the  prophecy
of  the  means  whereby  the  universe  shall  at  last  be
redeemed.  Maria — the  sea  of  limitless  space — Maria
the  Virgin,  born  herself  immaculate  and  without  spot,
of  the  womb  of  the  ages,  shall  in  the  fulness  of  time
bring  forth  the  perfect  man,  who  shall  redeem  the  race.
He  is  not  one  man,  but  ten  thousand  times  ten  thou-
sand, the  Son  of  Man,  who  shall  overcome  the  limita-
tions of  matter,  and  the  evil  which  is  the  result  of
the  materialisation  of  spirit.  His  Mother  is  spirit,
his  Father  is  spirit,  yet  he  is  himself  incarnate ;  and
how  then  shall  he  overcome  evil,  and  restore  matter
to  the  condition  of  spirit  ?  By  force  of  love.  It  is
love  which  is  the  centripetal  power  of  the  universe ;
it  is  by  love  that  all  creation  returns  to  the  bosom  of
God.  The  force  which  projected  all  things  is  will,
and  will  is  the  centrifugal  power  of  the  universe.
Will  alone  could  not  overcome  the  evil  which  results
from  the  limitations  of  matter ;  but  it  shall  be  over-
come in  the  end  by  sympathy,  which  is  the  knowledge
of  God  in  others, — the  recognition  of  the  omnipresent
self.  This  is  love.  And  it  is  with  the  children  of
the  spirit,  the  servants  of  love,  that  the  dragon  of
matter 'makes  war.

Now,  whether  or  not  the  world  be  strong  enough
to  bear  this  yet,  we  know  not.  This  is  not  the  first
time  we  have  revealed  these  things  to  men.  An
ancient  heresy,  cursed  by  the  Church,  arose  out  of  a
true  inspiration ;  for  the  disciples  are  ever  weaker
than  the  master,  and  they  have  not  his  spiritual
discernment.      I    speak    of    the    Gnostics.      To   the

r 2  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

Master  of  the  Gnostics  we  revealed  the  truth  of  the
Immaculate  Conception.  We  told  him  that  Im-
manuel  should  be  the  God-Man  who,  transcending
the  limitations  of  matter,  should  efface  the  evil  of
materialisation  by  the  force  of  love,  and  should  see
and  hear  and  speak  and  feel  as  though  he  were  pure
spirit,  and  had  annihilated  the  boundaries  of  matter.
This,  then,  he  taught  ;  but  they  who  heard  his
teaching-,  applying  his  words  only  to  the  individual
Jesus,  affirmed  that  Jesus  had  had  no  material  body,
but  that  he  was  an  emanation  of  a  spiritual  nature ;
an  JEon  who,  without  substance  or  true  being  in  the
flesh,  had  borne  a  phantom  part  in  the  world  of  men.
Beware  lest  in  like  manner  ye  also  are  misread.  It
is  so  hard  for  men  to  be  spiritual.  It  is  as  hard  for
us  to  declare  ourselves  without  mystery.  The  Church
knows  not  the  source  of  its  dogmas.  We  marvel  also
at  the  blindness  of  the  hearers,  who  indeed  hear,  but
who  have  not  eyes  to  see.  We  speak  in  vain, — ye
discern  not  spiritual  things.  Ye  are  so  materialised
that  ye  perceive  only  the  material.  The  Spirit  comes
and  goes  ;  ye  hear  the  sound  of  its  voice  :  but  ye
cannot  tell  whither  it  goeth  nor  whence  it  cometh.

All  that  is  true  is  spiritual.  No  dogma  of  the  Church
is  true  that  seems  to  bear  a  physical  meaning.  For
matter  shall  cease,  and  all  that  is  of  it,  but  the  Word
of  the  Lord  shall  remain  for  ever.  And  how  shall  it
remain  except  it  be  purely  spiritual  ;  since,  when
matter  ceases,  it  would  then  be  no  longer  compre-
hensible? I  tell  you  again,  and  of  a  truth, — no
dogma  is  real  that  is  not  spiritual.     If  it  be  true,  and

Concerning  Revelation.  1 3

yet  seem  to  you  to  have  a  material  signification,  know
that  you  have  not  solved  it.  It  is  a  mystery :  seek
its  interpretation.  That  which  is  true,  is  for  spirit
alone.

No.  IV.

CONCERNING  REVELATION.1

ALL  true  and  worthy  illuminations  are  reveila-
tions,  or  re-veilings.  Mark  the  meaning  of
this  word.  There  can  be  no  true  or  worthy  illumina-
tion which  destroys  distances  and  exposes  the  details
of  things.

Look  at  this  landscape.  Behold  how  its  moun-
tains and  forests  are  suffused  with  soft  and  delicate
mist,  which  half  conceals  and  half  discloses  their
shapes  and  tints.  See  how  this  mist  like  a  tender
veil  enwraps  the  distances,  and  merges  the  reaches  of
the  land  with  the  clouds  of  heaven  !

How  beautiful  it  is,  how  orderly  and  wholesome  its
fitness,  and  the  delicacy  of  its  appeal  to  the  eye  and
heart !  And  how  false  would  be  that  sense  which
should  desire  to  tear  away  this  clinging  veil,  to  bring
far  objects  near,  and  to  reduce  everything  to  fore-
ground in  which  details  only  should  be  apparent,  and
all  outlines  sharply  defined  !

Distance   and   mist   make  the  beauty  of  Nature :

1  Home,  November  27,  1883.     Received  in  sleep.

14  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

and  no  poet  would  desire  to  behold  her  otherwise
than  through  this  lovely  and  modest  veil.

And  as  with  exoteric,  so  with  esoteric  nature.  The
secrets  of  every  human  soul  are  sacred  and  known
only  to  herself.  The  ego  is  inviolable,  and  its  person-
ality is  its  own  right  for  ever.

Therefore  mathematical  rules  and  algebraic  formulae
cannot  be  forced  into  the  study  of  human  lives;  nor
can  human  personalities  be  dealt  with  as  though  they
were  mere  ciphers  or  arithmetical  quantities.

The  soul  is  too  subtle,  too  instinct  with  life  and
will  for  treatment  such  as  this.

One  may  dissect  a  corpse;  one  may  analyse  and
classify  chemical  constituents  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to
dissect  or  analyse  any  living  thing.

The  moment  it  is  so  treated  it  escapes.  Life  is  not
subject  to  dissection.

The  opening  of  the  shrine  will  always  find  it
empty  :  the  God  is  gone.

A  soul  may  know  her  own  past,  and  may  see  in
her  own  light :  but  none  can  see  it  for  her  if  she  see
it  not.

Herein  is  the  beauty  and  sanctity  of  person-
ality.

The  ego  is  self-centered  and  not  diffused  ;  for  the
tendency  of  all  evolution  is  towards  centralisation
and  individualism.

And  life  is  so  various,  and  so  beautifully  diverse
in  its  unit}-,  that  no  hard  and  fast  mathematical  law-
making can  imprison  its  manifold ness.

All  is  order :  but  the  elements  of  this  order  har-

Concerning  Revelation,  1 5

v>

monise  by  means  of  their  infinite  diversities  and
gradations.

The  true  mysteries  remained  always  content  with
nature's  harmony  :  they  sought  not  to  drag  distances
into  foregrounds ;  or  to  dissipate  the  mountain
nebula,  in  whose  bosom  the  sun  is  reflected.

For  these  sacred  mists  are  the  media  of  light,  and
the  glorifiers  of  nature.

Therefore  the  doctrine  of  the  mysteries  is  truly
reveilationy — a  veiling  and  a  re-veiling  of  that  which
it  is  not  possible  for  eye  to  behold  without  violating
all  the  order  and  sanctities  of  nature.

For  distance  and  visual  rays,  causing  the  diversities
of  far  and  near,  of  perspective  and  mergent  tints,  of
horizon  and  foreground,  are  part  of  natural  order  and
sequence  :  and  the  law  expressed  in  their  properties
cannot  be  violated.

For  no  law  is  ever  broken.

The  hues  and  aspects  of  distance  and  mist  indeed
may  vary  and  dissolve  according  to  the  quality  and
quantity  of  the  light  which  falls  upon  them  :  but
they  are  there  always,  and  no  human  eye  can  annul
or  annihilate  them.

Even  words,  even  pictures  are  symbols  and  veils.
Truth  itself  is  unutterable,  save  by  God  to  God.

1 6  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

No.V.

concerning  the  interpretation  of  the
mystical  scriptures.

Part  i.1

u  T  F,  therefore,  they  be  Mystic  Books,  they  ought
JL  also  to  have  a  Mystic  Consideration.  But  the
Fault  of  most  Writers  lieth  in  this, — that  they  dis-
tinguish not  between  the  Books  of  Moses  the  Prophet,
and  those  Books  which  are  of  an  historical  Nature.
And  this  is  the  more  surprising  because  not  a  few
of  such  Critics  have  rightly  discerned  the  esoteric
Character,  if  not  indeed  the  true  Interpretation,  of
the  Story  of  Eden  ;  yet  have  they  not  applied  to  the
Remainder  of  the  Allegory  the  same  Method  which
they  found  to  fit  the  Beginning;  but  so  soon  as  they

1  Paris,  June  6,  1878.  Read  in  sleep,  in  a  library  purporting  to  be
that  of  Emmanuel  Swedenborg,  in  the  spiritual  world,  Swedenborg
himself  being  present.  As  we  subsequently  ascertained,  it  represents
the  doctrine  or  that  famous  seer,  but  without  his  limitations.  Like
most  of  the  writings  thus  beheld  by  the  seeress,  it  was  in  German  text
and  archaic  spelling,  and  also,  like  several  others,  was  given  in
immediate  response  to  a  mental  request  for  light  on  the  subjects  treated,
made  by  me  without  her  knowledge  either  of  my  request  or  of  my  need,
or  being  able  of  herself  to  have  supplied  the  want.  On  seeking — also
from  transcendental  sources — to  know  more  respecting  this  experience,
we  received  for  answer  that  "a  portion  of  Swedenborg  is  still  in  this
sphere,  through  which  he  can  communicate  with  those  with  whom  he
is  in  affinity  ; "  and  that  under  his  magnetism,  the  seeress  had  been
enabled — as  stated  in  the  preface— to  recover  these  recollections.  The
capitals  of  the  original  are  retained,  but  the  spelling  is  moder:

The  Mystical  Scriptures.  1 7

are  over  the  earlier  Stanzas  of  the  Poem,  they  would
have  the  Rest  of  it  to  be  of  another  Nature.

"  It  is,  then,  pretty  well  established  and  accepted  of
most  Authors,  that  the  Legend  of  Adam  and  Eve,
and  of  the  Miraculous  Tree  and  the  Fruit  which  was
the  Occasion  of  Death,  is,  like  the  story  of  Eros  and
Psyche,  and  so  many  others  of  all  Religions,  a
Parable  with  a  hidden,  that  is,  with  a  Mystic
Meaning.  But  so  also  is  the  Legend  which  follows
concerning  the  Sons  of  these  Mystical  Parents,  the
Story  of  Cain  and  Abel  his  Brother,  the  Story  of  the
Flood,  of  the  Ark,  of  the  saving  of  the  clean  and
unclean  Beasts,  of  the  Rainbow,  of  the  twelve  Sons  of
Jacob,  and,  not  stopping  there,  of  the  whole  Relation
concerning  the  Flight  out  of  Egypt.  For  it  is  not  to
be  supposed  that  the  two  Sacrifices  offered  to  God  by
the  Sons  of  Adam,  were  real  Sacrifices,  any  more
than  it  is  to  be  supposed  that  the  Apple  which  caused
the  Doom  of  Mankind,  was  a  real  Apple.  It  ought
to  be  known,  indeed,  for  the  right  Understanding  of
the  Mystical  Books,  that  in  their  esoteric  Sense  they
deal,  not  with  material  Things,  but  with  spiritual
Realities  ;  and  that  as  Adam  is  not  a  Man,  nor  Eve
a  Woman,  nor  the  Tree  a  Plant  in  its  true  Significa-
tion, so  also  are  not  the  Beasts  named  in  the  same
Books  real  Beasts,  but  that  the  Mystic  Intention  of
them  is  implied.  When,  therefore,  it  is  written  that
Abel  took  of  the  Firstlings  of  his  Flock  to  offer  unto
the  Lord,  it  is  signified  that  he  offered  that  which  a
Lamb  implies,  and  which  is  the  holiest  and  highest  of
spiritual  Gifts.      Nor  is  Abel  himself  a  real  Person,

B

1 8  "  Clcthcd  with  the  Sun."

but  the  Type  and  spiritual  Presentation  of  the  Race
of  the  Prophets ;  of  whom,  also,  Moses  was  a
Member,  together  with  the  Patriarchs.  Were  the
Prophets,  then  Shedders  of  Blood  ?  God  forbid  ;
they  dealt  net  with  Things  material,  but  with
spiritual  Significations.  Their  Lambs  without  Spot,
their  white  Doves,  their  Goats,  their  Rams,  and  other
sacred  Creatures,  arc  so  many  Signs  and  Symbols  of
the  various  Graces  and  Gifts  which  a  Mystic  People
should  offer  to  Heaven.  Without  such  Sacrifices  is
no  Remission  of  Sin.  But  when  the  Mystic  Sense
was  lost,  then  Carnage  followed,  the  Prophets  ceased
out  of  the  Land,  and  the  Priests  bore  rule  over  the
People.  Then,  when  again  the  Voice  of  the  Pro-
phets arose,  they  were  constrained  to  speak  plainly,
and  declared  in  a  Tongue  foreign  to  their  Method,
that  the  Sacrifices  of  God  are  not  the  Flesh  of  Bulls
or  the  Blood  of  Goats,  but  holy  Vows  and  sacred
Thanksgivings,  their  Mystical  Counterparts.  As  God
is  a  Spirit,  so  also  are  His  Sacrifices  Spiritual.  What
Foil}',  what  Ignorance,  to  offer  material  Flesh  and
Drink  to  pure  Power  and  essential  Being!  Surely  in
vain  have  the  Prophets  spoken,  and  in  vain  have  the
Christs  been  manifested  !

"Why  will  you  have  Adam  to  be  Spirit  and  Fve
Matter,  since  the  Mystic  Books  deal  only  with  spiritual
Entities?  The  Tempter  himself  even  is  not  Matter,
but  that  which  gives  .Matter  the  Precedence.  Adam
is,  rather,  intellectual  I^orce  :  he  is  of  Earth.  Eve  is
the  moral  Conscience  :  she  is  the  Mother  of  the  Liv-
ing.     Intellect,  then,  is  the  male,  and  Intuition  the

The  Mystical  Scrip  hires.  19

female  Principle.  And  the  Sons  of  Intuition,  herself
fallen,  shall  at  last  recover  Truth  and  redeem  all
Things.  By  her  Fault,  indeed,  is  the  moral  Con-
science of  Humanity  made  subject  to  the  intellectual
Force,  and  thereby  all  Manner  of  Evil  and  Confusion
abounds,  since  her  Desire  is  unto  him,  and  he  rules
over  her  until  now.  But  the  End  foretold  by  the
Seer  is  not  far  off.  Then  shall  the  Woman  be  exalted,
clothed  with  the  Sun,  and  carried  to  the  Throne  of
God.  And  her  Sons  shalj  make  War  with  the  Dragon,
and  have  Victory  over  him.  Intuition,  therefore,  pure
and  a  Virgin,  shall  be  the  Mother  and  Redemptress  of
her  fallen  Sons,  whom  she  bore  under  Bondage  to  her
Husband  the  intellectual  Force."

Part  2.

"  Moses,  therefore,  knowing  the  Mysteries  of  the
Religion  of  the  Egyptians,  and  having  learned  of  their
Occultists  the  Value  and  Signification  of  all  sacred
Birds  and  Beasts,  delivered  like  Mysteries  to  his  own
People.  But  certain  of  the  sacred  Animals  of  Egypt
he  retained  not  in  Honour,  for  Motives  which  were
equally  of  Mystic  Origin.  And  he  taught  his  Initiated
the  Spirit  of  the  heavenly  Hieroglyphs,  and  bade
them,  when  they  made  Festival  before  God,  to  carry
with  them  in  Procession,  with  Music  and  with  Danc-

1  This  portion,  which  was  received,  also  in  sleep,  two  nights  after
the  foregoing,  is  a  part  remembered  of  a  lecture — evidently  out  of  the
same  book — delivered  by  a  man  in  priestly  garb,  in  an  amphitheatre  of
white  stone,  to  a  class  of  students,  of  whom  the  seeress  was  one.

20  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim.*9

ing,  such  of  the  sacred  Animals  as  were,  by  their
interior  Significance,  related  to  the  Occasion.  Now,
of  these  Beasts,  he  chiefly  selected  Males  of  the  first
Year,  without  Spot  or  Blemish,  to  signify  that  it  is
beyond  all  Things  needful  that  Man  should  dedicate
to  the  Lord  his  Intellect  and  his  Reason,  and  this
from  the  Beginning,  and  without  the  least  Reserve.
And  that  he  was  very  wise  in  teaching  this,  is  evi-
dent from  the  History  of  the  World  in  all  Ages,
and  particularly  in  these  last  days.  For  what  is  it
that  has  led  Men  to  renounce  the  Realities  of  the
Spirit,  and  to  propagate  false  Theories  and  corrupt
Sciences,  denying  all  Things  save  the  Appearance
which  can  be  apprehended  by  the  outer  Senses,  and
making  themselves  one  with  the  Dust  of  the  Ground?
It  is  their  Intellect  which,  being  unsanctified,  has  led
them  astray;  it  is  the  Force  of  the  Mind  in  them,
which,  being  corrupt,  is  the  Cause.  of  their  own  Ruin,
and  of  that  of  their  Disciples.  As,  then,  the  Intellect
is  apt  to  be  the  great  Traitor  against  Heaven,  so  also
is  it  the  Force  by  which  Men,  following  their  pure
Intuition,  may  also  grasp  and  apprehend  the  Truth.
For  which  Reason  it  is  written  that  the  Christs  are
subject  to  their  Mothers.  Xot  that  by  any  means
the  Intellect  is  to  be  dishonoured;  for  it  is  the  Heir
of  all  Things,  if  only  it  be  truly  begotten  and  be
no  Bastard.    .

"  And  besides  all  these  Symbols,  Moses  taught  the
People  to  have  beyond  all  Things  an  Abhorrence  of
Idolatry.  What,  then,  is  Idolatry,  and  what  are  False
Gods?

The  Mystical  Scriptures.  2 1

•  To  make  an  Idol  is  to  materialise  spiritual  Mys-
teries. The  Priests,  then,  were  Idolaters,  who  coming
after  Mosej,  and  committing  to  Writing  those  Things
which  he  by  Word  of  Mouth  had  delivered  unto
Israel,  replaced  the  true  Things  signified,  by  their
material  Symbols,  and  shed  innocent  Blood  on  the
pure  Altars  of  the  Lord.

"  They  also  are  Idolaters  who  understand  the
Things  of  Sense  where  the  Things  of  the  Spirit  are
alone  implied,  and  who  conceal  the  true  Features  of
the  Gods  with  material  and  spurious  Presentations.
Idolatry  is  Materialism,  the  common  and  original  Sin
of  Men,  which  replaces  Spirit  by  Appearance,  Sub-
stance by  Illusion,  and  leads  both  the  moral  and  intel-
lectual Being  into  Error,  so  that  they  substitute  the
Nether  for  the  Upper,  and  the  Depth  for  the  Height.
It  is  that  false  Fruit  which  attracts  the  outer  Senses,
the  Bait  of  the  Serpent  in  the  Beginning  of  the
World.  Until  the  Mystic  Man  and  Woman  had
eaten  of  this  Fruit,  they  knew  only  the  Things  of  the
Spirit,  and  found  them  suffice.  But  after  their  Fall,
they  began  to  apprehend  Matter  also,  and  gave  it  the
Preference,  making  themselves  Idolaters.  And  their
Sin,  and  the  Taint  begotten  of  that  false  Fruit,  have
corrupted  the  Blood  of  the  whole  Race  of  Men,
from  which  Corruption  the  Sons  of  God  would  have
redeemed  them,"

22

M  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

No.    VI.

CONCERNING  THE   MOSAIC   COSMOGONY.1

THE  opening-  chapters  of  Genesis  have,  in  some  of
their  applications,  a  reference  to  the  Mysteries.
The  following  are  some  of  their  manifold  mean-
ings.

In  the  first  chapter  (and  beginning  of  the  second)
is  related  the  creation  of  human  nature  in  its  two
divisions,  intellect  and  intuition,  body  and  soul,
man  and  woman,  each  creation  occurring  by  develop-
ment or  evolution  out  of  lower  forms,  through  the
successive  incarnations  of  the  individual.

In  the  second  chapter  (beginning  at  verse  4)  is
described  humanity  (or  Adam),  male  and  female,  in
a  state  of  mere  intellectualism  or  external  reason,  and
before  the  advent  of  revelation  or  religious  percep-
vion.  Here  the  allegory  refers  to  the  race  and  to  the
individual  alike,  and  treats  of  man  as  sense  and  soul,
priest  and  prophet,  world  and  church.

The  Tree  of  Life  is  the  Central  Will  or  Divine
Life,  the  God,  that  is,  whether  of  the  universe  or  of
the  individual.  And  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  is  ex-
perience which  comes  of  trespass,  or  a  descent  from
the  region  of  spirit  to  that  of  matter.  It  is  thus
Maya,  or  illusion  ;  and  the  serpent,  or  tempter,  is  the
impulse  by  yielding  to  which  the   inward   reality  of

1  Boulogne,  August  1SS0.     Received  in  sleep.

Concerning  the  Mosaic  Cosmogony.         23

Being  is  abandoned  for  the  outward  appearance,  and
idolatry  is  committed  through  the  preference  of  the
symbol  to  the  verity,  of  the  form  to  the  substance,
The  phrase  "  coats  of  skin  "  implies  a  deeper  descent
into  materiality,  and  the  consequent  need  of  multi-
plied penances  and  transmigrations.

The  Tree  of  Life  signifies  also  the  secret  of  re-
generation, or  final  transmutation  into  pure  spirit,
and  the  consequent  attainment  of  eternal  life,  which
can  come  only  when  all  the  necessary  processes  have
been  performed,  and  the  soul — Eve — is  once  more
pure  and  free,  when  she  becomes  "  Mary."

In  the  Mysteries  the  Adam  of  the  second  chapter
signifies  also  the  ordinary  earth-man,  devoid  of
spiritual  perception  or  consciousness,  and  unable,
therefore,  at  all  to  comprehend  the  mysteries.  And
Eve  signifies  the  seer  and  prophet,  who,  being  illu-
minated in  soul  and  taught  of  the  Spirit,  has  in  his
keeping  the  knowledge  of  things  sacred,  but  is  on  no
account  to  divulge  that  knowledge  to  the  outer  world
of  mankind  at  large.  Springing  from  the  heart  of
humanity,  when  its  outer  sense  and  reason  and  pas-
sions are  laid  in  sleep,  or  mystic  trance,  Eve  is  the
Sibyl,  or  "  Mother,"  who  has  the  sacred  tree  in  charge,
but  may  not  communicate  of  it.  But  being  tempted
by  the  prospect  of  sensuous  reward,  she  yields  to  the
serpent  of  matter — or  astral  impulses — and  communi-
cates the  Mysteries  to  the  vulgar,  and  thereby  loses
her  supremacy  over  men,  and  from  being  their
mistress  and  ruler,  becomes  their  slave,  while  the
prophets,  her  offspring,  are  persecuted  and  slain,  so

24  "  Clothed  with  the  Stm"

that  all  her  revelations  and  proper  ministrations  are
made  in  pain  and  sorrow  and  labour.  For  it  is
characteristic  of  the  vulgar,  that  they  reverence  only
what  is  unfamiliar  and  mysterious  to  them.

The  Four  Rivers  springing  from  one  source  are  the
four  elements  which  enter  into  the  composition
alike  of  the  whole  and  the  part,  the  universe,  the
planet,  the  individual,  and  the  single  (physiological)
cell.  Together  they  constitute  the  fourfold  being.
Pison,  which  surrounds  and  encloses  the  earth  or
mineral  zone,  and  contains  the  materials  of  wealth
and  fame,  is  the  body,  or  material  region.  Gihon,
the  river  which  runs  through  the  land  of  burning,
denotes  the  Vale  of  Gehenna  or  purgatorial  region,
and  is  the  "  fiery  body,"  the  magnetic  belt  between
the  body  and  the  soul.  Hiddekel,  the  river  with  the
double  symbol  of  Two  Languages,  is  that  which  leads
back  to  the  ancient  time  and  place  of  the  soul's
"  innocence."  For,  being  representative  of  the  soul,
it  occupies  the  soul's  place  between  the  material  and
the  spiritual  part.  The  last  is  called  the  Euphrates,
and  implies  the  innermost  and  highest,  the  Spirit,  or
Will.  These  four  "  rivers "  go  forth  into  and  con-
stitute the  whole  universe,  and  all  therein  that  is  of  a
fourfold  nature.  A  portion  of  each  is  necessary  to
constitute  a  molecule,  or  monad,  of  the  substance  of
creation,  whether  a  planet,  a  man,  or  a  cell.  For  the
cell  is  the  type  of  the  kosmos.

I^ow  the  signification  of  the  Rivers  of  Eden  is  four-
fold, denoting,  First,  the  four  generations  of  the  soul's
evolution,  individually  and  collectively.

Concerning  the  Fall.  25

Secondly,  The  four  stages  of  the  soul's  initiation
and  perfectionment.

Thirdly,  The  four  interpretations  of  Scripture.

Fourthly,  The  four  elemental  spheres  of  nature  in
which  the  soul  has  its  generation  and  education.

No.  VII.

CONCERNING   THE   FALL.1

THE  friend  with  whom  I  was  staying  having
asked  me  to  obtain  for  her,  if  possible,  while
in  her  house  a  precise  and  practical  instruction  on
this  subject,  I  found  myself  surrounded  in  my  sleep
by  a  group  of  spirits,  who  conversed  together  upon
it  evidently  for  my  benefit.  They  began  by  saying
that  all  the  mistakes  made  about  the  Bible  arise  out
of  the  mystic  books  being  referred  to  times,  places,
and  persons  material,  instead  of  being  regarded  as
containing  only  eternal  verities  about  things  spiritual.
The  opening  chapters  of  the  sacred  books,  they  said,
exhibit  the  meaning  and  object  of  religion,  and  the
method  of  salvation.  They  are  an  epitome  of  the
whole  Bible,  a  kind  of  argument  prefixed  to  the
divine  drama  of  the  spiritual  history  of  man.

The  key  to  their  interpretation  is  to  be  found  in
the  word  Now.  There  is  no  past  in  the  Divine
Mind,  no  future  in  the  Divine  Economy.     To  each

1  Paris,  July  29,  1880.

26  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

is  one  thing  forbidden  under  penalty  of  death.  This
one  thing  is  disobedience  to  the  Divine  Will.
Death  is  the  natural  and  inevitable  result  of  rebellion
against  the  Central  Will,  which  is  the  Tree  of  Life.
Death  ensues  in  the  body  when  the  central  will  of
the  system  no  longer  binds  in  harmony  the  com-
ponent elements  of  the  body.  And  death  ensues
in  the  soul  when  it  is  no  longer  desirous  of  union  with
the  Divine  Will.  Wherefore  disobedience  and  rebel-
lion are  death.  But  to  desire  ardently  that  which  God
wills,  and  to  give  oneself  even  to  the  death  to  fulfil
God's  Will,  is  life.  For  "he  who  will  find  his  life
shall  lose  it;"  which  means  that  he  who  seeks  his  own
in  opposition  to  the  Divine  Will,  shall  perish.  "And
he  who  loses  his  life,  shall  find  it;"  which  means  that
he  who  giveth  himself  to  die  death  to  fulfil  the
Divine  Will,  shall  have — nay,  already  hath — eternal
life.

Now,  the  injunction  laid  on  every  human  soul  is,
not  to  disobey  the  Divine  Will.  For,  in  the  day  that
the  soul  wilfully  oppoies  itself  to  God,  she  shall
surely  die.  This  means  that  the  natural  death  or
dissolution  of  the  body  shall,  in  such  case,  entail  the
dissolution  and  dispersion  of  the  soul.  For  the
Divine  Breath,  or  Spirit,  is  the  central  iife  of  the
human  soul,  or  true  man  ;  and  if  the  elements  of  this
personality  be  no  longer  bound  in  obedience  to  the
Divine  Fire,  they  will  become  dissolved  and  dis-
persed in  the  void,  and  so  the  individual  perish.
"Dying.,  thou  shalt  die."  The  rebellious  Adam  hath
not  eternal  life.     Death  in  the  body  is  for  him  death

Concerning  the  Fall.  2  7

in  the  soul.  The  soul  is  a  purer  and  finer  essence
than  the  mere  matter  of  the  body.  But  when  she  is
rebellious,  and  her  elements  are  no  longer  bound  to
their  central  fire,  they  continue,  after  the  death  of
the  body,  to  disunite  and  disintegrate,  until,  at  length,
the  Holy  Spirit  being  withdrawn,  the  soul  dissolves
into  the  void  and  is  no  more.  This  is  eternal  death.
On  the  other  hand,  the  soul  redeemed  by  obedience
to  the  Divine  Will,  withdraws  itself,  and  aspires  ever
more  and  more  to  its  centre,  until — absorbed  therein
— it  becomes  like  unto  God,  wholly  spiritual.  This
is  eternal  life.

Now,  "the  Gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  "  For,  as  in  the  earthly  and
rebellious  Adam  we  die;  so  in  the  Christ  we  are
made  alive  for  evermore."  That  is,  that  inasmuch  as
by  disobedience  to  the  Divine  Will  the  soul  brings
on  itself  dissolution  and  eternal  death  ;  so,  when  it  is
regenerate  and  strives  continually  to  attain  the  Christ
nature,  it  obtains  thereby  eternal  life.  For  it  arises
necessarily  out  of  the  law  of  the  universe  that  nothing
can  continue  to  exist  which  is  out  of  harmony  with
the  Divine  Central  Will.  Now,  the  nature  which  is
in  most  perfect  harmony  with  the  Divine  Will  is  the
Christ-nature.  Wherefore,  of  the  redeemed  universe
the  perfect  chord  is,  Thy  Will  be  done.

But  had  it  been  permitted  to  the  rebellious  and
fallen  Adam,  after  his  act  of  disobedience  in
plucking  and  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  to  "  put
forth  his  hand  and  take  also  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  and
to  live  for  ever,"  the  result  would  have  been  an  eternal

28  "  Clothed  with  the  Su

11.

hell.  For  then  the  soul  would  have  continued  to
exist  for  ever  while  in  a  state  of  separation  by  dis-
obedience from  God,  and  while  insulting  and  defying
God.  Such  division  of  the  universe  against  itself
would  have  involved  its  destruction, — a  catastrophe
which  can  by  no  possibility  occur.  And  the  condition
would  have  involved  the  soul  in  a  perpetual  hell  of
misery  ;  wherefore,  in  merciful  arrest  of  such  a  doom,
God  drove  out  the  fallen  soul  from  the  reach  of
eternal  life.  But  even  while  doing  so,  God  pro-
nounced the  words  of  hope  and  redemption.  For
with  the  curse  comes  the  promise,  "  Adam  falling,
Christ  redeems."

For  the  soul  having  accomplished  the  act  of  dis-
obedience, has  its  "  eyes  opened."  And  it  now
perceives  that  alone  and  divorced  from  the  Divine
Will  it  is  "  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and
blind,  and  naked,"  as  said  of  the  Church  of  Laodicea
in  the  Apocalypse  ;  and  Adam,  knowing  he  is  fallen,
"  hides "  himself.  For  apart  from  God,  Who  is  its
life,  the  soul  is  nothing.  And  this  knowledge  of  her
shameful' condition  is  all  the  soul  gains  by  rebellion.
And  so  the  lesson  to  the  soul  is  this: — If  thou
disunite  thyself  from  God  and  make  thy  desire
earthwards,  thou  art  as  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and
must  die  the  death  of  the  body.  But  if  thou  desire
only  God,  and  make  God's  law  thy  will,  and  its
accomplishment  thy  delight,  thou  becomest  as  Gcd,
and  hast  eternal  life.

Concerning  the  PropJucy  of  the  Deluge.     29
No.  VIII.

CONCERNING  THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  DELUGE.1

WHEN  reading  this  morning  the  work  of  Eliphas
Levi  on  "  Magic,"  I  came  upon  the  following
sentence  : — "  In  the  Zohar,  one  of  the  chief  books  of
the  holy  Kabbala,  it  is  written,  '  The  Magic  Serpent,
son  of  the  Sun,  was  about  to  devour  the  World,  when
the  Sea,  daughter  of  the  Moon,  put  her  foot  on  his
head  and  crushed  him.' "

At  this  instant  a  writing  was  presented  to  my
spiritual  eyes,  in  which  I  read  the  following  ex-
planation of  the  Deluge  of  Noah  : —

"  The  Flood  came,"  says  the  Scripture,  "  and  swept
away  the  wicked."  The  Flood,  therefore,  is  not  the
wickedness  itself,  as  some  have  supposed,  but  that
which  destroyed  wickedness,  and  bore  the  righteous
unharmed  on  its  bosom.  The  Flood  is  Aphrodite
the  Sea-queen  and  Maria  the  Star  of  the  Sea  ;  or,  as
the  name  signifies,  Sea-salt,  or  Bitterness  of  the  Deep.
"  The  Woman  shall  crush  the  head  of  the  Serpent."
Maria,  the  God-woman,  or  feminine  presentation  of
the  supreme  power  and  goodness,  delivers  mankind
and  destroys  evildoers.  She  is  the  Water  of  Regen-
eration ;  the  Sea  through  which,  as  Paul  the  Mystic
says,  we  must  all  pass.  She  was  in  the  beginning,
because  she  is  God,  and  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  Divine
Cloud,  dwelt  upon  her.     "We  all  passed  through  the

1  Paris.  September  28,  187S.

3<D  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

Sea  and  through  the  Cloud."  Jesus  the  Saviour  went
down  into  her,  and  received  in  her  His  chrism,  while
at  the  same  time  the  Divine  Hermes  overshadowed
Him.

Maria  the  Sea  is  the  water  mystically  appointed  for
the  washing  away  of  Sin.  Therefore  as  the  Flood
she  purifies  the  world,  and  bears  on  her  immaculate
breast  the  Ark  of  the  Divine  Covenant  which  con-
tains the  Elect."  1

And  when  I  had  read  this,  it  was  impressed  on  my
mind  as  a  prophecy  having  special  significance  for
the  present  age.

No.  IX.

CONCERNING  THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF
ESTHER.'

THE  most  important  book  in  the  Bible  fcr  you
to  study  now,  and  that  most  nearly  about  to  be
fulfilled,  is  one  of  the  most  mystic  books  in  the  Old
Testament,  the  book  of  Esther.

This  book  is  a  mystic  prophecy,  written  in  the  form
of  an  actual  history.     If  I  give  you  the  key,  the  clue

1  Like  Eve,  Maria  and  the  Sea  are  mystical  synonyms  for  the  S
which  is  called   "  Bitterness  of  the  Deep"  because  — consisting  of  the
universal  substance- she  attains  her  perfection  through  painful  experi-
ence.    Concerning  Hermes,  see  Part  II.,  Nos.  XII.  and  XIII.,  (6).

-  Paris,    Easter    Sunday,    1S60.       Repeated    from   dictation    heard
interiorly  while  in  trance.

The  Book  of  Esther.  3 1

of  the  thread  of  it,  it  will  be  the  easiest  thing  in  the
world  to  unravel  the  whole.

The  great  King  Assuerus,  who  had  all  the  world
under  his  dominion,  and  possessed  the  wealth  of  all
the  nations,  is  the  genius  of  the  age.

Queen  Vasthi,  who  for  lier  disobedience  to  the  king
was  deposed  from  her  royal  seat,  is  the  orthodox
Catholic  Church.

The  Jews,  scattered  among  the  nations  under  the
dominion  of  the  king,  are  the  true  Israel  of  God.

Mardochi  the  Jew  represents  the  spirit  of  intuitive
reason  and  understanding.

His  enemy  Aman,  is  the  spirit  of  materialism,
taken  into  the  favour  and  protection  of  the  genius
of  the  age,  and  exalted  to  the  highest  place  in  the
world's  councils  after  the  deposition  of  the  orthodox
religion.

Now  Aman  has  a  wife  and  ten  sons.

Esther — who,  under  the  care  and  tuition  of  Mar-
dochi, is  brought  up  pure  and  virgin — is  that  spirit
of  love  and  sympathetic  interpretation  which  shall
redeem  the  world.

I  have  told  you  that  it  shall  be  redeemed  by  a
"woman."

Now  the  several  philosophical  systems  by  which
the  councillors  of  the  age  propose  to  replace  the
dethroned  Church,  are  one  by  one  submitted  to  the
judgment  of  the  age;  and  Esther,  coming  last,  shall
find  favour.

Six  years  shall  she  be  anointed  with  oil  of  myrrh,
that  is,  with  study  and  training  severe  and   bitter,

32  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

that  she  may  be  proficient  in  intellectual  knowledge,
as  must  all  systems  which  seek  the  favour  of  the  age.

And  six  years  with  sweet  perfumes,  that  is  with
the  gracious  loveliness  of  the  imagery  and  poetry
of  the  faiths  of  the  past,  that  religion  may  not  be
lacking  in  sweetness  and  beaut)-.

But  she  shall  not  seek  to  put  on  any  of  those
adornments  of  dogma,  or  of  mere  sense,  which,  by
trick  of  priestcraft,  former  systems  have  used  to  gain
power  or  favour  with  the  world  and  the  age,  and  for
which  they  have  been  found  wanting.

Now  there  come  out  of  the  darkness  and  the  storm
which  shall  arise  upon  the  earth,  two  dragons.

And  they  fight  and  tear  each  other,  until  there
arises  a  star,  a  fountain  of  light,  a  queen,  who  is
Esther.

I  have  given  you  the  key.  Unlock  the  meaning  of
all  that  is  written.

I  do  not  tell  you  if  in  the  history  of  the  past  these
voices  had  part  in  the  world  of  men.

If  they  had,  guess  now  who  were  Mardochi  and
Esther.

But  I  tell  you  that  which  shall  be  in  the  days  about
to  come.1

1  The  name  E>ther — which  is  one  with  Faster— denotes  a  star,  or
fountain  of  light,  a  dawn  or  rising.  The  feast  of  Purim.  instituted  in
token  of  the  deliverance  wrought  through  Esther,  coincides  in  date  with
Easter.  In  the  Protestant  Bible  the  later  portion  of  the  Book  of  Esther
is  placed  in  the  Apocrypha.  The  spelling  Jollowed  is  that  of  the  Douay
version.  The  penultimate  sentence  obviously  refers  to  the  work  in
which  we  were  engaged,  but  not  necessarily  to  the  workers  themselves.
The  two  dragons  are  materialism  and  superstition  ^see  Preface).

The  Vision  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  33

No.  X.

CONCERNING  THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  VISION  OF
NEBUCHADNEZZAR.1

THE  King  Nebuchadnezzar  is  mystically  identical
with  king  Assuerus,  in  that  each  alike  denotes
the  spirit  of  the  latter  age,  that,  namely,  of  mere
Intellectualism,  as  distinguished  from  and  opposed  to
Intuitionalism.  And  both  narratives,  as  well  also
as  that  of  the  Deluge  and  of  the  book  of  Esther,
are  prophecies  which  now  are  beginning  to  have
their  accomplishment  on  a  scale  greater  than  ever
before.  For,  the  image  shown  to  the  king  in  his
dream  represents  the  various  systems  of  thought
and  belief  which  find  favour  with  the  world.  Ot
these  the  intellectual  philosophy  which  rests  upon
the  basis  of  a  science  merely  physical,  is  the  head,
and  is  symbolised  by  the  gold.  And  this  rightly,  so
far  as  concerns  the  intellect ;  for  it  is  indeed  king  of
kings,  and  all  the  children  of  men,  the  beasts  of  the
field,  and  the  birds  of  the  air,  are  given  into  its
hands.  This  is  to  say,  all  the  activities  of  society,
its  learning,  its  industry,  and  its  art,  are  made
subordinate  to  the  intellect.  The  breast  and  arms
of  the  image  are  of  silver.  This  is  the  domain
of  morality  and  sentiment,  which  under  the  reign
r*(  the  mere  intellect  hold  a  subordinate  place.
Belonging  to  the  region  of  the  heart,  it  is  feminine  \

1  London,  February  22,  1881.     Received  in  sleep.

c

34  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

and  implying  the  intuition,  which  is  of  the  woman,
and  her  assigned  inferiority,  it  is  of  silver.  The
thighs  and  the  belly  are  of  brass,  and  this  kingdom
is  said  to  rule  over  the  whole  world.  By  this  is
meant  the  universality  under  a  regime  wholly
animal  and  non-moral,  of  falsehood,  cruelty,  impurity,
blasphemy,  and  all  those  deprivations  of  the  true
humanity,  which  characterise  an  age  of  materialism.
The  iron  of  which  the  legs  are  made,  represents
force,  and  denotes  the  negation  of  love,  and  the
consequent  prevalence  of  might  over  right,  and  the
universal  rule  of  selfishness.  By  the  mingling  of
iron  and  clay  in  the  feet  is  implied  the  weakness
and  instability  of  the  whole  structure,  the  clay
representing  matter,  which  is  made  the  foundation
of  the  system  instead  of  spirit,  which  alone  is  stable
and  enduring.

The  Stone  cut  out  without  hands,  which  destroys
this  image,  and  becomes  a  great  mountain  fining  the
whole  earth,  is  that  "Stone  of  the  Philosopher-
perfected    spirit,    and    the    true    gospel   of  the   inner
knowledge    which    appertains    thereto.      This     it     is
which  smites  the  age   upon    its   feet,  or   fundamental
basis,    its    materialistic    hypothesis.     And    with    the
demonstration    of  the   falseness   of  its    doctri
being  made  to  the  world,  shall  fall  the  whole  fabric
of  society,  with  its  empire  of  force,  its  exaltation  of
the    masculine    mode    of    the    mind,    its    subject
of  women,  its  torture  of  animals,  and    its  op
of   the    poor.     With    its   clay,   its    iron,   its    1
silver,   and    its   gold,    all    swept    away   as    chaff    by

The  Time  of  the  End.  35

the  wind,  the  true  knowledge  and  spirit  of  under-
standing which  are  of  the  intuition,  shall  usher
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  "  stone,"  become
a  mountain,  shall  fill  the  whole  earth.

No.  XL

CONCERNING  THE  PROPHECY  OF  THE  TIME  OF
THE  END.1

AS  there  was  a  return  of  the  spirit,  or  angel,  of
Elias  in  the  person  of  John  the  Baptist  before
the  advent  of  Jesus,  so  there  will  be  a  return  of  the
angel  of  Daniel,  before  the  next  manifestation  of  the
Christ.  Daniel's  angel  is  he  who  specially  foretold
the  culmination  and  the  hour  of  overthrow  of  the
world's  materialistic  system.  And  when  he  had  com-
pleted his  prediction  he  told  Daniel  that  he — Daniel
— should  rest  for  the  present,  but  when  the  time  was
accomplished  and  the  end  was  at  hand,  he  should
return  and  stand  again  in  his  place,  and  prophesy
before  the  world.  And  the  token  whereby  the  ap-
proach of  the  end  should  be  known  would  be  the
spectacle  of  the  "  abomination  of  desolation  standing
in  the  holy  place."  A  like  assurance  was  given  also
to  John.  Now,  the  holy  place  is  always — whether  in
the  universal  or  the  individual,  in  the  macrocosm  or
the  microcosm — the  place  of  God  And  the  Soul ;  and

1  See  note  on  next  page  but  one.

36  "  Clothed  with  the  S?in"

the  abomination  of  desolation,  or  which  maketh
desolate,  is  that  system  of  thought  which,  putting
matter  in  the  chief  place,  and  making  it  the  source,
substance,  and  object  of  existence,  abolishes  God  out
of  the  universe,  and  the  soul  out  of  man,  and  thus,
depriving  existence  of  its  light  and  life,  makes  it
empty,  desolate  and  barren,  a  very  abomination  of
desolation.

Jesus,  recalling  this  prophecy,  and  citing  the  words
of  Daniel's  angel,  also  foretold  the  same  event  as
marking  the  end  of  that  "  adulterous  "  generation  [a
term  identical  with  idolatrous  as  denoting  the  worship
of  and  illicit  association  with  matter],  and  the  coming
of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and  warned  the  elect  in
mystic  phrase,  thus  to  be  interpreted  : —

"When,  therefore,  ye  shall  see  matter  exalted  to
the  holy  place  o(  God  and  the  soul,  and  made  the  all
and  in  all  of  existence;

41  Then  let  the  spiritual  Israel  betake  themsel
the  hills  where  alone  salvation  is  to  be  found,  even  the
heights  and  fastnesses  of  the  divine  life.

"  And  let  him  who  has  overcome  the  body,  beware
lest  he  return  to  the  love  of  the  flesh,  or  seek  the  things
of  the  world.

"  Neither  let  him  who  is  freed  from  the  body,
become  again  re-incarnate.

"And  woe  to  the  soul  whose  travail  is  yet  unac-
complished, and  which  has  not  yet  become  weaned
from  the  body.

"And  beseech  God  that  these  things  rind  you  not

The  Time  of  the  End.  37

at  a  season  either  of  spiritual  depression  and  feeble-
ness, or  of  spiritual  repose  and  unwatchfulness.

u  For  the  tribulation  shall  be  without  parallel ;

"  And  such  that  except  those  days  shall  be  few  in
number,  escape  from  the  body,  would  be  impossible.

"  But  for  the  elect's  sake  they  shall  be  few.

"  And  if  any  shall  then  declare  that  here,  or  there,
the  Christ  has  appeared  as  a  person,  believe  it  not.
For  there  shall  arise  delusive  apparitions  and  mani-
festations, together  with  great  signs  and  marvels,  such
as  might  well  deceive  even  the  elect.  Remember,  I
have  told  you  beforehand.  Wherefore,  if  they  shall
say  unto  you,  Behold  he  is  in  the  desert,  whether  of
the  East  or  of  the  West, — join  him  not.  Or,  Behold
he  is  in  darkened  rooms  and  secret  assemblies, — pay
no  regard.

"  For,  like  lightning  coming  out  of  the  East  and
illuminating  the  West,  so  shall  be  the  world's  spiritual
awakening  to  the  recognition  of  the  Divine  in
Humanity.

"  But  wheresoever  the  dead  carcase  of  error  remains,
around  it,  like  vultures,  will  gather  both  deceivers  and
deceived.1

"  And  upon  them,  the  profane,  there  shall  be  dark-

1  The  foregoing  part  of  this  utterance  was  received  at  Paris,  Decem-
ber 6,  1879,  in  sleep,  the  inspiring  influence  impressing  itself  upon  the
seeress  as  being  the  angel  Gabriel, — a  circumstance  which  caused
some  perplexity — her  usual  instructor  being  Hermes  (  =  Raphael)—  until
it  was  remembered  that  Gabriel  was  the  inspiring  angel  of  Daniel,
whose  return  had  been  foretold.  The  remainder  was  received  under
waking  illumination  in  July  1886,  while  preparing  the  second  edition
of  "  The  Perfect  Way,"  in  which  it  appeared.

3%  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

ness  ;  the  Spirit  shall  be  quenched  and  the  soul
extinct;  and  there  shall  be  no  more  any  light  in
heaven,  or  in  heavenly  science  any  truth  and  mean-
ing. And  the  power  of  heaven  upon  men  shall  be
shaken.

"Then  shall  appear  the  new  sign,  the  Man  in
Heaven,  upon  the  rain-clouds  of  the  last  chrism  and
mystery,  with  great  power  and  glory.

"And  his  missioners  shall  gather  the  elect  with  a
great  voice,  from  the  four  winds  and  from  the  farthest
bounds  of  heaven.

"  Behold  the  Fig-Tree,  and  learn  her  parable.
When  the  branch  thereof  shall  become  tender,  and
her  buds  appear,  know  that  the  day  of  God  is  upon
you."

Wherefore,  then,  saith  the  Lord  that  the  budding
of  the  fig-tree  shall  foretell  the  end  ?

Because  the  fig-tree  is  the  symbol  of  the  divine
woman,  as  the  vine  of  the  divine  man.

The  fig  is  the  similitude  of  the  matrix,  containing
inward  buds,  bearing  blossoms  on  its  placenta,  and
bringing  forth  fruit  in  darkness.  It  is  the  cup  of
life,  and  its  flesh  is  the  seed-ground  of  new  births.

The  stems  of  the  rig-tree  run  with  milk  :  her
leaves  are  as  human  hands,  like  the  leaves  of  her
brother  the  vine.

And  when  the  fig-tree  shall  bear  rigs,  then  shall
be  the  second  advent,  the  new  sign  oi~  the  man
bearing  water,  and  the  manifestation  of  the  virgin-
mother  crowned.

The  Time  of  the  End.  39

For  when  the  Lord  would  enter  the  holy  city,  to
celebrate  his  Last  Supper  with  his  disciples,  he  sent
before  him  the  fisherman  Peter  to  meet  the  man  of
the  coming  sign.

"  There  shall  meet  you  a  man  bearing  a  pitcher  of
water."

Because,  as  the  Lord  was  first  manifest  at  a  wine-
feast  in  the  morning,  so  must  he  consummate  his
work  at  a  wine-feast  in  the  evening.

It  is  his  Pass-Over ;  for  thereafter  the  sun  must
pass  into  a  new  sign.

After  the  Fish,  the  Water-Carrier ;  but  the  Lamb
of  God  remains  always  in  the  place  of  victory,  being
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.

For  his  place  is  the  place  of  the  sun's  triumph.

After  the  vine  the  fig ;  for  Adam  is  first  formed,
then  Eve.

And  because  our  Lady  is  not  yet  manifest,  our
Lord  is  crucified.

Therefore  came  he  vainly  seeking  fruit  upon  the
fig-tree,  "  for  the  time  of  figs  was  not  yet."

And  from   that  day  forth,   because   of  the  curse
of  Eve,  no  man  has  eaten  fruit  of  the  fig-tree.

For  the  inward  understanding  has  withered  away,
there  is  no  discernment  any  more  in  men.  They
have  crucified  the  Lord  because  of  their  ignorance,
not  knowing  what  they  did.

Wherefore,  indeed,  said  our  Lord  to  our  Lady: —
"  Woman,  what  is  between  me  and  thee  ?  For  even
my  hour  is  not  yet  come."

Because  until  the  hour  of  the  man  is  accomplished

40  "  Clothed  with  the  Stm."

and    fulfilled,    the    hour    of    the    woman    must    be
deferred.

Jesus  is  the  vine;  Mary  is  the  fig-tree.  And  the
vintage  must  be  completed  and  the  wine  trodden  out,
or  e^er  the  harvest  of  the  figs  be  gathered.

.  But  when  the  hour  of  our  Lord  is  achieved,  hang-
ing on  his  Cross,  he  gives  our  Lady  to  the  faithful.

The  chalice  is  drained,  the  lees  are  wrung  out:
then  says  he  to  his  elect : — "Behold  thy  Mother!"

But  so  long  as  the  grapes  remain  unpluckcd,  the
vine  has  nought  to  do  with  the  fig- tree,  nor  Jesus
with  Mary.

He  is  first  revealed,  for  he  is  the  Word  ;  afterwards
shall  come  the  hour  of  its  interpretation.

And  in  that  day  every  man  shall  sit  under  the
vine  and  the  fig-tree  ;  the  dayspring  shall  arisj  in
the  orient,  and  the  fig-tree  shall  bear  her  fruit.1

For,  from  the  beginning,  the  fig-leaf  covered
the  shame  of  incarnation,  because  the  riddle  of
existence  can  be  expounded  only  by  him  who  has
the  woman's  secret.     It  is  the  riddle  of  the  Sphinx.

Look  for  that  tree  which  alone  of  all  trees  bears
a  fruit  blossoming  interiorly,  in  concealment,  and
thou  shalt  discover  the  fig.

Look  for  the  sufficient  meaning  of  the  manifest
universe  and  of  the  written  Word,  and  thou  shalt
find  only  their  mystical  sense.

Cover  the  nakedness  of  matter  and  o(  nature  with
the  fig-leaf,  and  thou  hast  hidden  all  their  shame.
For  the  fig  is  the  interpreter.

1  Zoch.  iii.  10;  Mic  iv.  4;  Cant.  i:.  13.

Concerning  the  Soul.  4 1

So  when  the  hour  of  interpretation  comes,  and  the
fig-tree  puts  forth  her  buds,  know  that  the  time  of
the  end  and  the  dawning  of  the  new  day  are  at
hand, — "  even  at  the  doors."

No.  XII.

CONCERNING   THE   SOUL:
its  Origin,  Nature,  and  Potentialities}

THE  Soul,  in  its  first  beginning,  is  not  something
added  to  the  body,  but  is  generated  in  the
body  by  the  polarisation  of  the  astral  elements.  Once
generated,  it  enters  and  passes  through  many  bodies,
until  finally  perfected.

As  there  are  two  of  the  outer,  so  also  of  the  inner.
The  two  of  the  inner  are  spirit  and  soul.  In  the
translation  of  the  Scriptures  the  word  spirit  is  often
used  where  soul  is  meant.  For  only  the  man  created
in  God's  own  image  is  a  living  soul,  that  is,  a  soul
which  has  the  Spirit  superadded  to  it.2

The  clearest  understanding  may  be  obtained  of
the  soul  by  denning  it  as  the  divine  idea.  Before
anything  can  exist  outwardly  and  materially,  the
idea  of  it  must  subsist   in   the   Divine   Mind.      The

1  London.     Spoken  in  trance  at  different  times  in  the  spring  of  1S81.

2  Spirit,  being  the  substance  of  all  things,  is  in  all  things,  but  does
not  become  the  Spirit  until,  bum  being  diffuse  and  abstract,  it  becomes,
by  polarisation,  concentrate  and  formulate,— from  heal  becoming  (lame.

42  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

soul,  therefore,  may  be  understood  to  be  divine  and
everlasting  in  its  nature.  But  the  soul  does  not  act
directly  upon  matter.  It  is  put  forth  by  the  Divine
Mind  ;  but  the  body  is  put  forth  by  the  sideral
or  fiery  body.  As  the  spirit  on  the  celestial  plane
is  the  parent  of  the  soul,  so  the  fire  on  the  material
plane  begets  the  body.

The  soul,  being  in  its  nature  eternal,  passes  from
one  form  to  another  until,  in  its  highest  stage,  it
polarises  sufficiently  to  receive  the  spirit.  It  is  in
all  organised  things.  Nothing  of  an  organic  nature
exists  without  a  soul.  It  is  the  individual,  and
it  perishes  if  abandoned  of  the  spirit.

As  already  said,  at  the  moment  when  the  soul
appears  in  any  hitherto  inorganic  entity,  it  is  by
means  of  the  convergence  of  the  magnetic  poles  of  the
constituent  molecules  of  that  entity.  The  focusing
of  these  poles  gives  rise  to  a  circular  magnetic
current,  and  an  electric  combustion  is  the  result
This  vital  spark  is  organic  life,  or  the  soul.  This
spontaneous  combustion,  or  generation,  is  not  a  new
creation  ;  for  nothing  can  be  either  added  to  or
withdrawn  from  the  universe.  It  is  but  a  new-
condition  of  the  one  substance.  The  soul  is  to
the  material  organ  what  the  tune  is  to  the  musical
instrument.  The  tune  subsists  in  the  mind  of  the
composer  (God),  before  the  keys  or  strings  of  the
instrument  can  give  it  expression.  But  unless  for
this  expression  it  could  not  become  manifest  to
sense.  This  tune  can  be  played  on  many  instruments,
and  transferred  from  one  to   another.     We  are  thus

Concerning  the  Soul.  43

brought   to  the  great  facts,  the    immortality  of  the
soul,  its  transmigrations,  and  the  metempsychosis.

The  process  of  incarnation,  and  the  method  by
which  the  soul  takes  new  forms,  are  in  this  wise.
When  two  persons  ally  themselves  in  the  flesh  and
beget  a  child,  the  moment  of  impregnation  is  usually
— though  not  invariably — the  moment  which  attaches
a  soul  to  the  newly  conceived  body.  Hence,  much
depends  upon  the  influences,  astral  and  magnetic,
under  which  impregnation  and  conception  take  place.
The  pregnant  woman  is  the  centre  of  a  whirl  of  mag-
netic forces,  and  she  attracts  within  her  sphere  a  soul
whose  previous  conduct  and  odic  condition  corre-
spond either  to  her  own  or  to  the  magnetic  influences
under  which  she  conceives.  This  soul,  if  the  pregnancy
continues  and  progresses,  remains  attached  to  her
sphere,  but  does  not  enter  the  embryo  until  the  time
of  quickening,  when  it  usually  takes  possession  of  the
body,  and  continues  to  inhabit  it  until  the  time  of
delivery.  A  pregnant  woman  is  swayed  not  by  her
own  will  alone,  but  as  often  by  the  will  of  the  soul
newly  attached  to  her  sphere;  and  the  opposition  and
cross-magnetisms  of  these  two  wills  often  occasion
many  strange  and  seemingly  unaccountable  whims,
alternations  of  character,  and  longings,  on  the  part  of
the  woman.  Sometimes,  however,  the  moment  of
impregnation  or  conception  passes  without  attracting
any  soul,  and  the  woman  may  even  carry  a  false
conception  for  some  time,  in  which  cases  abortion
occurs.  There  are  innumerable  accidents  which  may
happen  in  this  regard.     Or,  the  soul,  which  has  been

44  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

attracted  to  her,  may,  under  new  influences,  be  with-
drawn from  her  sphere,  and  from  the  embryo  which,
having  quickened,  may  consume  away  ;  or,  the  soul
originally  drawn  to  her  orbit  may  be  replaced  later
by  another,  and  so  forth.  Some  clairvoyant  women
have  been  conscious  of  the  soul  attached  to  them,
and  have  seen  it,  at  times  as  a  beautiful  infant,  at
times  in  other  shapes.  Children  begotten  by  ardent
and  mutual  love  are  usually  the  best  and  healthiest,
spiritually  and  physically,  because  the  radical  moment
is  seized  by  love,  when  the  astral  and  magnetic  in-
fluences are  strongest  and  most  ardent,  and  they
attract  the  strongest  and  noblest  souls.

For  you  to  understand  yet  more  clearly  and  fully
the  origin  and   nature  of  the  soul,  whence  it   comes,
and  how  it  passes  from  one  body  to  another,  you  must
know  that  the  plane  on  which   the  celestials  and  the
creatures  touch  each   other,  is  the  astral  plane.     The
substance  of  all  created  things  is  the  begetter  alike
of   body    and   soul.      The    soul,    as    I    have    said,    is
formed  by  polarisation  of  the  elements  of  the  astral
bod)',   and   it    is  a  gradual    process  ;     but  when  once
formed  it  is  an  entity   capable   o(  p
body   to   another.       Imagine   the    magnetic    forces  of
innumerable    elements   directed    and    focused    to  one
centre,  and  streams  of  electric  power   passing  al
all   their   convergent   poles   to  that  centre.     I  mag
these  streams   so  focused  as  to  create  a   fire  in  that
central  part, — a   kind   of  crystallisation   of  magn
force.     This  is  the  soul.     This  is   the   sacred   fire
Hestia  or  Vesta,  which  burns  continually.     The  b

Concerning  the  Soul.  45

and  person  may  fall  away  and  disappear  :  but  the
soul,  once  begotten,  is  immortal  until  its  perverse  will
extinguish  it.  For  the  fire  of  the  soul,  or  central
hearth,  must  be  kept  alive  by  the  higher  air  or
Divine  Breath,  if  it  is  to  endure  for  ever.  It  must
converge,  not  diverge.  If  it  diverge  it  will  be  dissi-
pated. The  end  of  progress  is  unity  ;  the  end  of
degradation  is  division.  The  soul,  therefore,  which
ascends,  tends  more  and  more  to  union  with  the
Divine.

And  this  is  the  manner  thereof.  Conceive  of  God
as  of  a  vast  spiritual  body  constituted  of  many
individual  elements,  but  all  these  elements  as  having
one  will,  and  therefore  being  one.  This  condition
of  oneness  with  the  Divine  Will  and  Being  constitutes
the  celestial  Nirvana.  Again,  conceive  of  the  de-
graded soul  as  dividing  more  and  more  until  at
length  it  is  scattered  into  many,  and  ceases  to  be  as
an  individual,  being,  as  it  were,  split  and  broken  up,
and  dispersed  into  many  pieces.  This  is  the  Nirvana
of  the  Amen,  or  annihilation  of  the  individual.1

"And  whence,"  you  inquire,  "is  the  supply  of  new
souls  for  the  continual  increase  of  the  world's  popula-
tion ? "  Souls,  as  you  know,  work  up  from  animals
and  plants  ;  for  it  is  in  the  lowest  forms  of  organic
life  that  the  soul  is  first  engendered.  Formerly  the
way  of  escape  for  human  souls  was  more  open  and
the  path  clearer,  because,  although  ignorance  of  in-
tellectual things  abounded  among  the  poorer  sort,  yet
the  knowledge  of  divine  things  and  the  light  of  faith
1  See  Appendix,  note  A.

46  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun*

were  stronger  and  purer.  Wherefore  the  souls  of
those  ages  of  the  world,  not  being  enchained  to  earth
as  they  now  aie,  were  enabled  to  pass  more  quickly
through  their  avatars,  and  but  few  incarnations  sufficed
where  now  many  are  necessary.

For  in  these  days  the  ignorance  of  the  mind  is
weighted  by  materialism  instead  of  being  lightened
by  faith.  It  is  sunk  to  earth  by  love  of  the  body
and  by  atheism,  and  excessive  care  for  the  things  of
sense.  And  being  crushed  thereby,  it  lingers  long
in  the  atmosphere  of  earth,  seeking  many  fresh  lodg-
ments, and  so  multiplies  bodies.

And,  furthermore,  you  must  not  conceive  of  Crea-
tion, or  the  putting-forth  of  things,  as  an  act  once
accomplished  and  then  ended.  For  the  celestial
Olympus  is  continually  creating  and  continually  be-
coming. God  never  ceases  giving  of  God  for  God's
creatures.  This  also  is  the  mystery  of  the  divine
incarnation  and  oblation.  The  celestial  substance  is
continually  individualising  itself  that  it  may  build
itself  up  into  one  perfect  individual.  Thus  is  the
circle  of  life  accomplished,  and  thus  its  ends  meet
the  one  with  the  other.

You  have  asked  me — "  How,  if  the  planet  consist  of
body,  perisoul,  soul,  and  spirit,  can  there  be  born
of  it  entities  which  are  not  like  it  fourfold,  but
threefold  or  even  twofold,  as  are  minerals  and  severed
parts  of  bodies,  things  made  by  art,  and  the  like."  1
answer  you  that  your  error  lies  in  looking  or.  the
planet  as  a  thing  apart  frcm  its  offspring.  Cert  tinly,
the  planet  is  fourfold,  and  certainly  also  its  offspring

Conceiving  the  Soul.  47

is  fourfold.  But  of  its  offspring  some  lie  in  the  astral
region  only,  and  are  but  twofold  :  and  some  in  the
watery  region,  and  are  but  threefold  ;  and  some  lie
in  the  human  region,  and  are  fourfold.  The  body
and  perisoul  are  the  metallic  and  gaseous  envelope  of
the  planet.  The  organic  region  composes  its  soul,
and  the  human  region  its  spirit,  or  divine  part.
For  when  it  was  but  metallic,  it  had  no  soul.  When
it  was  but  organic,  it  had  no  spirit.  But  when  man
was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  then  was  its  spirit
breathed  into  its  soul.  Now,  the  metals  have  no
soul ;  therefore  they  are  not  individuals.  And  not
being  individuals,  they  cannot  transmigrate.  But  the
plants  and  animals  have  souls.  They  are  individuals,
and  do  transmigrate  and  progress.  And  man  has  also
a  spirit  ;  and  so  long  as  he  is  man — that  is,  truly
human — he  cannot  re-descend  into  the  body  of  an
animal,  or  of  any  creature  in  the  sphere  beneath  him,
since  that  would  be  an  indignity  to  the  spirit.  But
if  he  lose  his  spirit,  and  become  again  animal,  he
may  descend,  yea,  he  may  become  altogether  gross
and  horrible,  and  a  creeping  and  detestable  thing,
begotten  of  filth  and  corruption.  This  is  the  end  of
persistently  evil  men.  For  God  is  not  the  God  of
creeping  things,  but  Baal  Zebub  *  is  their  God.  And
there  were  none  of  these  in  the  Age  of  Gold  :  neither
shall  there  be  any  when  the  earth  is  fully  purged.
O  Men  !  your  exceeding  wickedness  is  the  creator  of
your  evil  beasts  ;  yea,  your  filthy  torments  are  your
own  sons  and  abominable  progenitors  !

1  Impurity,  or  the  active  principle  in  putrefaction  and  corruption.

48  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun

Remember  that  there  is  but  one  substance.  Body,
sideral  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  all  these  are  one  in
their  essence.  And  the  first  three  are  difTerentialities
of  polarisation.  The  fourth  is  God's  Self.  When  the
Gods  put  forth  the  world,  they  put  forth  substance
with  its  three  potentialities,  but  all  three  in  the
condition  of  odic  light.  I  have  called  the  sub-
stantial light  sometimes  the  sideral  body,  sometimes
the  perisoul  ;  and  this  because  it  is  both.  For  it  is
that  which  makes,  that  which  becomes.  It  is  fire,
or  the  human  spirit  (not  the  divine),  out  of  which
and  by  which  earth  and  water  are  generated.  It  is
the  fiery  manifestation  of  soul,  the  magnetic  factor  of
the  body.  It  is  space  ;  it  is  substance  ;  it  is  founda-
tion. So  that  from  it  proceed  the  gases  and  the
minerals,  which  are  soulless,  and  also  the  organic
world,  which  hath  a  soul.  But  man  it  could  not
make.  For  man  is  fourfold  and  of  the  divine  ether
or  upper  air,  which  is  the  province  of  Zeus,  Father
of  Gods  and  men.

The  outer  envelope  of  the  macrocosm  and  micro-
cosm alike,  which  is  represented  by  Demeter,  is  in
reality  not  elemental  at  all,  but  is  a  compound  of  the
other  three  elements.  Her  fertility  is  due  to  the
"water,"  and  her  transmuting  or  chemical  power  to
the  fire.  This  water  is  the  soul  or  protoplasma,
which  is  put  forth  by  Deity  and  constitutes  the  in-
dividual. Nor  are  you  to  look  on  fire  as  a  true
element.  For  fire  is  to  the  body  what  spirit  is
the  soul.  As  the  soul  is  without  the  divine  life
until  vivified  by  the  spirit,  so  the  body,  or  matter,  is

Concerning  the  Sold.  49

without  physical  life  in  the  absence  of  fire.  No
matter  is  really  "dead  matter,"  for  the  fire-element
is  in  all  matter.  But  matter  would  be  "  dead  "  (that
is,  would  cease  to  exist  as  matter)  if  motion  were
suspended, — which  is,  if  there  were  no  fire.  For,  as
wherever  there  is  motion  there  is  heat,  and  con-
sequently fire,  and  motion  is  the  condition  of  matter,
so  without  fire  would  be  no  matter.

The  soul  is  not  astral  fluid,  but  is  manifest  by
means  of  the  astral  fluid  ;  for  the  soul  itself  is,  like
the  idea,  invisible  and  intangible.  You  will  see  the
meaning  best  by  following  out  the  genesis  of  any
particular  action.  The  stroke  of  the  pen  on  paper  is
the  phenomenon  ;  that  is  the  outer  body.  The  action
which  produces  the  stroke  is  the  astral  body,  and,
though  physical,  is  not  a  thing,  but  a  transition  or
medium  between  the  result  (the  stroke)  and  its  cause
(the  idea).  The  idea  manifested  in  the  act  is  not
physical,  but  mental,  and  is  the  soul  of  the  act.  But
even  this  is  not  the  first  cause.  For  the  idea  is  put
forth  by  the  will,  and  this  is  the  spirit.  Thus,  you
will  an  idea  as  God  wills  the  macrocosm.  The  real
body  (or  immediate  result)  is  the  astral  body ;  while
the  phenomenal  body  (or  ultimate  form)  is  the  effect
of  motion  and  heat.  If  you  could  arrest  motion,  you
would  have  as  the  result  fire,  and  thereby  would
convert  Demeter  into  Hephaistos.  But  fire  itself
also  is  material,  since  it  is  visible  to  the  outer  sense,
as  is  the  earth-body.  But  it  has  many  degrees  of
subtlety.  The  astral  or  odic  substance,  therefore  is
not  the  soul  itself,  but  is  the  medium  or  manifestor

D

50  "  Clothed  with  the  Su?i"

of  the  soul,  as  the  act  is  of  the  idea.  If,  however,
the  phrase  misleads  you,  it  is  better  to  modify  it,  as
thus  : —

The  act  is  the  condition  of  the  idea,  in  the  same
way  as  fire  or  incandescence  is  the  condition  of  any
given  object  Light  is  of  spirit,  heat  is  of  matter.
Water  is  the  result  of  the  operation  of  Wisdom  the
Mother,  or  oxygen,  and  Justice  the  Father,  or
hydrogen.  Air  is  the  result  of  the  mixture,  not
combination,  of  wisdom  and  force.  These  two  are
properly  elements.  They  are  soul  and  spirit.  But
Earth  is  not,  properly  speaking,  an  element  at  all.
She  is  the  result  of  the  water  and  the  fire,  and  her
rocks  and  strata  are  either  watery  or  igneous.  She  is
water  and  air  fused  and  crystallised.  Fire  also,  the
real  maker  of  the  body,  is  a  mode  and  condition,  and
not  a  true  element  See,  then,  that  the  only  real  and
true  and  permanent  elements  are  air  and  water,
spirit  and  soul,  will  and  idea,  divine  and  substan-
tial, father  and  mother ;  and  out  of  these  all  the
elements  of  earth  are  made  by  the  aid  of  the  condi-
tion of  matter,  which  is,  interchangeably,  heat  and
motion.

Wisdom,  Justice,  and  Force,  or  oxygen,  hydrogen,
and  azotb,  are  the  three  out  of  which  the  two  true
elements  are  produced.  But  water  is  a  combination,
air  is  a  mixture.  Wherefore  the  only  two  real
entities,  water  and  air,  are  unreal  to  the  phenomenal ;
while  the  untrue  elements,  earth  and  fire,  or  body
and  electric  fluid,  are  real  in  the  phenomenal.

Souls  are  re-incarnated  hundreds  and  thousands  of

Concerning  the  Soul.  5 1

times  ;  but  not  the  person  (which  implies  the  body),
for  the  body  perishes.  These  things  were  known  to
the  Gnostics,  Therapeutae,  Essenes,  and  to  Jesus  ;  and
the  doctrine  is  embodied  in  the  parable  of  the  Talents,
as  thus  explained  : — Into  the  soul  of  the  individual  is
breathed  the  Spirit  of  God,  divine,  pure,  and  without
blemish.  It  is  God.  And  the  individual  has,  in  his
earth-life,  to  nourish  that  Spirit,  and  feed  it  as  a  flame
with  oil.  When  you  put  oil  into  a  lamp,  the  essence
passes  into  and  becomes  flame.  So  is  it  with  the  soul
of  him  who  nourishes  the  Spirit.  It  grows  gradually
pure,  and  becomes  the  Spirit.  By  this  means  the
Spirit  be;omes  the  richer.  And,  as  in  the  parable  of
the  Talents,  where  God  has  given  five  talents,  man
pays  back  ten  ;  or  he  returns  nothing,  and  perishes.

When  a  soul  has  once  become  regenerate,  it
returns  to  the  body  only  by  its  own  free  will,  and  as
a  Redeemer  or  Messenger.  Such  a  one  regains  in
the  flesh  the  memory  of  his  past.  Regeneration  or
transmutation  may  take  place  in  an  instant  ;  but  it
is  rarely  a  sudden  thing,  and  it  is  best  that  it  come
gradually,  so  that  the  "Marriage"  of  the  Spirit  be
only  after  a  prolonged  engagement.

The  doctrine  of  "Counterparts,"  so  familiar  to  cer-
tain classes  of  "  Spiritualists,"  is  a  travesty,  due  to
delusive  spirits,  of  the  "  Marriage  of  Regeneration."

Regeneration  does  not  affect  the  interior  man  only.
A  regenerate  person  may  have  his  body  such  that  no
wounds  will  cause  death.

When    a    person     dies,    a    portoin    of    the    soul

52  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim"

remains  unconsumed, — untransmuted,  that  is,  into
spirit.  The  soul  is  fluid,  and  between  it  and  vapour
is  this  analogy.  When  there  is  a  large  quantity  of
vapour  in  a  small  space  it  becomes  condensed,  and  is
thick  and  gross.  But  when  a  portion  is  removed,  the
rest  becomes  refined,  and  is  rarer  and  purer.  So  it  is
with  the  soul.  By  the  transmutation  of  a  portion
of  its  material  the  rest  becomes  finer,  rarer,  and
purer,  and  continues  to  do  so  more  and  more  until
— after  many  incarnations,  made  good  use  of — the
whole  of  the  soul  is  absorbed  into  the  Divine  Spirit,
and  becomes  one  with  God,  making  God  so  much  the
richer  for  the  usury.  This  is  the  celestial  Nirvana.
But,  though  becoming  pure  Spirit,  or  God,  the  indi-
vidual retains  his  individuality;  so  that  instead  of  all
being  merged  in  the  One,  the  One  becomes  Many.
Thus  has  God  become  millions.  We,  too,  are  legion,
and  therein  resemble  God.  God  is  multitudes  and
nations,  and  kingdoms,  and  tongues.  And  the  sound
of  God  is  as  the  sound  of  many  waters.

No.  XIII.

CONCERNING  PERSEPHONE,  OR  THE  SOUL'S  DESCENT
INTO  MATTER.1

I   SEE  God  under  two  modes,  one  static  or  passive,
the  other  dynamic  or   active.      As   the   former,
God  is  original  Life,  Will,  Power.     As  the  latter,  God

1  London,  March  23,  1SS1.     Spoken  in  trance.

Concerning  Persephone.  53

is  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  the  Spirit  and  the  Sub-
stance of  God  are  one.  At  first  there  is  perfect  rest.
Then  comes  a  movement  of  rotation  round  itself,  and
Substance  becomes  first  ether,  and  at  length  matter.
Every  ultimate  particle  of  matter  moves  in  ether,  as
do  the  planets,  and  has  two  poles,  that  is  in  the
intercellular  ether.  Their  rotation  is  intensely  rapid  ;
it  makes  me  giddy  to  look  ;  and  by  this  movement
comes  creation.  This  is  accomplished  in  six  periods,
and  then  there  is  Rest,  and  the  whole  is  re-absorbed.
Wherefore  there  is  an  incessant  Putting- Forth  for  six
"days,"    and  a  recurring  Sabbath  of  Rest.

The  more  rapid  the  movement  of  the  particles  of
his  body,  the  more  material  is  the  man.  Hence  the
object  of  the  saint  is  to  attain  perfect  quiescence,  and
thereby  union  with  the  Divine  One.  The  "Philoso-
pher's Stone"  signifies  in  one  aspect  perfect  quiescence,
or  the  re-absorption  of  matter  into  spirit  through  the
absence  of  motion.

Thus  the  rigidity  we  know  as  matter  is  caused  by
the  incessant,  intense  movement  of  spirit.  This
truth,  for  the  Greeks,  is  represented  by  Demeter,
who  is  all  that  is  in  motion  and  solid.  And  whereas
motion  is  begotten  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  time,  her
parents  are  Rhea  and  Saturn.  Rhea  is  "the  mother"
of  the  Gods,  and  is  the  same  as  Nox,  the  original
Darkness  or  Invisible  Light  of  Divinity  prior  to  mani-
festation in  creation.  And  Persephone,  or  Proserpine,
is  the  daughter  of  Demeter  or  Motion — or  that  which
makes  visible — by  Ether.  Persephone  is  the  liquid  or
psychic  part  of  man,  which  consists  both  of  his  true

54  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun.n

soul  and  his  "  fiery  "  or  magnetic  perisoul.  And  the
story  of  the  stealing  of  Persephone,  or  rape  of  Proser-
pine, relates  to  the  "fixing  of  the  volatile,"  whereby
the  astral  part  becomes  coagulated  into  the  material.
Belonging  thus,  half  to  the  body,  or  lower  world,  and
half  to  the  heavens  and  upper  world,  and  thus  linking
the  two  together,  she  is  said  to  spend  six  months  of  the
year  in  Hades  and  six  on  Olympus.  And  she  would
be  updrawn  altogether  to  the  latter,  but  that  as  the
consequence  of  her  eating  a  pomegranate,  which  —
like  the  apple  of  Eve — is  the  symbol  of  illusion  or
matter,  she  is  fixed  in  the  lower  world  or  body,
whence  her  mother,  Demeter,  seeks  to  withdraw  her.

You  are  to  understand,  further,  that  this  descent  of
Persephone  into  Hades  comes  about  not  only  through
the  continued  motion  of  the  particles  of  the  soul,  but
also  through  their  depolarisation  from  the  central  and
Divine  Will.  The  body  ought  to  be  in  such  a  state
that  the  man  can  indraw  and  re-absorb  it.  But  Perse-
phone, through  following  her  own  will,  reversed  the
poles  of  her  constituent  substance,  and  caused  this  to
become  fixed.  Whenever,  as  was  the  case  with  Jesus,
the  man  is  in  union  with  the  central  will  of  his  -
tern,  he  has  power  to  indraw  and  re-absorb  his  b
And  one  of  the  purposes  of  the  Gospel  story  oi  the
water  being  changed  into  wine,  was  to  typify  this
transmutation.  Animals  never  have  this  power,  as
they  have  no  divine  spirit,  and,  therefore,  no  central
will,  to  polarise.  Man  has  it  only  by  the  Spirit's
descent  into  him.  The  eating  of  the  pomegranate
implies  the    reversal    of   the    poles,    and   the  illusion

Concerning  the  Genius  or  D  aim  on.         55

whereby  the  outer  becomes  the  inner,  and  the  in-
dividual polarises  outwardly  instead  of  centrally,  and,
so,  becomes  fixed  and  material.

NO.  XIV.

concerning  the  genius  or  daimon.1

Part  i.

EVERY  human  spirit-soul  has  attached  to  him  a
genius  or  dairnon,  as  with  Socrates  ;  a  minis-
tering spirit,  as  with  the  apostles  ;  or  an  angel,  as
with  Jesus.  All  these  are  but  different  names  for  the
same  thing.  My  genius  says  that  he  does  not  care
for  the  term  angel  because  it  is  misinterpreted.  He
prefers  the  Christian  nomenclature,  and  to  be  called
minister,  as  their  office  is  to  guide,  admonish,  and
illumine.

My  genius  looks  like  Dante,  and  like  him  is
always  in  red.  And  he  has  a  cactus  in  his  hand,
which  he  says  is  my  emblem.  (Speaking  of  Dante,  I
see  that  Beatrice  represents  the  soul.  She  is  to  him
what  the  woman  should  be  to  the  man.)  He  tells  me
to  say  that  the  best  weapon  against  the  astrals  is
prayer.  Prayer  means  the  intense  direction  of  the
will  and  desire  towards  the  Highest ;  an  unchanging-
intent  to  know  nothing  but  the  Highest.     So  long  as

1  London,  November  1880.     Spoken  in  trance.

56  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

Moses  held  up  his  hands  towards  heaven,  the  Israel-
ites prevailed.  When  he  dropped  them,  then  the
Amalekites.  The  genii  are  not  fighting  spirits,  and
cannot  prevent  evils.  They  were  allowed  to  minister
to  Jesus  only  after  his  exhaustion  in  combat  with  the
lower  spirits.  Only  the)'  are  attacked  by  these,  who
are  worth  attacking.

I  am  to  inform  you  that  the  genius  never  "controls"
his  client,  never  sutlers  the  soul  to  step  aside  from  the
body  to  allow  the  entrance  of  another  spirit.  The
person  controlled  by  an  astral  or  elemental,  on  the
contrary,  speaks  not  in  his  own  person,  but  in  that  of
the  spirit  controlling  ;  and  the  gestures,  expression,
intonation,  and  pitch  of  voice,  change  with  the  o
sing  spirit.  A  person  prophesying  sneaks  always  in
the  first  person,  and  says,  either  "  Thus  saith  the
Lord,"  or  "  So  says  some  one  else,''  nev  his

own  personality.    This  is  one  sign  oi  difference  \vr.
by  to  distinguish  between  the  various  orders  of  spi

Another   sign,    he    says,     whereby     to    distinguish
extraneous    spirits    from    one's    genius,    is    this, — the
genius    is    never  absent.       Provided    the    mind    is    in
a  condition  to  see,  he  is  always  present.     Other  spirits
need  times  to  be  appointed   and    engagements   to  be
made   for   certain  hours,   because  they  may  be    \
where    at    any    moment.       These    spirits,    moreover,
know  nothing  of  the   Gods.      Their  very  name-
secrets  from  them,  and  if  they  have  heard  them  :'
are  but  names  to  them.1     They  are  unable  to  grasp  or

1  One  of  their  commonest  modes  ption  is  by  the  assumption  of

divine  names  ;  but  their  utterances  are  always  pretentious  and  irane.

Concerning  the  Genius  or  Daimon.         57

conceive  of  anything  beyond  the  atmosphere  of  their
own  circle.  It  is  true  that  they  speak  of  God,  but  it
is  without  understanding  the  meaning  of  the  word.
The  more  negative  the  mind  of  the  individual,  the
more  ready  and  apt  he  is  to  receive  these  spirits.
And,  on  the  contrary,  the  more  positive  and  pro-
nounced the  will  of  the  individual,  the  more  open  he
is  to  divine  communication.  The  command  always
is — "  To  labour  is  to  pray  "  ;  "  To  ask  is  to  receive  "  ;
"  To  knock  is  to  have  the  door  open."  "  I  have  often
said,"  says  my  genius,  "  Think  for  yourself.  When
you  think  inwardly,  pray  intensely,  and  imagine  cen-
trally, then  you  converse  with  God.'

He  knows,  he  says,  concerning  our  immediate
future,  but  will  not  tell.  All  he  will  say  is  this, —
"  Be  sure  there  is  trouble.  No  man  ever  got  to  the
Land  of  Promise  without  going  through  the  desert."
Again  he  holds  up  to  me  the  cactus,  and  he  says  :
"  Do  not  fret  yourself  about  trying  to  get  into  the  lucid
state.  In  a  short  time  it  will  be  unnecessary  to
become  somnolent  at  all."  He  tells  me  that  to-night
I  shall  recollect  a  great  part  of  what  has  been  said,
and  the  next  time  more,  and  so  on  until  my  mind  is
quite  clear  on  the  subject.  It  is  a  weakness  and  an
imperfection  when  the  mind  does  not  retain  what  has
been  said.  At  night,  when  my  brain  is  free  from
disturbing  influences,  I  recollect  more  perfectly  all
I  have  seen  and  heard.  And  this,  he  says,  should
always  be  the  case,  because  my  place  is  not  taken  by
any  other  entity.  No  other  spirit  steps  in  to  dis-
possess me.  But  it  is  I  myself  who  see  and  hear  and
speak, — my  spiritual  self,  that  is.

58  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

The  genius  is  linked  to  his  client  by  a  bond  of
soul-substance.  Persistent  ill-living  weakens  this
bond,  and  after  several  incarnations — even  to  "seventy
times  seven  " — thus  ill-spent,  the  genius  is  freed  and
the  soul  definitively  lost.  It  is  not  isolated  crime,
as  murder,  adultery,  or  incest,  or  even  a  repetition  of
these,  which  breaks  this  bond  ;  but  a  continued  con-
dition of  the  heart  in  which  the  will  of  the  individual
is  in  persistent  opposition  to  the  Divine  Will.  For
this  is  a  state  in  which  repentance  is  impossible.
The  condition  most  favourable  to  salvation  and
speedy  emancipation  from  successive  incarnations,  is
the  attitude  of  willing  obedience, — freedom  and  sub-
mission. The  great  object  to  be  attained  is  emanci-
pation from  the  body,— from  the  power  and  need  of
the  body,  that  is.

In  order  the  better  to  comprehend  the  procession
of  Spirit,  it  must  be  understood  that  Life  may  be
represented  by  a  triangle,  at  the  apex  of  which  is
God.  Of  this  triangle  the  two  sides  are  formed  by
two  streams,  the  one  flowing  outwards,  the  other
upwards.  The  base  may  be  taken  to  represent  the
material  plane.  Thus,  from  God  proceed  the  Gods.
From  the  Gods  proceed  all  the  hierarchy  of  heaven,
with  the  various  orders  from  the  highest  to  the
lowest.  And  the  lowest  is  the  order  of  the  genii,
or  guardian  angels.  These  rest  on  the  material
plane,  but  do  not  enter  it.  The  other  side  of  the
triangle  is  a  continuation  of  the  base.  The  initiatory
forms  of  the  base  of  the  triangle  are  the  lowest
expressions  of  life.     These  are  the  first   expressions

Concerning  the  Genius  or  Daimon.         59

of  incarnation,  and  of  the  stream  which,  unlike  the
first,  flows  inwards  and  upwards.  The  side  of  the
triangle  represented  by  this  stream,  culminates  in  the
Christ,  and  empties  itself  into  pure  spirit,  which  is
God.  There  are,  consequently,  spirits  who,  by  their
nature,  never  have  been  and  never  can  be  incarnate.
And  there  are  others  who  reach  their  perfection
through  incarnation.  You  will  see,  then,  that  the
genii  and  the  astrals  have  nothing  in  common.
For  the  space  contained  in  the  triangle,  and  separat-
ing on  the  one  hand  the  apex  from  the  base,  and  on
the  other  hand  the  two  opposing  sides,  is  a  space
occupied  by  the  planetary  fluid.

There  are  but  two  eternal  generations, — that  of
the  celestials  who  begin  from  the  Spirit  and  are
"begotten;"  and  that  of  the  created  entities  who
accrete  a  body  exteriorly.  The  astrals  are  between
these  two.  They  are  as  planes  which  cannot  focus
the  Divine  Spirit,  since  their  rays  are  reflected  in  all
directions,  and  do  not  converge  to  a  central  point.
They  cannot  know  God.  They  are  not  microcosms.
Man  alone  of  the  created  entities  is  a  microcosm,  and
he  is  this  because  the  Divine  Spirit,  the  nucleolus,
contains  necessarily  the  potentiality  of  the  whole
celestial  cell.  In  God  are  all  the  Gods  included ;
and  the  nucleolus  in  the  perfected  created  cell  is,
therefore,  multiple.  Every  man  is  a  planet,  having
sun,  moon,  and  stars.

The  genius  of  a  man  is  his  satellite.  Man  is  a
planet.  God — the  God  of  the  man — is  his  sun,  and
the  moon  of  this  planet  is  Isis,  its  initiator,  or  genius.

60  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

The  genius  is  made  to  minister  to  the  man,  and  to
give  him  light.  But  the  light  he  gives  is  from  God,
and  not  of  himself.  He  is  not  a  planet  but  a  moon,
and  his  function  is  to  light  up  the  dark  places  of  his
planet.

The  day  and  night  of  the  microcosm,  man,  are  its
positive  and  passive,  or  projective  and  reflective  states.
In  the  projective  state  we  seek  actively  outwards  ;  we
aspire  and  will  forcibly  ;  we  hold  active  communion
with  the  God  without.  In  the  reflective  state  we  look
inwards,  we  commune  with  our  own  heart  ;  we  indraw
and  concentrate  ourselves  secretly  and  interiorly.
During  this  condition  the  "Moon"  enlightens  our
hidden  chamber  with  her  torch,  and  shows  us  our-
selves in  our  interior  recess.

Who  or  what,  then,  is  this  moon  ?  It  is  part  of
ourselves,  and  revolves  with  us.  It  is  our  celestial
affinity, — of  whose  order  is  it  said,  "  Their  angels  do
always  behold  the  face  of  My  Father."

Every  human  soul  has  a  celestial  affinity,  which  is
part  of  his  system  and  a  type  of  his  spiritual  nature.
This  angelic  counterpart  is  the  bond  of  union  between
the  man  and  God  ;  and  it  is  in  virtue  of  his  spiritual
nature  that  this  angel  is  attached  to  him.  Rudimen-
tary creatures  have  no  celestial  affinity  ;  but  from  the
moment  that  the  soul  quickens,  the  cord  of  union  is
established.

It  is  in  virtue  of  man's  being  a  planet  that  he  his
a  moon.  If  he  were  not  fourfold,  as  is  the  planet,  he
could  not  have  one.  Rudimentary  men  are  not  four-
fold.    They  have  not  the  Spirit.

Concerning  the  Genius  or  Daimon.         6 1

The  genius  is  the  moon  to  the  planet  man,  reflect-
ing to  him  the  sun,  or  God,  within  him.  For  the
divine  Spirit  which  animates  and  eternises  the  man,
is  the  God  of  the  man,  the  sun  that  enlightens  him.
And  this  sun  it  is,  an'd  not  the  outer  and  planetary
man,  that  his  genius,  as  satellite,  reflects  to  him.
Thus  attached  to  the  planet,  the  genius  is  the  com-
plement of  the  man  ;  and  his  "  sex "  is  always  the
converse  of  the  planet's.  And  because  he  reflects,
not  the  planet,  but  the  sun,  not  the  man  (as  do  the
astrals),  but  the  God,  his  light  is  always  to  be  trusted.

The  genius  knows  well  only  the  things  relating  to
the  person  to  whom  he  ministers.  About  other  things
he  has  opinions  only.  The  relation  of  the  ministering
spirit  to  his  client,  is  very  well  represented  by  that  of
the  Catholic  confessor  to  his  penitent.  He  is  bound
to  keep  towards  every  penitent  profound  secrecy  as
regards  the  affairs  of  other  souls.  If  this  Were  not
the  case,  there  would  be  no  order,  and  no  secret
would  be  safe.  The  genius  of  each  one  knows  about
another  person  only  so  much  as  that  other's  genius
chooses  to  reveal.

Part  2}

Now,  there  are  two  kinds  of  memory,  the  memory
of  the  organism  and  the  memory  of  the  soul.  The
first  is  possessed  by  all  creatures.  The  second,  which
is  obtained  by  Recovery,  belongs  to  the  fully  regene-
rate man.     For  the  Divine   Spirit  of  a  man  is  not

t    '.undo:     May  28,  1881.     Received  in  sleep.

62  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!*

one  with  his  soul  until  regeneration,  which  is  the
intimate  union  constituting  what,  mystically,  is  called
the  w  marriage  of  the  hierophant."

When  this  union  takes  place,  there  is  no  longer
need  of  an  initiator;  for  then  the  office  of  the  genius
is  ended.  For,  as  the  moon,  Isis,  or  u  Mother,"  of
the  planet  man,  the  genius  reflects  to  the  soul  the
Divine  Spirit,  with  which  she  is  not  yet  fully  united.
In  all  things  is  order.  Wherefore,  as  with  the  planets,
so  with  the  microcosm.  They  who  are  nearest
Divinity,  need  no  moon.  But  so  long  as  they  have
night, — so  long,  that  is,  as  any  part  of  the  soul
remains  unilluminated,  and  her  memory  or  perception
obscure, — so  long  the  mirror  of  the  angel  continues
to  reflect  the  sun  to  the  soul.

For  the  memory  of  the  soul  is  recovered  by  a
three-fold  operation, —  that  of  the  soul  herself,  of  the
moon,  and  of  the  sun.  The  genius  is  not  an  informing
spirit.  He  can  tell  nothing  to  the  soul.  All  that
she  receives  is  already  within  herself.  But  in  the
darkness  of  the  night,  it  would  remain  there  undis-
covered, but  for  the  torch  of  the  angel  who  enlightens.
"Yea,"  says  the  angel  genius  to  his  client,  "I
illuminate  thee,  but  I  instruct  thee  not.  I  warn
thee,  but  I  tight  not.  I  attend,  but  I  lead  not.  Thy
treasure  is  within  thyself!  My  light  showeth  where  it
lieth."

When  regeneration  is  fully  attained,  the  divine
Spirit  alone  instructs  the  hierophant.  "  For  the
gates  of  his  city  shall  never  be  shut ;  there  shall
be  no  night  there ;  the  night  shall  be  no  more.     And

Concerning  the  Genius  or  Daimon.        63

they  shall  not  need  the  light  of  the  lamp,  because
the  Lord  God  shall  enlighten  them."  The  prophet
is  a  man  illumined  by  his  angel.  The  Christ  is  a
man  married  to  the  Spirit.  And  he  returns  out  of
pure  love  to  redeem,  needing  no  more  to  return
to  the  flesh  for  his  own  sake.  Wherefore  he  is  said
to  come  down  from  heaven.  For  he  hath  attained,
and  is  a  medium  for  the  Highest.  He  baptiseth
with  the  holy  Ghost,  and  with  the  Divine  Fire  itself.
He  is  always  "in  heaven."  And  in  that  he  ascendeth,
it  is  because  the  Spirit  uplifteth  him,  even  the  Spirit
who  descendeth  upon  him.  "  And  in  that  he
descendeth,  it  is  because  he  has  first  ascended  beyond
all  spheres  into  the  highest  Presence.  For  he  that
ascendeth,  ascendeth  because  he  also  descended  first
into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth.  He  that  descended
is  the  same  also  who  ascendeth  above  all  the  heavens,
to  fill  all  things."  Such  a  one  returns,  therefore,
from  a  higher  world  ;  he  belongs  no  more  to  the
domain  of  Dionysos.  But  he  comes  from  the  "sun  "
itself,  or  from  some  nearer  sphere  to  the  sun  than
ours ;  having  passed  from  the  lowest  upwards.

And  what  of  the  genius  himself?  I  asked.  Is
he  sorry  when  his  client  attains  perfection,  and  needs
him  no  more  ?

And  he  said,  "  He  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bride-
groom. And  he  that  standeth  by  rejoiceth  greatly
because  of  the  bridegroom's  voice."  I  return,
therefore,  to  my  source,  for  my  mission  is  ended,
and  my  Sabbath  is  come.  And  I  am  one  with
the  twain.

64  "  Clothed  with  the  Suji"

Here  he  led  me  into  a  large  chamber  where  I
saw  four  bullocks  lying  slaughtered  upon  altars,
and  a  number  of  persons  standing  round  in  the
act  of  adoration.  And  above,  in  the  fumes  arising
from  the  spirits  of  the  blood,  were  misty  colossal
shapes,  half-formed,  from  the  waist  upwards,  and
resembling  the  Gods.  And  he  said  "  These  are
Astrals.  And  thus  will  they  do  until  the  end  of
the  world."

After  this  instruction  concerning  the  degradation
of  religion  through  the  materialisation  of  the  spiritual
doctrine  of  sacrifice,  he  resumed  : —

The  genius,  then,  remains  with  his  client  so  1"
the  man  is  fourfold.  A  beast  has  no  genius.  A
Christ  has  none.  For  first,  all  is  latent  light.  That
is  one.  And  this  one  becomes  two ;  that  is,  body
and  astral  bod)-.  And  these  two  become  three  ;
that  is,  a  rational  soul  is  born  in  the  midst  of  the
astral  body.  This  rational  soul  is  the  true  Person.
From  that  moment,  therefore,  this  personality  is  an
individual  existence,  as  a  plant  or  as  an  animal.
These  three  become  four  ;  that  is,  human.  And  the
fourth  is  the  Nous,  not  yet  one  with  the  soul,  but
overshadowing  it,  and  transmitting  light  as  it  were
through  a  glass,  that  is,  through  the  initiator.  But
when  the  four  become  three, — that  is,  when  the
"  marriage  "  takes  place,  and  the  soul  and  spirit  are
indissolubly  united, — there  is  no  longer  need  either
of  migration  or  o\  genius.  For  the  Nous  has  become
one  with  the  soul,  and  the  cord  of  union  is  dissolved.
And  yet  again,  the  three  become  twain   at  the  dis-

Concerning  the  Genius  or  Daimon.         65

solution  of  the  body  ;  and  again,  the  twain  become
one,  that  is,  the  Christ-spirit-soul.  The  Divine  Spirit
and  the  genius,  therefore,  are  not  to  be  regarded  as
diverse,  nor  yet  as  identical.  The  genius  is  flame,
and  is  celestial  ;  that  is,  he  is  spirit,  and  one  in
nature  with  the  Divine  ;  for  his  light  is  the  divine
light.  He  is  as  a  glass,  as  a  cord,  as  a  bond  between
the  soul  and  her  divine  part.  He  is  the  clear  at-
mosphere through  which  the  divine  ray  passes,  making
a  path  for  it  in  the  astral  medium.

In  the  celestial  plane,  all  things  are  personal.  And
therefore  the  bond  between  the  soul  and  spirit  is  a
person.  But  when  a  man  is  "  born  again,"  he  no
longer  needs  the  bond  which  unites  him  to  his  divine
source.  The  genius,  or  flame,  therefore,  returns  to
that  source  ;  and  this  being  itself  united  to  the  soul,
the  genius  also  becomes  one  with  the  twain.  For
the  genius  is  the  divine  light  in  the  sense  that  he  is
but  a  divided  tongue  of  it,  having  no  isolating  vehicle.
But  the  tincture  of  this  flame  differs  according  to  the
celestial  atmosphere  of  the  particular  soul.  The
divine  light,  indeed,  is  white,  being  seven  in  one.
But  the  genius  is  a  flame  of  a  single  colour  only.
And  this  colour  he  takes  from  the  soul,  and  by  that
ray  transmits  to  her  the  light  of  the  Nous,  her  divine
spouse.  The  angel-genii  are  of  all  the  tinctures  of
all  the  colours.

I  have  said  that  in  the  celestial  plane  all  things  are
personal,  but  in  the  astral  plane  they  are  reflects.
The  genius  is  a  person  because  he  is  a  celestial,  and
of  soul-spirit,  or  substantial  nature.     But  the  astrals

E

66  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

are  of  fluidic  nature,  having  no  personal  part.  In  the
celestial  plane,  spirit  and  substance  are  one,  dual  in
unity  ;  and  thus  are  all  celestials  constituted.  But  in
the  astral  plane  they  have  no  individual,  and  no
divine  part.  They  are  protoplasmic  only,  without
either  nucleus  or  nucleolus.

The  voice  of  the  genius  is  the  voice  of  God  ;  for
God  speaks  through  him  as  a  man  through  the  horn
of  a  trumpet.  Thou  mayest  not  adore  him,  for  he  is
the  instrument  of  God,  and  thy  minister.  But  thou
must  obey  him,  for  he  hath  no  voice  of  his  own,  but
sheweth  thee  the  will  of  the  Spirit.

No.  XV

concerning  the  "powers  of  the  air."1

Part  i.

I  SAW  last  night  in  my  sleep  my  genius  clothed
with  a  red  flame  and  standing  in  a  dark  place.
He  held  in  his  hand  a  cup,  into  which  he  bade  me
look.  I  did  so,  and  as  I  looked  a  mist  gathered  in
the  cup  like  a  cloud  ;  and  I  saw  in  the  cloud  spirits
wrestling  with  each  other.  Then  the  cup  seemed  to
widen,  until  it  became  a  great  table  upon  which
scenes  and  words  were  written.  And  I  saw  the
vapour  filled  with  astral  spirits,  ephemeral,  flame-like,
chimerical ;  and  upon  the  mist  which  enveloped  and

1  London,  November  17,  iSSo.

Concerning  the  "  Powers  of  the  Air?      67

swept  around  them  was  written,  "  The  Powers  of  the
Air."

And  I  said  to  my  genius,  "  Are  these  the  spirits
which  control  mediums?"  And  he  said,  "Do  not
use  that  word  Medium  ;  for  it  is  misleading.  These
are  the  powers  which  affect  and  influence  Sensitives.1
They  do  not  control,  for  they  have  no  force.  They
are  light  as  vapour.  See ! "  Then  he  breathed  on
the  table,  and  they  were  dispersed  on  all  sides  like
smoke.  And  I  said,  "  Whence  do  these  spirits -come,
and  what  is  their  origin  and  nature  ? "  And  he
answered, — "  They  are  Reflects.  They  have  no  real
entity  in  themselves.  They  resemble  mists  which
rise  from  the  damp  earth  of  low-lying  lands,  and
which  the  heat  of  the  sun  disperses.  Again,  they  are
like  vapours  in  high  altitudes,  upon  which  if  a  man's
shadow  falls  he  beholds  himself  as  a  giant.  For
these  spirits  invariably  flatter  and  magnify  a  man  to
himself.  And  this  is  a  sign  whereby  you  may  know
them.  They  tell  one  that  he  is  a  king  ;  another,  that
he  is  a  Christ  ;  another,  that  he  is  the  wisest  of
mortals,  and  the  like.  For,  being  born  of  the  fluids  of
the  body,  they  are  unspiritiial  and  live  of  the  body."

"  Do  they,  then,"  I  asked,  "  come  from  within  the
man  ?  "

"  All  things,"  he  replied,  "  come  from  within.  A
man's  foes  are  they  of  his  own  household."

"  And  how,"  I  asked,  "  may  we  discern  the  astrals
from  the  higher  spirits  ?  "

1  That  this  is  not  intended  to  be  an  exhaustive  account  of  the  experi-
ences of  Sensitives  will  be  seen  from  Nos.  XXXIX.,  XL.,  and  XLVI.

68  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim!*

"  I  have  told  you  of  one  sign  ; — they  are  flattering
spirits.  Now  I  will  tell  you  of  another.  They  always
depreciate  woman.  And  they  do  this  because  their
deadliest  foe  is  the  Intuition.  And  these,  too,  are
their  signs.  Is  there  anything  strong  ?  they  will  make
it  weak.  Is  there  anything  wise  ?  they  will  make  it
foolish.  Is  there  anything  sublime  ?  they  will  distort
and  travesty  it.  And  this  they  do  because  they  are
exhalations  of  matter,  and  have  no  spiritual  nature.
Hence  they  pursue  and  persecute  the  Woman  continu-
ally, sending  after  her  a  flood  of  eloquence  like  a  tor-
rent to  sweep  her  away.  But  it  shall  be  in  vain.  For
God  shall  carry  her  to  His  throne,  and  she  shall  tread
on  the  necks  of  them.

"  Therefore  the  high  Gods  will  give  through  a
woman  the  interpretation  which  alone  can  save  the
world.  A  woman  shall  open  the  gates  of  the  king-
dom to  mankind,  because  intuition  only  can  redeem.
Between  the  woman  and  the  astrals  there  is  always
enmity;  for  the}-  seek  to  destroy  her  and  her  office,
and  to  put  themselves  in  her  place.  They  are  the
delusive  shapes  who  tempted  the  saints  of  old  with
exceeding  beauty  and  wiles  of  love,  and  great  show  of
affection  and  flattery.  Oh,  beware  of  them  when  they
flatter,  for  they  spread  a  net  for  thy  soul."

"Am  I,  then,"  I  asked,  "in  danger  from  them?
Am  I,  too,  a  Sensitive  ? "     And  he  said, —

"  No,  you  are  a  Poet.  And  in  that  is  your  strength
and  your  salvation.  Poets  are  the  children  of  the
Sun,  and  the  Sun  illumines  them.  No  poet  can  be
vain  or  self-exalted;  for  lie  knows  that  he  speaks  only

Concerning  the  "  Pozvers  of  the  Air**       69

the  words  of  God.  '  I  sing,'  he  says,  '  because  I  must'
Learn  a  truth  which  is  known  only  to  the  Sons  of
God.  The  Spirit  within  you  is  divine.  It  is  God.
When  you  prophesy  and  when  you  sing,  it  is  the
Spirit  within  you  which  gives  you  utterance.  It  is  the
'  New  Wine  of  Dionysos.'  By  this  Spirit  your  body  is
enlightened,  as  a  lamp  by  the  flame  within  it.  Now,
the  flame  is  not  the  oil,  for  the  oil  may  be  there
without  the  light.  Yet  the  flame  cannot  be  there
without  the  oil.  Your  body,  then,  is  the  lamp-case
into  which  the  oil  is  poured.  And  this — the  oil — is
your  soul,  a  fine  and  combustible  fluid.  And  the
flame  is  the  divine  Spirit,  which  is  not  born  of  the  oil,
but  is  conveyed  to  it  by  the  hand  of  God.  You  may
quench  this  Spirit  utterly,  and  thenceforward  you  will
have  no  immortality;  but  when  the  lamp-case  breaks,
the  oil  will  be  spilt  on  the  earth,  and  a  few  fumes  will
for  a  time  arise  from  it,  and  then  it  will  expend  itself
and  leave  at  last  no  trace.  Some  oils  are  finer  and
more  spontaneous  than  others.  The  finest  is  that  of
the  soul  of  the  poet.  And  in  such  a  medium  the
flame  of  God's  Spirit  burns  more  clearly,  and  power-
fully, and  brightly,  so  that  sometimes  mortal  eyes
can  hardly  endure  its  brightness.  Of  such  a  one  the
soul  is  filled  with  holy  raptures.  He  sees  as  no  other
man  sees,  and  the  atmosphere  about  him  is  enkindled.
His  soul  becomes  transmuted  into  flame  ;  and  when
the  lamp  of  his  body  is  shattered,  his  flame  mounts
and  soars,  and  is  united  to  the  Divine  Fire.  Can
such  a  one,  think  you,  be  vain-glorious,  or  self-
exalted,  and  lifted  up  ?     Oh,  no,  he  is  one  with  God,

jo  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

and  knows  that  without  God  he  is  nothing.  I  tell  no
man  that  he  is  a  reincarnation  of  Moses,  of  Elias,  or
of  Christ.  But  I  tell  him  that  he  may  have  the
Spirit  of  these  if,  like  them,  he  be  humble  and  self-
abased,  and  obedient  to  the  Divine  Word.

"  Do  not,  then,  seek  after  '  controls.'  Keep  your
temple  for  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts  ;  and  turn  out
ot  it  the  money-changers,  the  dove-sellers,  and  the
dealers  in  curious  arts,  yea,  with  a  scourge  of  cords  if
need  be."

Part  2.

"The  astral  existences,  although  they  are  not  in-
telligent personalities,  are  frequently  the  media  of
intelligent  ideas,  and  operate  as  means  of  communi-
cation between  intelligent  personalities.  Ideas,  words,
sentences,  whole  systems  of  philosophy,  ma}'  be  borne
in  on  the  consciousness  by  means  of  the  currents  of
magnetic  force,  as  solid  bodies  are  conveyed  on  a
stream,  though  water  is  no  intelligent  agent.  The
minutest  cell  is  an  entity,  for  it  has  the  power  of  self-
propagation,  which  the  astral  has  not.  It  is  an
imprint  only,  a  shadow,  a  reflect,  an  echo.

"The  atmosphere  with  which  a  man  surrounds
himself — his  soul's  respiration — affects  the  astral  fluid.
Reverberations  of  his  own  ideas  come  back  to  him.
His  soul's  breath  colours  and  savours  what  a  sensitive
conveys  to  him.  But  he  may  also  meet  with  contra-
dictions, with  a  systematic  presentation  of  doctrine  or

Concerning  the  "Powers  of  the  Air"      71

of  counsels  at  variance  with  his  own  personal  views,
through  his  mind  not  being  sufficiently  positive  to
control  all  the  manifestations  of  the  electric  agent.
The  influence  of  the  medium,  moreover,  through
which  the  words  come,  interposes.  Or,  as  is  often
the  case,  a  magnetic  battery  of  thought  has  over-
charged the  element  and  imparted  to  it  a  certain
current.  Thus,  new  doctrines  are  "  in  the  air,"  and
spread  like  wildfire.  One  or  two  strongly  positive
minds  give  the  initiative ;  and  the  impulse  flies
through  the  whole  mass  of  latent  light,  correspond-
ingly influencing  all  who  are  in  relation  with  it.

"  In  man  the  astral  fluid  becomes  transformed  into
human  life  at  the  moment  of  conception.  It  is  the
envelope  of  the  soul,  and  constitutes  the  sideral  body,
which,  in  its  turn,  is  the  generator  of  the  external
body.  The  internal  man — he  who  ultimately  is
immortal — consists  of  soul  and  spirit.  The  sideral
phantom  and  the  outer  body  are  perishable,  save
when  they  undergo  transmutation  during  the  tenancy
of  the  soul  and  spirit.  Hence  the  sideral  body,  being
the  generator  of  sense,  is  the  "Tempter,"  which —
inclining  to  matter — gives  matter  the  precedence
over  spirit.  Of  time  and  of  sense,  it  beguiles  the
intuitive  part  of  man.  In  this  way  spirit  and  matter
represent,  respectively,  good  and  evil.  For,  in  the
day  that  thou  givest  thyself  over  to  matter,  thou
becomest  liable  to  extinction."

72  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

No.  XVI.

CONCERNING  THE  DEVIL  AND  DEVILS.1

BEING  unable  to  reconcile  the  statement  that
there  is  no  personal  Devil,  but  that  what  is
called  the  Devil  is  simply  the  negation  of  God,  with
the  evidences  of  the  possession  of  individuals  by
devils  or  evil  spirits,  I  received  in  my  sleep  this
explanation.

"  There  is  no  supreme  personal  positive  evil
existence  such  as  the  Devil  is  ordinarily  supposed
to  be.  There  is  only  the  negation  of  God,  which  is
to  God  what  darkness  is  to  light,  the  outermost  void
to  the  sol.  system.  But  there  are  evil  spirits,  the
souls  of  bad  men  on  their  downward  road  to  final
extinction.  And  these  are  wont  to  associate  them-
selves with  persons  in  the  flesh  for  whom  they  have
affinity,  partly  in  order  to  gratify  their  evil  pro-
pensities by  inciting  them  to  wickedness  and  mischief,
and  partly  to  obtain  from  them  the  vitality  necessary
to  prolong  their  own  existence.  Sometimes  they
are  so  low  in  vitality  that  a  sentence  of  expulsion
from  the  person  in  whom  they  have  taken  refuge,
involves  their  immediate  extinction,  unless  they  can
find  other  location,  though  it  be  only  in  an  animal.
And  this  was  the  case  with  the  devils  whom  Jes
on  expelling  them,  suffered  to  enter  into  the  herd  of
swine.     For  it  is  the  fact  that  the  disorders  of  men

1  Paris,  October  26,  1S77.

Concerning  the  Gods.  73

do  in  some  cases  result  from  their  possession  by
distinct  personal  entities  as  foreign  and  evil  spirits,
and  are  not  merely  disorders  of  their  own  physical
constitution.  Evil  spirits  have  no  chief,  no  organis-
ation, or  solidarity,  nothing  that  corresponds  to  God.
The  worse  they  are  the  lower  they  are,  and  the
nearer  to  extinction.  The  conditions  which  attract
them  are  due  to  men  themselves."

No.  XVII.

CONCERNING   THE   GODS.1

A  TRUE  Idea  is  the  reflect  of  a  true  Substance.
It  is  because  religious  ideas  are  true  ideas  that
they  are  common  to  all  ages  and  peoples  ;  the  differ-
ences being  of  expression  merely,  and  due  to  the
variation  of  density  and  character  of  the  magnetic
atmosphere  through  which  the  image  passes.  The
fact  that  every  nation  in  every  age  has  conceived,  in
some  shape,  of  the  Gods,  constitutes  of  itself  a  proof
that  the  Gods  really  are.  For  Nothing  projects  no
image  upon  the  magnetic  light ;  and  where  an  image
is  universally  perceived,  there  is  certainly  an.  object
which  projects  it.  An  Idea,  inborn,  ineradicable,
constant,  which  sophism,  ridicule,  or  false  science  has
power  to  break  only,  but  not  to  dispel : — an  image
which,  however  disturbed,  invariably  returns  on  itself
and   reforms,  as   does   the   image  of  the  sky  or  the

1  London,  December  20,  1880.     Spoken  in  trance.

74  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

stars  in  a  lake,  however  the  reflecting  water  may  be
momentarily  shaken  by  a  stone  or  a  passing  vessel :
— such  an  image  as  this  is  necessarily  the  reflection
of  a  real  and  true  thing,  and  no  illusion  begotten  of
the  water  itself.

In  the  same  manner  the  constant  idea  of  the  Gods,
persistent  in  all  minds  in  all  ages,  is  a  true  image  ;
for  it  is  verily,  and  in  no  metaphoric  sense,  the  pro-
jection upon  the  human  perception  of  the  Eidola  of
the  Divine  persons.  The  Eidolon  is  the  reflection
of  a  true  object  in  the  magnetic  atmosphere;  and
the  magnetic  atmosphere  is  a  transparent  medium,
through  which  the  soul  receives  sensations.  For  sen-
sation is  the  only  means  of  knowledge,  whether  for
the  body  or  for  the  reason.  The  body  perceives  by
means  of  the  five  avenues  of  touch.  The  soul  per-
ceives in  like  manner  by  the  same  sense,  but  of  a
finer  sort,  and  put  into  action  by  subtler  agents.  The
soul  can  know  nothing  not  perceptible  ;  and  nothing
not  perceptible  is  real.  For  that  which  is  not  can
Only  that  which  is  can  be  reflected.

No.  XVIII.
CONCERNING  THE   GREEK  MYSTERIES.1

IN    the  celebration    of    the    mysteries    of   Phoibos
Apollo,  it  was  forbidden  to  eat  anything  upon
which  terrestrial  fire  had  passed.     Wherefore  all  the

1  London,  March  27,  1SS1.     Received  in  sleep.

Concerning  the  Greek  Mysteries.  75

food  of  his  votaries  was  sun-baked,  and  his  chief
sacrifice  consisted  in  fruits  from  high  trees  ripened  by
the  sun's  rays.

With  these  mysteries  of  Apollo  were  associated
those  of  Zeus  and  Hera,  the  King  and  Queen,  be-
cause both  man  and  woman  are  admitted  to  the
highest;  and  also  because  Eve  and  Adam,  being
thus  initiated,  were  eaters  only  of  fruits  uncooked  ;
and,  in  one  of  the  historical  senses  of  the  allegory,
Eve  and  Adam  were  the  first  Messengers.  It  was,
therefore,  an  offence  against  Phoibos  and  Zeus  for
their  votaries  to  eat  anything  on  which  fire  had
passed,  or  any  fermented  wine.  Their  wine  was  the
pure  juice  of  the  grape  drunken  new,  and  their  bread
was  unleavened  and  sun-baked.

The  last  Messengers  must  be  initiated,  as  were  Eve
and  Adam,  into  these  inmost  and  highest  mysteries
of  the  perfect  humanity,  which  constitute  the  highest
of  all  castes,  and  entitle  those  who  attain  to  them  to
sit  on  the  golden  seats.1

These  mysteries  have  also  an  inward  significance
which  is  not  hard  to  find.

In  the  mysteries  of  Phoibos  and  Zeus,  the  initiated
attained  to  the  condition  of  a  grand  Hierophant.
("  See  !  I  tell  you  all  things."  )  He  was  enlightened
by  the  "sun,"  and  was  in  the  fourth  interior  circle  of
spirits,  which  is  that  of  the  Christs  of  God.2  To  this
interior  circle  Jesus  of  Nazareth  aimed  to  pass  after
his  resuscitation;    as  was   implied  when  he  said,  "I

1  See  No.  XXIV.  ;  also  "Dreams  and  Dream-Stories,"  No.  IX.
8  Comp.  Hymn  to  Phoibos,  Part  II.,  No.  XI.

J  6  "  Clothed  with  the  Stuu

will  drink  no  more  of  the  grape  until  I  drink  its  blood
new  in  the  kingdom  of  God."

In  the  mysteries  of  Hermes,  the  second  circle, —
the  God  who  guards  the  Soul, — it  was  forbidden  to  eat
any  creature  which  had  life,  or,  rather,  which  had
seeing  eyes.1  For  Hermes  is  the  Seer.  His  votaries
partook  only  of  vegetable  food,  which  might  be
cooked  with  terrestrial  fire,  and  of  wine,  which  might
be  fermented.

Next  in  order  were  the  orgies  of  Her  who  rose  from
the  sea;  and  in  these  the  initiates  might  eat  fish  which
are  truly  fish,  having  fins  and  scales,  but  baked  with
fire,  not  raw.  Wherefore  as  that  Goddess  is  the  Angel
of  Harmony,  or  of  the  Sweet  Song,  the  eating  of  fish
became  a  symbol  of  brotherly  love  and  union  ;  and
two  small  fishes  together  was  the  mystical  type  of
little  children  dwelling  together  in  unity  or  charity.2
For  fishes  swim  in  pairs  ;  and  He  who  fished  for  men
drew  them  unto  him  by  love.  And  all  fishers  were
under  the  protection  of  the  Sea-Queen.  There  are
two  mystical  truths  belonging  to  the  mysteries  of
Maria  the  Sea-Star;  and  they  are,  in  their  interior
sense,  the  two  fishes  which  Jesus  imparted  to  the
multitude.  Of  this  I  shall  tell  you  more  afterwards
when  I  speak  to  you  of  the  twelve  baskets  of  bread.
For  these  are  the  baskets  which  the  twelve  virgins
carried  in  the  divine  orgies.

In  the  mysteries  of  Bacchos  it  was  permitted  to  the
outer  circle  to  eat,  if  indeed  they  would,  of  all  flesh

1  Comp.  Hermes  to  his  Neophytes,  Part  II.,  Xo.  XII.  pt.  2.
a  Comp.  Hymn  of  Aphrodite,  Part  II.,  Xo.  XIV.  (2.)

Concerning  the  Greek  Mysteries,  77

save  of  the  unclean.  This  is,  they  might  eat  of  all
clean  beasts  of  the  field  and  birds  of  the  air.  This
was  the  fourth  and  lowest  caste.  But  the  votaries  of
Iacchos  (the  mystic  Bacchos),  having  known  all  the
higher  rites,  abstained  from  these  things,  though  they
allowed  them  to  the  multitude  who  are  in  the  body
only.  For  none  of  those  who  worshipped  Dionysos
(or  Iacchos)  were  uninitiated  in  the  rites  of  Demeter
and  Aphrodite.  And  for  this  reason  there  were  sub-
stituted for  the  mysteries  of  Dionysos  those  of  Ceres,
the  Earth-Mother,  in  which  the  use  of  flesh  was
entirely  prohibited.  For  this  reason  also  one  hears
not  of  the  mysteries  of  Bacchos  save  in  connection
with  wine,  whether  fermented  or  not  ;  for  the  interior
significance  of  his  rites  had  reference  to  the  truth  and
meaning  of  things.  The  orgies  of  Ceres  and  Bacchos
were  therefore  united,  the  Goddess  being  honoured  in
her  bread,  and  the  God  in  his  chalice  of  truth.  For
in  that  these  are  body  and  spirit,  solid  and  fluid,
outer  and  inner,  they  comprise  all  things  in  earth  and
in  heaven.

And  beyond  the  circle  of  Dionysos  lay  yet  another
— that  of  a  God  who  also  had  indeed  his  orgies,  but
these  were  forbidden  save  in  certain  fierce  nations  and
barbarous  times.  For  in  the  mysteries  of  Ares,  the
Man  of  War,  they  sacrificed  and  ate  human  flesh  and
the  flesh  of  horses,  which  also  war  together  with  man.
For  this  circle  is  outside  the  kingdom  of  the  fourfold
circles,  and  belongeth  to  the  beasts  of  prey.  And  his
star  is  red,  as  with  the  blood  of  the  slain.  But  the
orgies  of  Ares  the  Ram-headed  no  man  celebrated

yS  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim:*

save  in  war ;  and  he  who  knew  the  God  spared  not
his  life,  but  freely  sacrificed  himself.  For  it  was  an
abomination  to  eat  at  the  altar  of  Ares  in  time  of
peace.

Yet  hath  Ares  also  his  interior  meaning:  —  O
Knowledge,  thou  art  hard  of  access !  The  Horse
(which  is  the  symbol  of  the  intellect)  dieth  for  thee,
and  the  Warrior  is  pierced.  Thou  art  the  Man  of
War,  and  of  iron  are  the  wheels  of  thy  chariot !

The  Hebrew  Scriptures  describe  the  Lord  Jehovah,
or  Logos,  as  operating  as  the  Spirit  of  the  fifth  circle,
when  they  speak  of  God  as  a  Man  of  War.  And  the
book  of  Wisdom  (xviii.  15)  thus  represents  Him.
For  the  Divine  Word  takes  many  forms,  appearing
sometimes  as  one,  sometimes  as  another,  of  His
Seven  Angels,  or  Elohim.  These  are  only  Seven,
because  this  number  comprises  all  the  Spirits  of  God.
So  that  when  the  seventh  is  passed,  the  octave
begins  again,  and  the  same  series  of  processes  is
repeated  without,  as  reflects — becoming  by  distance
weaker  and  weaker — of  the  same  Seven  Lights.

See  that  above  all  things  you  teach  the  doctrine  of
Caste.  The  Christians  made  a  serious  mistake  in
requiring  the  same  rule  of  all  persons.  Castes  are
as  ladders  whereby  to  ascend  from  the  lower  to  the
higher.  They  are,  properly,  spiritual  grades,  and
bear  no  relation  to  the  outward  condition  of  life.
Like  all  other  doctrines,  that  of  caste  has  been
materialised.  The  castes  are  four  in  number,  and
correspond  to  the  fourfold  nature  of  man.

The  Daimons,  Guardian  Angels,  or  Genii  belong  to

Concerning  the  Greek  Mysteries.  79

the  order  of  Seraphs,  or  Serpents  of  Light,  which
surround  and  spring  from  the  supreme  orb.  Hence
the  idea  of  the  serpent  as  a  fallen  angel,  the  astrals
being  serpents  of  fire,  springing  from  Hades,  or  the
lower — the  material  and  astral — world,  which  is  the
obverse  of  the  upper.

Venus,  or  Aphrodite,  is  celestial  Harmony, — that
binding  power  of  sympathy  which  purifies,  enlightens,
and  beautifies.  The  Apple  in  her  hand  is  the  Kosmos
(denoting  the  world  sustained  and  redeemed  by  Love).

The  Owl,  sacred  to  Pallas,  and  the  Cat  to  Hermes,
are  types  of  the  Seer.  For  Wisdom  and  Under-
standing can  behold  things  in  dark  places.

The  Spoiling  of  the  Egyptians  has  a  secondary
reference  to  the  appropriation  of  their  sacred  mys-
teries by  the  Hebrews.  The  primary  reference  is  to
the  enrichment  and  edification  of  the  soul  by  means
of  the  lessons  obtained  through  the  experiences  of
the  body,  symbolised  as  Egypt.

Air,  Pallas,  is  the  offspring'  of  Ether,  Jupiter,  or
original  Substance  in  its  masculine  aspect.  Ether
is  universally  diffused,  penetrating  everywhere,  or,
rather,  impossible  to  be  excluded  from  anywhere.
The  whirling  atoms  of  the  densest  solids  revolve  in
ether,  as  do  the  planets  in  space.  In  a  sense  Ether
is  space.

The  Soul,  Persephone,  is  the  daughter  of  Earth,
Demeter  or  Motion,  and  of  Ether,  Zeus  or  Rest,
respectively  the  visible  and  invisible.  To  him  who
knows  the  mysteries  of  Demeter  or  Ceres,  the  eating
of  flesh  is  an  abomination.

So  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

These  mysteries  contained,  among  other  things,  the
relation  of  the  soul  to  the  elements  by  which  on
either  side  it  is  beset, — namely,  to  motion  and
matter  on  the  outer  side,  and  to  rest  and  spirit  on
the  inner.  Hence  Demeter  and  her  mysteries  are  of
profound  import,  and  relate  to  secrets  the  most  in-
terior. As  the  force  which  causes  spirit  to  become
manifest  as  matter  or  earth,  she  is  the  Earth-
Mother  and  the  power  whereby  germination  occurs.
Constituting  all  that  is  fixed  and  solid,  she  is
creation,  or  manifestation  through  action  or  motion,
the  invisible  made  visible.  And  to  her  is  due  the
phenomenal  or  illusive  by  which  her  daughter  Per-
sephone—or the  soul— is  drawn  outwards  and  down-
wards. Illusion,  the  "fiery  "  or  electric  body  generated
of  motion,  and  operating  as  a  veil  to  hide  the
inner  reality,  is  Maya  and  Glamour ;  and  the  soul
following  this  is  carried  off  to  Hades  by  its  ruler
Pluto  (the  God  especially  of  riches,  themselves
illusive  as  products  of  the  earth).  Eating  of  the
mystic  Pomegranate  (the  "  Apple "  of  Eve),  the
volatile  becomes  alchemically  fixed,  the  soul  is
incorporated  with  the  body,  and  in  part,  at  least,
materialised,  and  is  no  longer  "virgin"  or  pure,
because  wedded  to  flesh  and  sense.  At  the  entreaty
of  her  mother,  who  fears  her  total  immersion  in
matter,  and  consequent  final  loss,  Zeus  grants  that
she  may  divide  her  existence  between  the  two  worlds
or  conditions,  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly,  being
— while  in  the  lower — Queen  of  the  Shades  or  those
who  sleep,  being  unconscious  of  things  spiritual

Concerning  the  Greek  Mysteries.  8 1

Thus  the  volatile  or  astral  body,  which  is  the  im-
mediate manifestation  of  the  soul,  is  the  daughter —
or  product — of  Motion ;  and  Motion  is  the  daughter
of  Time  (Kronos  or  Saturn),  and  of  Substance,
which  is  Rhea,  or  the  Holy  Spirit  in  its  feminine
aspect.  This  last  is  the  Great  Mother,  the  original
Panthea.  The  production  of  the  material  body  by
the  fixing  of  the  particles  of  the  volatile  body  comes
of  the  reversal  of  the  poles  of  those  particles  through
the  outward  tendency  of  the  will  of  the  individual,
and  its  separation  or  divergence  from  the  divine  or
central  will.

The  force  whereby  Zeus,  the  central  spirit,  produces
the  soul  or  ethereal  body,  and  which  also  the  soul
uses  to  project  itself  still  further,  is  the  same  force
whereby  the  system  is  transmuted  and  indrawn  again
to  its  divine  centre  and  made  volatile.  The  force  is
one,  it  is  the  will  and  direction  that  are  various.

In  one  application  Persephone  is  the  grain  of
wheat,  Ceres  the  soil,  and  Hades  the  darkness  which
hides  the  seed,  until  under  solar  influence  it  emerges
and  returns  to  the  light.  It  was  through  a  misunder-
standing of  the  mysteries  of  Ceres,  and  of  the  true
meaning  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  that  the
custom  of  burning  the  dead  was  given  up  for  that  of
burying  them.

The  Gods  of  the  elements,  Athena  (air),  Poseidon
(water),  Hephaistos  (fire),  and  Demeter  (earth),  are
among  the  greatest,  and  are  close  to  the  throne,
having  universal  sway,  inasmuch  as  their  empire  is
universal.1

1  See  Part  II.,  Na  XIII.  pt.  2,  and  Appendix,  note  R.
F

82  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

No.  XIX.

CONCERNING  THE  ORIGIN  OF  EVIL,  AND  THE  TREE

as  the  type  of  creation.
Part  i.1

I  SPEAK  of  the  Tree  and  of  its  meaning.  Of  this
the  Hindus  understand  more  than  you,  for  they
represent  their  gods  with  many  arms.  This  is  be-
cause they  recognise  the  fact  that  the  type  of  all
existence  is  a  Tree,  and  that  God's  universal  symbol
is  that  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  the  Tree  was  planted  in  the  midst  of  the
garden,  forasmuch  as  it  was  and  is  the  type  of  all
existence,  the  centre  from  which  radiates  the  whole
of  creation.  Let  the  insight  of  the  Hindus  instruct
you  on  this  matter.

"  You  have  demanded  also  the  origin  of  Evil.  This
is  a  great  subject,  and  we  would  have  withheld  it
from  you  longer,  but  that  it  seems  to  us  now  that
you  are  in  need  of  it.  Understand,  then,  that  evil  is
the  result  of  creation.  For  creation  is  the  projection
of  spirit  into  matter;  and  with  this  projection  came
the  first  germ  of  evil.  We  would  have  you  know  that
there  is  no  such  thing  as  purely  spiritual  evil,  but
that  evil  is  the  result  of  the  materialisation  of  spirit.
If  you  examine  carefully"  all  we  have  said  to  you  con-

1  Paris,  July  21,  1S77.  This  part  was  written  clown  by  the  seeress
nerself  while  in  trance.  Part  2.  was  spoken  in  the  same  condition
immediately  afterwards.

Concerning  the  Origin  of  EviL  83

cerning  the  various  forms  of  evil,  you  will  see  that
every  one  is  the  result  of  the  limitations  of  matter.
Falsehood  is  the  limitation  of  the  faculty  of  percep-
tion ;  selfishness  is  the  result  of  the  limitation  of  the
power  to  perceive  that  the  whole  universe  is  but  the
larger  Self ;  and  so  of  all  the  rest.  It  is,  then,  true
that  God  created  evil  ;  but  yet  it  is  true  that  God  is
Spirit,  and  being  Spirit,  is  incapable  of  evil.  Evil  is
then,  purely  and  solely,  the  result  of  the  materialisa-
tion of  God.  This  is  a  great  mystery.  We  can  but
indicate  it  to-night."

Part  2.

I  see  a  lake,  vast  and  deep  and  bright.  I  am  not
certain  whether  it  is  lake  or  sea.  It  has  no  borders  that
I  can  perceive.  Its  waters  are  so  clear  that  I  could
see  the  pebbles  shining  at  the  bottom,  if  it  had  one.
It  is  overspread  by  a  flood  of  nebulous  light,  evenly
diffused  in  all  parts  ;  and  now,  as  I  look,  the  light  has
become  concentrated  into  flowers,  and  between  them
are  spaces  of  darkness  caused  by  the  withdrawal  of
the  light  into  the  flowers.  It  is  a  vast  floating  garden
of  flowers,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  garden  is  a  Tree.
The  tree  spreads  out  its  arms  everywhere.  The  gar-
den is  creation,  the  tree  is  God.  And  the  tree  seems
in  some  way  to  be  the  flowers,  and  the  flowers  belong
to  the  tree.  I  cannot  discern  the  material  of  the
tree  ;  it  evades  me  as  I  look.  It  is  not  matter ;  it  is
the  substance  of  matter,  the  divinity  underlying  it.
God  is  not  light,  but  that  of  which  light  itself  is  the

84  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

manifestation.  God  willed  it  to  be.  Light  is  the  result
of  God's  will.  God  said,  "  Let  light  be  ";  and  it  was.
Matter  is  the  intensification  of  Idea.  All  things  are
made  of  God's  thought.  God  is  Spirit,  and  the  sub-
stance of  things.  I  see  two  forces  ever  in  operation.
They  are  the  centrifugal  and  the  centripetal.  And  they
are  one  ;  yes,  one  and  the  same,  for  I  see  the  force  re-
bound back  to  God.  Creation  is  ever  being  projected
from  God  as  from  a  luminous  centre  ;  it  is  always
being  drawn  back  again  also.  Some  parts  refuse  to
return  ;  they  go  into  outer  space;  they  are  lost.  Let
me  see, — can  it  be  that  they  pass  beyond  the  sphere
of  the  Divine  attraction  ?  Yes  ;  I  sec  that  it  is  so,
and  oh  !  they  are  lost.  The  Spirit  is  withdrawn  ;  it
is  as  if  it  were  sucked  out  of  them,  and  they  wander
away  into  darkness,  and  expend  themselves.  The
rest,  who  approach  God,  develop  the  Spirit  in  them,
becoming  more  and  more  like  God.  God  is  the  richer
for  them.  They  continue  to  exist.  They  return,  but
do  not  become  lost  in  God.

I  thought  I  was  describing  orbs  in  space,  projected
from  a  central  sun  mound  which  they  circled  ;  but,
looking  closer,  I  see  them  as  individuals.  They  have
become  persons.  It  must  be  that  the  method  of
creation  is  the  same  for  all.

God  subsisted  prior  to  creation  ;  there  was  a  time
when  God 'did  not  create:  it  \  s  Sabbath  of  r

Such  Sabbaths  recur, — when  there  is  no  material  uni-
verse. This  is  when  the  Divine  mind  ceases  from
thinking.  For  God  to  think  is  to  create.  Matter  it-
self is  a  result  of  the  Divine  thought ;  it  was  first  pro-

Concerning  the  Great  Pyramid.  85

duced  by  the  intensification  of  Idea.  It  appears  to  me
that  its  first  form  was  like  water— fluidic.  Spirit  is
Divinity  itself.  God  is  dual.  I  see,  on  looking  closer,
that  through  this  duality  God  produces  creation.  Evil
is  caused  by  creation,  or  the  projection  of  spirit  into
matter;  that  is,  it  is  spirit  which,  by  being  projected
far  enough  from  the  Divine  centre,1  becomes  matter.
Perception  is  one  ;  the  senses  are  specialised  modes
of  perception.  God  is  perception  itself.  God  is  uni-
versal percipience.  God  is  both  that  which  sees  and
that  which  is  seen.  If  we  all  could  see  all,  hear  all,
touch  all,  and  so  forth,  there  would  be  no  evil,  for
evil  comes  of  the  limitation  of  perception.  Such
limitation  was  necessary,  if  God  was  to  produce  aught
other  than  God.  Aught  other  than  God  must  be  less
than  God.  Without  evil,  therefore,  God  would  have
remained  alone.  All  things  are  God,  according  to  the
measure  of  the  spirit  in  them.  And  now  I  see  that
the  nearest  of  all  to  God  is  a  woman.2

NO.  XX

CONCERNING  THE   GREAT   PYRAMID,  AND  THE
INITIATIONS   THEREIN.3

I  SEE  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  can  tell  you  all  about
it.     My  genius  informs  me  that  the  number  of
the  pyramids  in  Egypt  corresponds  to  the  number  of

1  The  centre,  that  is,  of  the  Divine  operation,  not  of  the  Divine  Being

2  As  type  of  the  feminine  or  love  aspect  of  the  Divine  Nature.

3  London,  March  22,  1SS1 .     Spoken  in  trance.

&6  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

the  mysteries  of  the  Gods.  No  one  has  yet  rightly
found  out  the  purpose  of  the  great  one.  It  was
built  simply  in  order  to  serve  in  initiations.  I  see  a
candidate  and  seven  or  eight  hierophants  going  in
procession  with  torches  through  the  passages.  Each
passage  represents  a  mystery,  the  chief  one  leading
to  the  "  king's  chamber."  This  represents  the  greater
mysteries.  The  "  queen's  chamber "  represents  the
lesser  mysteries.  The  coffer  in  the  king's  chamber
is  a  measure  representing  the  standard  of  the  perfect
Humanity.  And  in  this  the  candidate  was  laid  on
his  final  initiation.

It  appears  to  me  that  I  was  once  there  myself.
My  sensations  about  it  are  like  a  memory.  It  was
not  built  to  be  a  prophecy,  but  it  may  serve  as  a
prophecy.  In  it  is  symbolised  all  the  Wanderings  in
the  Desert, — the  history,  that  is,  of  the  soul  in  the
wilderness  of  the  bod)-.  In  representing  the  soul  of
the  individual,  it  represents  the  soul  also  of  the  race,
and  thus  is  really  a  prophecy.

The  new  birth  takes  place  in  the  king's  chamber.
It  is  the  last  stage.  A  person  may  be  initiated
several  times  in  various  incarnations  ;  but  he  is  re-
generated once  for  all.  The  "  baptism  "  took  place  in
the  queen's  chamber.  It  belonged  to  the  lesser
mysteries.  It  is  neither  initiation  nor  regeneration,
but  purification.  There  are  four  stages  to  be  passed
before  final  initiation.  They  correspond  to  the  four
elements,  earth,  fire,  water,  and  air  ;  and  they  relate
respectively  to  the  four  corresponding  divisions  of
man's   nature, — the   bod)',  the   phantom   or  perisoul,

Concerning  the  Great  Pyramid.  &j

the  soul,  and  the  spirit,  which  are  the  four  rivers  of
Eden.  And  the  candidate  has  to  be  tested  and
proved  in  each  of  them  by  the  "  tempter."

The  initiate  was  accompanied  by  his  sponsor  or
"  mother,"  a  priestess  or  Sibyl.  The  central  secret  of
the  Mysteries  was  the  tree  of  life  in  the  midst  of  the
garden;  Immortality,  the  secret  of  Transmutation,
or  of  changing  "  water "  (substance)  into  "  wine  "
(spirit).  This,  "  Issa" — the  son  of  Isis — or  Jesus,  is
alone  able  to  do.  O  incomprehensible  secret,  who
shall  understand  thee !  A  soul,  as  has  already  been
said,  may  be  initiated  more  than  once,  in  several
lives,  but  only  once  regenerated.  For  she — the  soul
— can  only  once  be  born  of  the  spirit,  or  "  wisdom. ''
To  be  regenerate  is  to  be  born  into  spiritual  life,  and
to  have  united  the  individual  will  with  the  Divine
Will.

This  union  of  the  two  wills  constitutes  the  spiritual
marriage,  the  accomplishment  of  which  is  in  the
Gospels  represented  under  the  parable  of  the  marriage
at  Cana  of  Galilee.  This  divine  marriage,  or  union
of  the  human  and  Divine  Wills,  is  indissoluble  ;
whence  the  idea  of  the  indissolubility  of  human
marriage.  And  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  marriage  of  the
spirit  of  man  to  that  of  God,  and  of  the  Spirit  of  God
to  that  of  man,  it  is  a  double  marriage.

I  see  the  ceremony  actually  taking  place.  The
hierophant  represents  the  Divine  Spirit  ;  and  he  and
the  candidate  face  each  other,  and  crossing  their
arms  grasp  each  with  each  hand  a  hand  of  the  other.
A  soul  may  be  partially  and  transiently  illuminated

88  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

by  the  Spirit  ;  the  Spirit  may  even  descend  upon  an
individual  and  make  him  a  prophet,  and  pass  away
leaving  him  unregenerate,  and  out  of  the  kingdcm  of
God, — as  occurred  to  John  the  Baptist.  But  it  is  the
divine  marriage  only  which  constitutes  regeneration,
the  sacrament  of  eternal  marriage.  Of  this  intimate
union  the  soul  itself  is  reborn,  and  its  inmost  recesses
divinely  illuminated.  Of  such  marriage  as  this  the
Patriarchs  were  ignorant.  Their  connection  with  the
Spirit  wras  fitful  and  transient,  and  they  were  there-
fore represented  as  living  in  concubinage.

We  have  herein  the  reason  why  the  Cup  is  denied
to  the  laity.  "  Of  even'  tree,"  it  is  said  to  the  unin-
itiate  Adam,  "thou  may  est  freely  communicate.  But
of  the  tree  of  knowledge  thou  mayest  not  communi-
cate." The  wine  is  the  spirit  of  interior  truth,  the
understanding  of  which  gives  eternal  life  ;  and  to  this
the  people  cannot  yet  attain.  They  may  receive  only
the  bread,  which  represents  only  the  element  of
substance.  This,  however,  contains  also  the  spirit,
although  unmanifested  and  unrecognised.

I  now  see  the  pyramid  distinctly.  It  was  built
entirely  for  initiations,  so  far  as  its  builders  were
concerned.  In  these  ceremonials  the  Reed  played  an
important  part,  and  in  sacred  mythos  generally.
Thus,  Moses  was  placed  in  a  basket  of  reeds.  The
Hindu  divinity  Kartikya  was  sheltered  in  infancy
by  reeds.  The  mysteries  of  Ceres,  or  Demeter,  were
carried  in  baskets  of  reeds,  called  canephora;  and  the
final  stage  in  the  initiation  of  Jesus  is  placed  at  Catia.
A  reed  also  was  placed  in  his  hand  at  his  condemna-

Concerning  the  Great  Pyramid.  89

tion.  And  the  virgin  in  the  sacred  marriage  initia-
tion also  bore  a  reed  with  a  cup  on  it.  This  is
because,  growing  in  and  out  of  the  water,  which  de-
notes the  soul,  and  being  a  straight  rod,  the  reed
denotes  the  spirit.  In  India  the  Lotus  has  the  same
significance.  I  perceive  that  Jesus  had  been  initiated
in  the  mysteries  of  India  and  Egypt  long  before  he
was  incarnated  as  Jesus,  and  he  appears  to  me  as
having  been  a  Brahmin.

The  Egyptians  and  Hindus  appear  to  be  of  the
same  race,  having  their  mysteries  in  common.  For  I
am  shown  one  of  each  people  riding  together  on  an
elephant.  Both  countries  were  colonised  at  the  same
time  from  Thibet,  and  from  thence  all  the  mysteries
proceeded.1  In  Egypt  the  initiations  were  generally
in  pyramids  and  temples.  In  India  and  Palestine
they  were  underground,  in  caves.  In  Cana  of  Galilee
there  is  a  large  cave,  which  was  used  for  the  purpose,
with  a  "  banqueting  "  room.

I  am  counting  the  pyramids.  I  see  thirty-six,  but
I  think  there  are  more.2

1  Herein  is  suggested  yet  another  application  of  the  parable  of  the
Deluge.  Thibet,  like  Thebes,  signifies  Ark  ;  and  if,  as  long  supposed,
it  was  once  the  sole  home  of  spiritual  knowledge  in  the  world  and
centre  whence  it  was  diffused,  it  may  be  said  of  the  ancient  Thibetan
mysteries  as  of  the  dwellers  in  the  Ark,  "Of  them  was  the  whole
earth  overspread."  The  facts  are  noteworthy  that  Thibet  is  the  highest
table-land  on  the  globe,  and  that  the  word  Ararat  is  identical  with  the
word  Arhat,  the  Hindu  term  for  the  summit  of  spiritual  attainment.

2  Concerning  the  method  of  recovery  of  these  recollections,  see  note
at  end  of  No.  XXXIL

90  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

No.  XXL

CONCERNING  THE  "  MAN  OF  POWER."  x

I  HAVE  said  that  everything-  is  fourfold,  and  as  is
the  planet,  so  also  is  the  man.  The  perfect  man
has  a  fourfold  outer  body, — gaseous,  mineral,  vegetable,
and  animal :  a  fourfold  sideral  body, — magnetic,  odic,
sympathetic,  elemental :  a  fourfold  soul, — partaking
of  the  soulic  elements  of  all  the  grades  through  which
he  has  passed,  being  elemental,  instinctive,  vital,
rational:  and  a  triune  Spirit, — because  there  is  no
external  to  Spirit, — desirous,  willing,  obedient.  There
is  nothing  in  the  universe  save  Man ;  and  the  Perfect
Man  is  "Christ  Jesus."

"Mercury"  fecundated  by  "sulphur "  becomes  the
master  and  regenerator  of  "salt."  It  is  azoth,  or
the  universal  magnesia  (of  the  Alchemists],  the  great
magical  agent,  the  light  of  light  fecundated  by
animating  force,  or  intellectual  energy,  which  is  the
sulphur.  As  to  salt,  it  is  simple  matter.  Every-
thing which  is  matter  contains  salt ;  and  all  salt
may  be  converted  into  pure  gold  by  the  combined
action  of  sulphur  and  mercury.  These  sometimes
act  so  rapidly  that  the  transmutation  may  be  made
in   an   hour,   an   instant,   almost  without   labour   and

1  London,  December  iSSo.  Spoken  in  trance,  but  not,  as  in  the
foregoing,  in  the  speaker's  own  person,  but  unaer  dictation  heard
interiorly;  and  so  also  with  the  three  utterances  which  follow

Concerning  the  "Man  of  Power"  91

without  cost.  At  other  times,  owing  to  the  contrary
dispositions  of  the  atmospheric  medium,  the  opera-
tion may  necessitate  days,  months,  or  years.  Salt  is
fixed  ;  mercury  is  volatile.  The  fixation  of  the
volatile  is  the  synthesis ;  the  volatilisation  of  the
fixed  is  the  analysis.  On  applying  to  the  fixed  the
sulphuretted  mercury,  or  the  astral  fluid  rendered
powerful  by  the  secret  operation  of  the  soul,  the
mastery  over  nature  is  obtained.  The  two  terms  of
the  process  are  materialisation  and  transmutation.
These  two  terms  are  those  of  the  "  Great  Work," —
the  redemption  of  spirit  from  matter.

Miracles  are  natural  effects  of  exceptional  causes.
The  man  who  has  arrived  at  wishing  for  nothing  and
fearing  nothing,  is  master  of  all.

The  Initiate  of  the  highest  grade — one  who  has
power  to  command  the  elemental  spirits,  and  thereby
to  hush  the  storm  and  still  the  waves — can,  through
the  same  agency,  heal  the  disorders  and  regenerate
the  functions  of  the  body.  And  this  he  does  by  an
exercise  of  his  will  which  sets  in  motion  the  magnetic
fluid.

Such  a  person,  an  Adept  or  Hierarch  of  magnetic
science,  is,  necessarily,  a  person  of  many  incarnations.
And  it  is  principally  in  the  East  that  these  are  to  be
found.  For  it  is  there  that  the  oldest  souls  are  wont
to  congregate.  It  is  in  the  East  that  human  science
first  arose ;  and  the  soil  and  astral  fluid  there  are
charged  with  power  as  a  vast  battery  of  many  piles.
So  that  the  Hierarch  of  the  Orient  both  is  himself  an
older  soul  and  has  the  magnetic  support  of  a  chain

92  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

of  older  souls,  and  the  earth  beneath  his  feet  and
the  medium  around  him  are  charged  with  electric
force  in  a  degree  not  to  be  found  elsewhere.

Now,  the  odic  or  sideral  body  is  the  real  body  of
the  man.  The  phenomenal  body  is  secondary.  The
odic  body  is  not  necessarily  of  the  same  shape  or
appearance  as  the  outward  body,  but  it  is  of  the
nature  of  the  soul.  The  creation  of  man  in  the
image  of  God  "  before  the  transgression,"  is  the  picture
of  the  man  having  power  ;  that  is,  having  an  odic
body  in  which  the  elements  were  not  fixed, — a  body
such  as  that  of  the  "risen  Christ."  What  I  have
said  concerning  the  volatilisation  of  salt,  will  help  to
the  understanding  of  this.  But  when  the  "sin  of
idolatry"  had  been  committed,  then  man  ceased  to
have  power  over  his  own  body,  and  thus  became  a
"pillar  of  salt,"  fixed  and  material.     He  was  "naked."

The  man  thus  referred  to.  attained  power  over  his
body  by  evolution  from  rudimentary  being;  and  at
last,  becoming  polarised,  received  the  Divine  Flame
of  Deity,  and  thereby  the  power  over  "salt."  But
by  reason  of  perverse  will  to  the  outer,  he  depolarised,
and  thereby  fixed  the  volatile.  Then  he  knew  that
he  was  "  naked,''  and  so  lost  "  Paradise."

Can  Paradise  be  regained  ?  Yes,  through  the
Cross  and  Resurrection  of  "  Christ.''  For,  as  in
"Adam"  all  die,  so  in  "Christ"  shall  all  be  made
alive.  And  forasmuch  as  the  earthly  dies,  the
celestial  lives.  The  body  can  be  transmuted  into
its  prototype,  the  magnetic  body.  This  is  the  work
of  the  adept.     The  magnetic  body  can  be  abandoned

Concerning  the  "  Man  of  Power"         93

to  the  odic  fluid,  and  the  soul  set  free.  This  is  the
work  of  post  mortem  evolution.  But  to  transmute
phenomenal  body,  magnetic  body,  and  soul  alike  into
spirit, — this  is  the  work  of  "Christ."  "I  have  power,"
said  Jesus,  "  over  my  body,  to  lay  it  down  and  to
take  it  up  again."

You  have  said  to  me,  "  If  the  odic  cr  sideral  body
be  the  maker  of  the  physical  body,  how  can  this
differ  in  form  from  it?  How  can  a  man  be  outwardly
human,  and  really  a  wolf,  a  hare,  or  a  dog  ? "

When  you  become  an  adept  you  will  know  that
such  fact  involves  no  contradiction.  The  transitions
of  the  sideral  body  are  not  sudden.  It  becomes
gradually,  and  does  not  undergo  changes  by  cata-
clysm. It  is  already  partly  human  before  it  has
ceased  to  wear  the  form  of  a  rudimentary  man,—  that
is,  of  an  animal.  You  have  seen  this  in  visions  when
you  beheld  the  human  shape  in  creatures  under
torture  in  the  laboratory.1  And  it  is  stilt  partly
rudimentary  when  it  puts  on  the  human.  Indulgence
in  its  lower  propensities  may  strengthen  it  in  its  old
likeness,  and  accentuate  its  former  propensities.  On
the  other  hand,  aspiration  towards  the  divine  will
accelerate  the  change,  and  cause  it  to  lose  altogether
its  lower  attributes.  That  which  is  born  of  flesh
is  in  the  image  of  the  flesh;  but  that  which  cometh
from  the  beyond  is  of  the  beyond.  The  womb  can
bring    forth    only    its    own    kind,    in    the    semblance

1  See  "Dreams  and  Dream-Stories,"  No.  XIV.,  "  The  Laboratory
Underground."

94  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

of  the  generators ;  and  as  soon  as  the  human  is
attained,  even  in  the  least  degree,  the  soul  has  power
to  put  on  the  body  of  humanity.  Hence  the  odie
body  always  possesses  some  attribute  of  humanity.
But  it  may  lose  this  by  sin  ;  and  in  such  case  it
returns,  by  a  fresh  incarnation,  to  the  form  of  the
beast.  Of  such  returns  to  the  lower  form,  some  are
purely  penitential  ;  but  most  are  retributory.  The
adept  can  see  the  human  in  the  beast,  and  can
tell  whether  the  soul  therein  is  an  ascending  or
a  descending  soul.  He  can  also  see  the  soul  in
a  man  ;  and  all  men  are  not  to  him  of  the  same
shape  or  appearance.  If  your  eyes  were  opened,
you  would  be  astonished  at  the  number  of  animals
you  meet  in  the  streets,  and  the  scarcity  of  men.
The  parable  of  the  Enchanted  City,  in  the  eastern
fables,  is  descriptive  of  this  mystery.

No.    XXII

CONCERNING   THE    "WORK   OF   TOWER."1

YOU  have  asked  me  if  the  Work  of  Power  is  a
difficult  one,  and  if  it  is  open  to  all.
It  is  open  to  all  potentially  and  eventually,  but  not
actually  and  in  the  present      In  order  to  regain  power
and    the   resurrection,  a   man    must   be   a    Hierarch  ;
that  is  to  say,  he  must  have  attained  the  magical  age

1  London,  Decemner  1SS0.      Received  in  si

Concerning  the  "  Work  of  Power"        95

of  thirty-three.  This  age  is  attained  by  having  ac-
complished the  Twelve  Labours,  passed  the  Twelve
Gates,  overcome  the  Five  Senses,  and  obtained
dominion  over  the  Four  Spirits  of  the  elements.  He
must  have  been  born  Immaculate,  baptised  with
Water  and  with  Fire,  tempted  in  the  Wilderness,
crucified  and  buried.  He  must  have  borne  Five
Wounds  on  the  Cross,  and  he  must  have  answered
the  riddle  of  the  Sphinx.  When  this  is  accomplished
he  is  free  of  matter,  and  will  never  again  have  a
phenomenal  body.

Who  shall  attain  to  this  perfection  ?  The  Man
who  is  without  fear  and  without  concupiscence  ;  who
has  courage  to  be  absolutely  poor  and  absolutely
chaste.  When  it  is  all  one  to  you  whether  you  have
gold  or  whether  you  have  none,  whether  you  have  a
house  and  lands  or  whether  you  have  them  not,
whether  you  have  worldly  reputation  or  whether  you
are  an  outcast, — then  you  are  voluntarily  poor.  It  is
not  necessary  to  have  nothing,  but  it  is  necessary  to
care  for  nothing.  When  it  is  all  one  to  you  whether
you  have  a  wife  or  husband,  or  whether  you  are
celibate,  then  you  are  free  from  concupiscence.  It  is
not  necessary  to  be  a  virgin  ;  it  is  necer*sarv  to  set  no
value  on  the  flesh.  There  is  nothing  so  difficult  to
attain  as  this  equilibrium.  Who  is  he  who  can  part
with  his  goods  without  regret  ?  Who  is  he  who  is
never  consumed  by  the  desires  of  the  flesh  ?  But
when  you  have  ceased  both  to  wish  to  retain  and  to
burn,  then  you  have  the  remedy  in  your  own  hands,
and  the  remedy  is  a  hard  and  a  sharp  one,  and  a

96  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

terrible  ordeal.  Nevertheless,  be  not  afraid.  Deny
the  five  senses,  and  above  all  the  taste  and  the
touch.  The  power  is  within  you  if  you  will  to
attain  it.  The  Two  Seats  are  vacant  at  the  Celestial
Table,1  if  you  will  put  on  Christ.  Eat  no  dead  thing.
Drink  no  fermented  drink.  Make  living  elements  of
all  the  elements  of  your  body.  Mortify  the  members
of  earth.  Take  your  food  full  of  life,  and  let  not  the
touch  of  death  pass  upon  it.  You  understand  me,
but  you  shrink.  Remember  that  without  self-im-
molation, there  is  no  power  over  death.  Deny  the
touch.  Seek  no  bodily  pleasure  in  sexual  com-
munion ;  let  desire  be  magnetic  and  soulic.  If  you
indulge  the  body,  you  perpetuate  the  body,  and  the
end  of  the  body  is  corruption.  You  understand  me
again,  but  you  shrink.  Remember  that  without  self-
denial  and  restraint  there  is  no  power  over  death.
Deny  the  taste  first,  and  it  will  become  easier  to
deny  the  touch.  For  to  be  a  virgin  is  the  crown
of  discipline.  I  have  shown  you  the  excellent  way,
and  it  is  the  Via  Dolorosa.  Judge  whether  the
resurrection  be  worth  the  passion  ;  whether  the
kingdom  be  worth  the  obedience  ;  whether  the
power  be  worth  the  suffering.  When  the  time  of
your  calling  comes,  you  will  no  longer  hesitate.

When  a  man  has  attained  power  over  his  body,  the
process  of  ordeal  is  no  longer  necessary.  The  Initiate
is  under  a  vow  ;  the  Hierarch  is  free.  Jesus,  therefore,
came  eating  and  drinking  ;  for  all  things  were  lawful

1  See  No.  XVIII.,  "Concerning  the  Greek  Mysteries."  Also,
"Dreams  and  Dream-Stories,"  No.  IX.,  "The  Banquet  of  the  Gods."

Concerning  the  "  Work  of  Power?        97

to  him.  He  had  undergone,  and  had  freed  his  will.
For  the  object  of  the  trial  and  the  vow  is  polarisa-
tion. When  the  fixed  is  volatilised,  the  Magian  is
free.  But  before  Christ  was  Christ  he  was  subject;
and  his  initiation  lasted  thirty  years.  All  things  are
lawful  to  the  Hierarch  ;  for  he  knows  the  nature  and
value  of  all.

When  the  elements  of  the  body  are  endowed  with
power,  they  are  masters  of  the  elemental  spirits,  and
can  overcome  them.  But  while  they  are  yet  under
bondage,  they  are  the  slaves  of  the  elernentals,  and  the
elementals  have  power  over  them.  Now,  Hephaistos  is
a  destroyer,  and  the  breath  of  fire  is  a  touch  of  death.
The  fire  that  passes  on  the  elements  of  your  food,  de-
prives them  of  their  vital  spirit,  and  gives  you  a  corpse
instead  of  living  substance.  And  not  only  so,  but  the
spirit  of  the  fire  enters  into  the  elements  of  your  body,
and  sets  up  in  all  its  molecules  a  consuming  and  a
burning,  impelling  to  concupiscence,  and  to  the  desire
of  the  flesh.  The  spirit  of  the  fire  is  a  subtle  spirit,
a  penetrative  and  diffusive  spirit,  and  it  enters  into
the  substance  of  all  matter  upon  which  it  acts.  When,
therefore,  you  take  such  substance  into  your  organism,
you  take  with  it  the  spirit  of  the  fire,  and  you  assimi-
late it  together  with  the  matter  of  which  it  has  become
a  part.

I  speak  to  you  of  excellent  things.  If  you  would
become  a  man  of  power,  you  must  be  master  of  the
fire.  The  man  who  seeks  to  be  a  hierophant,  must
not  dwell  in  cities.  He  may  begin  his  initiation  in  a
city,  but  he  cannot  complete  it  there.     For  he  must

G

98  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim"

not  breathe  dead  and  burnt  air.  In  a  city  you  respire
air  upon  which  the  flame  has  passed  ;  you  breathe
fire,  and  it  consumes  your  blood.  The  man  who  seeks
all  power  must  be  a  wanderer,  a  dweller  in  the  plain
and  the  garden  and  the  mountains.  He  must  seek
the  sun,  and  the  breath  of  night.  He  must  commune
with  the  moon  and  stars,  and  maintain  direct  contact
with  the  great  electric  currents  of  the  unburn t  air,  and
with  the  gracs  and  un paved  soil  of  the  planet.  It  is
in  unfrequented  places,  or  in  lands  such  as  those  of
the  East,  in  parts  where  the  abominations  of  Babylon
are  unknown,  and  where  the  magnetic  chain  between
earth  and  heaven  is  strong, — that  the  man  who
seeks  power,  and  who  would  achieve  the  Great  Work,
must  accomplish  his  initiation.

The  number  of  the  human  microcosm  is  thirteen  ;
four  for  the  outward  body,  four  for  the  sideral  b
four  for  the  soul,  and  one  for  the  Divine  Spirit.  For,
although  the  Spirit  is  Triune  it  is  One,  and  can  be
but  One  ;  because  it  is  God,  and  God  is  One.  At  the
Last  Supper,  therefore,  in  which  the  Magians  sym-
bolise the  Banquet  of  the  Microcosm,  there  are  twelve
apostolic  elements  and  one  Christ.  But  if  one  of
the  elements  be  disobedient  and  a  traitor,  the  Spirit
is  quenched  and  death  ensues

Concerning  Regeneration.  99

No.  XXIII.

CONCERNING   REGENERATION.1

THE  difference  between  the  "  Son  of  God  "  and
the  mere  prophet  is  that  the  former  is  born
regenerate,  and  is  therefore  said  to  be  "  born  of  a
virgin."2  But  regeneration  is  a  union  of  the  soul  and
spirit,  and  is  not  a  process  in  which  the  body  bears  a
part.  In  the  "  Baptism"  Jesus  received  the  y£on,  or
"  Dove,"  and  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  becom-
ing a  Medium  for  the  Highest.  The  Christ  is  in-
formed from  within,  and  "  needeth  not  that  any  man
should  tell  him  ;  for  he  knows  what  is  in  man."  But
the  adept  receives  from  without,  and  is  instructed  by
others.

The  adept,  or  "occultist,"  is  at  best  a  religious
scientist;  he  is  not  a  "saint."  If  occultism  were
all,  and  held  the  key  of  heaven,  there  would  be  no
need  of  "  Christ."  But  occultism,  although  it  holds
the  "  power,"  holds  neither  the  "  kingdom  "  nor  the
"  glory."  For  these  are  of  Christ.  The  adept  knows
not  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  "  the  least  in  this
kingdom    are   greater   than    he."      "  Desire  first  the

1  London,  June  1881.  Received  in  sleep,  in  answer  to  an  inquiry
respecting  the  advisability  of  studying  occult  science.

2  f.e.,  his  own  soul  purified  from  taint  of  materiality, — the  soul  being
always  the  "mother"  of  the  mystic  or  interior  man.     See  "  Definitions."

i oo  "  Clothed  wit h  the  Sun"

kingdom  of  God  and  God's  righteousness  ;  and  all
these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  As  Jesus
said  of  Prometheus,1  ''Take  no  thought  for  to-morrow.
Behold  the  lilies  of  the  field  and  the  birds  of  the  air,
and  trust  God  as  these."  For  the  saint  has  faith  ;
the  adept  has  knowledge.  If  the  adepts  in  oc-
cultism or  in  physical  science  could  suffice  to  man,  I
would  have  committed  no  message  to  you.  But  the
two  are  not  in  opposition.  All  things  are  yours,  even
the  kingdom  and  the  power,  but  the  glory  is  to  God.
Do  not  be  ignorant  of  their  teaching,  for  I  would
have  you  know  all.  Take,  therefore,  every  means  to
know.  This  knowledge  is  of  man,  and  cometh  from
the  mind.  Go,  therefore,  to  man  to  learn  it.  "  If
you  will  be  perfect,  learn  also  of  these."  "Yet  the
wisdom  which  is  from  above,  is  above  all."  For  one
man  may  begin  from  within,  that  is,  with  wisd<  m
and  wisdom  is  one  with  love.  Blessed  is  the  man
who  chooseth  wisdom,  fcr  she  leaveneth  all  thii
And  another  man  may  begin  from  without,  and  that
which  is  without  is  power.  To  such  there  shall  be  a
thorn  in  the  flesh.2  For  it  is  hard  in  such  case  to
attain  to  the  within.  But  if  a  man  be  first  wise
inwardly,  he  shall  the  more  easily  have  this  also
added  unto  him.  For  he  is  born  again  and  is  free.
Whereas  at  a  great  price  must  the  adept  buy
freedom.     {'Nevertheless.  I  bid  you  seek  ; — and  in  this

1  A  term  which  signifies  forethought.     The  remonstrance  is  ag

undue  anxiety  an««  alarm  on  the  soul's  behalf  while  in  ihe  path  of  duty,
,is  implying  distrust  of  the  divine  sufficiency.     See  Appendix,  note  I.
3  I.e.,  the  flesh  itself  is  their  thorn.

Concerning  Regeneration.  101

al  >o  you  shall  find.  But  I  have  shown  you  a  more
excellent  way  than  theirs.  Yet  both  Ishmael  and
Isaac  are  sons  of  one  father,  and  of  all  her  children
is  Wisdom  justified.  So  neither  are  they  wrong,  nor
are  you  led  astray.  The  goal  is  the  same ;  but  their
way  is  harder  than  yours.  They  take  the  kingdom
by  violence,  if  they  take  it,  and  by  much  toil  and
agony  of  the  flesh.  But  from  the  time  of  Christ
within  you,  the  kingdom  is  open  to  the  Sons  of
God.  Receive  what  you  can  receive  ;  I  would  have
you  know  all  things.  And  if  you  have  served
seven  years  for  wisdom,  count  it  not  loss  to  serve
seven  years  for  power  also.  For  if  Rachel  bear  tlK
best  beloved,  Leah  hath  many  sons,  and  is  exceeding
fruitful.  But  her  eye  is  not  single ;  she  looketh  two
ways,  and  seeketh  not  that  which  is  above  only.  But
to  you  Rachel  is  given  first,  and  perchance  her
beauty  may  suffice.  I  say  not,  let  it  suffice  :  it  is
better  to  know  all  things,  for  if  you  know  not  all,  how
can  you  judge  all  ?  For  as  a  man  heareth,  so  must
he  judge.  Will  you  therefore  be  regenerate  in  the
without,  as  well  as  in  the  within  ?  For  they  are  re-
newed in  the  body,  but  you  in  the  soul.  It  is  well  to
be  baptised  into  John's  baptism,  if  a  man  receive  also
the  Holy  Ghost.  But  some  know  not  so  much  as
that  there  is  any  Holy  Ghost.  Yet  Jesus  also,  being
himself  regenerate  in  the  spirit,  sought  unto  the
baptism  of  John,  for  thus  it  became  him  to  fulfil
himself  in  all  things.  And  having  fulfilled,  behold,
the  "Dove"  descended  on  him.  If  then  you  will  be
perfect,  seek  both  that  which  is  within  and  that  whir.h

102  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim"

is  without ;    and    the    circle    of  being,   which  -is  the
"  wheel  of  life,"  shall  be  complete  in  you.1

No.  XXIV.

CONCERNING  THE  MAN  REGENERATE.*

YOU  have  been  told  that  Jesus  and  those  like
him  came  back  voluntarily  and  were  born
under  conditions  different  from  the  ordinary,  in  that
they  had  accomplished  some  degrees  of  their  re-
generation. These  degrees  are  twelve  in  all,  and
constitute  twelve  labours,  twelve  gates,  or  twelve
pearls,  all  of  which  are  of  equal  value.  Jesus  was
born  regenerate  in  certain  degrees,  and  the  whole
were  completed  only  after  his  *' resurrection,"  during
the  retirement  which  ended  in  his  "  ascension."  The
last  degrees  are  the  most  difficult.  There  are  four
for  the  soul,  four  for  the  perisoui  (or  astral),  and  four
for  the  bpdy,  this  being  the  last.  And  it  was  this
that  Paul  was  so  anxious  to  accomplish,  but  failed  to
do.  With  some  the  body  is  never  redeemed  ;  but
this  does  not  hinder  the  "divine  marriage"  of  the
soul  and  spirit.  This  marriage  facilitates  the  re-
demption of  the  body,  but  may  take  place  without
it.

1  The  above  interpretation  concerning  Rachel  and  Leah,  as  we  sub-
sequently ascertained,  is  on  the  lines  of  the  Kabala.

2  London,  July  9,  18S1.     Received  in  sleep.    See  also  No.  XXXIII.

Concerning  the  Man  Regenerate.         103

There  are  four  zones  or  divisions  in  the  astral  light,
and  the  reflect  of  Jesus  is  in  the  highest  only,  and
cannot  be  seen  by  those  who  have  access  only  to  the
lower ;  and  not  being  strengthened  by  the  shadow  of
the  body  of  Jesus,  it  has  become  fainter,  until  now  it
is  hardly  perceptible.  This  is  because  his  body  was
indrawn.1

Jesus  had  a  great  advantage  in  his  birth,  owing
partly  to  his  own  regenerate  condition,  and  partly  to
that  of  his  parents.  Owing  to  the  purity  of  his
mother's  blood,  she  is  said  to  have  come  of  a  priestly
family.  For  the  same  reason  his  father  is  said  to
have  come  of  a  royal  descent,  for  the  terms  "  Tribe
of  Levi "  and  "  House  of  David "  have  a  mystic
meaning.2

The  sanctity  of  any  particular  Christ  is  dependent
upon  the  advance  made  by  him  previously  to  his
birth.  Jesus  had  in  this  respect  an  advantage  over
Buddha.  He  was  regenerate  in  more  degrees,  and
he  had  no  sexual  relations  as  had  Buddha.  The
Twelve  Labours  refer  each  to  some  concupiscence,
which  is  depicted  under  the  figure  of  a  ravenous  bird,
horse,  or  some  other  animal  which  requires  to  be
subdued.  And  Jesus  had  previously  accomplished
the  Labour  denoting  that  particular  kind  of  con-
cupiscence.

Now,  of  men   some   must  needs   be  satisfied   first

1  Some  occultists  have  made  their  own  failure  to  discern  the  reflect
of  Jesus -a  failure  here  accounted  for — a  ground  for  denying  his
existence.

2  For  another  and  more  profound  meaning  of  the  derivation  from
David,  see  note  to  No.  XXXV11I.

104  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

intellectually.    These  are  regenerate  first  in  the  mind  ;
and  afterwards  they  attain  to  the  kingdom.

But  some  begin  from  within  ;  and  these  are  the
most  blessed.  For  they  seek  the  kingdom  first,  and
the  rest  is  added  to  them  afterwards.

These  last  begin  the  Great  Work  in  the  heart,
by  means  of  the  affection.  And  the  grace  of  love
attracts  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  transmutes  them  from
glory  to  glory,  so  that  the  reason,  or  mind,  is
suddenly  enlightened  by  the  inner  reason  ;  and  with
such  the  work  of  regeneration  is  instantaneous, — M  in
the  twinkling  of  an  eye."  These  are  of  the  type  of
the  woman.

But  others — and  these  are  of  the  masculine  type —
must  perform  their  work  more  laboriously ;  for  in
them  the  mind  is  first  illuminated.  They  pass  from
without  inwards  ;  from  the  circumference  to  the
centre.  And  this  is  but  a  difference  of  method,  not
of  ultimatcs  ;  for  the  Reason  is  the  heir  of  all  things.

With  these  the  Great  Work  is  a  slow  process  ;  but
their  gold  is  one  in  kind  with  that  of  the  first.  For
when  at  last  the  divine  marriage  consummates  I
labours,  the  mind  and  the  body  are  already  redeemed,
and  beyond  the  power  of  death,  because  they  have
already  the  power.

But  with  those  who  are  regenerate  first  within,
there  is  suffering  of  the  body,  and  often  death.  For
two  opposing  currents  meet  with  violence,  and  the
result  may  be  the  rending  apart  of  body  and  spirit.
But  yet  their  death  is  not  as  the  death  of  the  un-
regenerate.     Because  in   the  very  shock  of  it   trans-

Concerning  the  Man  Regenerate.         105

mutation  takes  place :  matter,  that  is,  is  sublimated,
and  the  man  needs  no  further  incarnation.  He  is
free,  for  he  has  conquered  matter.  Wherefore  the
bond  is  severed  between  him  and  the  earthly,  and  he
will  return  to  the  earthly  no  more.

He  who  is  regenerate  first  in  the  body  and  mind,
usually  lives  long,  even  beyond  the  limit  of  mortal
life,  and  absorbs  in  that  period  his  entire  astral  being,
and  often  even  his  body.  Thus  did  Enoch,  thus  Elias,
and  some  others.  I  do  not  name  them.  And  Jesus
remained  to  do  this  also.  For  he  would  leave
nothing  undone,  being  in  the  end  Lord  of  the  king-
dom, the  power,  and  the  glory.

But  when  he  arose  from  the  dead,  not  having  seen
corruption,  nor  fallen  under  the  dominion  of  death,
there  remained  to  him  one  degree  of  regeneration
to  be  accomplished, — he  was  not  yet  "  ascended."

For  there  were  then  but  the  eleven  ;  because  the
twelfth — "Judas" — was  imperfect.  And  because  of
this  Judas,  Jesus  fell  under  the  power  of  the  cross.

[For  Judas  was  the  type  of  his  own  weakness;  since
the  flesh,  not  being  wholly  regenerate,  was,  in  that
unfulfilled  degree,  weak.

And  the  regeneration  of  his  body  not  being  com-
plete before  his  crucifixion,  his  flesh-will  still  warred
against  his  spirit-will,  and  he  could  still  find  room
to  say,  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."

The  Martyrs  who  followed  his  teaching  were  braver
in  the  face  of  death  than  Jesus,  though  their  pains
were,  for  the  most  part  of  them,  far  sharper.

Tender  women,  maidens,  and  youths  went  fearless

106  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim"

and  smiling  to  the  stake  or  the  rack,  without  tear  or
sigh  ;  but  Jesus  shrank  and  wept  piteously  at  the
foot  of  his  cross.

Yet  a  nun  may  be  victor  in  the  spirit  though  his
body  remain  unredeemed.  For  this  redemption  of
the  body — when  fully  accomplished — is  transmuta-
tion, and  its  beginning  is  the  At-one-ment  of  the  will
of  the  flesh  with  the  will  of  the  spirit].

But  when  Jesus  completed  his  regeneration,  then
there  were  again  twelve.

But  until  Jesus,  no  man  ever  attained  these  twelve
degrees  and  the  divine  marriage  from  within.
Hitherto  the  taking  of  the  kingdom  had  been  from
without,  by  violence  and  labour,  after  the  manner  of
the  Patriarchs.

Now,  these  twelve  degrees  are  fourfold  for  almost
every  part  of  man  ;  being  four  for  the  body,  four  for
the  astral,  four  lor  the  soul,  but  one  for  the  spirit.

And  until  Jesus  there  had  been  no  regeneration  of
the  twelve  in  this  order, — from  within.  Buddha  at  his
death  had  attained  to  the  ten  only.

For  of  some  the  regeneration  is  fourfold  ;  being
one  degree  for  each  kingdom,  and  the  last  for  the
marriage  of  the  spirit.

And  with  some  it  is  sevenfold  ;  being  two  for  each
kingdom,  and  the  seventh  for  the  marriage.  Such  was
the  regeneration  of  the  mother  and  father  of  Jesus.

But  Jesus  himself  had  more  than  the  four,  the
seven,  or  the  ten- ;  for  he  had  the  thirteen.

And  first  he  had  four  of  the  soul.  With  these,  two
of  the  astral,  and  one  of  the  body,  he  was  born.

Concerning  the  Christ  and  the  Logos.      107

Afterwards,  at  the  "  ninth  hour."  when  he  had
completed  the  fourth  degree  of  the  astral,  he  con-
summated the  divine  marriage.

Afterwards  he  achieved  three  degrees  for  his  body,
but  the  last  only  after  his  '  ascension  "  to  the  mount
of  the  Lord.

No  man  ever  attained  thus  before.  And  since  the
glory  is  of  the  Spirit,  or  divine  part,  it  is  said  l  that
Jesus  by  his  marriage-feast  manifested  forth  his  glory.

And  the  celebration  of  this  marriage  was  in  Jordan;
but  the  manifestation  was  in  Cana.

For  Jesus  had  received  the  Double  Portion  ;  and
hence  his  double  glory.2

No.  XXV.

CONCERNING   THE   CHRIST   AND   THE   LOGOS.8

NOW,  Christ  Jesus — the  perfected  spiritual,  not
physical,  man  —  is  the  culmination  of  the
human  stream  which  flows  upwards  into  the  bosom
of  God.  Man,  arising  by  evolution  from  the  lowest,
finds  his  highest  development,  as  man,  in  the  Christ.
Having  reached  this  point,  he  is  the  perfect  Son  of
Man,  in  that  he  is  produced  in  and  of  Humanity  ;  and
being  such,  and  because  he  is   such,  he  receives  the

1  I.e.,  in  the  Mysteries,  on  which  the  Gospels  are  based.

2  Concerning  the  Double  Portion,  see  No.  XXXVII.

3  London,  July  12,  1881.     Received  in  Sleep.

108  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun!'

baptism  of  the  Logos.  Now,  the  Logos  is  the  Adonai,1
a  word  which  implies  Duality.  And  the  Adonai  is
the  Son  of  God,  the  Only-Begotten,  the  Two-in-One,
whose  manifestation  is  possible  only  through  the
Christ.  The  Celestial  Trinity  is  composed  of  Sub-
stance, Force,  and  Law.  Fcrce  is  Original  Life,  or
God  the  Father.  Substance  is  Original  Bein^,  or  God
the  Mother.  Indissolubly  conjoined,  together  they
are  Living  Substance,  the  En-Soph  or  Boundless
One  of  the  Kab;ila.  In  themselves  incapable  of
manifestation,  they  become  manifest  in  and  through
Law,  their  Expression,  Word,  Logos,  or  Son.  But
the  Logos  is  celestial,  and  the  human  could  not
know  him  in  his  divine  nature.  That  the  human
may  touch  and  know  the  divine,  it  is  necessary  for
the  two  natures  to  meet.  This  is  accomplished  in
"Christ  Jesus."  Christ  signifies  the  Anointed.  He
is  human  in  pedigree;  and  his  Christhood  is  attained
only  when  he  receives  into  his  own  spirit  the  Logos.
Then  is  accomplished  the  union  o\  the  two  natures,
the  divine  and  the  human.  The  two  streams  meet
and  mingle,  and  thenceforth  man  knows  and  under-
stands God — through  the  Christ.  For  the  Christ,  hav-
ing received  the  Logos,  is  Son  of  God,  as  well  as  Son
of  Man  ;  and  the  Son  oi  God  in  him  reveals  to  him
the  Father.  Man  as  human  only  could  not  say,  as  the
Christ  says, — "  I  and  the  Father  are  One."  It  is  the
in-dwelling  Word  who  enables  him  to  say  this, — "  For
He  who  dwelleth  in  the  bosom  of  God  (the  Logos)

1  The  name  invariably  substituted  by  the  Hebrews  lor  Jehovah  in
speaking.     See  Part  II.,  No.  VIII.,  also  Fart  III.

The  Perfect ionment  of  the  Christ.        109

even  He  hath  revealed  God."  Having-  received  the
Law,  or  Word,  the  Christ  receives  also  the  Father  and
the  Wisdom  of  God  through  the  Word  or  Son,  be-
cause Adonai — being  the  Duality — manifests  both  of
these  to  and  in  the  Christ.  Hence  Stephen,  dying,
exclaimed, — "Behold,  I  see  the  Heavens  open,  and
the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."
In  this  utterance  he  declares  the  union  of  the  Human
and  the  Divine.  He  declares  that  in  Christ,  Adonai
is  manifest ;  and  that  in  consequence  of  this  union,
humanity  is  exalted  into  Heaven.  For  humanity
can  attain  to  the  celestial  only  through  "  Christ."
When  man  penetrates  into  this  sphere  he  is  "  in
Christ  Jesus."  And,  as  Paul  says,  "being  in  Christ
he  is  in  God,  and  God  in  him  ;  for  Christ  is  God's."
God,  so  to  speak,  lays  hold  of  man  in  Christ,  and
draws  him  into  Heaven.  For  at  this  moment  both
rivers  meet,  and  flow  one  into  the  other  in  indissoluble
union,  the  Logos  in  the  Christ,  the  Divine  in  the
Human,  the  God  in  Man.

No.  XXVI.

CONCERNING   THE   PERFECTION MENT  OF   THE

CHRIST.1

UST  after  I  had  been  speaking  of  the  mistake
made  by  Christians  in  regarding  Jesus  as  a
ready-made  perfection,  I  received  a  momentary

1  Paris,  October  i,  1879.

J

no  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

vision  confirming  what  I  had  been  saying.  For  it
represented  to  me  the  gradual  perfectionmcnt  of  the
Christ  through  suffering,  or  experience  ;  and  a  voice
uttered  aloud  the  words,  "  Ought  not  Christ  to  have
suffered  these  things,  and  so  to  have  entered  into  his
glory  ?  "  And  other  like  passages  also  were  suggested
to  my  mind.1

Soon  after  this  I  found  myself  in  my  sleep  sitting  on
a  hill-side  and  carving  a  Cross  out  of  wood.  And  a
young  man  came  to  me  and  said,  "  I  alone  know  how-
to  make  crosses,  and  I  will  show  you  if  you  will  come
with  me."  And  I  took  him  for  Jesus,2  and  I  followed
him,  and  in  our  converse,  which  was  long,  but  of
which  I  remember  but  a  small  part,  he  spoke  much
of  the  difficult)-  that  lies  in  the  way  of  any  one  who
wishes  to  attain  a  full  revelation,  owing  to  the  deteri-
oration of  man's  system  through  impure  habits  of  life
and  especially  in  respect  of  food  \\  which  the

blood  is  tainted  and  the  tissues  rendered  incapable  of
the  sensitiveness  necessary  for  perfect  interior  vision.
Even  with  all  his  advantages  of  as  pure  a  paternity
and  maternity  as  the  earth  afforded,  he  said,  he  him-
self had  been  unable  to  attain  to  perfect  knowk
and  now,  after  nearly  two  thousand  years  of  further
degeneration,  it  is  hopeless  to  attain  all.  That  will
come  only  when  the  world  has  for  many  generations
lived  purely,  and  the  human  system  has  recovered  in
a  great  degree  the  perfection  which  properly  belongs

1  Luke  xxiv.  26  (Douay  Versi  n);  Hel         )    8,9;  1  Pet  iv.  1.
4  But  afterwards  believed  him  to  have  been  Hermes,  assuming,  as  is
his  wont,  a  character  in  accordance  with  his  messa

Concerning  Christian  Pantheism.        1 1 1

to  it,  and  which  it  once  had.  It  is  to  man  frugivor-
ous,  and  to  him  alone,  that  the  Intuition  reveals  her-
self, and  of  her  comes  all  revelation.  For  between
him  and  his  spirit  there  is  no  barrier  of  blood  ;  and
in  him  alone  can  the  spirit  and  the  man  be  at  one.

No.    XXVII.

CONCERNING   CHRISTIAN    PANTHEISM.1

THE  crucifixion  of  Jesus  was  an  actual  fact,  but  it
had  also  a  spiritual  signification  ;  and  it  is  to
this  spiritual  meaning,  and  not  to  the  physical  fact,
that  the  whole  of  the  mystical  writings  of  the
Christians  refer.

The  fundamental  truth  embodied  in  the  crucifixion
is  Pantheism.  God  is  in  all  creatures  ;  and  the  stage
of  purification  by  fire  through  which  all  being  is  now
passing,  is  the  crucifixion  of  God.  Jesus,  as  the  most
perfect  of  initiates,  is  selected  by  the  Christian
mystics  as  the  representative  of  God.  He  is  for
them,  as  Buddha  for  the  Buddhist  mystics,  God
manifest  in  the  flesh.  In  his  crucifixion,  therefore,
is  the  symbol  and  type  of  the  continual  crucifixion  of
God  in  his  suffering  creatures,  which  crucifixion  is
the  means  and  cause  of  their  purification,  and  thus
of  their  redemption.  "These,"  says  God,  "are  the
wounds  wherewith   I  was  wounded   in   the  house  of

1  Received  in  sleep.     Paris,  June  22,  1879.

ii2  "  Clotlicd  with  the  Suu"

My  friends."  1  Which  means,  "  I  am  wounded  in  the
body  or  person  of  all  creatures  who  are  Mine — who
are  sealed  unto  Me."  For  "  the  house  of  my  friends  "'
is  nothing  more  than  the  mystical  phrase  for  the
temple  of  the  body  of  others.  "  Enter  thou  into  my
house,  O  Lord  !  "  cries  the  holy  soul  who  desires  to
be  visited  while  in  the  body  by  the  Divine  Presence.
And  the  Man-God,  showing  His  five  mystical  wounds
to  the  Angels,  thus  declares,  "  These  are  the  wounds
of  My  crucifixion  wherewith  I  am  wounded  continually
in  the  persons  of  those  who  are  Mine.  For  I  and
My  brethren  are  one,  as  God  is  One  in  Me."

No.  XXVIII.
CONCERNING   THE

BEING  asleep  I  saw  myself  in  a  large  room  like  a
library,  for  it  had  in  it  a  great  many  shelves
filled  with  bo.oks  ;  and  there  were  several  persons  in
it  to  whom  I  was  speaking  of  the  Christs,  their  origin
and  mission,  and  part  in  the  history  of  mankind.
And  I  spoke  much  of  Jesus,  representing  that  the
doctrine  of  his  immaculate  conception  was  to  be
understood  only  in  a  mystic  sense,  and  that  all  the
story  we  have  of  his  birth  refers  solely  to  his  initia-

1  Zech.  xiii.  6.     Judged  by  the  context,  either  the  passage  is  corrupt
or  the  citation  is  from  some  Scripture  not  now  extant.

2  Paris,  October  17,  1879.

Concerning  the  "Blood  of  C/irist"       113

tion,1  which  is  the  true  birth  of  the  Son  of  God.  And
I  proved  this  by  many  texts  and  passages  from  the
gospels  themselves  and  other  writings.  And  I  spoke
also  of  the  origin  of  Jesus,  and  how  he  had  been
made  perfect  through  suffering.  Of  this  suffering  we
hear,  I  said,  but  little  in  the  one  life  of  his  which  is
recorded  in  the  gospels.  The  suffering  referred  to  is
a  long  course  of  trial  and  upward  progress  experi-
enced in  former  incarnations.  And  I  named  some  of
the  more  recent  ones,  but  have  not  been  enabled  to
retain  them.

Coming  to  his  passion  and  death,  I  explained  that
these  were  no  atonement  in  the  sense  ordinarily
understood.  For  that  God  does  not  take  the  mere
shedding  of  innocent  blood  as  any  satisfaction  for  the
moral  guilt  of  others.  But  that  the  mystical  Blood
of  Christ  by  which  we  are  saved,  is  no  other  than  the
secret  of  the  Christs  whereby  they  transmute  them-
selves from  the  material  to  the  spiritual  plane,  the
secret,  namely,  of  inward  purification.  And  I  showed
that  throughout  all  the  sacred  writings  the  word
blood  is  used  as  a  synonym  for  life  ;  and  that  life  in
its  highest,  perfectest,  and  intensest  sense,  is  not  the
mere  physical  life  understood  by  materialists,  but  the
essence  of  that  life,  the  inward  God  in  the  man.
And  when  it  is  written  that  those  in  the  highest
courts  of  heaven  are  they  who  have  made  their  robes
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  it  is  signified  that

1  Initiation  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  agency  of  any  human
institution.  The  true  initiator  is  in  every  case  the  divine  spirit  in  the
aspirant  himself.

H

H4  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

they  have  attained  redemption  through  their  perfect
attainment  of  the  secret  of  the  Christs.  And  when
also  it  is  said  that  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  from
all  sin,  it  is  signified  that  sin  is  impossible  to  him  who
is  perfectly  spiritualised,  and  has  been  baptised  with
the  spiritual  baptism.  The  blood  of  Christ,  therefore,
is  not  the  material  blood  of  any  man  whatsoever.
It  is  the  secret  and  process  of  spiritual  perfection-
ment  attained  by  the  Christ,  and  that  whereby  all
who,  following  his  method,  know  God  and  are  initi-
ated, become  redeemed  and  attain  the  gift  of  eternal
life.  And  many  other  things  I  said,  being,  as  it
seemed  to  me,  taught  of  some  spirit,  and  not  knowing
beforehand  what  things  I  was  to  say.

Now  I  perceived  behind  me,  a  little  to  my  right,  a
beautiful  marble  image  of  Pallas  Athena,  which  stood
in  a  small  recess  in  the  wall,  and  there  fell  upon  it  a
bright  golden  light  like  sunshine,  which  varied  from
time  to  time  to  all  the  seven  colours,  but  more  fre-
quently to  the  violet  than  to  the  others.  And  the
light  was  chiefly  on  the  head  and  bosom  of  the  figure,
which  was  clad  as  a  warrior  with  helmet,  shield,  and
spear.  And  I  could  hardly  determine  as  I  looked  at
it  whether  it  were  a  living  or  a  marble  form,  so  life-
like was  it.

A  little  while  later  all  the  people  to  whom  I  had
been  speaking  were  gone  away,  and  I  was  in  the
room  alone  with  my  mother.  She  was  in  great
distress  and  agitation,  regarding  me  as  lost  and  as  an
apostate  from  Christianity  ;  nor  would  she  listen  to
any  explanation  I  could  make  on  the  matter.     She

Concerning  the  "  Blood  of  Christ?       1 1 5

wept  bitterly,  declaring  I  had  broken  her  heart,  and
made  her  old  age  a  sorrow  and  a  burden  to  her  by
my  apostacy,  and  that  I  should  be  utterly  cast  away
unless  I  repented  and  returned  to  the  orthodox  belief;
and  she  besought  me  on  her  knees  to  recant  what  I
had  said.  No  words  can  convey  the  intensity  of  my
pain,  and  the  trouble  of  spirit  caused  me  by  this
conduct  of  hers.  My  mother  seemed  to  swoon  at  my
feet  with  the  excess  of  her  emotion  ;  and  I  was  on
the  point  of  yielding  to  her  entreaties  when  I  saw  the
door  of  the  room  open  and  a  Spirit  enter.  He  came
and  stood  beside  me,  and  said  these  words, — <;  Whoso
putteth  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  looketh  back,  is
not  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  whoso  loveth
father  or  mother  more  than  Me,  is  not  worthy  of  Me."
Then  the  dream  passed  away  and  I  remember  no
more  :  but  a  deep  feeling  remained  impressed  on  my
mind  that  the  scene  was  but  the  rehearsal  and  fore-
shadowing of  something  that  would  actually  occur  in
my  future  life.

*  *  It  is  a  satisfaction,  which  the  sympathetic  reader  will  share,
to  be  able  to  state  that,  by  taking  the  dream  as  a  warning  rather
than  as  a  positive  prediction,  and  observing  caution  accordingly,
opposition  of  the  kind  described  was  reduced  to  a  minimum,
and  no  breach  of  affection  or  serious  unhappiness  ensued.  The
mother  only  survived  the  daughter  by  a  few  weeks.

The  image  of  Pallas  illumined  by  the  seven  rays  denotes  the
Divine  Wisdom  in  its  plenitude,  and  manifesting  all  the  "Seven
Spirits  of  God."  As  beheld  on  this  occasion,  it  was  an  emphatic
intimation  that  the  doctrine  enunciated  was  uttered  under  the
inspiration  of  them  all,  and  especially  of  those  represented  by
the  two  dominant  rays,  Love  and  Reverence.

1 1 6  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

No.  XXIX.

CONCERNING  VICARIOUS  ATONEMENT.1

I  STOOD  in  my  sleep  on  the  balcony  of  a  house.
It  was  night,  and  so  dense  and  dark  and  im-
penetrable that  neither  earth  nor  star,  nor  any  object,
could  be  distinguished.  Nevertheless,  though  not
knowing  where  I  was,  I  was  conscious  of  being  in  or
very  near  to  a  city.

And  I  beheld  floating  about  in  the  darkness,  small
tongues  of  flame  exactly  resembling  in  appearance
the  flame  of  a  candle.  They  moved  of  themselves  as
if  they  were  living  creatures  who  directed  their
motions  with  intelligence  and  will.  They  sank  and
rose  and  passed  through  the  air  in  all  directions,  and
nothing  but  them  was  visible,  so  intense  was  the
darkness.

And  as  I  watched  the  flames,  two  of  them  came
floating  towards  me,  and  entering  the  house,  glided
round  the  room,  and  then  returned  to  me  on  the
balcony,  and  stopped  and  alighted,  one  on  each  of
my  hands,  and  there  remained  awhile.  And  then
the  whole  scene  passed  away  and  the  following
succeeded.

I  saw  a  child,  a  boy  at  school,  who  thought  himself
unjustly  treated  by  the  woman  who  kept  the  school,
and  sorely  oppressed  and  persecuted.     And  he  went

1  Taris,  January  31,  1SS0.

Concerning  Vicarious  Atonement.        117

into  the  room  where  she  sat,  and  in  a  fury  broke  and
destroyed  everything  upon  which  he  could  lay  his
hands.  And  the  paroxysm  of  his  anger  made  him
appear  as  one  possessed.  He  dashed  beautiful  vases
to  the  floor,  and  trampled  flowers  under  his  feet,
and  tore  to  pieces  rich  draperies,  for  the  room  was
furnished  and  decorated  in  a  very  costly  and  splendid
fashion.  And  then  he  suddenly  turned  on  the  woman,
and  seizing  her  by  the  hair,  beat  her  and  tore  her
garments,  and  scratched  her  hands  and  face.  And
all  the  defence  she  made  was  a  few  words  of  remon-
strance. And  I  was  shocked  and  terrified,  thinking
she  was  dead,  and  wondered  what  would  become  of
the  child  who  had  the  fury  of  a  wild  beast  and  the
strength  of  a  man.

Then,  after  an  interval,  I  saw  a  young  girl,  the
daughter  of  the  woman  who  had  been  thus  assaulted.
She  was  kneeling  before  a  furnace  and  watching
something  in  the  flames.  And  she  turned  and  looked
at  me  and  said,  "  The  punishment  due  to  the  child  is
a  terrible  one,  and  cannot  be  escaped.  He  is  con-
demned to  be  branded  with  a  red-hot  iron  on  the
palm  of  each  hand,  and  then  to  be  expelled  from  the
school.     The  brands  are  now  heating  in  the  furnace."

Saying  this,  she  turned  again  to  the  furnace,  and
then  with  a  rod  drew  out  the  iron  and  branded
herself  on  each  hand.  And  I  saw  the  flesh  shrivel
up  with  the  heat.  Then  she  held  up  her  palms
towards  me,  and  said,  "  See  and  read  what  is  written
on  them."  And  I  read  on  each  hand  the  word,
burnt    into   the    flesh,    "Guilty"      "And   now,"   she

1 1 8  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

added,  u  I  am  going  to  quit  this  house,  my  home,  as
I  am  banished."  "  You  !  "  I  cried.  "  You  are  not  the
guilty  one  !  What  have  you  done  to  deserve  this  ?
I  do  not  understand."

And  she  answered,  "  I  told  you  the  punishment
due  to  the  child  cannot  be  escaped.  And  I  have
taken  it  upon  myself  of  my  own  free  will,  although
I  am  innocent  and  the  beloved  daughter  of  her  who
has  been  so  grievously  offended  and  injured.  As  he
would  have  been  branded,  I  am  branded.  And  as  he
would  have  been  expelled,  I  am  expelled.  Thus
have  I  redeemed  him.  I  suffer  for  him.  Justice  is
satisfied,  and  he  is  pardoned.  This  is  Vicarious
Atonement."

Then,  as  she  spoke  these  words,  a  wind  blew  in  my
face,  and  I  breathed  it  in,  and  being  inspired,  spoke
thus,  with  a  loud  voice  : —

"  O  fool,  to  imagine  that  justice  can  be  satisfied  by
the  punishment  of  the  innocent  for  the  guilt}-  !
Rather  is  it  doubly  outraged.  How  can  your  being
branded  on  the  hands  save  the  child  ?  Hath  not  the
Word  of  God  declared,  '  No  man  shall  take  the  sin
of  another,  nor  shall  any  make  atonement  for  his
brother's  trespass  ;  but  every  one  shall  bear  his  own
sin,  and  be  purified  by  his  own  chastisement.'  And
again,  is  it  not  written,  '  Be  ye  perfect '  ?  And  as  no
one  can  become  perfect  save  through  suffering,  how
can  any  become  perfect  if  another  bear  his  suffering
for  him  ?  To  take  away  his  suffering  is  to  take  away
his  means  of  redemption,  and  rob  him  of  his  crown  of
perfection.     The  child   cannot  be  pardoned  through

Concerning  Vicarious  Atonement,        119

your  assumption  of  his  chastisement.  Only  if  through
suffering  himself  he  repent,  can  he  receive  forgive-
ness. And  so  with  the  man  who  sins  against  the
Creator  by  outraging  his  intuition  and  defiling  the
temple  of  God.  The  suffering  of  the  Creator  Himself
for  him,  so  far  from  redeeming  him,  would  but  rob
him  of  his  means  of  redemption.  And  if  any  declare
that  the  Lord  God  hath  thus  ordained,  the  answer  is,
'Justice  first,  and  the  Lord  God  afterwards!'  But
only  through  the  perversion  of  ignorance  can  such
doctrine  be  believed.  The  Mystery  of  Redemption
has  yet  to  be  understood.

"  This  is  that  Mystery.  There  is  no  such  thing  as
Vicarious  Atonement ;  for  none  can  redeem  another
by  shedding  innocent  blood.  The  Crucifix  is  the
emblem  and  symbol  of  the  Son  of  God,  not  because
Jesus  shed  his  blood  upon  the  cross  for  the  sins  of
man,  but  because  the  Christ  is  crucified  perpetually
so  long  as  sin  remains.  The  saying,  '  I  am  resolved
to  know  nothing  save  this  one  mystery,  Christ  Jesus
and  Him  crucified,'  is  the  doctrine  of  Pantheism.
For  it  means  that  God  is  in  all  creatures,  and  they
are  of  God,  and  God  as  Adonai  suffers  in  them.1

"  Who,  then,  is  Adonai  ?  Adonai  is  the  Dual  Word,
the  manifestation  of  God  in  Substance,  who  manifests
himself  as  incarnated  Spirit,  and  so  manifesting  him-
self, by  love  redeems  the  world.  He  is  the  Lord  who,
crucified  from  the  beginning,  finds  his  full  manifesta-
tion in  the  true  Son  of  God.  And  therefore  is  it
written  that  the  Son  of  God,  who  is  Christ,  is
1  See  note  on  p.  108.

1 20  "  Clothed  ivith  the  Sun?

crucified.  Only  where  Love  is  perfect  is  Sympathy
perfect,  and  only  where  sympathy  is  perfect  can  one
die  for  another.  Wherefore  the  Son  of  God  says,
'  The  wrongs  of  others  wound  me,  and  the  stripes  of
others  fall  on  my  flesh.  I  am  smitten  with  the  pains
of  all  creatures,  and  my  heart  is  pierced  with  their
hearts.  There  is  no  offence  done  and  I  suffer  not,
nor  any  wrong  and  I  am  not  hurt  thereby.  For  my
heart  is  in  the  breast  of  every  creature,  and  my  blood
is  in  the  veins  of  all  flesh.  I  am  wounded  in  my
right  hand  for  man,  and  in  my  left  hand  for  woman  ;
in  my  right  and  left  feet  for  the  beasts  of  the  earth
and  the  creatures  of  the  deep  ;  and  in  my  heart  for  all.'
"The  Crucifix,  then,  is  the  divinest  of  symbols
because  it  is  the  emblem  of  Christ  and  token  of  God
with  man.  It  is  the  allegory  of  the  doctrine  of  Pan-
theism that  man  becomes  perfect — the  soul  becomes
God — through  suffering.  He  who  is  wise,  understands ;
and  he  who  understands  is  initiated  ;  and  he  who  is
initiated  loves ;  and  he  who  loves  knows  ;  and  he
who  knows  is  purified.  And  the  pure  behold  God
and  comprehend  the  Divine,  with  the  mystery  of  pain
and  of  death.  And  because  the  Son  of  God  loves,  he
is  powerful,  and  the  power  of  love  redeems.  He
being  lifted  up,  draws  all  men  unto  him.  This  is
the  mystery  of  the  Seven  Steps  of  the  Throne  of  the
Lord.  And  the  Throne  itself  is  of  white,  a  glory
dazzling  to  look  upon.  And  in  the  midst  of  that
Light  is  one  whose  appearance  is  that  of  a  lamb  that
hath  been  slain.  And  he  is  Christ  our  Lord,  the
manifestation  of  Adonai,  whose  love  hath  thrust  him

Concerning  Vicarious  Atonement.        121

<*>

through  and  through.  And  to  him  is  given  all  power
to  redeem  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  For  he  opened
his  heart  to  all  creatures,  and  gave  himself  freely  for
them.  And  because  he  loved,  he  laboured  and
grudged  not,  even  to  death.  And  because  he
laboured  he  was  strong,  for  love  laboured  in  him.
And  being  strong  he  conquered,  and  redeemed  them
from  death.  They  were  not  forgiven  because  Christ
died  ;  they  wTere  changed  because  he  loved.  For  he
washeth  their  souls  white  with  his  doctrine,  and
purifieth  them  with  his  deeds.  And  these  are  his
heart's  blood,  even  the  word  of  God  and  the  pure
life.  This  is  the  atonement  of  Christ  and  perpetual
sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God.  Believe  and  thou  shalt
be  saved  :  for  he  that  believeth  is  changed  from  the
image  of  death  to  life.  And  he  that  believeth  sinneth
no  more,  and  oppresseth  no  more.  For  he  loveth  as
Christ  hath  loved,  and  is  in  God  and  God  in  him.
The  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin,  not  by
the  purchase  of  pardon  with  another's  gold,  but
because  the  love  of  God  hath  changed  the  life  of  the
sinner.  The  penitent  saves  himself  by  suffering,
sorrow,  and  amendment.  By  these  he  rises  and  his
life  is  redeemed.  And  it  is  the  Christ  that  redeems
him  by  giving  his  heart's  blood  for  him.  It  is  Christ
in  him  who  takes  his  infirmities  and  bears  his  sorrows
in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  And  the  same  which
was  true  of  old,  is  true  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Christ
Jesus  is  crucified  continually  in  each  one  until  the
kingdom  of  God  come.  For  wherever  is  sin,  are
suffering,  death,  and  oppression ;  and  where  these  are

122  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

the  Christ  shall  be  manifest,  and  by  love  shall  labour,
and  die,  and  redeem.*'

Here  the  sound  of  my  voice  woke  me,  and  the
vision  ended.  But  presently  I  slept  again,  and  be-
held an  infinite  expanse  of  sky,  open  and  clear  and
blue  and  sunlit,  all  in  the  most  intense  degree  ;  and
across  it  and  upwards  flew  an  eagle  like  a  flash  of
lightning  before  me.  And  I  knew  it  was  intended
to  signify  that  with  the  reproach  of  innocent  blood
removed  from  God,  and  the  Divine  character  vindi-
cated, there  is  nought  to  check  the  soul's  aspiration.

*#*  Representing  the  return  of  the  inspiring  spirit  to  Gel,  the
apparition  of  the  eagle  was,  like  the  illumined  image  of  Pallas,  an
emphatic  declaration  of  the  divinity  of  the  utterance.

No.  XXX.

CONCERNING  PAUL   AND   THE   DISCIPLES   OF   JESUS.1

IN  a  vision  which  was  given  to  me  last  night,  it
was  represented  to  me  that  the  common  view  of
Paul's  character  and  position  with  regard  to  the
primitive  Church  is  a  totally  false  one  ;  and  the
persons  who  made  the  communication  which  I  am
about  to  relate,  appeared  to  me  to  have  been  per-
ally  acquainted  with  Paul,  and  to  be  thoroughly
familiar  with  the  events  occurring  at  the  time  of  his
apostleship.  They  told  me,  with  evident  indignation,
that  the  Christian  Church  of  to-day  entirely  misunder-
stands the  relationship    really  existing  between  the

1  Paris,  July  17.  1877,

Concerning  Paul  and  the  Disciples  of  Jesus.    123

apostles  whom  Christ  had  instructed  and  elected  as
his  missionaries,  and  the  converted  Hebrew  sacerdotal  -
ist.  "  It  is  amazing,"  they  said,  "  that  your  Church
can  read  in  the  writings  extant  concerning  our
relations  with  Paul  the  account  of  the  mistrust,
suspicion,  and  disfavour  with  which  we  always
regarded  him,  and  not  see  that  he  was  never  one
with  us.  The  very  leader  and  chief  of  our  circle
withstood  him  to  the  face  again  and  again,  as  though
he  had  been  an  enemy  of  the  Church  ;  and  on  one
occasion  he  was  forced  to  fly  from  the  brethren  by
night  and  by  stratagem,  so  great  and  so  bitter  was
the  indignation  his  view  of  the  faith  aroused  among
us  who  had  been  the  Lord's  friends,  and  who  knew
the  truth  as  Paul  never  saw  it.  For  he  imported  into
that  pure  and  simple  rule  of  life  a  mass  of  Levitical
and  Rabbinical  usages  and  beliefs  which  we  had
shaken  from  us  as  the  dust  from  our  feet.  He  sunk
the  realities  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  under  an  over-
whelming weight  of  hard  sayings  and  sacerdotal
misrepresentations.  He,  who  had  never  known  the
Master  as  he  was,  took  upon  himself  to  distort  his
image  into  that  of  a  strange  God  whom  we  had  not
known.  Nor  could  we  recognise  in  his  garbled
version  of  the  beautiful  and  willing  martyrdom  of  the
man  whom  we  had  so  dearly  loved,  a  single  trait  of
his  character,  or  the  least  resemblance  to  the  doctrine
he  had  taught  us.  What  we  had  seen  and  known  as
the  pure  and  perfect  love  of  a  ready  death,  bravely
borne  for  conscience'  sake,  Paul  presented  to  us  in  a
new  and  unlovely  guise  as  the  sacrifice  of  a  victim  to
appease  the  anger  of  the  God  whom  Jesus  called  his

124  "  Clothed  with  the  Sttn."

Father  and  ours.  Out  of  that  which  had  been  for  us
a  simple  rule  of  life,  a  simple  purging  of  the  old  faith,
Paul  erected  the  strange  and  elaborate  system  which
is  called  '  the  scheme  of  the  Atonement!  For  us  and
our  Master  there  had  been  no  'scheme;'  God  was
reconciled  to  man  by  love,  and  not  by  sacrifice.  But
Paul  would  have  a  "  new  religion,"  and  a  creed  hard  to
understand  ;  and  he  left  to  the  world  a  Christianity
of  his  own  which  we  knew  not,  but  which  is  yours  to-
day. And  in  this  he  did  us  greater  evil  and  detriment
than  if  he  had  persecuted  and  slain  us  all  physically.
For  by  his  false  conversion  he  deceived  the  world  and
drowned  the  truth  by  a  flood  of  strange  doctrines.
For  this  we  were  all  against  him,  and  never  acknow-
ledged his  apostleship,  being  persuaded  that  he  knew
not  Christ  nor  the  faith  whifch  Christ  taught.  Had
he  been  content  with  the  truth,  we  would  never  have
set  our  faces  against  him  ;  for  he  had  many  gifts,
among  which  his  eloquence  was  not  the  least.  But
through  his  fatal  perversion  of  the  faith,  and  through
his  fatal  love  of  metaphysical  doctrines  and  of  Rab-
binical subtleties,  he  falsified  that  which  was  the  glory
of  the  Church,  and  brought  into  the  world  the  mon-
strous doctrines  of  the  'Christianity'  which  is
preached  in  your  churches  to-day.

I  was  further  told,  that  on  the  night  before  Paul's
escape  in  the  basket  let  down  from  the  wall  of
Damascus,  a  violent  altercation  had  taken  place
between  him  and  the  brethren,  in  the  course  of
which  Paul  had  maintained  that  the  only  chance  for
the  final  triumph  of   the  Gospel   lay  in  its  erection

Concerning  Paul  and  the  Disciples  of  Jesus.    125

into  a  system,  and  one  that  must  of  necessity  be
sacrificial.  They  then  challenged  him  upon  the  point,
but  he  insisted  that  he  saw  further  into  the  matter
than  they  did,  and  that  his  special  mission  lay  in  the
elaboration  of  the  plan  he  had  conceived  with  regard
to  Christ's  position  as  a  mediator  between  God  and
man.

[The  vision  was  entirely  spontaneous  and  unex-
pected. I  had  not  previously  given  any  attention  to
the  subject ;  nor  was  I  aware  that  a  similar  instruction
had  sometime  previously  been  given  to  my  colleague.

The  personages  I  beheld  in  my  vision  bore  no
resemblance  to  any  of  the  numerous  representations
of  the  apostles  made  by  painters  ;  but  I  was  far  from
being  in  a  sufficiently  lucid  condition  to  obtain  an
impression  of  their  appearance  so  vivid  and  distinct
as  to  enable  me,  as  usually  is  the  case,  to  make  a
drawing  of  them.  Neither  have  I  been  able,  with
anything  like  my  accustomed  accuracy,  to  reproduce
their  words.  The  tone  and  substance,  however,  are
faithfully  rendered.  The  tone  throughout  was  that
of  strong  indignation,  mingled  with  regret,  against
Paul ;  and  of  scorn  at  the  folly  of  Christendom  in
accepting  so  gross  and  palpable  a  perversion  of  the
teaching  of  Jesus  and  nature  of  God  as  that  involved
in  the  sacerdotal  doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement.]  l

1  2  Peter  iii.  15,  16  (an  epistle  of  exceedingly  doubtful  authority),
evidently  represents  a  desire  either  to  compose  or  to  ignore  this  feud
by  treating  the  difference  as  more  apparent  than  real.  The  above
utterance  impugns  the  genuineness  of  all  the  non-Pauline  Epistles  so
far  as  they  propound  this  tenet.

126  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!*

No.   XXXI.

CONCERNING   THE   MANICH^EANISM   OF   PAUL.1

AT  this  moment  I  hear  a  surge  of  waters.     Out  of
the  midst  of  them  a  voice  seems  to  speak  to
me.     This  is  what  it  says  : —

"  Many  years  before  Paul  wrote  there  arose  a  sect
called  the  Manichaeans.  The  founder  of  that  sect,
like  the  founder  of  the  Epicureans,  was  inspired  by
US  ;  but  they,  like  the  Epicureans,  understood  not
the  nature  of  sin.  The  founder  of  the  Manichaeans,
whom  we  call  Felix,  saw  this,  that  evil  is  the
result  of  creation  ;  but  his  disciples  understood  that
all  matter  is  evil.  In  this  alone  they  erred.  And
Paul,  following  his  reason,  but  uninspired,  perceived
only  the  doctrine  of  the  disciples.  It  is  true,  then,  as
the  founder  of  the  Manichaeans  saw,  that  evil  is  the
result  of  creation,  but  not  that  matter  is  evil.  He
who  among  you  possesses  the  most  vivid  imagination,
can  project  upon  the  retina  palpable  rings  of  his
thought.  Thus  it  is  with  Deity.  I  have  said  already
that  matter  is  the  intensification  of  Idea,  and  that
evil  is  the  result  of  materialisation.2  You  have  asked
me,  Why,  then,  did  God  create  ?  I  perceive  that
God  created  by  force  of  will  ;  and  that,  willing,  God
imparted  to  ever)-  thought  the  power  of  will  which,
but  for  the  limitation,  could  not  have  existed.  God,
therefore,  is  so  much  the  richer  by  the  will  of  the
thought  which  lie  projects/'

1  Paris,  July  24.  1877.     Spoken  in  trance.
*  Comp.  No.  XIX.  Part  2.

Concerning  the  Gospels,  127

No.   XXXII.

CONCERNING  THE  GOSPELS  ;   THEIR  ORIGIN  AND
COMPOSITION.1

I  AM  looking  at  the  inside  of  the  Serapeum  at
Alexandria.  The  temple  is  connected  with  a
library  which,  as  I  see  it,  is  still  there,  neither  dis-'
persed  nor  burnt,  but  filled  with  manuscripts, — mostly
rolls  upon  sticks.  I  see  a  council  of  many  men  sitting
at  a  table  in  the  room  of  the  library,  and  I  see  a
number  of  names,  as  Cleopatra,  Marcus  Antonius,
and  others.  This  is  called  the  second  library  of
Alexandria,  the  former  having  been  destroyed  under
Julius  Caesar.  The  nucleus  of  this  or.e  was  the  gift  of
Antony  to  Cleopatra,  who  added  to  it  and  improved
it  immensely,  till  it  contained  all  the  existing  litera-
ture of  the  world ;  and — why,  they  are  deliberately
concocting  Christianity  out  of  the  books  there !  and,
so  far  as  I  can  see,  the  Gospels  are  little  better
than  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  (historically,  I  mean), — ■
so  deliberately  are  they  making  up  the  new  religion
by  replanting  the  old  on  the  Jewish  system.

Write  down  these  names  and  the  dates  which  are
specially  shown  me.     Theophilus,  patriarch  of  Alex-

1  London,  November  6,  1881.  Spoken  in  trance.  It  was  wholly  inde-
pendent of  any  knowledge  or  prepossession  of  either  of  us, — the  subject
being  quite  new  to  us, — and  proved  on  subsequent  research,  while
going  far  beyond  history,  to  be  in  full  accordance  with  history  so  far  as
history  goes,  and  also  with  the  results  of  independent  and  candid  criti-
cism.    By  "history"  is  not  meant  ecclesiastical  tradition  or  invention.

12  8  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

andria,  and  Ambrosius.  A.D.  390,  B.C.  286.  This  last
is  the  date  at  which  the  library  was  first  of  all  got
together.  A.D.  390 1  is  the-date  of  the  chief  destruction
of  the  documents  out  of  which  the  new  religion  was
made.  If  they  could  be  recovered  we  should  have
absolute  proof  of  its  concoction  from  Hindu,  Persian,
and  other  originals  ; — the  interpolations,  extracts,  and
alterations  proving  this.  They  show,  too,  that  the
name  first  adopted  for  the  typical  man  was  more  like
Krishna,  and  that  Jesus  was  a  later  choice,  adopted
at  Jewish  suggestion,  in  order  to  suit  a  Jewish  hero.
The  system  was  long  under  formation,  and  it  took  all
that  time  to  perfect.2  Every  detail  of  the  Gospel
history  is  invented,  the  number  of  the  apostles,  and
all  the  rest.  Nothing  is  historical  in  the  sense
supposed.

I  see  the  Serapeum  destroyed ; — not  only  the  library
but  the  temple,  so  fearful  were  they  of  leaving
any  trace  of  ihe  concoction.  It  was  destroyed  by
Christians  at  the  instigation  especially  of  Theodo*us,
Ambrosius,  and  Theophilus.3  Their  motive  was  a
mixed  one,  each  of  the  leaders  having  a  different  aim.
The  object  of  the  concoctors  themselves  was  to
sustain  and  continue  the  ancient  faith  by  transplant-
ing it  to  a  new   soil,  and  engrafting  it  on  Judaism.

1  The  temple  was  destroyed  A.D.  389.    The  library  had  never  c*

to  exist,  the  Bruchium,  at  the  time  of  its  destruction,  having  overflowed
into   the    Serapeum.       The    remnant    was    far    exceeded   by  Ant
additions  from  Pergamos,  which  thus  became  the  virtual  nucleus.

2  There  is  an  ambiguity  here,  owing  to  the  date  of  the  completion  of
the  "concoction"  not  being  specified.

3  Theodosius  was  Emperor  of  the  eastern  division  of  the  Roman
Empire.     Ambrosius  was  Archbishop  of  Milan.

Concerning  the  Gospels.  129

The  object  of  Theophilus  was  to  make  the  new
religion  the  enemy  and  successor  of  the  old,  by
making  it  appear  to  have  an  independent  basis  and
origin.  Ambrose  destroyed  the  library  in  order  to
confute  the  Arians  by  leaving  it  to  appear  that
Christianity  had  an  origin  altogether  supernatural.
The  concoctors  themselves  did  not  intend  it  to  be
regarded  as  supernatural,  but  as  representing  the
highest  human.  And  they  accordingly  fixed  and
accumulated  upon  Jesus  all  that  had  been  told  of
previous  Christs, — Mithras,  Osiris,  Krishna,  Buddha,
and  others, — the  original  draft  containing  the  doctrine
of  the  transmigration  of  souls  most  explicitly  and
distinctly.1  The  concoction  was  undertaken  in  order
to  save  religion  itself  from  extinction  through  the
prevalence  of  materialism,  —  for  the  times  corre-
sponded in  this  respect  exactly  to  the  present.  And
the  plan  was  to  compose  out  of  all  the  existing
systems  one  new  and  complete,  representing  the
highest  possibilities  and  satisfying  the  highest  aspira-
tions of  humanity.

The  great  loss,  then,  is  not  that  of  the  first  but
that  of  the  second  library  of  Alexandria.  The
Serapeum  was  destroyed  by  Christians  in  order  to
prevent  the  human  origin  of  their  religion  from  being
ascertained.     The  object  was  to  have  it  believed  that

1  The  reason  for  the  exclusion  is  not  far  to  seek.  '  There  is  no
more  (birth  nor)  death  for  those  who  are  in  Christ.'  Transmigration
being  the  condition  of  man  unregenerate  only,  the  gospels — which
have  for  their  purpose  the  exhibition  of  Man  Regenerate — had  no  call
to  refer  to  the  previous  stages  of  his  evolution.  It  is  implied  in  the
account  of  his  birth  of  a  virgin,  as  see  Nos.  XXIII.,  XXIV.

130  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

it  all  centered  in  one  particular  actual  person,  and
was  not  collected  and  compiled  from  a  multiplicity  of
sources.

All  the  conversations  in  the  Gospels  were  fabricated
by  the  aid  of  various  books  in  order  to  illustrate  and
enforce  particular  doctrines.  I  cannot  recognise  the
language  of  many  of  the  ancient  manuscripts  used.
The  Latin  ones  which  I  see  are  all  in  capitals,  and
without  any  division  between  the  words,  so  that  they
look  like  one  long  word.

I  am  shown  the  actual  scene  of  the  destruction  of
the  library  and  dispersion  of  the  books.  There  is  a
dreadful  tumult.  The  streets  of  Alexandria  are  filled
with  mobs  of  people  shouting  and  hastening  to  the
spot.  They  do  not  know  the  rea  '^ject.  They  have
been  told  that  the  library  contains  the  devil's  books,
which,  if  allowed  to  remain,  will  be  the  means
destroying  Christianity.  The  noise  and  tumult  are
dreadful.  I  cannot  bear  it;  pray  recall  me,  it  hurts
ne  so.  It  is  extraordinary  how  exactly  alike  ihe  two
times  are  both  politically  and  religiously.  Everything
established  is  making  up  in  both  ;  and  that  which
comes  out  of  each  is  the  fuller  revelation  of  the  divine
Idea  of  Humanity.  All  works  for  us  and  the  new
revelation.  But  the  world  suffers  terribly  in  the
birth.  Afterwards  things  gradually  become  much
better.

***  In  explanation  of  the  method  of  this  recovery  it  may  be
stated  that,  according  to  occult  science,  every  event  or  circum-
stance which  has  taken  place  upon  the  planet,  has  an  ..
counterpart,  or  picture,  in  the  magnetic  light.     So  that  there  are

Concerning  the  Actual  Jesus.  131

actually  ghosts  of  events  as  well  as  of  persons.  These  magnetic
existences  are  the  Shades  or  Manes  of  past  times,  circumstances,
acts,  and  thoughts,  of  which  the  planet  has  been  the  scene,  and
they  can  be  conjured  and  evoked.  The  appearances  left  on  such
occasions  are  but  shadows  left  on  the  protoplasmic  mirror.
"This  magnetic  atmosphere,  or  astral  soul,  is  called  the  Anima
Mundi\  and  in  it  are  stored  up  all  the  memories  of  the  planet,
its  past  life,  its  history,  its  affections  and  recollections  of  physical
things.  The  adept  may  interrogate  this  phantom-world,  and  it
shall  speak  for  him.  It  is  the  cast-off  vestment  of  the  planet;
yet  it  is  living  and  palpitating,  for  its  very  fabric  is  spun  of
psychic  substance,  and  its  entire  parenchyma  is  magnetic." —
See  No.  XLV.  ;  *1so  "The  Perfect  Way,"  Lecture  V.  par  39
(R.  and  E.  editL  .,.  Concerning  the  recovery  of  the  individual
memory,  see  No.  XL.

No.  XXXIII.

CONCERNING  THE   ACTUAL  JESUS.1

I  AM  shown  the  Descent  from  the  Cross.  I  see
Jesus  carried  by  Joseph  of  Arimathea  to  his
house.  The  house  communicates  with  a  sepulchre ;
and  Jesus  is  carried  to  the  house  where  they  do  some-
thing to  revive  him  ;  for  he  has  swooned  rather  than
died.  The  clothes  are  placed  in  the  sepulchre,  but
not  Jesus.  I  see  a  rupture  of  the  pericardium,  but
no  fatal  injury  to  the  heart.  I  see  plainly  that  he  is
not  dead.  There  is  no  organic  lesion  ;  and  the  wound
heals  like  a  simple  wound,  without  suppuration,  and

1  London,  March  22,  1881.     Spoken  in  trance.     See  also  No.  XXIV.

132  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

by  incessant  bathing  with  water.  What  a  lovely
climate  it  is  there !  and  how  curious  that  there  should
have  been  a  Joseph  at  both  birth  and  crucifixion  !

I  am  now  shown  the  truth  respecting  the  birth  of
Jesus.  It  was  most  certainly  an  ordinary  birth.  I
see  that  quite  distinctly.  The  names  are  all  altered.
The  birth-name  of  Jesus  is  not  Jesus,  or  anything  like
it.  Nothing  is  real  as  I  havj  thought  it.  Very  little
happens  as  related.  The  losing  and  finding  in  the
temple,  and  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  are
allegories  of  which  the  signification  is  spiritual.  The
miracles  of  the  raising  of  the  ruler's  daughter  and
widow's  son  are  real  facts.  Jesus  saw  clairvoyantly
that  the  former  was  not  dead,  and  that  the  body  was
uninjured  by  disease,  so  that  the  soul  could  return  to
it.  For  disease  is  gradual  death,  and  when  death
occurs  through  it  the  soul  is  set  free  altogether.  In
violent  or  sudden  death  the  soul  is  slow  to  get  away,
and  the  separation  is  a  long  proa

In  his  own  case  Jesus  instructed  his  friends  before-
hand what  to  do.  Joseph  of  Arimathea  was  a  friend
of  Mary  Magdalen  ;  and  she  procured  for  him  the
requisite  balms.  I  see  her  running  with  them  through
the  sepulchre  to  the  house.  Jesus  was  not  organi-
cally dead  at  all,  for  the  heart  never  ceased  to  beat.
He  foreknew  all  the  particulars  of  the  event,  and
provided  accordingly.

Nor  is  Jesus  well  again  on  the  third  day.  He  is  at
least  ten  days  under  treatment  in  Joseph's  house.
Three  days  is  a  mystical  period,  having  no  relation
to  actual  time.      All  about   him   are  women  exce]  t

Concern  ing  the  A  ctual  Jesus,  133

one,  the  old  man.  Jesus'  name  begins  with  M.  I
do  not  see  the  rest  of  it.

The  perfected  adept  is  he  who  has  attained  in
himself  the  Philosopher's  Stone  of  a  spirit  absolutely
quiescent,  and  is  in  union  with  the  Divine  Will.
Being  without  ardour,  sympathy  and  compassion  are
for  him  but  other  names  for  Justice;  and,  incapable
of  anger,  his  temperament  is  always  cool  and  equable.
I  now  see  faults  in  Jesus  which  I  did  not  see  before.
I  mean  Jesus  as  he  actually  was,  and  not  as  he  is
depicted  in  the  Gospels.  They  are  faults  from  the
adept's  point  of  view.  I  am  shown  a  passion-flower
as  the  emblem  of  his  character.  He  sacrificed  him-
self for  others,  but  would  have  been  able  to  do  more
had  he  been  more  careful, — especially  in  respect  of
his  diet.  His  liability  to  give  way  continually  to
indignation  or  pity  prevented  him  from  getting
higher.  He  allowed  himself  to  be  drawn  too  much
out  of  himself  to  reach  the  highest  possible.

I  see  him  bidding  his  followers  good-bye.  It  is  on
a  hill  which  he  ascends,  and  he  disappears  from  their
view,  lost  in  cloud  or  mist.  He  now  becomes  a
hermit.  I  see  him  in  the  wilderness  alone  ;  and
there  he  attains  the  higher  life  which  constituted  his
true  ascension.

Jesus  was  able  to  influence  persons  at  a  distance
by  means  of  an  emanation  which  he  projected  from
himself;  so  that  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  be
dead  when  supposed  to  be  seen  by  Paul.

I  now  see  some  one  with  him  on  his  mountain.  It
is  John,  writing  down  the  Apocalypse  at  the  dictation

1 34  "  Clothed  with  the  SunT

of  Jesus.  Jesus  recollects  all  his  past  incarnations,
and  epitomises  them  in  the  Apocalypse,  which  is  the
history  of  his,  and  of  every  perfected  soul.  He  is
quite  an  old  man  at  this  time.

And  now  I  see  the  panther's  skin  of  Bacchos,  and
whence  Jesus  got  the  name  which  has  been  given  him
of  "  Rabbi  Ben  Panther,"  and  why  he  was  said  to  be
the  son  of  one  Panther.  It  is  a  play  on  Pan  and
thcos,  and  means  all  (he  gods.  The  panther's  skin
represented  the  raiment,  or  attributes,  of  all  the  gods,
with  which  Jesus,  as  a  "Son  of  God,"  was  held  to  be
endowed.

I  am  shown  that  there  is  but  little  of  real  value  in
the  Scriptures.  They  are  a  mass  of  clay,  comparatively
modern,  with  here  and  there  a  bit  of  gold.  The
angel  whom  I  saw  before,  and  who  told  us  to  burn
the  Bible,1  now  puts  it  in  the  fire,  and  there  cor:
few  pages  only  <>f  matter  which  is  original  and  divine.
All  the  rest  is  interpolation  or  alteration.  This
the  case  with  both  Old  Testament  and  New,  [saiah
and  the  prophet-,      [saiah  I   mixture.      I

all    fragments    from    various    sources,   just    thr
together.     The  book  of  Genesis  is  one  large  parable  ,
and  so  are  all  the  legends  o{  the  wanderings  and  wars
of   Israel.     All    is    mixed     up    with    fiction.      M
wrote  none  of  it.     And  similarly  with  all  the  books
of  the   Law  and   the   prophets.     All   are   made  up  in
this  manner.      Here  and  there  is  an  original
the  ancient   Revelation,  but  these  are  largely   inter-
spersed with  additions  and  embellishments,  commen-
1  In  a  vision  received  sometime  pre\  i

Concerning  the  Actual  Jesus.  135

taries,  and  applications  to  the  times  by  copyists  and
interpreters.  And  when  the  angel  told  us  to  put  the
Bible  in  the  fire,  he  meant  separate  the  gold  from  the
dross  and  clay.

As  for  the  gospels,  they  are  almost  entirely  para-
bolical. Religion  is  not  historical,  and  in  no  wise
depends  upon  past  events.  For,  faith  and  redemp
tion  do  not  depend  upon  what  any  man  did,  but  on
what  God  has  revealed.  Jesus  was  not  the  historical
name  of  the  initiate  and  adept  whose  story  is
related.  It  is  the  name  given  him  in  initiation.1
His  birth,  the  manner  of  it,  his  being  lost  and  found
by  his  parents  in  the  temple,  his  lying  three  days  in
the  tomb, — all  are  parabolic,  as  also  is  the  story  of
the  Ascension.  The  Scriptures  are  addressed  to  the
soul,  and  make  no  appeal  to  the  outer  senses.  The
whole  story  of  Jesus  is  a  mass  of  parables,  the  things
that  occurred  to  him  being  used  as  symbols.  Thus,  the
Crucifixion  represents  the  soul's  sufferings;  the  Resui-
rection  its  transmutation  ;  and  the  life  and  Ascension
are  a  prophecy  of  what  is  possible  to  man.

The  real  original  gospel  is  that  of  John.  The
others  came  long  afterwards,  and  all  were  written
long  after  the  time  of  Jesus.  Jesus  partly  wrote  the
Apocalypse  by  the  hand  of  John  as  he  sat  with  him
on  the  mountain,  and  partly  in  the  isle  of  Patmo  .
In  both  cases,  Jesus,  by  his  "  angel,"  inspired  John
with  his  visions.  This  was  many  years  after  the
"  Ascension,"  as  his  disappearance  on  the  hill  was
termed.     The  Apocalypse  was  rather  a  recovery  than

1  See  Part  II.,  XL,  Hymn  to  Phoibos,  v.  9.

136  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

an  original  composition  of  Jesus.  The  gospel  life  of
Jesus  is  made  up  of  the  lives  of  all  the  divine  teachers
before  him,  and  represents  the  best  the  world  had
then,  and  the  best  it  has  in  it  to  be.  And  it  is
therefore  a  prophecy.  The  recorded  life  of  Jesus
epitomised  all  the  teachers  before  him,  and  the
possibilities  of  mankind  some  day  to  be  realised.

The  "  beautiful  feet  of  the  messengers  on  the
mountains  "  are  the  first  rays  of  the  rising  sun  of  the
coming  salvation,  seen  by  the  watchers  from  the
spiritual  heights, — the  "shepherds  who  tend  their
flocks," — even  their  own  pure  hearts  and  thoughts.
They  it  is  who  see  from  the  "  hills  "  the  coming  God,
the  demonstration  of  the  divinity  that  is  in  humanity,
while  the  world  below  is  wrapped  in  darkness.

NO.  XXXIV.
CONCERNING  THE   PREVIOUS   LIVES   OF  JESUS.1

THIS  morning  between  sleeping  and  waking  I
saw  myself,  together  with  many  other  persons,
walking  with  Jesus  in  the  fields  round  about  Jer-
usalem, and  while  he  was  speaking  to  us.  a  man
approached,  who  looked  very  earnestly  upon  him.
And  Jesus  turned  to  us  and  said,  "This  man  whom
you  see  approaching  is  a  seer.  He  can  behold  the
past  lives  of  a  man  by  looking  into  his  face."     Then,

1  Paris,  February  7.  1SS0.

Concerning  the  Previous  Lives  of  Jesus,     137

the  man  being  come  up  to  us,  Jesus  took  him  by  the
hand  and  said,  "  What  readest  thou  ?  "  And  the  man
answered,  "I  see  thy  past,  Lord  Jesus,  and  the  ways
by  which  thou  hast  come."  And  Jesus  said  to  him,
"  Say  on."  So  the  man  told  Jesus  that  he  could  see
him  in  the  past  for  many  long  ages  back.  But  of  all
that  he  named,  I  remember  but  one  incarnation,  or,
perhaps,  one  only  struck  me,  and  that  was  Isaac.
And  as  the  man  went  on  speaking,  and  enumerating
the  incarnations  he  saw,  Jesus  waved  his  right  hand
twice  or  thrice  before  his  eyes,  and  said,  "  It  is
enough,"  as  though  he  wished  him  not  to  reveal
further.  Then  I  stepped  forward  from  the  rest  and
said,  "Lord,  if,  as  thou  hast  taught  us,  the  woman  is
the  highest  form  of  humanity,  and  the  last  to  be
assumed,  how  comes  it  that  thou,  the  Christ,  art  still
in  the  lower  form  of  man  ?  Why  comest  thou  not  to
lead  the  perfect  life,  and  to  save  the  world  as  woman  ?
For  surely,  thou  hast  attained  to  womanhood."  And
Jesus  answered,  "  I  have  attained  to  womanhood,  as
thou  sayest ;  and  already  have  I  taken  the  form  of
woman.  But  there  are  three  conditions  under  which  the
soul  returns  to  the  man's  form;  and  they  are  these:  —

"  1st.  When  the  work  which  the  Spirit  proposes  to
accomplish  is  of  a  nature  unsuitable  to  the  female  form.

"  2nd.  When  the  Spirit  has  failed  to  acquire,  in  the
degree  necessary  to  perfection,  certain  special  attri-
butes of  the  male  character.

"  3rd.  When  the  Spirit  has  transgressed,  and  gone
back  in  the  path  of  perfection,  by  degrading  the
womanhood  it  had  attained.

138  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!'

"  In  the  first  of  these  cases  the  return  to  the  male
form  is  outward  and  superficial  only.  This  is  my
case.  I  am  a  woman  in  all  save  the  body.  But  had
my  body  been  a  woman's,  I  could  not  have  led  the
life  necessary  to  the  work  I  have  to  perform.  I  could
not  have  trod  the  rough  ways  of  the  earth,  nor  have
gone  about  from  city  to  city  preaching,  nor  have
fasted  on  the  mountains,  nor  have  fulfilled  my  mission
of  poverty  and  labour.  Therefore  am  I — a  woman
— clothed  in  a  man's  body  th?t  I  may  be  enabled  to
do  the  work  set  before  me.

"  The  second  case  is  that  of  a  soul  who,  having
been  a  woman  perhaps  ma  ly  times,  has  acquired
more  aptly  and  readily  the  higher  qualities  of  woman-
hood than  the  lower  qualities  of  manhood.  Such  a
soul  is  lacking  in  energy,  iM  resoluteness,  in  that  par-
ticular attribute  of  the  Spirit  which  the  prophet
ascribes  to  the  Lord  v  h  n  he  says,  '  The  Lord  is  a
Man  of  war.1  Theref'/'C  the  soul  is  put  back  into  a
man's  form  to  acquis  the  qualities  yet  lacking.

"The  third  oa>*£  is  that  o(  the  backslider,  who,
having  nearly  attained  perfection, — perhaps  even
touched  it, — degrades  and  soils  his  white  robe,  and
is  put  back  into  the  lower  form  again.  These  are
the  common  tor  there  are  few  women  who  are

worthy  to  be  women."

I  was  distinctly  and    posith  -.red    that  the

incident   thus   shown    me   was   one  that   act;.
curred,  and  that   1  had  borne  part   in  it,  though  ne
record  of  it  survives.

Concerning  Ike  Holy  Family.  139

No.  XXXV.

CONCERNING  THE  HOLY  FAMILY.1

THERE  were  two  subjects,  on  which  I  was  de-
siring light,  the  explanation  of  which  came  to
me  in  a  curious  manner.  They  were  (1)  The  real  sig-
nification of  the  gospel  account  of  the  parentage  and
childhood  of  Jesus,  which  we  have  seen  reason  to  re-
gard as  mystical  and  unliteral ;  and  (2)  The  faculty
of  divination  by  means  of  the  crystal  or  cup.  I  had
just  awoke,  and  was  on  the  point  of  drinking  my
usual  cup  of  coffee,  when  I  was  astonished  by  seeing
in  the  liquid  some  words,  while  at  the  same  instant
there  was  flashed  upon  my  mind  a  full  view  and  ex-
planation of  the  meaning  of  the  Holy  Family ;  and
this  is  what  I  received.

"This  is2  the  divining  cup  of  Joseph,  who  repre-
sented the  spiritual  Egypt  of  Israel's  infancy.  Egypt
was  the  spiritual  father  of  Jesus,  his  spiritual  mother,
Mary,  being  Israel's  pure  intuition  of  God,  and  "  virgin
daughter  of  Sion."3    Being  of  Jewish  birth,  Jesus  went

1  Paris,  October  27,  1878.

2  Meaning,  of  course,  answers  to  ;  the  effect  of  a  bright  surface,  as
that  of  a  crystal,  disc,  or  fluid,  being  so  to  magnetise  the  sensitive  as
to  render  objective  any  images  or  ideas  previously  subjective  whether  in
his  own  or  in  another's  magnetic  atmosphere,  or  in  that  of  the  planet,
this  last  being  the  anima  mundi.     See  note  at  end  of  No.  XXXII.

In  this  aspect  Mary  is  the  soul  collective  instead  of  individual  only.

140  '"  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

into  Egypt  to  be  initiated  in  the  sacred  mysteries  of
the  country  from  which,  through  Moses,  the  Israelites
originally  obtained  their  religion.  Of  that  religion
and  those  mysteries,  Jesus,  as  a  Christ,  was  the  pro-
duct. For  their  object  was  the  production  of  a  man
so  perfected  through  the  development  of  his  mind  and
spirit,  as  to  realise  the  divine  idea  of  humanity.  As
a  full  initiate  and  adept,  a  hierarch  or  "master"  of
the  mysteries,  Jesus  returned  to  Judaea  to  fulfil  his
mission,  receiving  at  the  hands  of  John — a  prophet  of
the  Esscnes,  who  were  followers  of  the  same  mysteries
— his  baptism  of  the  Spirit.

Joseph,  therefore,  represents  Egypt, — not,  however,
as  denoting  the  body,1  but  the  mind, — and  is  an  old
man  because  Egypt  was  the  senior  of  Israel,  and  also
because,  in  the  evolution  of  man,  the  mind  precedes
the  soul  in  manifestation.  And  in  having  him  lor
his  foster-father,  Jesus  is  set  forth  as  adopting  the
wisdom  and  elder  religion  of  Egypt,  to  incorporate
them  with  the  Jewish.  Joseph,  moreover,  in  being
elderly  and  a  widower,-  represents  Eg)  pt  in  respect  of
its  past  youth  and  lost  prime.  That  he  is  not  shown
as  the  true  spouse  of  Mary,  or  real  father  of  her  son,
is  because,  though  the  mind  may  aid  these  by  its
knowledge  and  wisdom,  the  true  spouse  o\  the  soul
is  the  Divine  Spirit,  who  is  thus  the  true  father  of  the

1  See  Part  II.,  XIII.,  Hymn  to  the  Planet-God  (6).
*  According  to  Christian  tradition.

Concerning  the  Metempsychosis  or  Avatar.      141
No.  XXXVI.

CONCERNING  THE   METEMPSYCHOSIS   OR  AVATAR.1

METEMPSYCHOSIS  means,  in  its  chief  aspect,
not  transmigration  which  is  of  souls,  but  the
vivification  or  illumination  of  a  soul  already  incarnate
by  the  spirit  of  a  preceding  "  angel."  Thus,  the
soul  of  Jesus  was  overshadowed  by  the  angel  of
Moses.

The  Word,  Logos,  or  Adonai — for  they  are  the  same
— speaks  in  the  spirit  of  one  or  the  other  of  the  Gods
of  the  Seven  Spheres.  He  spoke  through  the  Spirit,  '
or  God,  of  the  Fourth  Sphere — Dionysos  or  Iacchos —
to  Noah,  Moses,  and  Jesus.  Nevertheless  Jesus  was
not  an  incarnation  of  either  of  these,  and  when  he
said,  "  Your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my  day,"
he  spoke,  in  one  sense,2  of  his  own  former  birth  as
Isaac.  For  Jesus  was  a  transmigration  or  re-incarna-
tion of  the  soul  of  Isaac,  and  the  two  names  are
occultly  related.

The  metempsychosis  constitutes  a  planetary  Avatar.
The  number  of  these  is  variously  stated  to  be  ten
and  twelve.  Both  are,  in  a  sense,  right.  There  are  ten
such  Avatars  and  twelve  angels,  or  messengers,  for  the

1  London,  March  1881.     Spoken  in  trance.

2  Another  sense  was  Abraham's  recognition  of  the  doctrine  implied
by  the  term  "  Christ."  In  their  profoundest  and  most  interior  meati-
ing  the  Patriarchs  represent  the  component  elements  of  the  planetary
divinity.

142  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

first  and  last  are  dual  or  "twins."  The  pair  at  the
first  Avatar  were  "Eve"  and  "Adam," — for  this  also
is  one  sense  of  the  allegory.  The  Avatars  and  their
angels  have  their  corresponding  signs  in  the  Zodiac,
the  double  ones  being  represented  by  the  double  signs
Gemini  and  Pisces.  The  latter  Avatar,  now  at  hand,
will  introduce  Aquarius,  "the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man
in  Heaven."  Heracles  is  an  epitome  of  the  "  twelve
Avatars  of  the  Lord."  Each  of  his  labours— the
labours,  that  is,  of  the  soul — represents  a  divine
operation,  and  constitutes  an  Avatar,  while  its  sign
in  the  Zodiac  corresponds  to  the  nature  of  the
Labour.  These  signs  represent  the  twelve  gates  of
the  Holy  City,  or  perfected  kosmos,  and  the
twelve  mysteries  of  the  greater  initiation  ;  and  the
gates  are  spoken  of  as  pearls,  because  pearls  are
found  at  the  sea-bottom,  and  in  oysters,  which  are
difficult  to  get  and  hard  to  open  ;  and  the  sea
represents  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  soul.  In  order
to  obtain  these  twelve  mysteries,  one  must  be  at
great  labour  and  trouble,  risking  one's  life  in  diving
for  them,  going  down  into  the  sea  naked  and
stripped  of  all  things,  finding  them  in  obscurity  and
darkness,  and  when  they  are  brought  up,  requiring  a
keen  blade  to  open  them.

The  "twelve  apostles"  are  types  of  these  a
and  mysteries.  John  represents  the  dual  messenger  to
come.  And  by  a  metempsychosis  corresponding  to
that  by  which  the  spirit  of  Moses  instructed  Jesus,
the  spirit  of  John  will  instruct  the  angel  of  the  new
Avatar.     This  spirit  is  dual.     For  John    represents

?

Concerning  the  Metempsychosis  or  Avatar.     143

both  the  Virgin  and  himself.  This  is  the  "  mother  "
referred  to  by  Jesus  at  his  crucifixion.  John  comprises
the  feminine  as  well  as  the  masculine  element.  His
inspiring  spirit  is  the  same  as  that  of  Daniel.  The
spirit  that  informed  Noah,  Moses,  and  Jesus  is
5  / y  Dionysos  (Jehovah  Nissi),  the  God  of  the  planet.
And  the  spirit  which  informed  Daniel  and  John,  and
will  inform  the  angel  of  this  century,  is  Michael,
who  represents  Zeus  and  Hera,  or  the  planet
Jupiter.1

That  which  comes  back  as  a  messenger  or  angel,
is  not  the  personal  soul  of  the  individual  man
employed  ;  for  that  has  become  transmuted  into
spirit.  Nor  does  the  spirit  itself  which  was  in  that
soul  become  re-incarnate.  That  which  comes  is  the
overshadowing,  informing  spirit  who  influenced  and
spoke  through  the  man  in  his  lifetime,  and  the  man
himself  also,  who  has  become  an  angel,  or  pure
spirit,  and  who  no  longer  needs  the  body.  So  that
his  return  is  voluntary,  and  his  coming  an  Avatar.
The  new  Avatar  will  be  of  the  double  or  over-
shadowing spirit  of  Daniel  and  John,  as  well  as  the
spirit  which  was  in  those  men.  For,  owing  to  the
union  between  them,  the  two — the  man's  spirit  and
the  divine  spirit — are  so  much  one  as  to  be  scarcely
distinguishable ;    and   the  God    speaks    through    the

1  See  Daniel  x.  21  and  xii.  I,  and  Apoc.  xii.  7.  That  Michael  is
by  many  regarded  as  the  angel  of  the' sun,  is  probably  from  their
taking  him  to  be  the  "angel  standing  in  the  sun"  of  Apoc.  xix.
17.  But  even  so,  the  position  would  not  imply  more  than  a  temporary
presidency.

144  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

man's  spirit  It  is  as  a  tube  within  a  tube.  God
speaks  through  the  Logos,  the  Logos  through  an
Elohc,  and  the  Elohe  through  the  perfected  spirit  of
a  former  prophet.  But  of  this  last  it  is  a  metempsy-
chosis, not  a  transmigration  or  re-incarnation.  That
is,  the  spirit  returning  informs  the  spirit  of  one
already  incarnate,  and  who,  like  John  the  Baptist,
may  be  thus  used  without  being  himself  regenerate
and  *  in  the  kingdom  of  God."

No.  XXXVII

CONCERNING  THE  M  >N  OF  THE  CHRIST.1

THE  Christs  are  above  all  things  nicdia,  and  the
various  descriptions  they  gave  of  their  office —
such  as  "lam  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,"  "I
am  the  door,"  and  the  like — referred  not  to  themselves
at  all,  but  to  the  Spirit  who  spoke  through  them.
Jesus,  when  questioned  on  this  very  subject,  said
plainly,  "The  words  which  I  speak  unto  you  I  speak-
not  of  myself;  but  the  Father  which  dwelleth  in  me.
he  doeth  the  works."  Jesus,  then,  spoke  as  he  was
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  was  no  other  than  a
clear  glass  through  which  the  divine  glory  shone  [As
it  is  written,  "  And  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as
of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and
truth  "      Mow,    he  Only  Begotten  is  not  mortal  man,

1  London,  1SS1.     Received  in  sleep.

Concerning  the  Aion  of  the  Christ.       145

but  he  who  has  been  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father
from  all  eternity,  even  the  Word,  the  Maker,  the
Speaker,  the  Manifestor.]  It  was  this  Holy  Spirit
which  descended  upon  Jesus  at  his  baptism,  and
dwelt  in  him  for  the  time  of  his  sojourn  upon  earth,
speaking  through  him  and  controlling  him ;  while
he,  on  his  part,  so  lived  as  to  bring  all  his  personal
will  into  oneness  with  that  Spirit.

The  Spirit  answers  to  the  Essence,  the  Father,  and
the  Word.  Of  these,  the  first  is  one  of  the  seven
spirits,  or  divine  flames,  of  universal  Divinity.  The
second  is  the  angel,  or  God,  of  the  planet,  and  is  the
^Eon  of  the  Christ.  The  third  is  the  Christ.  They
are  respectively  "  the  spirit,  the  water,1  and  the
blood."  The  Father  and  the  Word  may  therefore
be  said  to  be  one  ;  for  by  the  Word  the  Father  is
manifest,  and — in  the  microcosm — the  Word  is  the
Father  manifested.

The  greatest  hierarch — he,  that  is,  who  has  the
most  perfect  control  over  Nature — is  not  only  a  man
of  many  incarnations,  but  has  obtained  from  God  the
greatest  and  rarest  of  gifts, — that  of  being  a  medium
for  the  Highest.  Such  a  one  is  the  yEon,2  and  has
what  is  called  the  "  double  portion."  Elisha  craved
and  received  this  grace.  "  Where  now  is  the  God  of
Elijah?"  he  cried,  when    endeavouring  to  work  his

1  A  term  which,  as  here  used,  implies  also  the  "mother,"  "  water"
denoting  especially  the  substance  or  feminine  principle,  as  distinguished
from  the  energy  or  masculine  principle.

2  The  person  who  receives  the  Alow  being  called  an  iHon,  as  theper«
son  who  manifests  the  Christ  is  called  a  Christ.

1 46  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim.*9

first  miracle ;  and  he  besought  Elijah  that  a  portion
of  his  double1  might  rest  upon  him.  For  Elijah  had
so  transmuted  his  soul  into  spirit  that  it  was  doubled,
and  a  portion  of  this  he  bestowed  on  Elisha.  Such
an  ^Eon  it  was  that  descended  upon  Jesus,  to  quit
him  at  the  final  moment.  Hence  the  exclamation,
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "

No.  XXXVIII.
CONCERNING  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  GRACE.2

ONE  of  the  most  dangerous  mysteries  to  place  in
the  hands  of  the  vulgar  is  that  of  the  doctrine  of
grace.  When  once  union  has  been  accomplished  be-
tween the  human  and  the  divine  wills,  there  is  grace.
And  the  man  under  grace  cannot  sin  mortally.
Conformity  between  the  human  and  the  divine  wills
is  the  condition  of  salvation,  and  salvation  is  not
forfeited  through  any  specific  act.  unless  such  act  be
wilful  and  indicate  a  condition  of  rebellion.

Of  a  man  under  grace,  David  is  a  type.  1 1  is  heart
was  right  with  God  ;  his  intuition  was  un fallen.  So
that  even  his  many  and  grievous  sins  did  not,  and
could  not,  alienate  him  from  God.  The  man  who  is
deliberately  in  opposition  to  the  divine  will  is  in  far
greater  danger  than  the  man  who,  having  a  true  in-
tuition, sins  more  flagranti}-.     It  is  not  by  a  specific

1  This  is  not  the  magnetic  phantom  ordinarily  so-called.
■  London,  December  1SS0.     Spoken  in  trance.

Concerning  the  "  Four  Atmospheres"     147

act,  or  many  specific  acts,  that  the  soul  is  destroyed ;
but  by  a  state  of  heart  in  constant  opposition  to
the  divine  will.  Hence  the  axiom  of  the  Calvinist,
"  If  you  are  under  grace  you  cannot  sin," — that  is,
mortally.

*V*  Whence  one  reason  for  the  appellation  "Son  of  David"
applied  to  the  Christ.  The  man  must  first  be  "under  grace"
before  he  can  become  regenerate.  It  is  an  indispensable  step
in  his  soul's  progress.  Wherefore  the  latter  is  said  to  be  the
son  of  the  former.

No.  XXXIX.

CONCERNING  THE   "FOUR  ATMOSPHERES."1

THE  earthly  mind  (anima  bnita)  is  that  part  of
man  which  contains  his  material  memory,
abilities,  affections,  cares,  acquirements,  and  the
images  bred  of  his  associations  in  each  particular
incarnation.  This  mind  is  shed  with  the  body  and
shade,  and  is — as  it  were — an  individual  in  itself.  It
inhabits  the  astral  sphere  and  cannot  get  beyond  it ;
nor  does  it  ever  return  to  earth  (embodied),  but  dwells
perhaps  for  many  centuries,  in  the  magnetic  light,
which  it  takes  for  heaven,  seeking  its  own  affinities
and  frequenting  the  places  and  persons  familiar  to  it.
But  the  soul — or  anima  divina,  which  is  the  true  man —
has  another  destiny  than  this.     It  leaves  its  body  on

1  London,  August  1881.     Received  in  sleep.

1 48  *  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

earth,  its  shade  and  its  earthly  mind  in  the  astral
sphere,  and  mounts  to  its  own  proper  higher  region,
until  the  time  comes  for  it  either  to  pass  into  Nirvana,
or  to  become  again  incarnate.  The  soul  retains  the
celestial  memory  ; — that  memory  only  in  which  lives
such  of  its  past  as  is  worthy  to  live,  and  is  not  of  an
ephemeral  nature, — its  knowledges,  virtues,  and  true
loves.  The  only  anections,  therefore,  which  live
eternally  are  those  of  the  soul, — those  which  have
struck  deep  into  the  man  and  made  part  of  his  in-
most being.  The  loves  of  the  mere  body  or  earthly
mind  die  with  these,  and  form  no  part  of  the  per-
manent man.  True  it  is  that  some  souls  are  retained
in  their  phantoms  for  a  time  more  or  less  long,  not
being  pure — or,  rather,  not  strong — enough  to  mount
higher.  But  being  in  the  astral  sphere  they  cannot
see  beyond  it,  and — like  the  astral  phantom — believe
they  are  at  their  journey's  end.  The  larva,  or  shade,
is  not  the  same  as  the  phantom  seen  by  the  ordinary
lucid.  For  the  two  are  separable,  and  the  shade
occupies  a  yet  lower  atmosphere.  After  a  little  while,
moreover,  the  shade  consumes  away  and  disappears;
but  the  phantom  with  which  the  lucid  converses,  re-
mains as  strong  and  individual  as  ever,  it  may  be  for
centuries.  For  not  only  the  recently  dead,  but  some
who  lived  and  died  before  the  Christian  era,  have
been  evoked  and  conversed  with,  and  these  are
not  mere  reflects  (like  the  purely  astral  entities  which
are  emanations  from  the  living),  since  they  reason  and
remember,  and  give  proofs  of  their  identity.  The
ordinary  lucid  obtains  access  to  them  only  because  he

Concerning  the  "Four  Atmospheres"     149

is  himself  in  the  astral  when  in  the  lucid  condition,
and  sees,  therefore,  only  what  is  there.  To  enter  the
heavenly  sphere,  and  to  come  into  communion  with
souls,  a  regenerated  state  is  necessary.  Now,  the
sphere  entered  depends,  not  alone  on  the  lucid,  but
also  on  the  magnetiser1  and  the  circle  present  at  the
experience.  There  are  four  atmospheres  surrounding
us,  and  only  in  the  highest  of  these  do  we  find  the
freed  soul.  Each  sphere  is  the  counterpart  of  each
portion  of  man,  and  each  has  its  system  and  its  sun.
Interior  knowledge,  earnest  aspiration,  and  purity  of
thought  and  life,  are  the  keys  by  which  alone  can  be
opened  the  gates  of  the  inmost  and  highest  sphere.
The  lowest  is  enlightened  by  the  material  sun.  It  is
that  of  the  present  life  of  the  body.  The  next  is
enlightened  by  the  astral  or  magnetic  light ;  and  it  is
that  of  the  sideral  body  or  perisoul.  The  next  is
that  of  the  soul,  and  it  is  enlightened  by  the  spiritual
sun.  And  the  highest  is  the  immediate  presence  of
the  Lord  God,  where  is  the  ';  great  white  throne  "  and
the  company  of  the  "virgins."  Now,  the  "virgins"
are  souls  which,  being  perfectly  spiritualised,  retain
no  taint  of  materiality.2

1  This  is  not  necessarily  a  corporeal,  or  even  an  extraneous,  being,
but  may  be  the  spirit  of  the  lucid  himself.

2  See  Apoc.  xiv.  4,  where  they  are  called  virgins  in  virtue  of  their
having  overcome  the  need  of  sexual  relations  prior  to  their  final  incar-
nations as  in  No.  XXIV.,  par.  4.  The  term  ''women"  was  some-
times used  as  a  general  term  for  things  material.  See  also  "  Dreams
and  Dream-Stories,"  No.  IX.  /

150  "  Clothed  with  the  Sztn"

No.  XL.

CONCERNING  THE  HEREAFTER.1

WHEN  a  man  parts  at  death  with  his  material
body,  that  of  him  which  survives  is  divisible
into  three  parts,  the  anima  divina,  or.  as  in  the
Hebrew,  Neshamah  ;  the  anima  brnta,  or  Ruach,
which  is  the  persona  of  the  man  ;  and  the  shade,
or  Nephcsh,  which  is  the  lowest  mode  of  soul  sub-
stance. In  the  great  majority  of  persons  the  con-
sciousness is  gathered  up  and  centered  in  the  anima
bniiay  or  Ruach  ;  in  the  few  wise  it  is  polarised  in  the
anima  divina.  Now,  that  part  of  man  which  pa-
through,  or  transmigrates, — the  process  whereof  is
called  by  the  Hebrews  Gilgal  Neshamoth, — is  the
anima  divina,  which  is  the  immediate  receptacle  of
the  deific  Spirit.  And  whereas  there  is  in  the  world
nothing  save  the  human,  actual  or  potential,  the
Neshamah  subsists  also  in  animals,  though  only  as
a  mere  spark,  their  consciousness  being  therefore
rudimentary  and  diffuse.  It  is  the  Neshamah  which
finally  escapes  from  the  world  and  is  redeemed  into
eternal  life.  The  anima  bmta,  or  earthly  mind,  is
that  part  of  man  which  retains  all  earthly  and  local
memories,  reminiscent  affections,  cares  and  personali-

1  London,  July  1SS1.  Received  in  sleep,  in  timely  and  satisfactory
solution  of  sundry  perplexing  experiences  ;  and  subsequently  found  to
be  a  concise  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Kabala.

Concerning  the  Hereafter.  1 5 1

ties  of  the  world  or  planetary  sphere,  and  bears  his
family  or  earth-name.  After  death  this  anima  bruta,
or  Ruach,  remains  in  the  "lower  Eden,"  within  sight
and  call  of  the  magnetic  earth-sphere.  But  the
anima  divina,  or  Neshamah, — the  name  of  which
is  known  only  to  God, — passes  upwards  and  con-
tinues its  evolutions,  bearing  with  it  only  a  small
portion,  and  that  the  purest,  of  the  outer  soul,  or
mind.  This  anima  divina  is  the  true  man.  It  is  not
within  hail  of  the  magnetic  atmosphere ;  and  only  on
the  rarest  and  most  solemn  occasions  does  it  return  to
the  planet  unclothed.  The  astral  shade,  the  Nephesh,
is  dumb  ;  the  earthly  soul,  the  anima  bruta,  or  Ruach,
speaks  and  remembers;  the  divine  soul,  the  Neshamah,
which  contains  the  divine  light,  neither  returns  nor
communicates,  that  is,  in  the  ordinary  way.  That
which  the  anima  bruta  remembers,  is  the  history  of
one  incarnation  only,  because  it  is  part  of  the  astral
man,  and  the  astral  man  is  renewed  at  every  incarna-
tion of  the  Neshamah.  But  very  advanced  men
become  re-incarnate,  not  on  this  planet,  but  on  some
other  nearer  the  sun.  The  anima  bruta  has  lived  but
once,  and  will  never  be  re-incarnate.  It  continues  in
the  "  lower  Eden,"  a  personality  in  relation  to  the
earth,  and  retaining  the  memories,  both  good  and
bad,  of  its  one  past  life.  If  it  have  done  evil,  it
suffers  indeed,  but  is  not  condemned  ;  if  it  have  done
well,  it  is  happy,  but  not  beatified.  It  continues  in
thought  its  favourite  pursuits  of  earth,  and  creates  for
itself  houses,  gardens,  flowers,  books,  and  so  forth,
out  of  the  astral  light.     It  remains  in  this  condition

152  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun*

more  or  loss  strongly  defined,  according  to  the  per-
sonality it.  I  id  acquired,  until  the  anivia  divina,  one
of  whose  temples  it  was,  has  accomplished  all  its
avatars.  Then,  with  all  the  other  eaithly  souls  be-
longing to  that  divine  soul,  it  is  drawn  up  into  the
celestial  Eden,  or  upper  heaven,  and  returns  into  the
essence  of  the  Neshamah.  But  all  of  it  does,  not
return;  only  the  good  memories;  the  bad  sink
to  the  lowest  stratum  of  the  astral  light,  where
they  disintegrate.  For,  if  the  divine  soul  were
permanently,  in  its  perfected  state,  to  retain  the
memories  of  all  its  evil  doings,  its  misfortunes,
its  earthly  griefs,  its  earthly  loves,  it  would  not
be  perfectly  happy.  Therefore,  only  those  loves  and
memories  return  to  the  Neshamah,  which  have  pene-
trated the  earthly  soul  sufficiently  to  reach  the  divine
soul,  and  to  make  part  of  the  man.  It  is  said  that
all  marriages  are  made  in  Heaven.  This  means  that
all  true  love  unions  are  made  in  the  celestial  within
the  man.  The  mere  affections  of  the  anima  brutazre
evanescent,  and  belong  only  to  it.  When  this,  the
Ruach,  is  interrogated,  it  can  speak  only  of  one  life,
for  it  has  lived  but  one.  Of  that  one  it  retains  all  the
memories  and  all  the  affections.  If  these  have  been
strong,  it  remains  near  those  persons  whom  especially
it  loved,  and  overshadows  them.  A  single  Neshamah
may  have  as  many  of  these  former  selves  in  the
astral  light,  as  a  man  may  have  changes  of  raiment.
But  when  the  divine  soul  is  perfected,  and  about  to
be  received  into  "the  Sun/'  or  Nirvana,  she  indraws
all  these  past  selves,  and  possesses  herself  of  their

Concerning  the  Hereafter,  153

memories  ;  but  only  of  the  worthy  parts  of  these,
and  such  as  will  not  deprive  her  of  eternal  calm.
In  "  the  planets,"  the  soul  forgets  ;  in  "the  suns,"  she
remembers.  For,  in  memorid  ceterna  erit  Justus}
Not  until  a  man  has  accomplished  his  regeneration,
and  become  a  son  of  God,  a  Christ,  can  he  have  these
memories  of  his  past  lives.  Such  memories  as  a  man,
on  the  upward  path,  can  have  of  his  past  incarnations,
are  by  reflection  only  ;  and  the  memories  are  not  of
events  usually,  but  of  principles  and  truths,  and  habits
formerly  acquired.  If  these  memories  relate  to
events,  they  are  vague  and  fitful,  because  they  are
reflections  from  the  overshadowing  of  his  former
selves  in  the  astral  light.  For  the  former  selves — the
deserted  temples  of  the  anima  divina — frequent  her
sphere  and  are  attracted  towards  her,  especially  under
certain  conditions.  From  them  she  learns  through
the  intermediary  of  the  genius,  or  "  moon,"  who  lights
up  the  camera  obscura  of  the  mind,  and  reflects  on  its
tablet  the  memories  cast  by  the  overshadowing  past.
The  anima  bruta,  or  Ruach,  seems  to  itself  to  progress,
because  it  has  a  vague  sense  that  sooner  or  later  it
will  be  lifted  to  higher  spheres.  But  of  the  method
of  this  it  is  ignorant,  because  it  can  only  know  the
celestial  by  union  with  it.  The  learning  which  makes
it  seem  to  itself  to  progress  is  acquired  by  reflected
soul-rays  coming  from  the  terrestrial.  Advanced
men  on  the  earth  assist  and  teach  the  astral  soul,
and  hence  its  fondness  for  their  spheres.  It  learns
by  reflected  intellectual  images,  or  thoughts.  The
1  Ps.  cxii.  6,

154  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

Ruach  is  right  when  it  says  it  is  immortal.  For
the  better  part  of  it  will  in  the  end  be  absorbed
into  the  Neshamah.  But  if  one  interrogate  a  Ruach
of  even  two  or  three  centuries  old,  it  seldom  knows
more  than  it  knew  in  its  earth-life,  unless,  indeed,
it  gain  fresh  knowledge  from  its  interrogator.  The
reason  why  some  communications  are  astral,  and  others
celestial,  is  simply  that  some  persons — the  greater
number — communicate  by  means  of  the  anima  brut  a
in  themselves;  and  others — the  few  purified — by  means
of  their  anima  divina.  For,  like  attracts  like.  The
earthly  souls  of  animals  are  rarely  met  with  ;  they
come  into  communion  with  animals  rather  than  with
man,  unless  an  affection  between  a  man  and  an
animal  have  been  very  strong.  If  a  man  would  meet
and  recognise  his  beloved  in  Nirvana,  he  must  make
his  affection  one  of  the  Neshamah,  not  of  the  Ruach.
There  arc  many  degrees  of  love.  True  love  is  stronger
than  a  thousand  deaths  ;  for,  though  one  die  a  thou-
sand times,  a  single  love  may  yet  perpetuate  itself
past  every  death  from  birth  to  birth,  growing  and
culminating  in  intensity  and  might.

Now,  all  these  three,  Nephesh,  Ruach,  and  Nes-
hamah, are  discrete  modes  of  one  and  the  same
universal  being,  which  is  at  once  life  and  substance,
and  is  instinct  with  consciousness,  inasmuch  as  it  is,
under  whatever  mode,  Holy  Spirit.  Wherefore,  there
inheres  in  them  all  a  divine  potency.  Evolution,
which  is  the  manifestation  oi  that  which  is  inherent,
is  the  manifestation  of  this  potency.     The  first  formu-

Concerning  the  Hereafter.  155

lation  of  this  inherency,  above  the  plane  of  the
material,  is  the  Nephesh,  this  being  the  soul  by  which
are  impelled  the  lower  and  earlier  forms  of  life.
It  is  the  "moving"  soul  that  breathes  and  kindles.
The  next — the  Ruach — is  the  "  wind  "  that  rushes
forth  to  vivify  the  mind.  Higher,  because  more
inward  and  central,  is  the  Neshamah,  which,  borne  on
the  bosom  of  the  Ruach,  is  the  immediate  receptacle
of  the  Divine  particle,  and  without  which  this  cannot
be  individualised  and  become  an  indiffusible  per-
sonality. Both  the  "  wind "  and  the  "  flame "  are
spirit ;  but  the  wind  is  general,  the  flame  particular.
The  wind  fills  the  house;  the  flame  designates  the
person.  The  wind  is  the  Divine  Voice  resounding  in
the  ear  of  the  Apostle  and  passing  away  where  it
listeth;  the  flame  is  the  Divine  Tongue  uttering
itself  in  the  word  of  the  Apostle.  Thus,  then,  in  the
soul  impersonal  are  perceived  the  breath  and  afflatus
of  God  ;  but  in  the  soul  personal  is  the  formulate  and
express  utterance  of  God.  Now,  both  of  Nephesh
and  Ruach,  that  which  is  gathered  up  and  endures  is
Neshamah.

156  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

No.  XLI.

CONCERNING   THE   TRUE  EGO.1

[This  Illumination  followed  upon  a  meditation  on  the  following
passage  from  G.  H.  Lewes  :  "The  evolution  of  organisms,  like
the  evolution  of  crystals,  or  of  islands  and  continents,  is  deter-
mined, first,  by  laws  inherent  in  the  substance  evolved  ;
secondly,  by  relations  to  the  medium  in  which  the  evolution
takes  place."]

r  I  ^HERE  is  a  law  inherent  in  the  primordial
-L  substance  of  all  matter  which  obliges  all  things
to  evoke  after  the  same  mode  and  manner.  The
worlds  in  the  infinite  abyss  of  heaven  are  in  all
respects  similar  to  the  cells  in  vegetable  or  animal
tissue.  Their  evolution  is  similar,  their  distribution
similar,  and  their  mutual  relations  are  .similar.  Where-
fore, by  the  study  of  the  natural  sciences,  the  truth
may  be  learnt,  not  only  in  regard  to  these,  but  in
regard  also  to  the  occult  sciences  ;  for  the  facts  of  the
first  are  as  a  mirror  to  the  facts  of  the  last  And
just  what  the  spiritual  Ego  is  to  the  physical  man,  is
God  to  the  manifest  universe, — its  spirit,  dwelling  in
and  pervading  it;  no  more,  no  less.

1  Paris,  December  6,  1SS2.  Having  previously  studied  materialistic
science  in  Paris,  Mrs  Kingston]  returned  thhher  to  study  materialistic

philosophy,  when  this  and  the  following  Illuminations,  to  No.  XJ.YIl.
inclusive,  were  received  by  her  in  elucidation  of  the  subjects  studied,
and  in  correction  of  the  doctrine  enunciated  by  her  professor.  The
Illuminations  were  received  chiefly  in  sleep.

Concerning  the  True  Ego.  157

And  as  for  the  souls  of  the  planets,  let  us  enquire
awhile  what,  as  an  individual,  thou  art.  Thy  soul  is
constituted  of  the  agglomerate  essences  of  all  the
individual  consciousnesses  composing  thy  system.  It
has,  then,  grown,- — evolving  gradually  from  rudi-
mentary entities,  themselves  evolved  by  polarisation
from  mineral  and  gaseous  matter.  And  these  entities
combine  and  coalesce  to  form  higher  entities,  the
combined  forces  of  their  manifold  consciousnesses
polarising  and  centralising  so  as  to  form  the  human
soul.  In  the  same  way,  the  souls  of  the  planets  are
formed  by  the  agglomeration  and  combination  of  the
myriad  souls  composing  them,  these  souls  ranging
from  the  mineral  to  the  human  group,  and  thus  com-
posing the  four  principles  of  each  planet's  kingdom.
Each  planetary  God  is,  therefore,  not  a  supernatural,
extraneous  personage,  but  is  the  sum  total  of  the
souls  composing  the  planet.  His  physical  body  is  the
visible  planet  and  its  phenomena.  His  astral  body
and  mind  are  the  plant  and  animal  intelligences.  His
soul  is  man's  superior  reason  ;  and  his  spirit  is  divine,
being  the  Nous  of  the  man.  And  as  when  we  speak
of  the  planet-god,  we  specially  mean  that  Nous,  it  is
said  with  truth  that  our  divine  part  is  no  other  than
the  planet-god, — in  our  case  Dio-Nysos,  the  god  of
the  emerald.    /J'/y5J

And  again,  such  as  are  all  creatures  composing  the
planet  to  the  planet,  such  also  are  the  planets  to  the
universe,  and,  in  consequence,  such  are  the  Gods  to
GOD.

The  primordial  God  is  the  sum  total  of  all  the

1 5  3  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!'

Gods.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  the  agglomerate  essences
of  all  the  deities.  To  pray  to  God  is  to  address  all
the  Celestial  Host,  and,  by  inclusion,  all  the  spirits  of
just  men.

But  the  Gods  are  not  limited  in  number.  For
human  convenience  they  are  called  seven,  or  twelve,
or  twenty-four,  or  seventy  ;  but  these  are  names  of
orders  only.  Beyond  number  are  the  orbs  in  infinite
space,  and  each  of  these  is  a  God.  Phoibos  is  legion,
so  also  is  Hermes,  so  also  Aphrodite,  so  also  Diony-
sos,  so  also  Ares,  Zeus,  Hera,  Kronos,  and  the  rest.
Phoibos  is  the  spirit  of  all  the  suns  ;  Poseidon,  of  all
the  seas  ;  and  each  divinity  has  his  quality,  corres-
ponding to  the  conditions  of  the  elements  which
compose  his  kingdom.

To  every  planet  belongs  a  different  spectrum,  and
the  physical  is  the  measure  of  the  spiritual.  And
every  physical  world  of  causes  has  its  spiritual  world
of  effects.

Now,  the  world  of  causes  is  the  material  and  the
astral,  and  the  world  of  effects  is  the  psychic.  There-
fore it  may  be  said  that  the  soul  is  the  effect  of  the
body,  for  organism  is  before  function,  and  the  mineral
before  man.  And  yet  it  is  true  that  organism  is  the
effect  of  idea,  and  that  mind  is  the  cause  of  evolution.
So  that  spirit  is  before  matter  in  its  abstract,  but  not
in  its  concrete  conception.  All  things  are  begotten
by  fission  or  section  in  a  universal  blastoderm  or
protoplast,  and  the  power  which  causes  this  genera-
tion is  centrifugal.

Concerning  God.  159

No.  XLII.

CONCERNING  GOD.1

BUT  why  should  we  be  at  the  pains  to  seek  further
than  the  phenomenal  ?  Why  this  incessant
craving  to  prove  ourselves  immortal,  and  to  argue  a
God  into  the  universe  ?

The  answer  is  manifold,  because  the  appeal  is  to
nature,  to  reason,  and  to  principle.  First,  evolution,
as  revealed  by  the  facts  of  physical  science,  is  in-
explicable on  the  material  hypothesis ;  as  equally
also  are  the  facts  of  occult  science  and  experience.
Secondly,  it  has  been  proved  that  mind  in  man  anti-
cipates the  demonstration  of  natural  laws,  and  argues
by  mathematical  and  logical  induction  that  what  is
ought  to  be,  while  yet  the  actual  fact  is  undiscovered.
It  is  thus  evident  that  mind,  greater  than  and  yet
identical  with  man's  intelligence,  has  preceded  pheno-
menon. Thirdly,  the  primary  principle  in  the  sane
mind,  justice,  demands  satisfaction,  and  insists  that
rectitude  of  intelligence  infers  also  rectitude  of  spirit.
And  if  this  be  conceded,  all  the  rest  follows.  What,
then,  must  we  conceive — positing  this  indefeasible
principle  of  justice  as  the  central  sun  of  our  philo-
sophical system  ?  Equity  on  all  planes,  and  a  perfect
correspondence  and  balance  between  physical  and
spiritual;  between  the  world  of  causes  and  the  world

1  Paris,  December  8,  9,  1882.

160  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun.*

of  effects.  Justice  is  represented  by  the  dual  balance,
of  which  one  scale  is  spirit  and  the  other  matter;  one
male  and  the  other  female ;  without  which  dual  prin-
ciple the  system  of  the  balance  itself  would  be  impos-
sible.    The  balance  is  unity  ;  the  scales  are  the  duad.

What,  then,  is  God?  Spirit;  essential  substance.
Is  God,  then,  impersonal?  Impersonal  if  the  word
persona  be  taken  in  its  radical  meaning,  but  personal
in  the  highest  and  truest  sense  of  that  word  if  the
conception  be  of  essential  consciousness.  For  God
has  no  limitations.  God  is  a  pure  and  naked  fire  burn-
ing in  infinity,  whereof  a  flame  subsists  in  all  creatures.
The  Kosmos  is  a  tree  having  innumerable  blanches,
each  connected  with  and  springing  out  of  various
boughs,  and  these  again  originating  in  one  stem,  and
nourished  by  one  root.  And  God  is  as  a  lire  burning
in  this  tree,  and  yet  consuming  it  not.  God  is
"I  AM."  Such  is  the  nature  of  infinite  and  essential
being.  And  such  is  God  in  the  beginning  before  the
worlds.

What,  then,  is  the  purpose  of  evolution  and  separa-
tion into  main-  forms  ?  Life  is  the  elaboration  of  soul
tJirougli  the  varied  transformations  of  matter.

Spirit  is  essential  and  perfect  in  itself,  having
neither  end  nor  beginning.  Spirit  is  abstract.  Soul
is  secondary  and  perfected,  being  begotten  of  spirit.
Soul  is  concrete.  And  the  whole  object  of  creation
or  manifestation  is  the  evolution  of  souls.  Spirit  is
the  primary  Adam  ;  soul  is  Eve,  the  woman,  taken
out  of  the  side  of  the  man.  Spirit  is  the  first  prin-
ciple ;  soul  is  the  derivative.

Concerning  God.  161

Now,  the  essential  principle  of  personality  or  con-
sciousness— the  higher  personality — is  spirit.  And
this  personality  is  God.  Wherefore  the  higher  and
interior  personality  of  every  monad  is  God.  But  this
primary  principle,  being  naked  essence,  could  not  be
separated  off  into  individuals  unless  contained  and
limited  by  a  secondary  principle.  This  principle,
being  derived  and  not  essential,  must  be  evolved.
Spirit,  therefore,  is  projected  into  matter  in  order  that
soul  may  be  begotten  thereby.

Soul  is  begotten  in  matter  by  means  of  polarisation.
And  spirit,  of  which  all  matter  consists,  returns  to  its
essential  nature  in  soul.  Soul  is  the  medium  by
which  spirit  is  individuated,  and  in  which  it  becomes
concrete.  So  that  by  means  of  creation,  God  the  One
becomes  God  the  Many.  And  the  object  set  before
the  saint  is  so  to  live  as  to  render  the  soul  luminous
and  consolidate  with  the  spirit,  that  thereby  the
spirit  may  be  perpetually  one  with  the  soul,  and
thus  eternise  its  individuality.

For  personality  is  of  and  in  the  spirit ;  but  in-
dividuality appertains  to  the  soul.  But  for  creation
there  would  be  one  vast  diffused  and  unindividuated
consciousness,  contained  in  one  vast  xiiffused  sub-
stance. Of  this  substance  all  things  consist  by  means
of  this  force  or  spirit ;  and  the  soul  grows  up  out  of
matter  by  means  of  evolution ; — that  is,  by  the  inherent
force  acting  on  the  manifest  substance.  And  thus  the
soul  is  born  in  the  womb  of  matter,  and  within  her  is
conceived  the  personal  element  which,  divided  from
God,  is  yet  God  and  man.     For  God  is  not  multiplied

L

1 62  "  Clothed  with  the  Sttn."

neither  diminished  ;  but  God  is  separated  into  many.
The  matter  is  the  wax,  the  soul  is  the  wick,  and  God
is  the  flame  which  illumines.  If  they  ask  thee  the
reason  of  creation,  thou  shalt  answer, — The  evolution
and  elaboration  of  the  soul

Anna  is  the  rolling  year,  the  Time,  of  which  is  born
Maria  the  soul,  the  mother  of  God.  God  is  the  first
of  the  ten  categories  of  Aristotle,1  as  the  number
one  is  the  root  of  all  numbers.  Thcu  canst  not  begin
the  tables  with  the  duad,  because  the  unity  is  the
primal  idea.  Therefore  this  unity  is  positive  and
essential  in  necessity.

To  God  everything  is  good  ;  it  is  only  to  men  that
evil  appears  positive.  As  it  is  written,  "  I  am  the
Lord,  and  there  is  none  else  ;  I  form  the  light  and
create  darkness  ;  I  make  peace  and  create  evil  ;  I  the
Lord  do  all  these  things."  For  that  which  differenti-
ates evil  from  good  is  the  plane  of  the  action,  and  the
medium  in  which  the  thought  is  conceived.  If  thou
love  from  the  plane  of  the  spirit  through  the  medium
of  the  soul,  thou  lovest  as  Christ  loveth.  But  if  thou
love  from  the  plane  of  the  astral  man,  through  the
medium  of  the  bod}-,  thou  hast  lust  And.  again,  if
spirit  desire  aught,  it  desires  that  which  is  like  i:-
spi ritual,  and  its  treasure  is  in  heaven  :  this  is
aspiration.  But  if  the  plane  oi  desire  be  the  astral,
the  medium  of  desire  is  material,  and  the  material
desireth  matter,  that  is,  riches  upon  earth.  This
avarice.  And  again,  the  passion  of  the  spirit
fierce  upward  burning  towards  spirit  ;  a  force  bursting
1  QvaLa,  original  substance  or  simple  being  ;  the  I

Concerning  God.  163

forth  and  leaping  into  life ;  a  vehement  talcing  of
heaven  by  heavenly  violence.  This  is  zeal.  But
the  passion  of  the  astral  is  a  fierce  burning  down-
ward through  the  body  ;  a  force  translating  itself  in
material  action  ;  a  furious  and  blind  collision  of
matter  with  matter.  This  eventuates  in  murder.
See,  then,  that  according  to  the  plane  and  the
medium,  so  is  an  act- good  or  evil.  There  is  nothing
truly  evil  in  its  essential  idea  ;  for,  primarily,  all  is
good,  because  the  primary  is  spirit.

(In  answer  to  questions.)  Any  desire  or  act  of  the
body  that  does  not  profit  the  mind,  that  is  sensuality.

It  is  necessary  that  certain  interior  mysteries
belonging  to  the  Celestial  be  kept  secret,  because  if
they  should  be  given  to  the  people  the  mysteries
would  all  speedily  become  materialised,  and  so  lost.
But  if  they  be  confided  to  a  few  Wise,  and  transmitted
only  to  the  Initiate,  they  will  be  preserved  in  their
true  meaning.  And  again,  if  these  wise  men  betray
their  secret,  the  uninitiated  would  lay  violent  hands
on  them,  and  so  they  and  the  secret  would  perish
together.  But  when  the  majority  are  wise,  then  may
the  mysteries  be  told  openly.1

1  The  fact  that  the  mysteries  have  been  disclosed  anew  expressly  in
order  that  they  may  be  made  generally  known,  is  by  no  means  to  be
interpreted  as  an  indication  that  in  the  view  of  their  guardians  the  time
has  come  when  the  "  majority  are  wise."  But  this  only  : — (i)  That  the
concealment  of  the  mysteries  has  already  led  to  their  materialisation
and  loss  at  the  hands  of  the  priesthoods,  and  only  by  their  publication
can  they  be  restored  ;  and  (2)  that  the  majority  are  sufficiently  wise,  at
least  in  the  land  of  the  present  promulgation,  to  refrain  from  murderous
persecution  either  for  the  sake  of  opinion  or  in  the  interests  of  an
Order.

4  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

No.  XLIII.

CONCERNING  PSYCHE,  OR  THE  SUPERIOR  HUMAN
SOUL.1

IT  is  truly  said  that  God  is  the  primordial  mind,
and  that  the  kosmic  universe  and  its  manifesta-
tions are  the  ideas  of  that  mind.  Mind  in  itself  is
passive  ;  it  is  organ,  not  function.  Idea  is  active  ;
it  is  function.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  mind  begins  to
act,  it  brings  forth  ideas,  and  these  constitute  exist-
ence. Mind  is  abstract ;  ideas  are  concrete.  When
thou  thinkest,  thou  creatcst.  Ever}-  thought  is  a
substantial  action.

Thoth,2  therefore,  is  the  creator  of  the  Kosmos.
The  science  of  the  mysteries  can  be  understood
only  by  one  who  has  studied  the  physical  sciences;
because  it  is  the  climax  and  crown  of  all  these,  and
must  be  learned  last,  and  not  first.  Unless  thou
understand  the  physical  sciences,  thou  canst  not
comprehend  the  doctrine  of  Vehicles^  which  is  the
basic  doctrine  of  occult  science.  u  If  thou  under-
stand not  earthly  things,  how  shall  I  make  thee
understand  heavenly  things?"  Wherefore,  get  know-
ledge, get  knowledge,  and  be  greedy  of  knowledge,
ever  more  and  more.  It  is  idle  for  thee  to  seek
the  inner  chamber  until  thou  hast  passed  through
the  outer.     This,  also,  is  another  reason  why  occult

1  Paris,  December  13,  [882.

-  Aiso  spelt  'J/nittt,  in  which  form  it  is  identical  in  both  sound  and
meaning  with  our  word    Thought,     Thoth  Of  1  haut  >   ptian

equivalent  for  both  Hermes  and  the  Logos.

Cojtcerning  Psyche,  165

science  cannot  be  unveiled  to  the  horde.  To  the  un-
learned, no  truth  can  be  demonstrated.  Theosophy1
is  the  royal  science.  If  thou  wouldst  reach  the  king's
presence  chamber,  there  is  no  way  save  through  the
outer  rooms  and  galleries  of  the  palace.

In  every  living  globule  there  are  four  inherent
powers.  I  speak  not  now  of  the  component  parts
of  a  cell,  but  of  forces.  The  first  and  lowest  mode
of  power  is  mechanical ;  the  second  is  chemical ;  the
third  is  electric,  and  the  fourth  is  psychic.  The  first
three  belong  to  the  domain  of  physiological  science ;
the  last  to  that  of  occult  science.  It  is  this  last  mode
of  power  which  belongs  to  the  immaculate  and
essential.  It  is  inherent  in  the  substantial,  and  is
therefore  permanent  as  an  indefeasible  quantity.  It
is  in  the  Arche,2  and  it  is  wherever  there  is  organic
life.  Now  the  Psyche  is  from  the  beginning  latent
and  diffused  in  all  matter ;  and  forasmuch  as  Psyche
also  is  not  of  herself,  but  of  spirit,  therefore  is  spirit
also  the  basic  quality  of  all  things  ; — the  motionless
by  motion  converted  into  the  solid  ;— the  invisible  by
energy  made  visible.  So  that  herein  are  two : — that
which  is  made  visible,  and  that  which  makes  visible ;
and  of  these  again  is  a  third,  that  which  is  visible.

And  of  this  energy,  or  primordial  forre,  there  are
two  modes  (because  everything  is  dual),  the  centri-
fugal or  accelerating  force ;  and  the  centripetal  or
moderating  force.     (Yet,  as  I  have  already  said,  this

1  This  term  is  used  here  in  its  ancient  sense,  the  science  of  divine
things,  and  without  reference  to  any  modern  or  special  application  of  it.
-  See  Appendix,  "  Definitions."

1 66  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

second  mode  of  energy  is  feminine,  and  therefore
derivative,  being"  reflex  and  complementary  to  its
primary.)  By  means  of  the  first  force,  substance
(Psyche)  becomes  matter.  By  means  of  the  second,
substance  resumes  her  first  condition.  But  in  all
matter  there  is  a  tendency  to  revert  to  substance,
and  hence  to  polarise  soul  by  means  of  evolution.
The  tendency  to  revert  to  substance  is  the  cause  of
evolution.  And  this,  because  the  instant  the  centri-
fugal mode  begins  to  act,  that  instant  its  derivative,  the
centripetal,  begins  also  to  exercise  its  influence.  And
no  sooner  has  the  primordial  Arche  assumed  the  con-
dition of  matter,  than  matter  itself  begins  to  diffe-
rentiate, actuated  by  the  inherent  force  of  psychic
energy,  and  by  differentiation  begets  individuals
without  number.

Then  Psyche, once  impersonal  because  essential,  be-
comes individuated  and  personal,  and  through  the
gate  of  matter  issues  forth  into  new  life.  A  tiny  spark
in  the  globule,  Psyche  becomes  a  refulgent  blaze  in  the
globe.  And  this  by  continual  accretion  and  centralisa-
tion. As  along  a  chain  o(  nerve-cells  the  current  of
magnetic  energy  flows  to  its  central  point — being  con-
veyed, as  is  a  mechanical  shock,  along  s  ol~  units
in  contiguity — with  ever  culminating  impetus,  so  is
the  psychic  energy  throughout  nature  developed.
Hence  the  necessity  oi  centres,  oi  associations,
organisms.  Thus,  by  the  system  a  tisat  ion  of  congeries
of  living  entities,  that  which  in  each  is  little  becomes
great  in  the  whole.  For  the  quality  o\~  Psyche  is  ^
the  same,  and  her  potentiality  is  invariable.

Concern  ing  Psyche.  167

I  have  spoken  of  an  outer  personality  and  of  an
inner  personality ;  of  a  material  consciousness  as
differing  from  a  spiritual  consciousness.  So  now,  in
like  manner,  I  speak  of  a  spiritual  energy  as  differ-
ing from  a  material  energy.  The  energy  whereby
Psyche  polarises  and  accretes,  is  not  dependent  on  the
undulations  of  ether,  as  are  material  energies.  For
Psyche  is  the  essence  of  the  ether  itself.  All  mani-
fested life  is  a  process  of  burning.  Psyche  is  the  sub-
stance of  the  medium  by  which  the  burning  is
conditioned.  The  first  state  of  matter  is  ether.
But  Psyche  is  within  and  before  the  ether.  There-
fore is  she  rightly  termed  immaculate.  And  to  the
first  state  of  matter  corresponds  a  first  mode  of  force,
that  is  rotatory,  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  in  one.
But  before  and  within  force  is  will; — that  is  Necessity.
Necessity  is  the  will  of  God.  Now  this  will  is
spiritual  force.  It  is  inherent  in  Psyche,  and  she  is
the  medium  in  which  it  operates.  Such,  therefore,  as
the  primordial  will  is  in  relation  to  the  primordial
substance,  such  is  the  individual  will  in  relation  to
the  derived  soul.  And  when  the  current  of  spiritual
energy  (or  will)  is  strong  enough  in  the  complex
organism  to  polarise  and  kindle  centrally,  then  the
individual  Psyche  conceives  divinity  in  her  womb,  and
becomes  God-conscious.  In  the  rudimentary  stages
of  matter  this  current  is  not  strong  enough,  or  continu-
ous enough,  thus  to  polarise.

Psyche,  when  once  she  has  gathered  force  enough
to  burn  centrally,  is  not  quenched  by  the  disintegra-
tion of  the  physical   elements.      These,   indeed,  fall

1 68  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

asunder  and  desquamate  many  times  during  life,
whether  it  be  the  life  of  an  individual  or  the  life  of  a
system  ;  yet  the  consciousness  and  memory  remain
the  same.  Thou  hast  not  in  thy  physical  body  a
single  particle  that  thou  hadst  fifteen  years  since,  yet
thou  art  the  same  Ego,  and  thy  thought  is  continuous.
Thy  Psyche,  therefore,  has  grown  up  out  of  many
elements  ;  and  in  thine  Ego  their  interior  Egos  are
perpetuated,  because  their  psychic  force  is  centralised
in  thine  individuality.  And  when  thy  Psyche  pas
forth  from  the  disintegrating  particles  of  tin-  physical
body,  these  shall  build  up  new  material  entities,  and
the  reversion  of  matter  to  substance  shall  still  con-
tinue. And  thy  substantial  part  shall  go  forth  to  new
affinities.

"  But,"  thou  sayest,  "  if  soul  be  immaculate,  how
comes  she  to  be  attracted  by  material  alTinitL

The  link  between  her  and  earth  is  Karma.
until  she    is   permeated    throughout   her   essence   by
spirit,  is  she  able  to  rise  above  the  astral  in:"
Remember  that  the  science  of  th  is  a  science

of  vehicles.  Soul  is  the  highest  of  the^e  vehicles.
But  the  spirit  is  the  first  and  last  term.  Immaci
though  she  be  in  her  virginal  essence,  she  is  not  the
espoused  bride  until  the  bond  between  her  and
earth  be  severed.  And  this  can  only  be  when  c\
molecule  of  her  essence  is  pervaded  by  spirit,  and
indissolubly  married  therewith,  as  God  with  Arche
in  the  Principle.

"  Put,"  thou   sayest,  "  there  are   foul   and    horrible
forms; — have  these  also  an  immaculate  P

I

Concerning  Psyche.  169

These  have  a  Psyche  overwhelmed  by  her  Karma,
because  of  her  feebleness.  Either  increase  or  decrease
is  the  portion  of  the  soul.  "  He  that  gathereth  not
with  me,  scattereth."  Then,  when  the  celestial  is
weak  and  divided,  the  astral  and  material  are  strong.

"  But,"  thou  sayest,  "  if  soul  be  thus  a  resultant  of
polarisation  occurring  in  the  organism  she  animates,
how  can  soul  pass  from  one  body  to  another  by
re-incarnation  ?  Surely  soul  is  formed  anew  in
every  body  and  cannot  undergo  transmigration  ?  "

Do  not  confuse  between  substance  and  force.
Substance  is  Psyche,  the  medium.  Force  is  Spirit,
the  energy.  That  which  burns  in  a  flame  is  gas  ;
the  process  of  burning  is  a  mode  or  condition  of
the  gas.  That  which  is  burnt  is  fuel,  or  matter,  in
■which  the  gas  is  generated.  And  when  thou  askest,
"  How  can  the  Pysche,  which  is  generated  in  one
body,  pass  by  transmigration  to  another?"  it  is  as
though  thou  askedst,  "How  can  the  flame  generated
in  one  log  of  wood  pass  to  another  ?"  The  dispensa-
tion of  physical  series  may  be  compared  to  a  furnace
into  which  are  cast  in  succession  many  faggots.  In
each  faggot  is  a  certain  amount  of  unburnt  gas  and
of  latent  energy  ;  because  there  is  no  medium  with-
out inherent  force.  This  latent  or  inherent  force
is  capacity.  (A  living  medium  need  not  always  be
active,  but  it  must  retain  the  capacity  of  action.  God
need  not  always  be  creating,  but  God  must  always
retain  the  capacity  of  creating.)  As  by  the  burning
the  gas  of  each  faggot  is  consumed,  the  elements  of
the  faggot  (in  each  of  which  is  stored  a  certain  propor-

1 70  "  Clothed  with  tJie  Sun"

tion  of  this  gas)  disintegrate  and  fall  into  ash.  Then
another  faggot  catches  the  flame  and  continues  it  with-
out solution,  supplying  in  the  same  way  the  necessary-
medium.  But  observe  that  Psyche  is  not  "generated
in  a  body,"  neither  is  flame  generated  in  a  faggot.
But  for  fuel  there  could  be  no  flame,  and  but  for
matter  there  could  be  no  Psyche.  That  which  really
is  "  generated  "  in  the  fuel,  is  the  gas  by  means  of
which  flame  becomes  manifest.  And  that  which
really  is  generated  in  the  body,  is  the  condition  by
means  of  which  Psyche  abstract  becomes  Psyche
concrete.

No.  XLIV.

CONCERNING   THE    1  -    TYPE   OF   THE

HEAVENLY   PERSONALITY.

[Extract  from  Diary,  Paris,  Christmas  Day,  1S02
"It  is  strange  how  I  forget!  This  evening  I  have  re-read
several  passages  and  ch  ipters  written  by  my  own  hand,  and
conceived  in  my  own  mind,  of  "The  Perfect  Way,"  and  they  rilled
me  with  as  great  wonder  and  admiration  as  though  I  had  read
them  for  the  first  time  in  some  stranger's  work.  Ought  this  not
to  set  me  a-thinking  how  little  this  outward  and  mundane
memory  has  to  do  with  the  true  and  interior  consciousness:
For,  indeed,  in  my  true  self  I  know  well  all  these  things,  and
a  hundredfold  more  than  there  lie  written  ;  yet  my  exterior
self  forgetteth  them  right  readily,  and,  once  they  are  written,
scarce  remembereth  them  more  !  And  this  sets  me  wondering
whether,  perchance,  we  are  not  altogether  out  oi  the  reckoning
\tlen  we  talk  of  memory  as  a  iu.

Concerning  the  Poet.  171

memory,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  use  the  word,  signifies  a
thinking  back  into  the  past,  and  an  act  by  which  past  experience
in  time  is  recalled.  But  how  shall  the  true,  essential  self,  which
is  without  end  or  beginning,  have  memory  in  any  such  sort,
since  the  "  eternal  remembrance "  of  the  soul  seeth  all  things
at  a  glance,  both  past  and  to  come  ?  To  that  which  is  in  its
nature  Divine  and  of  God,  memory  is  no  longer  recollection,
but  knowledge.  Shall  we  say  that  God  remembers  ?  Nay,  God
knoweth.  I  thank  thee,  O  my  Divine  Genius  ;  Thou  art  here  !
I  feel  thee  ;  thine  aura  encompasseth  me  ;  I  burn  under  the
glow  of  thy  wonderful  presence.  Yes,  it  is  thus  indeed  ! "
Here  meditation  passes  into  illumination,  and  the  diary  thus
continues.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  writer  had  caught  in
advance  the  style  of  her  illuminator.]

THIS  faculty  which  we  call  Memory  is  but  the  faint
reflex  and  image  in  the  material  brain  of  that
function  which,  in  all  its  celestial  plenitude,  can  belong
only  to  the  heavenly  man.  That  which  is  of  time
and  of  matter  must  needs  think  by  means  of  an  organ
and  material  cells,  and  these  can  only  work  mechani-
cally, and  by  slow  processes.  But  that  which  is  of
eternity  and  spirit  needeth  neither  organ  nor  process,
since  organism  is  related  only  to  time,  and  its  re-
sultant is  process.  "  Yea,  thou  shalt  see  face  to  face  !
Thou  shalt  know  even  as  thou  art  known!"  And  just
as  widely  and  essentially  as  the  heavenly  memory
differs  from  the  earthly,  so  doth  the  heavenly  per-
sonality differ  from  that  of  the  material  creature.

Thou  mayest  the  more  easily  gather  somewhat  oi
the  character  of  the  heavenly  personality  by  consider-
ing the  quality  of  that  of  the  highest  type  of  mankind
on  earth, — the  Poet.

172  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim!*

The  poet  hath  no  self  apart  from  his  larger  self.
Other  men  pass  indifferent  through  life  and  the
world,  because  the  self-hood  of  earth  and  heaven
is  a  thing  apart  from  them,  and  toucheth  them  not.

The  wealth  of  beauty  in  earth  and  sky  and  sea  lieth
outside  their  being,  and  speaketh  not  to  their  heart.

Their  interests  are  individual  and  limited  :  their
home  is  by  one  hearth  :  four  walls  are  the  boundary
of  their  kingdom, — so  small  is  it  !

But  the  personality  of  the  poet  is  divine:  and  being
divine,  it  hath  no  limits.

He  is  supreme  and  ubiquitous  in  consciousness  :
his  heart  beats  in  every  element.

The  pulses  of  all  the  infinite  deep  of  heaven
vibrate  in  his  own  :  and  responding  to  their  strength
and  their  plenitude,  he  feels  more  intensely  than
other  men.

Not  merely  he  sees  and  examines  these  rocks  and
trees:  these  variable  waters,  and  these  glittering
peaks.

Not  merely  he  hears  this  plaintive  wind,  these
rolling  peals.

But  he  is  all  these  ;  and  with  them — nay,  in  them
— he  rejoices  and  weeps,  lie  shines  and  aspires,  he
sighs  and  thunders.

And  when  he  sings,  it  is  not  he — the  man — whose
voice  is  heard  :  it  is  the  voice  of  all  the  manifold
Nature  herself.

In  his  verse  the  sunshine  laughs  :  the  mountains
give  forth  their  sonorous  echoes;  the  swift  lightnings
hash.

Concerning  the  Poet.  173

The  great  continual  cadence  of  universal  life  moves
and  becomes  articulate  in  human  language.

0  joy  profound  !  O  boundless  selfhood  !  O
God-like  personality !

All  the  gold  of  the  sunset  is  thine  ;  the  pillars  of
chrysolite  ;  and  the  purple  vault  of  immensity  !

The  sea  is  thine  with  its  solemn  speech,  its  misty
distance,  and  its  radiant  shallows  !

The  daughters  of  earth  love  thee  :  the  water-
nymphs  tell  thee  their  secrets ;  thou  knowest  the
spirit  of  all  silent  things  !

Sunbeams  are  thy  laughter,  and  the  rain-drops  of
heaven  thy  tears ;  in  the  wrath  of  the  storm  thine
heart  is  shaken  :  and  thy  prayer  goeth  up  with  the
wind  unto  God.

Thou  art  multiplied  in  the  conscience 1  of  all  living
creatures  ;  thou  art  young  with  the  youth  of  Nature  ;
thou  art  all-seeing  as  the  starry  skies  :

Like  unto  the  Gods, — therefore  art  thou  their
beloved  :  yea,  if  thou  wilt,  they  shall  tell  thee  all
things  ;

Because  thou  only  understandest,  among  all  the
sons  of  men  !

Concerning  memory ;  why  should  there  any  more
be  a  difficulty  in  respect  of  it  ?  Reflect  on  this  say-
ing,— "  Man  sees  as  he  knows."  To  thee  the  deeps
are  more  visible  than  the  surfaces  of  things ;  but  to
men    generally  the   surfaces    only  are  visible.     The

1  An  archaism  for  consciousness.  In  the  French  there  is  still  but
one  word — conscience— {ox  the  two  things.

1 74  "  Clothed  with  the  SunT

material  can  perceive  only  the  material,  the  astral  the
astral,  and  the  spiritual  the  spiritual.  It  all  resolves
itself,  therefore,  into  a  question  of  condition  and  of
quality.  Thy  hold  on  matter  is  but  slight,  and  thine
organic  memory  is  feeble  and  treacherous.  It  is  hard
for  thee  to  perceive  the  surfaces  of  things  and  to  re-
member their  aspect.  But  thy  spiritual  perception
is  the  stronger  for  this  weakness,  and  the  profound  is
that  which  thou  seest  the  most  readily.  It  is  hard
for  thee  to  understand  and  to  retain  the  memory  of
material  facts;  but  their  meaning  thou  knowest  in-
stantly and  by  intuition,  which  is  the  memory  of  the
soul.  For  the  soul  takes  no  pains  to  remember  ;  she
knows  divinely.  Is  it  not  said  that  the  immaculate
woman  brings  forth  without  a  pang  ?  The  sorrow
and  travail  of  conception  belong  to  her  whose  desire
is  unto  "  Adam."  l

No.  XLV.

CONCERNING    PSYCHE.1

{Continued from  No.  XLIIL)

BUT  it  may  make  the  subject  clearer  to  thee  if,
leaving  such  material  comparisons,  we  speak
of  those  things  which  only  may  be  fitly  compared
together.     Thou  knowest  already  the  nature  of  the

1  I.e.,  The  outer  sense  and  lower  reason.
-  Paris,  January  6,  1883.

Concerning  Psyche.  175

planet  and  the  divisions  of  its  Ego  into  four  parts  or
regions.  Of  these  thou  knowest  that  the  soul  or
Psyche  is  in  man  ;  the  human  superior  reason.  Now
there  appertains  to  the  planet  besides  all  these  four
regions,  an  atmosphere  of  a  magnetic  nature.1  This
atmosphere  is  well  known  to  thee.  It  is  the  astral  or
sideral  soul  of  the  planet,  the  anima  mundi  or  picture-
world.  Therein  are  stored  up  all  the  memories  of  the
world  ;  its  past  life,  its  history,  its  affections  and  re-
collections of  physical  things.  The  adept  may  inter-
rogate this  phantom  world,  and  it  shall  speak  for  him.
It  is  the  cast-off  vestment  of  the  planet ;  yet  it  is
living  and  palpitating,  for  its  very  fabric  is  spun  of
psychic  substance,  and  its  entire  parenchyma 2  is
magnetic.  And  forasmuch  as  the  planet  is  an  entity
ever  being  born  and  ever  dying,  so  this  astral  counter-
part of  itself  is  ever  in  process  of  increase, — the  mirror
of  the  globe,  a  world  encompassing  a  world.  But  the
Divine  Spirit,  Dio-Nysos,  is  not  in  this  magnetic
circle.  God  the  Nous  is  in  the  celestial,  and  the
temple  thereof  is  in  the  heart  of  humanity.

Such  as  is  the  astral  world  to  the  planet,  the  Ruach
is  to  man.  And  in  truth  the  great  magnetic  sphere
of  the  planet  is  itself  composed  and  woven  out  of  the
magnetic  Egos  of  its  offspring,  precisely  as  these  in
their  turn  are  woven  out  of  the  infinitely  lesser  atoms

1  Not  another  element,  but  another  mode  of  the  astral ;  that  in
which  it  represents  its  past  as  distinguished  from  its  present  condition,
which  co-exist, — the  latter  continually  passing  into  the  former.

2  Anatomically,  the  mass  of  a  glandular  or  similar  organ.  Botani-
cally,  the  soft  cellular  tissue  of  plants.

1 76  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

which  compose  the  individual  man.  So  that,  by  a
figure,  one  may  represent  the  whole  astral  atmosphere
of  the  planet  as  a  system  of  so  many  tiny  spheres,
each  reflecting  and  transmitting  special  rays.  But  if
in  this  astral  sphere  thou  shouldst  seek  the  true  soul
and  Divine  Spirit,  thou  shalt  not  find  them ;  for  they
are  of  the  higher  altitudes.  To  each  world  its  Ruach,
and  but  one.  But  the  world's  true  soul  migrates  and
interchanges.  And  this  is  the  secret  of  the  "  creation  "
of  worlds.  Worlds,  like  men,  have  their  karma,  and
new  kosmic  globes  arise  out  of  the  ruins  of  former
states.  As  the  soul  of  the  individual  human  unit
transmigrates  and  passes  on,  so  likewise  does  the
Psyche  of  the  planet.  From  world  to  world,  in  cease-
less intercourse  and  impetus,  the  living  Neshamah
pursues  her  variable  way.  And  as  she  passes,  the
tincture  of  her  divinity  changes.  Here  her  spirit  is
derived  through  Iacchos,  there  through  Aphrodite,
anon  through  Hermes  or  another  god.  Here,  again,
she  is  weak,  and  there  strong.  Your  planet  did  not
begin  this  avatar  in  strength;  an  evil  karma  over-
whelmed  its  soul,  and  evil  lives  predominated  in  its
first  ages.  Monstrous  reptiles,  creeping  things,  and
many  fierce  natures  tore  and  devoured  each  other  in
the  great  deeps.  For  the  world-soul  was  weak,  and
brought  forth  with  pain  and  trouble.  But  Adonai
reigns,  and  shall  reign.

Now  the  physical  molecules  o{  the  planet  are  its
many  generated  bodies,  whether  of  plants,  of  animals,
or  of  men  ;  and  these  are  continually  dropping  into
decay  and  being  shed.     But  the  living  germs  of  all

Concerning  Psyche.  177

these  organisms  die  not ;  they  revert  continually  to
their  proper  place,  and  the  soul  of  each  gathers
strength  by  progression.  And  the  ghost  of  each  living
thing  goes  into  the  astral  sphere,  its  proper  place  ;
and  the  dust  of  each  creature  to  the  earth;  and  the
Psyche  departs  to  fulfil  her  karma.  For  Psyche  is  as
a  flame  within  a  flame,  whereof  the  highest  and  most
luminous  part  mounts  and  wanders,  while  the  heavier
and  the  less  pure  remains  burning  above  the  surface
of  the  earth.

And  as  with  the  man,  so  with  the  planet;  for  small
and  great  there  is  one  law.  And  one  star  differeth
from  another  star  in  glory.  And  so  throughout  the
infinite  vistas  and  systems  of  heaven.  From  star  to
star,  from  sun  to  sun,  from  galaxy  to  galaxy,  the
kosmic  souls  migrate  and  interchange.  But  every
God  keeps  his  tincture  and  maintains  his  indefeasible
personality.

There  is  no  evil.  There  are  only  weak  and  strong,
and  the  differentiation  of  substance.

Compare  like  with  like,  and  preserve  the  affinity  of
similars.

All  things  are  explicable  and  comprehensible  ;  but
the  key  of  their  explanation  is  order.

Order  is  the  first  word  of  analysis,  and  the  alphabet
of  synthesis.

i yS  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun'

No.  XLVI.

CONCERNING   CONSCIOUSNESS   AND   MEMORY   IN
RELATION    TO   PERSONALITY.1

CONSCIOUSNESS  is  not  so  much  a  thing  as  a
condition.  Now,  if  thou  wouldst  have  a  clear
conception  of  that  condition  by  means  of  ana',
take  as  an  illustration  the  image  of  an  incandescent
globe, — a  ball  of  fire,  fluid  and  igneous  throughout  its
whole  mass.2  Divide  this  globe  in  thought  into  several
successive  zones,  each  containing  its  precedent.  Thou
wilt  find  that  the  central  interior  zone  only  contains
the  radiant  point,  or  heart  of  the  fiery  mass,  and
that  each  successive  zone  constitutes  a  circumferential
halo  more  or  less  intense,  according  to  its  nearness  to
the  radiant  point,  but  secondary  and  derived  c
and  not  in  itself  a  source  of  luminous  radiation.

It  is  thus  with  the  macrocosm,  and  thus  also  with
the  human  kingdom.  In  the  latter  the  soul  is  the
interior  zone,  and  it  alone  contains  the  radiant  point.
By  this  one  indivisible  effulgence,  the  successive  zones
are  illuminated  in  unbroken  continuity;  but  the
source  of  this  effulgence  is  not  in  them.  I  call  this
effulgence  consciousness,  and  this  radiant  point  the
spiritual  ego  or  divine  spark.  Now,  for  all  things
there  is  one  law.  God  is  nothing  that  man  is  not.
Man,    therefore,    is    one.      But    within    this    unit}-    is

1  Paris.  January  15.  1

*  The  idea  is  of  a  Hobe  self-luminous  and  heated  from  within.

Concerning  Consciousness  and  Memory,     179

plurality.  God  being  one,  is  yet  three  ;  for  in  one
personality  are  three  persons.  And  not  only  three  ;
for  God  is  beyond  number,  being  all  that  is.  So
that  in  this  divine  unity  are  many  comprehended
personalities.  This  is  because  spirit  is  in  its  very
essence  consciousness,  and  wherever  spirit  is  there  is
consciousness.  Yet  all  spirit  is  one.  Wherefore
consciousness  is  one.  And  as  spirit  is  manifold,
so  consciousness  is  manifold.  And  spirit,  like  light,
is  diffusive.  Were  it  otherwise  there  could  be  no
universe,  but  only  one  point  spreading  no  rays,  and
instead,  thick  darkness  and  unconsciousness  through-
out eternity.  But  this  is  absurd  and  against  reason  ;
because  it  is  the  very  nature  of  light  to  be  radiant ;
and  radiance  is  itself  light ;  so  that  wherever  light  is
there  is  radiance  or  shining ;  and  God  is  the  Shining
One,  or  radiant  point,  of  the  universe.  God  is  the
supreme  consciousness,  and  the  divine  radiance  is
also  consciousness.  And  man's  interior  ego  is  con-
scient  only  because  the  radiant  point  in  it  is  divine.
But  this  consciousness  emits  consciousness,  and  trans-
mits it,  first  to  the  anima  bruta,  and  last  to  the
physical  body.  But  the  more  concentrated  the
consciousness,  the  brighter  and  more  effulgent  the
central  spark.  It  is  erroneous  to  think  of  conscious-
ness as  non-diffusive,  precisely  as  it  would  be  to
think  of  light  as  non-radiant.  But  it  is  true  that
consciousness  hath  a  centre  of  diffusion,  as  light  hath
a  radiant  point.

Now,  if  from  the  midst  of  this  imagined  globe  of
fire   thou  take   the   central    incandescent   spark,  the

1 80  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

whole  globe  does  not  immediately  become  dark,  but
the  effulgence  lingers  in  each  zone  according  to  its
degree  of  nearness  to  the  centre  of  the  sphere.  It  is
thus  also  when  dissolution  occurs  in  the  process  of
death.  Everything  is  conscious  according  to  its
proper  degree.  In  somnambulism  either  the  anima
bruta  and  the  physical  body  are  conscious  while  the
consciousness  of  the  soul  is  suspended ;  or  the  reverse
occurs,  according  to  the  kind  of  somnolence  induced.
But  that  part  which  remains  conscious  is  capable  of
reflection,  of  thought,  of  memory,  and  even  of  in-
telligent invention  and  acumen,  according  to  its  kind
and  its  endowments.  Consciousness  is,  therefore,
diffusive  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  divisible.  He  best
comprehends  this  truth  who  is  nearest  and  most  like
to  God  ;  and  such  a  one  is  the  poet.

Thou  knowest  that  in  the  end,  when  Nirvana  is
attained,  the  soul  shall  gather  up  all  that  it  hath
left  within  the  astral  of  holy  memories  and  worthy
experience,  and  to  this  end  the  Ruach  rises  in  the
astral  sphere,  by  the  gradual  decay  and  loss  of  its
more  material  affinities,  until  these  have  so  dis-
integrated and  perished,  that  its  substance  is  thereby
lightened  and  purified.  But  continual  commerce  and
intercourse  with  earth  add,  as  it  were,  fresh  fuel  to  its
earthly  affinities,  keeping  these  alive,  and  hindering
its  recall  to  its  spiritual  ego.  Thus,  therefore,  the
spiritual  ego  itself  is  detained  from  perfect  absorption
into  the  divine,  and  union  therewith.  For  the  Ruach
shall  not  all  die,  if  there  be  in  it  anything  worthy  of
recall.      The  astral  sphere   is   its  purging  chamber.

Concerning  Consciousness  and  Memory.      1 8 1

For  Saturn,  who  is  Time,  is  the  trier  of  all  things  ;
he  devoureth  all  the  dross ;  only  that  escapeth  which
in  its  nature  is  ethereal  and  destined  to  reign.  And
this  death  of  the  Ruach  is  gradual  and  natural.  It
is  a  process  of  elimination  and  disintegration,  often
— as  men  measure  time — extending  over  many
decades,  or  even  centuries.  And  those  Ruachs  which
appertain  to  wicked  and  evil  persons,  having  strong
wills  inclined  earthwards, — these  persist  longest  and
manifest  most  frequently  and  vividly,  because  they
rise  not,  but,  being  destined  to  perish  utterly,  are  not
withdrawn  from  immediate  contact  with  the  earth.
They  are  all  dross  ;  there  is  in  them  no  redeemable
element.  But  the  Ruach  of  the  righteous  complaineth
if  thou  disturb  his  evolution.  "Why  callest  thou  me?
disturb  me  not.  The  memories  of  my  earth-life  are
chains  about  my  neck ;  the  desire  of  the  past
detaineth  me.  Suffer  me  to  rise  towards  my  rest,
and  hinder  me  not  with  evocations.  But  let  thy
love  go  after  me  and  encompass  me  ;  so  shalt  thou
rise  with  me  through  sphere  after  sphere."

For  the  good  man  upon  earth  can  love  nothing
less  than  the  divine.  Wherefore  that  which  he  loveth
in  his  friend  is  the  divine,  that  is,  the  true  and  radiant
self.  And  if  he  love  it  as  differentiated  from  God,
it  is  only  on  account  of  its  separate  tincture.  For
in  the  perfect  light  there  are  innumerable  tinctures.
And  according  to  its  celestial  affinity,  one  soul  loveth
this  or  that  splendour  more  than  the  rest.  And
when  the  righteous  friend  of  the  good  man  dieth,
the  love  of  the  living  man  goeth  after  the  true  soul

i.82  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

•.if  the  dead;  and  the  strength  and  divinity  of  this
love  helpeth  the  purgation  of  the  astral  soul,  the
osychic  ghost.  It  is  to  this  astral  soul,  which  ever
remaineth  near  the  living  friend,  an  indication  of  the
way  it  must  also  go, — a  light  shining  upon  the  upward
path  that  leads  from  the  astral  to  the  celestial  and
everlasting.  For  love,  being  divine,  is  towards  the
divine.  "  Love  exalteth,  love  purifieth,  love  up-
lifteth."

There  is  but  one  God  ;  and  in  God  are  compre-
hended all  thrones,  and  dominions,  and  powers,  and
principalities,  and  archangels,  and  cherubim  in  the
celestial  world.  And  through  these  are  all  the  worlds
begotten  in  time  and  space,  each  with  its  astral
sphere.  Now,  all  these,  both  terrene  and  heavenly,  are
conscient  entities,  vet  all  subsist  in  one  conscious-
which  is  one  God.  Because  all  things  are  of  spirit,  and
God  is  spirit,  and  spirit  is  consciousness.  The  material
of  the  physical  brain  is  constituted  of  countless  cells
and  innumerable  connecting  fibres,  and  each  cell  hath
its  own  consciousness,  according  to  its  degree.  Vet
the  resultant  of  all  these  concordant  functions  is  one
perception  and  one  consciousness.  There  is  als
consciousness  o\  the  nerves,  and  another  of  the  b"
and  another  of  the  tissues.  There  is  a  consciou-
of  the  eye,  and  another  of  the  ear,  and  another  of  the
touch.  There  is  a  consciousness  appropriate,  and
appertaining  specially  and  distinctively,  to  every
bodily  organ.  And  all  these  work  night  and  day
within  the  body,  each  according  to  its  kind  and  its

Concerning  the  Substantial  Ego.         183

order.  Yet  the  intellect  of  the  man  knoweth  nothing
thereof.  Interrogate  one  of  these  living  organs,  and
it  will  answer  thee  after  its  kind.  If  man,  then,  can
so  little  dominate  and  direct  the  divers  parts  of  his
own  physical  body,  why  should  he  find  it  strange
that  his  ethereal  self  be  likewise  similarly  multiple  ?
The  anima  bruta  is  as  an  organ  of  the  spiritual  man  ;
and  though  it  be  part  of  him,  its  acts,  its  functions,
and  its  consciousness  are  not  identical  with  those  of
the  spiritual  soul.  Consciousness  is  divisible,  there-
fore, and  diffusible  in  man,  as  in  God  ;  in  the  planet,
as  in  the  universe  \  and  one  law  is  throughout  all.

No.  XLVII.

CONCERNING  THE  SUBSTANTIAL  EGO  AS  THE  TRUE

SUBJECT.1

IT  hath  been  said,  "  All  life  is  a  burning,"  and  thou
sayest,  "  Let  the  cells  of  the  brain  be  likened  to
these  burning  logs,  and  their  ash  to  waste  tissue,  and
the  flame  to  consciousness.  Then  is  consciousness
nothing  more  than  an  unstable  product,  which,  when
the  logs  are  all  consumed,  dieth  away  with  their  ash.
How  then  shall  we  think  of  Psyche,  if  she  be  this

1  Paris,  February  27,  1 883.  Received  during  the  night,  and  written
down  while  in  trance.  The  word  Subject,  spelt  with  a  capital,  is  used
herein  in  its  metaphysical  sense,  to  denote  the  thinking  and  perceiv-
ing agent.

1 84  "  Clothed  with  the  Sl  n?

flame?  Is  not  all  consciousness  phenomenon  merely,
depending  for  its  existence  on  an  organic  process  ;  a
consensus  of  vital  action  in  the  nervous  cells  ?  And
the  Psyche,  what  is  she  but  the  sum  of  conscious
states,  —  a  complexity,  unstable  and  automatic,
making  and  unmaking  herself  at  each  instant,  even  as
the  flame?"

What,  then,  doth  cognise  these  unstable  states  ?
These  successive  and  ephemeral  objective  condi-
tions, to  what  Subject  do  they  manifest  themseh
and  how  are  they  recognised  ?  If  consciousness  be
phenomenon,  to  what  noumenon  is  it  related  ?
Perceivest  thou  not  that  the  flame,  which  is  pheno-
menon, appearcth  not  to  itself,  and  dependeth  for  its
objectivity  on  the  subjectivity  of  the  observer?  The
physiologist  who  telleth  thee  that  memory  is  a
biological  processus,  and  that  consciousness  is  a  state
dependent  on  the  duration  and  intensity  of  molecular
nervous  vibration,  toucheth  not  the  Psyche.  For  this
molecular  phenomenon  is  incapable  of  cognising  itself;
it  is  objective  only.  Seest  thou  not  that  unless  there
bean  inner,  subjective  ego  to  perceive  and  to  reflect
in  itself  this  succession  of  phenomenal  states,  the
condition  of  personality  would  be  impossible  ?  Or.
thinkest  thou  that  unless  in  the  true  and  inner
universe  the  ideal  flame  subsisted,  thou  couldst
cognise  the  material  flame  ?  Knowest  thou  not  that
in  the  Divine  Mind  subsist  eternally  and  substanti  i
all  those  things  of  which  thou  beholdest  the  images
and  phenomena  ?  It  is  this  inner  substantial
noumenon  which  is  the  Psyche.     And  as  in  nature

C oncer 71  ing  th  e  Su bsta v.  tia I  Ego,         185

there  are  infinite  gradations  from  simple  to  complex,
and  from  coarse  to  fine,  so  is  Psyche  reached  by
innumerable  degrees,  and  they  who  have  not  pene-
trated to  the  inner,  stop  short  at  the  secondary
consciousness,  which  is  objective  only,  and  imagine
that  the  subjective,  which  alone  explains  all,  is
undemonstrable.  But  only  Psyche  can  apprehend
the  psychical  ;  only  reason  can  reach  the  ultimate.
"  By  what,  or  by  whom,"  say  the  biologists,  "  are  these
ephemeral  and  unstable  states  which  they  name
consciousness,  apprehended  ?  Dependent  for  their
production  upon  duration  and  intensity  of  vibration,
they  pass  away  as  quickly  as  they  appear."  If,  then,
they  appear,  it  is  to  something,  otherwise  their  pro-
duction and  apparition,  automatic  in  itself,  could
not  be  cognised.  A  thing  or  a  state  doth  not  appear
to  itself,  but  to  the  observer.  For  apparition  and
production  are  processes  affecting  a  Subject,  and  this
Subject  is  Psyche.

But  the  vice  of  your  biologists  lieth  in  their  pursuit
of  the  unity  in  the  simple  rather  than  in  the  complex.
By  this  method  they  reverse  and  invert  the  divine
method  of  evolution,  and  nullify  its  end.  They  refuse
unity  to  the  man,  in  order  to  claim  it  for  the  molecule.
For  the  ultimate  element,  indivisible  and  indestructible
by  thought,  for  the  simplest  and  lowest  monad  only,
they  claim  unity,  and  thereby  individuality.  Thus
they  divinise  the  lowest,  and  in  their  method  evolution
hath  no  motive  or  reasonable  end.

But,  in  truth,  Psyche  is  the  most  complex  of
essences,  and   of  this  complexity  is   born    responsi-

1 86  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

bility.  Pure  and  naked  simplicity  of  being-  is  the
outermost  and  lowermost,  touching*;  negation.  And
the  dignity  and  excellence  of  the  human  soul  lieth
not  in  her  simplicity,  but  in  her  complexity.  She  is
the  summit  of  evolution,  and  all  generation  works  in
order  to  produce  her.  The  philosophy,  then,  which
deifies  the  lowest  in  place  of  the  highest,  ignores  the
true  sense  of  its  own  doctrine  of  evolution.  For  the
occult  law  which  governs  evolution  brings  together,  in
increasingly  complex  and  manifold  entities,  innumer-
able unities,  in  order  that  these  units  may,  of  their
substantial  essence,  polarise  one  complex  essence; —
complex,  because  evolved  from,  and  by  the  concur-
rence of,  many  simple  monads  ;  — essence,  because  in
its  nature  indivisible  and  indestructible.  The  problem
of  the  Ego  in  man  is  the  problem  of  God  in  nature.
By  the  same  method  which  expounds  the  last,  shall
the  first  be  expounded  likewise.  The  human
therefore,  the  synthesis,  the  divine  impersonal  per-
sonified. And  the  higher  and  more  excellent  this
personality,  the  profounder  the  consciousness  of  the
impersonal.  The  divine  personality  is  not  cone
but  abstract,  and  the  divine  consciousness  is  not
objective,  but  subjective.  The  phenomenal  pen-
ality and  consciousness  are  to  the  noumenal  as
water  reflecting  the  heavens,  the  nether  completing
and  returning  to  the  upper  its  own  concrete  reflex.

If  thou  desirest  really  to  study,  to  comprehend,  and
to  master  the  heavenly  science,  thou  must  learn  that
interior  and  subjective  method  by  which  only  heave
tilings  are  apprehended.     Thou  must  shift  the  ground

Concerning  the  Substantial  Ego.         187

of  thine  observation  from  the  exterior  to  the  interior ;
and  this  can  be  accomplished  only  by  means  of  re-
generation. "I  tell  thee  that  unless  thou  be  born
again,  thou  shalt  not  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And
this  saying  meaneth  that  unless  a  man  be  regenerate
he  shall  not  be  able  to  see  the  inner  and  essential,
which  are  the  only  true  and  divine  things.  The
unregenerate  man  works  always  from  the  exterior,
and  hath  experience  only  of  that  which  is  without.
But  thou,  if  thou  wouldst  behold  the  kingdom  of  God,
learn  to  live  in  the  essential,  and  fix  the  polaric  point
of  thy  mind  in  the  central  and  substantial.

Part  2.1

It  is  necessary,  before  entering  on  the  study  of  the
substantial,  that  thou  shouldst  clearly  apprehend  what
difference  there  is  between  the  abstract  and  the  con-
crete. Now  the  study  of  the  material  is  the  study  of
the  objective,  and  that  of  the  substantial  is  the  study
of  the  subjective.  That,  then,  which  the  biologists
term  the  subjective  is  not  truly  so,  but  only  the  last
or  interior  phases  and  conditions  of  phenomena.
Thus,  for  example,  the  unstable  states  which  con-
stitute consciousness,  are  in  their  view  subjective
states.  But  they  are  objective  to  the  true  subject,
which  is  Psyche,  because  they  are  perceived  by  this
latter,  and  whatever  is  perceived  is  objective.  There
are  in   the    microcosm    two    functions, — that   of  the

1  Received  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  manner  as  the  fore-
going, but  written  down  on  the  following  day.

1 88  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun.*9

revealer,  and  that  of  the  entity  to  which  revelation  is
made.  The  unstable  states  of  the  biologist,  which
accompany  certain  operations  of  organic  force,  are  so
many  modes  whereby  exterior  things  are  revealed  to
the  interior  subject.  They  are  not  in  themselves  the
subject  to  which  the  revelation  is  made.  Do  not
think  that  thou  canst  attain  the  subjective  by  the
same  method  of  study  which  discovers  to  thee  the
objective.  The  last  is  found  by  observation  from
without  ;  the  first  by  intuition  from  within.  The
human  kosmos  is  a  complexity  of  many  principles,
each  having  its  own  mode  of  operation.  And  it  is,
therefore,  on  the  rank  and  order  of  the  principle
affected  by  any  special  operation  that  dependeth  the
nature  of  the  effect  produced.  When,  therefore,  for
example,  the  biologist  speaketh  of  "  unconscious
cerebration,"  he  should  ask  himself  to  whom  or  to
what  such  operation  is  unconscious,  knowing  that  in
all  vital  processes  there  is  infinite  gradation.  Ques-
tions of  duration  affect  the  mind  ;  questions  of  inten-
sity affect  the  Psyche.  All  processes  which  occur  in
the  objective  are  relative  to  something;  there  is  but
one  thing  absolute,  and  that  is  the  Subject.  Uncon-
scious cerebration  is,  therefore,  only  relatively  uncon-
scious in  regard  to  that  mode  of  perception  which  is
conditioned  in  and  by  duration.  But  inasmuch  as
any  such  process  of  cerebration  is  intense,  it  is  per-
ceived by  that  perceptive  centre  which  is  conditioned
by  intensity,  and  in  relation  to  that  centre  it  is  not
unconscious.  The  interior  man  knoweth  all  process
but    many    processes    are    not    apprehended    by    the

Concerning  the  Christian  Mysteries.      189

mental  man.  This  truth  ought  in  itself  to  demon-
strate to  thee  the  distinction  of  the  human  principles,
and  their  separability  even  on  this  plane  of  life.  If,
then,  the  mundane  ego  and  the  heavenly  ego  be  so
distinct  and  separable,  even  when  vitally  connected,
that  a  nervous  process  conscious  to  the  latter  shall  be
unconscious  to  the  former,  how  much  more  shall
separability  be  possible  when  the  vital  bond  is
broken  ?  If  the  polarities  of  all  thy  kosmos  were
single  and  identical  in  direction,  thou  wouldst  be
conscious  of  all  processes,  and  nothing  would  be  to
thee  unknown,  because  thy  central  point  of  perception
would  be  precisely  the  focus  of  all  convergent  radii.
But  no  unregenerate  man  is  in  such  case.  For  most,
the  perceptive  point  lies  in  the  relative  and  objective
man,  and  by  no  means  in  the  absolute  and  subjective.
Thus  the  convergent  radii  pass  unheeded  of  their
consciousness,  because,  as  yet,  they  know  not  their
own  spirit.  They  are  asleep  while  they  live,  and
incapable  of  absolute  cognition.

No.  XLVIII.

concerning  the  christian  mysteries.1

Part  i.

THE  two  terms  of  the  history  of  creation  or  evolu-
tion are  formulated  by  the  Catholic  Church  in
two  precious  and  all-important  dogmas.    These  are —

1  Paris,  December  12,  1882.

1 90  "  Ch thcd  with  the  Sun"

first,  the  Immaculate  Conception  of  the  Blessed
Virgin  Mary  ;  and,  secondly,  the  Assumption  of  the
Blessed  Virgin  Mary.1  By  the  doctrine  of  the  first  we
are  secretly  enlightened  concerning  the  generation  of
the  soul,  who  is  begotten  in  the  womb  of  matter,  and
yet  from  the  first  instant  of  her  being  is  pure  and
incorrupt.  Sin  comes  through  the  material  and  intel-
lectual element,  because  these  belong  to  matter.  But
the  soul,  which  is  of  the  celestial,  and  belongs  to
heavenly  conditions,  is  free  of  original  sin.  u  Salem,
which  is  from  above,  is  free,  which  is  the  mother  of  us
all.  But  Agar" — the  intellectual  and  astral  part  —
11  is  a  bond  slave,  both  she  and  her  son."  The  soul,
born  of  time  (Anna),  is  yet  conceived  without  taint
of  corruption  or  decay,  because  her  essence  is  divine.
Contained  in  matter,  and  brought  into  the  world  by
means  of  it,  she  is  yet  not  of  it,  else  she  could  not  be
mother  of  God.  In  her  bosom  is  conceived  that
bright  and  holy  light — the  Nucleolus — which  dwells  in
her  from  the  beginning,  and  which,  without  inter-
course with  matter,  germinates  in  her  and  manifests
itself  as  the  express  image  of  the  eternal  and  ineffable
personality.  She  gives  this  image  individuality.
Through  and  in  her  it  is  focused  and  polarised  into  a
perpetual  and  self-subsistent  person,  at  once  God  and
man.  But  were  she  not  immaculate, — did  any  admix-
ture of  matter  enter  into  her  integral  substance, — no
such  polarisation  of  the  Divine  could  occur.  The
womb  in  which  God  is  conceived  must  be  immaculate  ;
the  mother  of  Deity  must  be  "ever- virgin."    She  grows

1  The  latter  is  not  yet  promulgated.     See  7 ."..  V.  43.  n.  2.

Concerning  the  Christian  Mysteries.      191

up  from  infancy  to  childhood  at  the  knee  of  Anna  ;
from  a  child  she  becomes  a  maiden, — true  type  of  the
soul,  unfolding,  learning,  increasing,  and  elaborating
itself  by  experience.  But  in  all  this  she  remains  in
her  essence  divine  and  uncontaminated,  at  once
daughter,  spouse,  and  mother  of  God.

As  the  Immaculate  Conception  is  the  foundation  of
the  mysteries,  so  is  the  Assumption  their  crown.  For
the  entire  object  and  end  of  kosmic  evolution  is  pre-
cisely this  triumph  and  apotheosis  of  the  soul.  In
the  mystery  presented  by  this  dogma,  we  behold  the
consummation  of  the  whole  scheme  of  creation — the
perpetuation  and  glorification  of  the  individual  human
ego.  The  grave — the  material  and  astral  conscious-
ness— cannot  retain  the  immaculate  Mother  of  God.
She  rises  into  the  heavens  ;  she  assumes  divinity.  In
her  own  proper  person  she  is  taken  up  into  the  King's
chamber.  From  end  to  end  the  mystery  of  the  soul's
evolution — the  history,  that  is,  of  humanity  and  of  the
kosmic  drama — is  contained  and  enacted  in  the
cultus  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary.  The  acts  and  the
glories  of  Mary  are  the  one  supreme  subject  of  the
holy  mysteries.

Part  2.1

It  is  necessary,  in  relation  to  the  Mysteries,  to  dis-
tinguish between  the  unmanifest  and  the  manifest,  and

1  Home,  August  19,  18S3.  Mrs  Kingsford  thus  prefaces  this  exposi-
tion in  her  diary  : —

"  How  wonderfully  the  Church  helps  one  in  matters  of  Theosophy  !
When  I  am  doubtful  about  Divine  Order,  or  about  function  in  the  human

192  u  Clot 'hed  with  the  Sun"

between  the  macrocosm  and  the  microcosm.  These
last,  however,  are  identical,  in  that  the  process  of  the
universal  and  the  process  of  the  individual  are  one.

Mary  is  the  soul,  and  as  such  the  matrix  of  the
divine  principle — God — made  man  by  individualisa-
tion,  through  descent  into  the  "  Virgin's  womb."
But  the  seven  principles  of  universal  spirit  are  con-
cerned in  this  conception  ;  since  it  is  through  their
operation  in  the  soul  that  she  becomes  capable  of
polarising  divinity.

[This  is  the  secret  aspect  of  the  Mosaic  week  of
Creation,  each  day  of  which  week  denotes  the  opera-
tion of  one  of  the  Seven  creative  Elohim  or  Divine
Potencies  concerned  in  the  elaboration  of  the  spiritual
microcosm.]

It  is  said  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  is  the
daughter,  spouse,  and  mother  of  God.  But,  inasmuch
as  spiritual  energy  has  two  conditions,  one  of  \
ivity  and  one  of  activity, — which  latter  is  styled  the
Holy  Spirit, — it  is  said  that  Mary's  spouse  is  not  the
Father,  but  the  Holy  Ghost,  these  terms  implying
respectively   the  static  and   the  dynamic   modes   of

kingdom,  I  appeal  instinctively  to  Catholic  doctrine,  and  am  at  once
set  in  the  right  path.     I  think  I  should  nev<       I         early  linden
the  Order  and  Function  of  the  Soul  but  for  the  Catholic  teachings
cerning  the   Mother  of  God  ;  nor  should   I   have  comprehended   the
Method  of  Salvation  by  the  Merits  of  our  Divine  Principle,  save  for
the  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation  and  the  Atonement."

Between  Catholic  doctrine  in  its  inner  and  true  meaning,  however,
and  that  doctrine  as  set  before  the  world,  -

distinction,  holding  firmly  to  the  dictum  that  "The  Church  has  all  the
truth,  but  the  priests  have  materialised  it,  making  themselves  and  their
ollowers  idolaters."

Concei'ning  the  Christian  Mysteries,     193

Deity.  For  the  Father  denotes  the  motionless,  the
force  passive  and  potential,  in  whom  all  things  are —
subjectively.  But  the  Holy  Ghost  represents  will  in
action, — creative  energy,  motion  and  generative  func-
tion. Of  this  union  of  the  Divine  will  in  action —
the  Holy  Ghost — with  the  human  soul,  the  product  is
Christ,  the  God-Man  and  our  Lord.  And  through
Christ,  the  Divine  Spirit,  by  whom  he  is  begotten,
flows  and  operates.

In  the  trinity  of  the  unmanifest,  the  great  deep,  or
ocean  of  infinitude — Sophia  (Wisdom) — corresponds
to  Mary,  and  has  for  spouse  the  creative  energy,  of
whom  is  begotten  the  Manifestor,  Adonai,  the  Lord.
This  "  Mother"  is  co-equal  with  the  Father,  being-
primary  and  eternal.  In  manifestation  the  "Mother"
is  derived,  being  born  of  Time  (Anna),  and  has  for
Father  the  Planet-God, — for  our  planet,  Iacchos
Joachim,  or  Jacob  ;l  so  that  the  paternity  of  the  first
person  of  the  Trinity  is  vicarious  only.  The  Church,
therefore,  being  a  Church  of  the  manifest,  deals  with
Mary  (substance),  under  this  aspect  alone,  and  hence
does  not  specify  her  as  co-equal  with  the  first  prin-
ciple. In  the  unmanifest,  being  underived,  she  has  no
relation  to  time.

1  Ps.  xxiv.  6;  cxxxii.  2,  5,  &c.  See  Appendix,  "Definitions."  Every
kosmic  entity,  whether  a  system,  a  planet,  or  a  person,  is  constituted  of
a  certain  portion  of  Divinity,  segregated  and  assigned  to  be  its  life  and
substance.  These  names  designate  that  particular  individuation  of  the
universal  deity  of  which  we  and  our  planet  consist.  Wherefore  Mary,
as  the  perfected  human  soul,  is  "  daughter"  of  the  planet-god,  precisely
as  her  "son"  Christ,  the  perfected  human  spirit,  is  "son"  of  the
planet-god.  The  soul  is  at  once  "  daughter,  mother,  and  spouse  of
God,"  as  woman  is  at  once  daughter,  mother,  and  spouse  of  man.

N

1 94  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

No.  XLIX.

CONCERNING   DYING.1

WHEN  a  man  or  an  animal  dies  a  violent  death,
it  is  not  an  immediate  separation  that  takes
place  between  body  and  soul.  There  are  many
principles  to  be  considered,  each,  as  it  were,  incased
in  an  outer,  like  a  nest  of  Chinese  boxes,  or  the  spiral
of  a  cone.  And  the  lower  consciousness  can  be  re-
animated in  the  physical  body  by  physical  means.
This  is  the  consciousness  related  to  nerve-stimulation
and  reflex  action,  as  involuntary  gesture  and  all
animal  functions.  It  is  only  by  degrees  that  the
soul  disengages  itself,  and  its  skirts  Linger  long  in
the  physical  system,  and  can  be  detained  artificially.

All  the  component  elements  of  the  body  polarise  to
form  a  unity,  which  is  as  a  sun  to  the  system  But
this  polarisation  is  fourfold,  and  the  central  and  in-
most point  of  radiance  is  not  objective  but  subjective
That  which  reflects  is  molecular  ;  that  which  shines  is
non-molecular.  Force,  or  spirit,  is  non-molecular.
That,  therefore,  is  alone  one  and  indivisible,  and  it  is
subjective.  When  Psyche  is  one  with  the  spirit,  she
too  becomes  subjective.  It  has  been  said,  "All  things
are  by  infinite  gradation,  and  Psyche  is  reached  by
innumerable   degrees  ;  so   that   they  who  have   not

1Same  place  and  date  as  the  fv*e|»*>ing.

C oncer 71  ing  Dj  ing,  195

.  penetrated  to  the  inner,  stop  short  at  the  secondary
consciousness,  and  imagine  that  to  be  the  subjective."
Psyche,  so  long  as  existence l  lasts,  is  a  mirror  to  the
spirit  ;  she  reflects,  and  is  therefore  molecular.  But
she  is  gradually  in  process  of  at-one-ment ; — she
and  the  spirit  mutually  attract  and  permeate  each
other.  She  will,  then,  finally  become  non-molecular
and  entirely  subjective.  Therefore  the  higher  the
entity  undergoing  death,  the  easier  the  detachment  of
Psyche  from  the  lower  consciousnesses  which  enshrine
her.  For  the  nearer  she  is  to  being  herself  a  radiant
point,  the  nearer  she  is  to  unity  and  spiritual  subjec-
tivity. The  saint  does  not  fear  death  because  his
consciousness  is  gathered  up  into  Psyche,  and  she  into
her  spouse.  "  The  grave — that  is  the  physical  and
astral  consciousness — cannot  retain  the  holy  Virgin."
The  whole  object  of  incarnation  is  to  build  up  a
spiritual  counterpart,  subjective  and  substantial.
Now,  when  once  the  radii  of  the  physical  and  astral
molecules  have  polarised  a  radiant  point  interior  and
superior  to  themselves,  no  injury  or  mutilation  of  the
physical  ego  will  affect  the  subjective  ego.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  physical  bodies  are  constantly  chang-
ing and  interchanging  their  particles ;  portions  of
other  bodies  are  engrafted  continually  within  them  ;
but  there  is  no  change  in  the  unity  or  continuity  of
the  higher  consciousness.  This  is  because  the  true
unity  is  not  objective,  but  subjective.  The  true  "  Son
of  man  "  is  "  in  heaven,"  and  it  is  his  body  and  anima
brnta  only  which  are  on  earth.  Most  of  the  mistakes
1  The  state  of  manifested  as  distinguished  from  unmanifested  being.

196  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

of  the  materialists  arise  from  understanding  localities
and  things  when  they  should  understand  conditions
and  principles.  Of  course  a  subjective  entity  cannot
be  localised  in  space  or  duration.  Potentially  the
soul  is  always  eternal,  although  brought  into  relation
with  the  objective  through  time.  It  is  therefore
a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  soul  is  in  the  body
in  the  same  sense  as  the  watery  humours  of  the
body.  The  soul  is  in  the  body  only  in  the  sense
in  which  Arche  is  in  the  universe  ;  that  is,  she  is
interior  to  it  in  the  fourth  dimension,  of  which,  objec-
tively, no  idea  can  be  formed.  If  there  were  no  other
consciousness  inherent  in  man  than  the  lower  consci-
ousness of  the  cells,  there  could  be  no  self-conscious-
ness, or  unity  of  thought.  The  cerebral  sense  would
not  be  reflected  in  knowledge,  and  man  would  not
be  cognisant  of  his  apprehensions  and  perceptions.
Continuity  of  memory  and  will  must  belong  to  one,
and  must  be  positive  and  absolute,  that  is,  when  they
relate  to  higher  selfhood.

As  regards  the  lower  consciousness,  it  is  easy  to
understand  that  in  the  case  of  violent  death,  death  is
not  instantaneous.  The  stroke  of  the  sword  which
divides  the  physical  head  from  the  physical  trunk
may  indeed  be  instantaneous,  but  this  physical
separation  does  not  constitute  death,  and  this  process
is  not  really  complete  until  the  phantom  is  wholly
disengaged.  So  long  as  it  is  present,  of  course,  any
physical  aid  given  to  the  nerve-cells  permits  the
manifestation  of  its  forces.  But  when  it  has  wholly
abandoned  the  bodv  such  aid  would  be  furnished  in

Concern ing  t, : e  One  Life.  197

vain.  The  fluidic  body  is  so  tenuous  and  elastic  that
no  mere  separation  of  the  physical  frame  would  suffice
to  destroy  its  integrity.

No.  L.

CONCERNING   THE  ONE   LIFE;1

being  a  recapitulation,

(10

THE  spirit  absorbed  in  man  or  in  the  planet  does
not  exhaust  Deity.

Nor  does  the  soul  evolved  upward  through  matter
exhaust  substance.

There  remain,  then,  ever  in  the  fourth  dimension
■ — the  principium — above  the  manifest,  unmanifest
God  and  soul.

The  perfection  of  man  and  of  the  planet  is  attained
when  the  soul  of  the  one  and  of  the  other  is  through-
out illuminate  by  spirit.

But  spirit  is  never  the  same  thing  as  soul.  It  is
always  celestial  energy,  and  soul  is  always  substance.

That  which  creates  is  Spirit  (God).

The  immanent  consciousnesses  (spirits)  of  all  the
cells  of  a  man's  entity,  cause  by  their  polarisation
a  central  unity  of  consciousness,  which  is  more  than

1  Written  at  home,  the  first  five  sections  on  December  9,  1883,  and
the  rest  on  January  21,  1884,  and  regarded  by  the  writer  as  an  exercise
ot  meditation,  based  on  previous  illuminations,  rather  than  as  a  fre  h
illumination.     It  is  unfinished.

[98  "  Clothe  i  with  the  Sun.79

the  sum  total  of  all  their  consciousnesses,  because  it
is  on  a  higher  round  or  plane.

For  in  spiritual  science  everything  depends  upon
levels  ;  and  the  man's  evolution  works  round  spirally,
as  does  the  planetary  evolution.

In  this  relation  consider  the  worlds  of  form  and
formless  worlds  of  Hindu  theosophy.

Similarly  the  soul  of  the  planet  is  more  than  the
associated  essences  of  the  souls  upon  it  :  because  this
soul  also  is  on  a  higher  plane  than  they.

Similarly,  too,  the  consciousness  of  the  solar
system  is  more  than  that  of  the  associated  world-
consciousnesses.

And  the  consciousness  of  the  manifest  universe  is
greater  than  that  of  its  corporate  systems.

But  that  of  the  unmanifest  is  higher  and  greater
still :  as,  except  in  substance,  God  the  Father  is
greater  than  God  the  Son.

(2.)

The  elemental  kingdoms  represent  spirit  on  its
downward  path  into  matter.

There  are  three  of  these  before  the  mineral  is
reached.

These  are  the  formless  worlds  before  the  worlds  of
form.

They  are  in  the  planet,  and  also  in  man.

All  the  planets  inhabited  by  manifest  forms  are
themselves  manifest.

After  the  form-worlds  come  other  formless  worlds,
caused  by  the  upward  arc  of  ascending  spirit :  but
these  also  are  in  the  planet.

Concerning  the  One  Life.  199

They  are  also  in  the  man  :  and  are  the  states  of
pure  thought.

The  thinker,  therefore,  who  is  son  of  Hermes,  is
as  far  beyond  the  medium  who  is  controlled  and  who
is  not  self-conscious,  as  the  formless  worlds  of  the
ascending  arc  are  beyond  the  formless  worlds  of  the
elemental,  or  descending,  arc.

In  the  planet  and  in  the  man  they  only  seem  con-
tiguous because  each  round  is  spiral.

But  each  round  takes  the  One  Life  higher  in  the
spiral.

Neither  the  planet-soul  nor  the  man-soul  goes  over
exactly  the  same  ground  again.

But  perverse  and  disobedient  will  may  reverse  the
direction  of  the  spiral.

Individuals  in  whom  the  will  so  acts,  are  finally
abandoned  by  the  planet  to  the  outer  sphere.

(3.)

The  One  Life  is  the  point  of  consciousness.

The  will  is  the  impulse  which  moves  it.

In  the  celestial  the  One  Life  is  the  Elohim  ;  and
the  will  is  the  Father.

The  One  Life  is  manifest  by  effulgence  (the  Son).

So,  then,  the  will  begets  in  substance  the  effulgence,
which  is  the  manifestation  of  the  One  Life.

In  man  and  the  planet  the  effulgence  is  dim  and
diffuse  until  it  moves  into  the  soul.  Then  only  Christ
is  born.

The  One  Life  is  invisible  until  Christ  manhests  it.

200  "  ClolJicd  with  the  Sun."

Christ  in  man  has  for  counterpart  Adonai  in  the
heavens.

So,  then,  the  One  Life  is  in  the  Father-Mother
latently,  until  manifest  by  the  Son  (effulgence).

And  the  procession  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  from  the
Father-Mother  through  the  Son.

Herein  is  the  difference  reconciled  between  the
Greek  and  Latin  Churches.

The  point  of  consciousness  shineth  more  and  more
unto  the  perfect  day  of  brightness  ("  Nativity  of
Christ "  within  man).

(40

The  object  of  creation  is  the  production  of
"Ancients."  x

They  are  the  first-fruits  of  the  souls  of  the  planets  ;
or  "First  Resurrection.''  (First  in  dignity,  not  in
time.)

The)'  are  not  themselves  creators;  but  are  regene-
rators of  that  which  is  created  ;

Being  vehicles  for  the  I  I  y  Spirit,  who  is  the
regenerator,  through  Christ.

Because  will  can  create  only  when  it  is  in  the
abstract  ;  the  derived  does  not  create.

The  Father-Mother  creates  through  Adonai  by
means  of  the  Holy  Spirit

The  will  of  the  perfect  man  renovates  through  the
effulgence  of  his  One  Life.

His  Karma  is  poured  out  over  the  world  to  save
mankind.

1A.V.,  "  Apoc.  iv.

Concerning  the  One  Life.  201

He  is  the  Saviour  through  his  precious  life.
There  are  twenty-four  Ancients,  because  there  are
twelve  Avatars  of  the  Lord,  and  every  one  is  dual.

(5-)

Will,  when  it  is  derived  through  existence,  begets
Karma.

God  has  no  Karma.     God  does  not  ex-ist :  God  [S.

Karma  is  the  channel  of  initiation.  God  is  not
initiated.

The  perfect  man  saves  himself  and  saves  others  by
his  righteousness.

The  two  terms  of  existence  are  creation  and  re-
demption.

The  first  is  God's  work;  the  second  is  the  work  of
Christ, — God  in  man.

The  reason  why  the  Ancient  cannot  create  is  because
he  is  not  infinite.

He  is  immortal,  not  eternal ;  he  is  derived,  not  self-
subsistent.

His  is  the  point  of  grace,  not  the  point  of  projection.

The  thrones  of  the  Ancients  are  round  about  the
Throne  of  God  and  below  it

The  lower  self  is  the  cause  of  the  difference  be-
tween man  and  nature.

This  lower  self  is  the  unreal  self,  the  magnetic
states.

These  magnetic  states  are  the  serpent,  in  whose
folds  all  nature  is  involved  (to  man).

202  "  Clothed  with  the  S?inn

It  is  the  serpent  that  tempts  Eve,  the  souL

How  does  this  magnetic  self  arise  ?

It  is  a  reflect,  the  pole  of  which  is  antithetic  to  the
pole  of  the  true  self.

The  perfect  balance  is  to  be  in  the  centre  or
equator,  between  the  two.

Nature  has  no  lower  self;  consequently  she  is  not
self-conscious  (does  not  know  that  she  is  "  naked  ").

The  centre  of  the  true  self  is  in  eternity;  the  poles
are  in  time.

The  soul's  proper  seat  is  in  the  centre, — eternity.

When  she  is  there,  the  man  is  in  eternal  life.

This  centre  is  the  tree  of  life.

The  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  is  the
condition  of  the  cognisance  of  the  two  poll  -

Eating  the  fruit  of  this  tree  is  the  act  by  which  the
soul  beholds  these  two  poles.

While  she  remained  in  her  first  state,  she  was  as
nature  is,  seeing  only  one  pole,  the  good,  and  not
knowing  herself.

(7.)

There  are  two  modes  of  God, — the  manifest  and
the  un manifest.

God  manifest  rises  gradually  through  nature  to
meet  God  unmanifest

Every  level  in  nature  rises  out  of  itself  to  merge  in
every  other  level.

When    the   mind-plane   is    reached,  God   em
thence  as  the  soul,  and  looks  upon  himself

Concerning  the  One  Life,  20

That  into  which  the  soul  looks  back  is  the  past  of
her  journey, — time  and  nature.

That  into  which  she  looks  forward  is  God, — spirit
and  eternity.

The  point  she  has  reached  is  eternal  life, — the  tree
in  the  midst  of  paradise.

The  false  self  is  the  mirage  in  time.

As  the  planes  evolved,  their  laws  were  the  laws  of
God.

But  backwards  they  are  the  laws  of  the  Devil.

"  A  prayer  said  backwards  is  an  evocation  of  the
Evil  One."

(8.)

The  God  manifest  is  the  true  self.

The  God  unmanifest  is  the  Divine  overshadowing,
the  true  spouse  of  the  soul.

To  know  one's  self  is  no  sin.

God  planted  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and
evil.

The  sin  is  in  the  retrogression  towards  the  astral*

It  is  the  giving  of  the  apple  to  Adam.

Adam  is  commanded  ;  Adam  is  rebuked.

From  the  moment  of  the  fall,  a  new  projection
takes  place,  similar  to  that  of  God's  first  projection
into  time.

The  wheel  turns  again,  and  all  is  done  over  again
in  the  microcosm.

For  the  retrogression  towards  the  intellectual
(Adam)  is  a  displacement  of  the  centre.

20|  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun!1

It  is  a  transference  of  the  tree  of  life  from  the
place  of  Eve  (the  soul)  to  the  place  of  Adam.

The  centre  can  be  nowhere  save  in  the  meeting-
place  of  the  two  lines  which  intersect  at  right  angles
the  two  triangles  of  the  "  Seal  of  Solomon."'

There  can  be  but  one  point  of  centre,  therefore  the
two  trees  represent  two  lines  crossed.

When  the  One  Life  has  reached  the  seventh
kingdom,  then  is  the  Sabbath.

That  is  the  point  of  return  from  Nature — God  in
Action — to  God  in  God — Rest.

Seven  for  the  outgoing,  seven  for  the  incoming.1

(9.)

Thought  in  nature  is  the  law  of  God.

Thought  in  man  is  the  law  o\  (iod  ;  because  man
i>  the  offspring  of  nature,  and  there  is  but  one  law.

All  the  planes  in  nature  express  this  thought  in
unison.

Law  in  one  plane  does  not  conflict  with  law  in
another  plane.  Therefore  God  is  invariable  in
nature.

But  in  man  there  appears  to  be  conflict  of  two
diverse  wills.  How  is  this,  and  whence  comes  the
will  which  conflicts  with  the  law  of  God  in  man  ?

Man,  like  the  world,  is  constituted  of  many  planes.

Each  plane  has  its  consciousness,  and  the  medium

1  The   difference    between    this    reckoning  and    that   in    The

.  Part   II..  No.  111.,  v.  60,  61,  is  only  apparent,  the  point  wh  ch
lie  two  series  have  in  common  being  here  reckoned  twice  over,  making

'  In-  to'.al  in  both  cases  thirteen.

Concerning  the  One  Life.  205

of  one  plane  is  more  responsive  and  powerful  in  ex-
pressing the  will  of  God  than  that  of  another  plane.

The  same  is  true  of  nature's  plane.  It  is  a  question
of  subtlety  and  rarefaction  of  media.

The  cause  of  evolution  is  the  constant  convergence
of  radii.

That  is, — the  consciousness  of  the  mineral  plane
has  a  tendency  to  express  itself  in  a  higher  plane,  i.e.,
as  vegetable  consciousness ;  and  the  vegetable  as
animal  ;  and  the  animal  as  human;  and  the  human
as  divine.

But  when  the  human  is  reached,  the  whole  process
begins  over  again,  in  petto.

And  in  man  unregenerate,  the  tendency  is  not  from
behind  forwards,  in  upward  order,  but  in  downwards,
or  retrogressive  series.

For  in  man  all  the  planes  are  consubstantiate,  and
all  their  modes  of  law  obtain.  Some  media  are
weaker  or  denser  than  others,  and  these  are  the
lowermost  and  outermost, — "  touching  negation."

(10.)

As  the  earth  in  its  whirling,  or  individuation,
throws  off  its  Karma,  so  it  is  with  man.

It  is  through  Karma  that  initiation  occurs.

Karma  is  two  faced,  good  and  evil.  But  only  the
good  face  reflects  on  us  the  divine  light.

Diana  is  the  moon ;  so  also  is  Hecate.

The  "  moon "  is  good  or  evil,  according  to  the
condition  of  the  postulant.

PART  THE    SECOND.

THE  BOOK  OF  THE   MYSTERIES  OF  GOD,

ANCIENTLY  CALLED

THE  GREATER  MYSTERIES,

AS    CONTAINING    KNOWLEDGES    WHICH    FOR    THEIR

INTERIORNESS     WERE     RESERVED     FOR

INITIATES    OF    HIGH    GRADE.

"And  I  saw  another  angel  flying  in  mid-heaven,  having
an  eternal  gospel  to  proclaim  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the
earth,  ar.d  unto  every  nation,  and  tribe,  and  tongue,  and
people  ;  and  he  saith  with  a  great  voice,  Fear  God,  and
give  him  glory  ;  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come  :  and
worship  him  that  made  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  sea
and  fountains  of  waters,"

Apoc.  xiv.  6,  7  (R.V.).

"I   AM,"

210  "  Clothed  wilh  the  Sun.9

No.  I.

THE   CREDO;1

being  a  summary  of  the  spiritual  history  of  the  Sons
of  God,  and  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdoms  of  the
Seven  Spheres.

I  BELIEVE  in  one  God  ;  the  Father  and  Mother
Almighty  ;  of  whose  substance  are  the  genera-
tions of  Heaven  and  of  earth  :  And  in  Christ  Jesus
the  Son  of  God,  our  Lord;  who  is  conceived  of  the
Holy  Ghost  ;  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary  ;  suffered]
under  the  world-rulers  ;  is  crucified,  dead,  and  buried;
who  descended!  into  hell  ;  who  riseth  again  from  the
dead ;  who  ascendeth  into  Heaven,  and  sitteth  at
the  right  hand  of  God  ;  by  whose  law  the  quick  and
the  dead  are  judged.  I  believe  in  the  Seven  Spirits
of  God;  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven;  the  communion
ol  the  elect  ;  the  passing-through  of  souls  ;  the
redemption  of  the  bod)-;  the  life  everlasting;  and  the
Amen.- A

Me  that  believeth  and   is  initiated  shall  be  saved  ;
and  he  that  believeth  not  shall  consume  away.8

This  and  the  next  were  received  in  Paris,  July  18791
For  the  Notes  indicated  by  small  capitals,  see  Ap)  endix.

The  "  Lord's  Prayer  J*  2 1 1

No.  II.

THE   "LORD'S   PRAYER ";
being  a  prayer  of  the  Elect  for  interior  perfectionment,

OUR  Father-Mother  who  art  in  the  upper  and  the
within  :

Hallowed  be  Thy  name:

Thy  kingdom  come :

Thy  will  be  done,  in  the  body  as  in  the  spirit :

Give  us  every  day  the  communion  of  the  mystical
bread  :

And  perfect  us  in  the  power  of  Thy  Sons,  according
as  we  give  ourselves  to  perfect  others :

And  in  the  hour  of  temptation  deliver  us  from  the
hand  of  Satan.

For  Thine  are  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and  the
glory,

In  the  life  eternal,  and  in  the  Amen.A

212  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

No.  III.

CONCERNING   HOLY  WRIT.

ALL  Scriptures  which  are  the  true  Word  of  God,
have  a  dual  interpretation,  the  intellectual  and
the  intuitional,  the  apparent  and  the  hidden.

2.  For  nothing'  can  come  forth  from  God  save  that
which  is  fruitful.

3.  As  is  the  nature  of  God,  so  is  the  Word  of  God's
mouth.

4.  The  letter  alone  is  barren  ;  the  spirit  and  the
letter  give  life.

5.  But  that  Scripture  is  the  more  excellent  which  is
exceeding  fruitful  and  brings  forth  abundant  signifi-
cation.

6.  For  God  is  able  to  say  many  things  in  one,  as
the  perfect  ovary  contains  man)-  seeds  in  its  chalice.

7.  Therefore  there  are  in  the  Scriptures  of  God's
Word  certain  writing",  which,  as  richly  yielding  trees,
bear  more  abundantly  than  others  in  the  self-same
holy  garden.

8.  And  one  of  the  most  excellent  is  the  history  of
the  generation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.

9.  For  therein  is  contained  in  order  a  genealogy,
which  has  four  heads,  as  a  stream  divided  into  four
branches,  a  word,  exceeding  rich.

10.  And  the  first  of  these  generations  is  that  of  the
Gods.

Concerning  Sin  and  Death.  213

11.  The  second  is  that  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

12.  The  third  is  that  of  the  visible  world.

13.  And  the  fourth  is  that  of  the  Church  of  Christ.

No.  IV.

CONCERNING  SIN   AND  DEATH.1

AS  is  the  outer  so  is  the  inner :  He  that  worketh
is  One.

2.  As  the  small  is,  so  is  the  great :  there  is  one  law.

3.  Nothing  is  small  and  nothing  is  great  in  the
Divine  Economy.

4.  If  thou  wouldst  understand  the  method  of  the
world's  corruption,  and  the  condition  to  which  sin
hath  reduced  the  work  of  God,

5.  Meditate  upon  the  aspect  of  a  corpse ;  and
consider  the  method  of  the  putrefaction  of  its  tissues
and  humours.

6.  For  the  secret  of  death  is  the  same,  whether  of
the  outer  or  of  the  inner.

7.  The  body  dieth  when  the  central  will  of  its
system  no  longer  bindeth  in  obedience  the  elements
of  its  substance.

8.  Every  cell  is  a  living  entity,  whether  of  vege-
table or  of  animal  potency.

9.  In  the  healthy  body  every  cell  is  polarised  in

1  Paris,  October  3,  1878.     Received  in  sleep.

214  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

subjection   to   the    central   will,   the   Adonai    of  the
physical  system.

10.  Health,  therefore,  is  order,  obedience,  and
govern  merit.

11.  But  wherever  disease  is,  there  is  disunion,
rebellion,  and  insubordination.

12.  And  the  deeper  the  seat  of  the  confusion,  the
more  dangerous  the  malady,  and  the  harder  to
quell  it.

13.  That  which  is  superficial  may  be  more  easily
healed ;  or,  if  need  be,  the  disorderly  elements  may
be  rooted  out,  and  the  body  shall  be  whole  and  at
unity  again.

14.  But  if  the  disobedient  molecules  corrupt  each
other  continually,  and  the  perversity  spread,  and
the  rebellious  tracts  multiply  their  elements  ;  the
whole  body  shall  fall  into  dissolution,  which  is
death.

15.  For  the  central  will  that  should  dominate  all
the  kingdom  of  the  body,  is  no  longer  obeyed  ;  and
every  element  is  become  its  own  ruler,  and  hath  a
divergent  will  of  its  own.

16.  So  that  the  poles  of  the  cells  incline  in  divers
directions  ;  and  the  binding  power  which  is  the  life  of
the  bod)-,  is  dissolved  and  destroyed.

17.  And  when  dissolution  is  complete,  then  follow
corruption  and  putrefaction.

18.  Now,  that  which  is  true  of  the  physical,  is  true
likewise  of  its  prototype.

19.  The  whole  world  is  full  of  revolt  ;  and  every
element  hath  a  will  divergent  from  God.

Concerning  the  "  Great  Work?         2 1 5

20.  Whereas  there  ought  to  be  but  one  will,
attracting  and  ruling  the  whole  man.

21.  But  there  is  no  longer  brotherhood  among  you;
nor  order,  nor  mutual  sustenance.

22.  Every  cell  is  its  own  arbiter;  and  every  member
is  become  a  sect.

23.  Ye  are  not  bound  one  to  another :  ye  have
confounded  your  offices,  and  abandoned  your
functions.

24.  Ye  have  reversed  the  direction  of  your  magnetic
currents  ;  ye  are  fallen  into  confusion,  and  have  given
place  to  the  spirit  of  misrule.

25.  Your  wills  are  many  and  diverse ;  and  every
one  of  you  is  an  anarchy.

26.  A  house  that  is  divided  against  itself,  falleth.

27.  O  wretched  man;  who  shall  deliver  you  from
this  body  of  death  ?  c

No.  V.

CONCERNING  THE  "GREAT  WORK,"  THE  REDEMPTION,
AND  THE  SHARE  OF  CHRIST  JESUS  THEREIN.1

"  T~?  OR  this  cause  is  Christ  manifest,  that  he  may
-L         destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."
2.  In  this  text  of  the  holy  writings  is  contained

1  Commenced  in  Paris,  September  30,    1878,  to  v.  20.     Completed
in  London,  July,  13,  1881.     Received  chiefly  in  sleep.

2 1 6  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

the  explanation  of  the  mission  of  the  Christ,  and  the
nature  of  the  Great  Work.

3.  Now  the  devil,  or  old  serpent,  the  enemy  of
God,  is  that  which  gives  pre-eminence  to  matter.

4.  He  is  disorder,  confusion,  distortion,  falsification,
error.  He  is  not  personal,  he  is  not  positive,  he  is
not  formulated.  Whatever  God  is,  that  the  devil  is
not.

5.  God  is  light,  truth,  order,  harmony,  reason:  and
God's  works  are  illumination,  knowledge,  understand-
ing, love,  and  sanity.

6.  Therefore  the  devil  is  darkness,  falsehood,  dis-
order, discord,  ignorance ;  and  his  works  are  con-
fusion, folly,  division,  hatred  and  delirium.

7.  The  devil  is  therefore  the  negation  of  God's
Positive.  God  is  I  AM  :  the  devil  is  NOT.  He  has
no  individuality  and  no  existence  ;  for  he  represents
the  not-being.  Wherever  God's  kingdom  is  not,  the
devil  reigns.

8.  Now  the  Great  Work  is  the  redemption  of
spirit  from  matter;  that  is,  the  establishment  of  the
kingdom  of  God.

9.  Jesus  being  asked  when  the  kingdom  of  God
should  come,  answered,  "  When  Two  shall  be  as
One,  and  that  which  is  Without  as  that  which  is
Within."  »

io.  In  saying  this,  he  expressed  the  nature  of  the
Great  Work.  The  Two  are  spirit  and  matter :  the
within  is  the  real  invisible  ;  the  without  is  the  illusory
visible,

1  II.  Ep.  Clement,  v.  L

Concerning  the  "  Great  Work?  2 1 7

11.  The  kingdom  of  God  shall  come  when  spirit
and  matter  shall  be  one  substance,  and  the  pheno-
menal shall  be  absorbed  into  the  real.

12.  His  design  was  therefore  to  destroy  the
dominion  of  matter,  and  to  dissipate  the  devil  and
his  works.

13.  And  this  he  intended  to  accomplish  by  pro-
claiming the  knowledge  of  the  Universal  Dissolvent,
and  giving  to  men  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of
God.

14.  Now,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  us  ;  that
is,  it  is  interior,  invisible,  mystic,  spiritual.

15.  There  is  a  power  by  means  of  which  the  outer
may  be  absorbed  into  the  inner.

16.  There  is  a  power  by  means  of  which  matter
may  be  ingested  into  its  original  substance.

17.  He  who  possesses  this  power  is  Christ,  and  he
has  the  devil  under  foot.

18.  For  he  reduces  chaos  to  order,  and  indraws  the
external  to  the  centre.

19.  He  has  learnt  that  matter  is  illusion,  and  that
spirit  alone  is  real.

20.  He  has  found  his  own  central  point :  and
all  power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  on
earth.

21.  Now,  the  central  point  is  the  number  thirteen  :
it  is  the  riTrmber  of  the  marriage  of  the  Son  of  God.

22.  And  all  the  members  of  the  microcosm  are
bidden  to  the  banquet  of  the  marriage.

23.  But  if  there  chance  to  be  even  one  among  them
which  has  not  on  a  wedding  garment,

2 1 3  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

24.  Such  a  one  is  a  traitor,  and  the  microcosm
is  found  divided  against  itself.

25.  And  that  it  may  be  wholly  regenerate,  it  is
necessary  that  Judas  be  cast  out.

26.  Now  the  members  of  the  microcosm  are  twelve:
of  the  senses  three,  of  the  mind  three,  of  the  heart
three,  and  of  the  conscience  three.

27.  For  of  the  body  there  are  four  elements  ;  and
the  sign  of  the  four  is  sense,  in  the  which  are  three
gates ;

28.  The  gate  of  the  eye,  the  gate  of  the  ear,  and
the  gate  of  the  touch.

29.  Renounce  vanity,  and  be  poor:  renounce  praise,
arid  be  humble:  renounce  luxury,  and  be  chaste.

30.  Offer  unto  God  a  pure  oblation  :  let  the  fire  of
the  altar  search  thee,  and  prove  thy  fortitude.

31.  Cleanse  thy  sight,  thine  hands,  and  thy  feet:
carry  the  censer  of  thy  worship  into  the  courts  of  the
Lord  ;  and  let  thy  vows  be  unto  the  Most  High.

32.  And  for  the  magnetic  man l  there  are  four
elements  :  and  the  covering  of  the  four  is  mind,  in
the  which  are  three  gates  ;

^^.  The  gate  of  desire,  the  gate  of  labour,  and
the  gate  of  illumination.

34.  Renounce  the  world,  and  aspire  heaven-ward  :
labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perishes,  but  ask  of
God  thy  daily  bread  :  beware  of  wandering  doctrines,
and  let  the  Word  of  the  Lord  be  thy  light.

1  I.e.,  the  magnetic  or  astral  part  of  Man,  which  is  accounted  a
person  or  system  in  itself.

Concerning  the  "  Great  Work.11  219

35.  Also  of  the  soul  there  are  four  elements:  and
the  seat  of  the  four  is  the  heart,  whereof  likewise
there  are  three  gates  ;

36.  The  gate  of  obedience,  the  gate  of  prayer,  and
the  gate  of  discernment.

37.  Renounce  thine  own  will,  and  let  the  law  of
God  only  be  within  thee :  renounce  doubt :  pray
always  and  faint  not :  be  pure  of  heart  also,  and
thou  shalt  see  God.

38.  And  within  the  soul  is  the  Spirit :  and  the
Spirit  is  One,  yet  has  it  likewise  three  elements.

39.  And  these  are  the  gates  of  the  oracle  of  God,
which  is  the  ark  of  the  covenant  ;

40.  The  rod,  the  host,1  and  the  law :

41.  The  force  which  solves,  and  transmutes,  and
divines  :  the  bread  of  heaven  which  is  the  substance
of  all  things  and  the  food  of  angels ;  the  table  of
the  law,  which  is  the  will  of  God,  written  with  the
finger  of  the  Lord.

42.  If  these  three  be  within  thy  spirit,  then  shall
the  Spirit  of  God  be  within  thee.

43.  And  the  glory  shall  be  upon  the  propitiatory,
in  the  holy  place  of  thy  prayer.

44.  These  are  the  twelve  gates  of  regeneration :
through  which  if  a  man  enter  he  shall  have  right  to
the  tree  of  life.

45.  For  the  number  of  that  tree  is  thirteen.

46.  It  may  happen  to  a  man  to  have  three,  to
another  five,  to  another  seven,  to  another  ten.

1  The  Sacramental  bread  called  by  the  Hebrews  "Showbread."

220  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

47.  But  until  a  man  have  twelve,  he  is  not  master
over  the  last  enemy.

48.  Therefore  was  Jesus  betrayed  to  death  by
Judas  :  because  he  was  not  yet  perfected.

49.  But  he  was  perfected  through  suffering:  yea,
by  the  passion,  the  cross,  and  the  burial.

50.  For  he  could  not  wholly  die :  neither  could  his
body  see  corruption.

51.  So  he  revived  :  for  the  elements  of  death  were
not  in  his  flesh  ;  and  his  molecules  retained  the
polarity  of  life  eternal.

52.  He  therefore  was  raised  and  became  perfect:
having  the  power  of  the  dissolvent  and  of  trans-
mutation.

53.  And  God  glorified  the  Son  of  Man  :  yea,  he
ascended  into  heaven,  and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of
the  Majest)  on  high.

54.  Thence  also  the  Christ  shall  come  again  :  in
power  like  unto  the  power  of  his  ascension

55.  For  as  yet  the  devil  is  undissipated  :  the  Virgin
indeed  has  crushed  his  head;  but  still  he  lies  in  wait
for  her  heel.

56.  Therefore  the  Great  Work  is  yet  to  be  ac-
complished.

57.  When  the  leaven  shall  have  leavened  the
whole  lump  ;  when  the  seed  shall  have  become  a
tree;  when  the  net  shall  have  gathered  all  things
into  it.

58.  For  in  the  same  power  and  glory  he  had  at  his
ascension,  shall  Christ  Jesus  be  manifested  from
heaven  before  angels  and  men.

it

Before  the  Beginning"  221

59.  For  when  the  cycle  of  the  creation  is  com-
peted, whether  of  the  macrocosm,  or  of  the  microcosm,
the  Great  Work  is  accomplished.

60.  Six  for  the  manifestation,  and  six  for  the
interpretation :  six  for  the  outgoing,  and  six  for
the  ingathering :  six  for  the  man,  and  six  for  the
woman.

61.  Then  shall  be  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  God.1

NO.  VI.

CONCERNING  ORIGINAL  BEING  ;   OR,  "  BEFORE  THE
BEGINNING."

BEFORE   the  beginning   of   things,    before   the
generation   of  the  heavens,  the  great  and  in-
visible God  alone  subsisted.

2.  Even  the  God  whose  name  is  unspeakable,  upon
Whom  no  eye  hath  ever  looked,  whose  nature  no  mind
create  can  fathom.

3.  In  the  bosom  of  the  Eternal  were  all  the  Gods
comprehended,  as  the  seven  spirits  of  the  prism,  con-
tained in  the  Invisible  Light.

4.  The  Elohim  filled  and  comprised  the  universe,
and  the  universe  was  at  rest.

5.  There  was  no  motion,  nor  darkness,  nor  space,
nor  matter.

1  See  note  to  Part  I.t  No.  L.  (8) ;  also  Appendix,  Second  Coming.

222  "  Clothed  with  the  Stm.  *

6.  There  was  no  other  than  God.

7.  For  there  was  One  only,  the  Uncreate  and  Self-
subsistent.

8.  But  forasmuch  as  motion  was  conceived  in  the
bosom  of  the  Elohim,  the  Invisible  Light  moved  on
itself;

9.  And  gathering  itself  inward  toward  its  axis,  left
beyond  and  without  it  another  self.

10.  So  that  where  God  was  not,  there  was  darkness
and  the  abyss.

11.  Yet  had  the  darkness  of  itself  no  existence,  for
before  the  beginning  God  was  all  in  all.

12.  And  that  which  had  been  God  became  dark-
ness by  the  withdrawal  of  God.

13.  So  that  the  darkness  is  no  entity,  for  it  is
the  negation  of  being.

14.  It  is  no  presence,  for  where  a  presence  is,  there
is  God.

15.  Neither  can  it  produce,  neither  can  it  be  mani-
fested, neither  can  it  be  annihilated.

16.  Vet,  forasmuch  as  the  darkness  doth  not  com-
prehend God,  it  is  as  another  self.

17.  Not  having  power  in  itself,  for  all  power  is
God's.

18.  Neither  having  personality,  for  all  personality
is  of  Gcjd

19.  But  unless  there  were  again  to  be  cessation  of
motion,  there  can  be  no  extinction  of  negation.

20.  It  may  be  bounded,  but  never  annihilated.

21.  Whatever  is,  is  of  God;  but  God  only  is
absolute  and  perfect  being.

w  In  the  Beginning!9  223

22.  All  things  visible  and  invisible  were  potential
in  God  before  the  beginning,  and  of  God's  fulness  we
have  all  received.

23.  Inasmuch  as  anything  is  absolute,  strong,  per-
fect, true,  insomuch  it  resembles  God  and  is  God.

24.  Inasmuch  as  anything  is  out  of  reason,  weak,
divided,  false,  insomuch  it  approaches  negation,  and
is  of  negation.

25.  Now  the  Absolute,  which  is  God,  is  Spirit.

No.  VII.

ALPHA,   OR   "IN    THE   BEGINNING."

IN   the  beginning,  the   potentialities  of  all  things
were  in  Elohim.

2.  And  Elohim  was  twain,  the  Spirit  and  the
Water, — that  is,  the  heavenly  deep.

3.  Now  the  spirit  of  Elohim  is  original  life,  and  the
heavenly  waters  are  space  and  dimension.

4.  He  is  the  line,  and  She  is  the  circle.

5.  And  without  them  is  void  and  darkness

6.  Now  the  Divine  twain  were  from  the  beginning
contained  in  the  bosom  of  the  One  who  was  before
the  beginning  :

7.  Even  God  the  nameless,  invisible,  unfathomable,
unspeakable,  motionless :

8.  From  whom  proceeded  the  heavens — that  is,  the
duality,  spirit,  and  deep — and  the  earth — that  is,
spiritually,  the  beyond.

224  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun.

9.  Now   the   beyond  was  without  form  and  void,
and  darkness  covered  the  face  of  it.

10.  But  the  heavenly  waters  were  covered  by  the
Spirit  of  God.

No.  VIII.

BETA,   OR  ADONAI,   THE   MANIFESTOS

THEN  from  the  midst  of  the  Divine  Duality,  the
Only  Begotten  of  God  came  forth  :

2.  Adonai,  the  Word,  the  Voice  invisible.

3.  He  was  in  the  beginning,  and  by  Him  were  all
things  discovered.

4.  Without  Him  was  not  anything  made  which  is
visible.

5.  For  He  is  the  Manifestos  and  in  Him  was  the
life  of  the  world.

6.  God   the  nameless  hath  not  revealed  God,  but
Adonai  hath  revealed  God  from  the  beginning.

7.  He  is  the  presentation  of  Elohim,  and  by  Him
the  Gods  are  made  manifest.

8.  He  is  the  third  aspect  of  the  Divine  Triad  :

9.  Co-equal  with  the  Spirit  and  the  heavenly  deep.

10.  For  except  by  three  in  one,  the  Spirits  of  the
Invisible  Light  could  not  have  been  made  manifest.

11.  But  now  is  the  prism  perfect,  and  the  generation
of  the  Gods  discovered  in  their  order.

12.  Adonai  dissolves  and  resumes  ;  in  His  two  hands
are  the  dual  powers  of  all  things.

The  Mystery  oj  Redemption.  225

13.  He  is  of  His  Father  the  Spirit,  and  of  His
Mother  the  great  deep.

14.  Having  the  potency  of  both  in  Himself,  and  the
power  of  things  material.

15.  Yet  being  Himself  invisible,  for  He  is  the  cause,
and  not  the  effect.

16.  He  is  the  Manifestor,  and   not  that  which  is
manifest.

17.  That  which  is  manifest  is  the  Divine  Substance.

NO.  IX.
GAMMA,   OR  THE   MYSTERY   OF    REDEMPTION.

ALL  things  are  formed  of  the  Divine  Substance,
which  is  the  Divine  idea.

2.  Therefore  all  things  are  one,  as  God  is  one.

3.  And  every  monad  of  the  Divine  Substance  hath
in  ilself  the  potency  of  twain,  as  God  is  twain  in  one.

4.  And  every  monad  which  is  manifest,  is  manifest
by  the  evolution  of  its  Trinity.

5.  For  thus  only  can  it  bear  record  of  itself,  and
become  cognisable  as  an  entity.

6.  There  are  three  which  bear  record  in  the  Holy  of
Holies, — the  Spirit,  the  Water,  and  the  Word, — an.l
these  three  are  one.

7.  And  there  are  three  which  bear  record  in  the
outer  world, — the  life,  the  soul,  and  the  body, — and
these  three  agree  in  one.

8.  As  is  God,  so  is  all  which  goes  forth  from  God.

P

226  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim"

9.  From  the  imponderable  particles  of  physical
light,  to  the  molecules  of  the  lead  of  the  outermost
circle,  D

10.  All  things  in  heaven  and  in  earth  are  of  God,
both  the  invisible  and  the  visible.

11.  Such  as  is  the  invisible,  is  the  visible  also,  for
there  is  no  boundary  line  betwixt  spirit  and  matter.

12.  Matter  is  spirit  made  exteriorly  cognisable  by
the  force  of  the  Divine  Word.

13.  And  when  God  shall  resume  all  things  by  love,
the  material  shall  be  resolved  into  the  spiritual,  and
there  shall  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.

14.  Not  that  matter  shall  be  destroyed,  for  it  came
forth  from  God,  and  is  of  God  indestructible  and
eternal.

15.  Hut  it  shall  be  indrawn  and  resolved  into  its
true  self.

16.  It  shall  put  off  corruption,  and  remain  incorrup-
tible.

17.  It  shall  put  off  mortality,  and  remain  immortal.

18.  So  that  nothing  be  lost  of  the  Divine  sub-
stance.

19.  It  was  material  entity:  it  shall  be  spiritual
entity.

20.  For  there  is  nothing  which  can  go  out  from  the
presence  of  God.

21.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the
dead  :  that  is,  the  transfiguration  of  the  body.  °

22.  For  the  bod}',  which  is  matter,  is  but  the  mani-
festation of  spirit :  and  the  Word  of  God  shall
transmute  it  into  its  inner  being

The  Mystery  of  Generation.  227

23.  The  will  of  God  is  the  alchemic  crucible :  and
the  dross  which  is  cast  therein  is  matter.

24.  And  the  dross  shall  become  pure  gold,  seven
times  refined  ;  even  perfect  spirit.

25.  It  shall  leave  behind  it  nothing :  but  shall  be
transformed  into  the  Divine  image.

26.  For  it  is  not  a  new  substance  :  but  its  alchemic
polarity  is  changed,  and  it  is  converted.

27.  But  except  it  were  gold  in  its  true  nature,  it
could  not  be  resumed  into  the  aspect  of  gold.

28.  And  except    matter   were  spirit,  it  could  not
revert  to  spirit.

29.  To  make  gold,  the  alchemist  must  have  gold.

30.  But  he   knows   that  to  be   gold  which  others
take  to  be  dross.

31.  Cast  thyself   into   the  will   of  God,  and   thou
shalt  become  as  God.

32.  For  thou  art  God,   if  thy  will  be  the  Divine
will.

33.  This  is  the  great  secret:   it  is  the  mystery  of
redemption.

No.  X.

DELTA,  OR  THE  MYSTERY  OF  GENERATION.

BY  the  word  of  Elohim  were  the  seven  Elohim
manifest :
2.  Even  the  seven  Spirits  of  God,  in  the  order  of
their  precedence :

228  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

3.  The  Spirit  of  Wisdom,  the  Spirit  of  Understand-
ing, the  Spirit  of  Counsel,  the  Spirit  of  Power,  the
Spirit  of  Knowledge,  the  Spirit  of  Righteousness,  and
the  Spirit  of  Divine  Awfulness.

4.  All  these  are  coequal  and  coeternal.

5.  Each  has  the  nature  of  the  whole  in  itself:  and
each  is  a  perfect  entity.

6.  And  the  brightness  of  their  manifestation  shineth
forth  from  the  midst  of  ca:h,  as  wheel  within  wheel,
encircling  the  White  Throne  of  the  Invisible  Trinity
in  Unity.

7.  These  are  the  Divine  fires  which  burn  before  the
presence  of  God  :  which  proceed  from  the  Spirit,  and
are  one  with  the  Spirit.

8.  He  is  divided,  yet  not  diminished  :  He  is  All,
and  He  is  One.

9.  For  the  Spirit  of  God  is  a  flame  of  fire  which
the  Word  of  God  divideth  into  many:  yet  the  original
flame  is  not  decreased,  nor  the  power  thereof  nor  the
brightness  thereof  lessened.

10.  Thou  mayest  light  many  lamps  from  the  flame
of  one;  yet  thou  dost  in  nothing  diminish  that  first
flame.

11.  Now  the  Spirit  of  God  is  expressed  by  the
Word  of  God.  which  is  Adonai

12.  For  without  the  Word  the  Will  could  have  had
no  utterance.

13.  Thus  the  Divine  Will  divided  the  Spirit
of  God,  and  the  seven  fires  went  forth  from
the  bosom  of  God,  and  became  seven  spiritual
entities.

The  Mystery  of  Generation.  229

14.  They  went  forth  into  the  Divine  Substance,
which  is  the  substance  of  all  that  is.

15.  Now  the  Divine  Substance  is  the  great  deep  :
that  is  the  first  protoplasma.

16.  She  encircles  and  embraces  all  things,  and  of
Her  are  dimension,  and  form,  and  appearance.

17.  Her  veil  is  the  astral  fluid ;  She  is  the  soul
of  individuals  and  the  receptacle  of  the  Divine
nucleus.

18.  Now  the  Divine  Substance  is  not  matter,  but
She  is  matter  in  its  potential  essence.

19.  She  is  the  manifestation  of  personality,  enclos-
ing the  Divine  nucleus.

20.  There  are  some  entities  which  remain  for  ever
invisible  and  jntangible,  being  constituted  only  of  two
elements,  that  is  of  spirit  and  of  soul.

21.  These  are  fluidic  beings,  changing  their
external  forms  according  to  the  will  of  the  Spirit
which  they  have  received.

22.  They  are  persons,  because  the  plasmic  sub-
stance which  envelops  the  spirit  of  each,  hinders  the
intimate  union  of  that  spirit  with  other  spirit.

23.  Spirit  alone  is  diffuse,  and  the  naked  flame  is
liable  to  fuse  with  other  flames.

24.  But  the  flame  which  is  enclosed  in  substance
has  become  an  indiffusible  personality.

25.  Other  entities  there  are  which  are  visible  and
tangible  to  material  sense.

26.  For  the  Divine  Substance  which  encloses  the
spirit  of  each,  coagulates  exteriorly  and  becomes
matter  in  the  outermost.

230  "  Clothed  with  the  Su7i."

27.  So  that  the  entity  is  composed  of  spirit,  soul,
and  corporeal  appearance.

28.  The  outermost  has  become  coagulate ;  its
inner  content  is  fluid  substance  ;  its  innermost  is
spirit.

29.  The  innermost  is  intangible  light,  which  is  the
first  generation  ;  manifest  by  the  Will  of  God  through
the  Word  of  God.

30.  The  fluid  medium  is  the  firmament,  which  the
Will  of  God  divided  from  out  of  the  great  deep.

31.  And  the  outermost  is  the  dry  earth,  which  is
matter;  which  the  Will  of  God  causeth  to  appear  by
the  gathering  together  of  the  waters,  that  is  of  the
first  protoplasma.

32.  As  of  the  greater,  so  also  of  the  lesser.

33.  This  is  the  great  secret  ;  it  is  the  mystery  of
generation.

34.  Now  of  these  two  kinds  of  entities,  invisible
and  visible,  there  are  innumerable  varieties  and
orders,  having  different  functions,  consistence,  form,
and  tinctures,  and  dimension.

35.  There  are  thrones,  and  dominions,  and  prin-
cipalities, and  powers.

36.  There  are  Christs,  and  prophets,  and  saints,
and  congregations  of  the  elect.

37.  And  concerning  these  the  Spirit  shall  give  you
discernment  hereafter.

The  First  of  the  Gods.  231

No.  XL

EPSILON,   OR   THE  FIRST   OF  THE  GODS.E

Proem,

MANY  are  the  thrones  which  the  Holy  Spirit  of
Elohim  hath  vivified.

2.  They  are  centres  of  systems,  bonds  of  graces,
trees  of  life,  suns  of  many  worlds.

3.  And  the  colour  of  them  is  the  colour  of  the
ruby  and  of  the  fire  ;  and  their  name  is,  in  the
Hebrew,  Uriel,  and  in  the  Greek,  Phoibos,  the  Bright
One  of  God.

4.  To  whom  are  committed  the  dominion  of  the
highest  sphere,  and  the  demonstration  of  the  reason  of
all  things  which  are  manifest.

5.  The  Spirit  of  whose  being  is  the  Spirit  of
Wisdom,  which  is  the  first  of  the  holy  Seven.

6.  Now,  He — the  angel  of  the  sun — is  not  the
Spirit  of  Wisdom,  but  the  brightness  of  the  glory
thereof,  and  the  express  image  of  the  selfsame  spirit.

7.  He  is  the  first  of  the  Gods,  and  his  praise  is
great,  and  his  works  are  wonderful,  and  his  throne  is
in  the  midst  of  heaven.

8.  He  is  that  light  which  Adonai  created  on  the
first  day.

9.  And  before  his  face  Python  the  mighty  serpent
fell  from  heaven,  to  make  his  dwelling  in  the  caverns
and  in  the  secret  places  of  earth.

232  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

Hymn  to  Phoibos.

1.  Strong  art  thou  and  adorable,  Phoibos  Apollo,
who  bearest  life  and  healing  on  thy  wings,  who
crownest  the  year  with  thy  bounty,  and  givest  the
spirit  of  thy  divinity  to  the  fruits  and  precious  things
of  all  the  worlds.

2.  Where  were  the  bread  of  the  initiation  of  the
Sons  of  God,  except  thou  bring  the  corn  to  ear  ;  or
the  wine  of  their  mystical  chalice,  except  thou  bless
the  vintage  ?

3.  Many  are  the  angels  who  serve  in  the  courts  of
the  spheres  of  heaven  :  but  thou,  Master  of  Light
and  of  Life,  art  followed  by  the  Christs  of  God.

4.  And  thy  sign  is  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  in
heaven,  and  of  the  Just  made  perfect ;

5.  Whose  path  is  as  a  shining  light,  shining  more
and  more  unto  the  innermost  glory  of  the  day  of  the
Lord  God.

6.  Thy  banner  is  blood-red,  and  thy  symbol
is  a  milk-white  lamb,  and  thy  crown  is  of  pure
gold.

7.  They  who  reign  with  thee  are  the  Hierophants
of  the  celestial  mysteries  ;  for  their  will  is  the  will  of
God,  and  they  know  as  they  are  known.

"8.  These  are  the  sons  of  the  innermost  sphere  ;  the
Saviours  of  men,  the  Anointed  of  God.

9.  And  their  name  is  Christ  Jesus,  in  the  da}-  of
their  initiation.

10.  And  before  them  every  knee  shall  bow,  of
things  in  heaven  and  of  things  on  earth.

Hymn  to  Phoibos.  233

11.  They  are  come  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  are
set  down  for  ever  at  the  right  hand  of  God.

12.  And  the  Lamb,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the
seven  spheres,  shall  give  them  to  drink  of  the  river  of
living  water.

13.  And  they  shall  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is
in  the  centre  of  the  garden  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

14.  These  are  thine,  O  Mighty  Master  of  Light;
and  this  is  the  dominion  which  the  Word  of  God
appointed  thee  in  the  beginning :

1 5.  In  the  day  when  God  created  the  light  of  all  the
worlds,  and  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness.

16.  And  God  called  the  light  Phoibos,  and  the
darkness  God  called  Python.

17.  Now  the  darkness  was  before  the  light,  as  the
ir\ht  forerunneth  the  dawn.

18.  These  are  the  evening  and  the  morning  of  the
first  cycle  of  the  Mysteries.

19.  And  the  glory  of  that  cycle  is  as  the  glory  of
seven  days  ;  and  they  who  dwell  therein  are  seven
times  refined ;

20.  Who  have  purged  the  garment  of  the  flesh  in
the  living  waters  ;

21.  And  have  transmuted  both  body  and  soul  into
spirit,  and  are  become  pure  virgins.

22.  For  they  were  constrained  by  love  to  abandon
the  outer  elements,  and  to  seek  the  innermost  which
is  undivided,  even  the  Wisdom  of  God.

23.  And  Wisdom  and  Love  are  One.

234  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

No.  XII.

zeta,  or  the  second  of  the  gods.

Part  i.

Proem.
ND  the  Spirit  of  Wisdom  gave  counsel,  whose

A

is    the    angel    of  the    innermost    sphere,    the
brightest  of  the  sons  of  heaven.

2.  Lord  Adonai,  who  createst,  remember  the  souls
beneath  Thine  altar.

3.  And  put  a  firmament  between  them  and  Thee,
to  divide  the  upper  from  the  nether,  and  the  inner
from  the  without.

4.  And  whereas  there  hath  been  but  one,  let  there
henceforth  be  twain,  the  form  and  the  substance,  the
apparent  and  the  real  ;

5.  That  they  who  are  bound  may  remain  in  the
outer  element.

6.  But  to  me  Thou  committest  thine  only  beg
who  shall  enter  within  the  veil.

7.  And  God  made  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of  all
being,  and  divided  the  spirit  from  the  body.

8.  And  the  firmament  is  the  gate  of  the  kingdom
of  heaven.

9.  And  God  gave  the  keys  thereof  to  the  angel  oi
the  second  sphere,  whose  spirit  is  the  Spirit  oi  Under-
standing.

10.  He  is  Hermes,  the  mediator,  for  he  mediates
between  the  outer  and  the  inner.

The  Second  of  the  Gods.  235

11.  He  is  the  transmuter  and  the  healer,  Raphael
the  physician  of  souls.

12.  There  is  no  riddle  he  shall  not  solve  for  thee,
nor  any  solid  he  shall  not  melt,  nor  any  wall  he  shall
not  pass  through.

13.  Many  are  his  states  and  his  aspects;  his  weight
is  as  lead,  he  runneth  like  water,  he  is  light  as  the
mist  of  dawn.

14.  Yet  he  is  as  a  rock  between  earth  and  heaven,
and  the  Lord  God  shall  build  his  Church  thereon  ;F

15.  As  a  city  upon  a  mountain  of  stone,  whose
windows  look  forth  on  either  side.

16.  And  upon  the  left  are  the  kingdoms  of  the
world  and  the  shape"  of  illusion ;  and  upon  the  right
are  the  heights  of  heaven  and  the  kingdom  of
spirit.

17.  And  to  him  are  committed  the  keys  of  the
invisible,  and  of  the  Holy  of  Holies  within  the
veil.

18.  Whatsoever  soul  he  shall  bind,  shall  be  bound
in  the  outer  and  the  nether.

19.  And  whatsoever  soul  he  shall  loose,  shall  be
loosed  in  the  inner  and  the  upper.

20.  He  shutteth  and  no  man  openeth  ;  he  setteth
free  and  none  shall  bind  again.

21.  And  his  number  is  the  number  of  twain  ;  he  is
the  angel  of  the  twofold  states.

22.  And  the  waters  below  and  above  the  firma-
ment, are  the  evening  and  the  morning  of  the  second
day.  G

236  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

Hymn  to  Hermes.

1.  As  a  moving  light  between  heaven  and  earth  ;
as  a  white  cloud  assuming  many  shapes  ;

2.  He  descends  and  rises,  he  guides  and   illumines,
he    transmutes    himself   from    small    to    great,    from
bright  to   shadowy,  from   the   opaque   image   to
diaphanous  mist.

3.  Star  of  the  East  conducting  the  Magi  :  cloud
from  whose  midst  the  holy  th  :  by  day
a  pillar  of  vapour,  by  night  a  shining  flame

4.  I  behold  thee,  Hermes,  Son  of  God,  slayer  of
Argus, H  archangel,  who  Dearest  the  rod  of  knowledge,
by  which  all  things  in  heaven  or  on  earth  are
1         ured.

5.  Double  serpents  entwine  it,  because  as  serpents
the\-  must  be  wise  who  desire  God.1

6.  And  upon  thy  feet  arc  living  wings,  bearing
thee  fearless  through  space  and  over  the  abyss  of
darkness  ;  because  they  must  be  without  dread  to
dare  the  void  and  the  deep,  who  desire  to  attain  and
to  achieve.

7.  Upon  thy  side  thou  wearest  a  sword  o^  a  single
stone,  two-edged,  whose  temper  resisteth  all  thi

8.  For  they  who  would  slay  or  save  must  be  armed
with  a  strong  and  perfect  will,  defying  and  penetrat-
ing with  no  uncertain  force.

9.  This  is  llerpe.  the  sword  which  destroycth
demons ;  by  whose  aid  the  hero  overcometh,  and
the  saviour  is  able  to  deliver.

10.  Except  thou  bind  it  upon  thy  thigh  thou  shalt

Hymn  to  Hermes.  237

be  overborne,  and  blades  of  mortal  making  shall  pre-
vail against  thee.

11.  Nor  is  this  all  thine  equipment,  Son  of  God  ;
the  covering  of  darkness  is  upon  thine  head,  and  none
is  able  to  strike  thee.

12.  This  is  the  magic  hat,  brought  from  Hades,
the  region  of  silence,  where  they  are  who  speak
not.

13.  He  who  bears  the  world  on  his  shoulders  shall
give  it  to  thee,  lest  the  world  fall  on  thee,  and  thou
be  ground  into  powder.  J

14.  For  he  who  has  perfect  wisdom  and  knowledge,
he  whose  steps  are  without  fear,  and  whose  will  is
single  and  all-pervading  ;

15.  Even  he  must  also  know  how  to  keep  the
divine  secret,  and  not  to  expose  the  holy  mysteries
of  God  to  the  senses  of  the  wicked.

16.  Keep  a  bridle  upon  thy  lips,  and  cover  thy  head
in  the  day  of  battle.

17.  These  are  the  four  excellent  things, — the  rod,
the  wings,  the  sword,  and  the  hat.

18.  Knowledge,  which  thou  must  gain  with  labour:
the  spirit  of  holy  boldness,  which  cometh  by  faith  in
God  ;  a  mighty  will,  and  a  complete  discretion.

19.  He  who  discovers1  the  holy  mysteries  is  lost.

20.  Go  thy  way  in  silence,  and  see  thou  tell  no
man.

1  I.e.,  uncovers,  or  discloses,  to  profane  eyes.

238  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!1

Part  2.
An  Exhortation  of  Hermes  to  his  Neophytes.

1.  He  whose  adversaries  fight  with  weapons  of
steel,  must  himself  be  armed  in  like  manner,  if
he  would  not  be  ignominiously  slain  or  save  him-
self by  flight.

2.  And  not  only  so,  but  forasmuch  as  his  adver-
saries may  be  main',  while  he  is  only  one  ;  it  is  even
necessary  that  the  steel  he  carries  be  of  purer  temper
and  of  more  subtle  point  and  contrivance  than  theirs.

3.  I,  Hermes,  would  arm  you  with  such,  that  bear-
ing a  blade  with  a  double  edge,  ye  may  be  able  to
withstand  in  the  evil  hour.

4.  For  it  is  written  that  the  tree  of  life  is  guarded
by  a  sword  which  turneth  every  way.

5.  Therefore  I  would  have  you  armed  both  with  a
perfect  philosophy  and  with  the  power  oi  the  divine
life.

6.  And  first  the  knowledge  ;  that  you  and  they
who  hear  you  may  know  the  reason  of  the  faith  which
is  in  you.

7.  But  knowledge  cannot  prevail  alone,  and  ye  are
not  yet  perfected.

8.  When  the  fulness  of  the  time  shall  come,  I  will
add  unto  you  the  power  o(  the  divine  life.

9.  It  is  the  life  of  contemplation,  of  fasting,  of
obedience,  and  of  resistar

10.  And  afterwards  the  chrism,  the  power,  and  the
glory.     But  these  are  not  yet

Exhortation  of  Hermes.  239

11.  Meanwhile  remain  together  and  perfect  your
philosophy.

12.  Boast  not,  and  be  not  lifted  up;  for  all  things
are  God's,  and  ye  are  in  God,  and  God  in  you.

13.  But  when  the  word  shall  come  to  you,  be  ready
to  obey.

14.  There  is  but  one  way  to  power,  and  it  is  the
way  of  obedience.1

15.  Call  no  man  your  master  or  king  upon  the
earth,  lest  ye  forsake  the  spirit  for  the  form  and
become  idolaters.

16.  He  who  is  indeed  spiritual,  and  transformed
into  the  divine  image,  desires  a  spiritual  king.

17.  Purify  your  bodies,  and  eat  no  dead  thing  that
has  looked  with  living  eyes  upon  the  light  of  Heaven.

18.  For  the  eye  is  the  symbol  of  brotherhood
among  you.     Sight  is  the  mystical  sense.

19.  Let  no  man  take  the  life  of  his  brother  to  feed
withal  his  own.

20.  But  slay  only  such  as  are  evil ;  in  the  name  of
the  Lord.

21.  They  are  miserably  deceived  who  expect  eternal
life,  and  restrain  not  their  hands  from  blood  and
death.

22.  They  are  miserably  deceived  who  look  for  wives
from  on  high,  and  have  not  yet  attained  their  man-
hood.

23.  Despise  not  the  gift  of  knowledge ;  and  make
not  spiritual  eunuchs  of  yourselves.

1  At  this  point  the  seeress  was  shown  a  garland  of  fig-leaves,  the
symbol  of  Hermes.     For  its  meaning  see  pp.  38-41,  and  242,  243.

240  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun.*

24.  For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve.

25.  Ye  are  twain,  the  man  with  the  woman,  and
she  with  him,  neither  man  nor  woman,  but  one
creature.

26.  And  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you. K

No.  XIII.
ETA^OR  (MYSTICALLY)  THE  THIRD  OF  THE  GODS.L

Part  i.
Proem.

THE  mystery  of   thine  orbit,    O    Earth,   and   the
secret  of  the  work  of  the  third  day  ;

2.  Which  the  wise  of  old  knew  not,  for  the  Lord
God  withheld  them.

3.  The  Light  is  as  wisdom,  the  water  as  understand-
ing, and  the  dry  earth  as  the  force  and  power  of
things.

4.  Phoibos  first,  and  Hermes  next,  and  last  the
kingdom  of  Dionysos.

Hymn  to  the  Planet- (

(1.)

1.  O  Father  Iacchos  ;  thou  art  Lord  of  the  Body,
God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;

2.  Twice  bor  ,  baptised  with  fire,  quickened  by  the
spirit,  instructed  in  secret  things  be   eath  the  earth:

3.  Who  wearest  the  horns  of  the  ram,  who  ridest

Hymn  to  Iacchos.  241

upon  an  ass,  whose  symbol  is  the  vine,  and  the  new-
wine  thy  blood  ;

4.  Whose  Father  is  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts  ;  whose
Mother  is  the  daughter  of  the  King.M

5.  Evoi,  Iacchos,  Lord  of  initiation  ;  for  by  means
of  the  body  is  the  soul  initiated  :

6.  By  birth,  by  marriage,  by  virginity,  by  sleep,  by
waking,  and  by  death  :

7.  By  fasting  and  vigil,  by  dreams  and  penance,  by
joy,  and  by  weariness  of  the  flesh.

8.  The  body  is  the  chamber  of  ordeal :  therein  is
the  soul  of  man  tried.

9.  Thine  initiates,  O  Master,  are  they  who  come
out  of  great  tribulation,  whose  robes  are  washed  in
the  blood  of  the  vine.

10.  Give  me  to  drink  of  the  wine  of  thy  cup,  that  I
may  live  for  evermore  :

11.  And  to  eat  of  the  bread  whose  grain  cometh  up
from  the  earth,  as  the  corn  in  the  ear.

12.  Yea;  for  the  body  in  which  man  is  redeemed,
is  of  the  earth  ;  it  is  broken  upon  the  cross  ;  cut  down
by  the  sickle ;  crushed  between  grindstones.

13.  For  by  the  suffering  of  the  outer,  is  the  inner
set  free.

14.  Therefore  the  body  which  thou  givest  is  meat
indeed,  and  the  word  of  thy  blood  is  drink  indeed.

15.  For  man  shall  live  by  the  word  of  God.

16.  Evoi,  Father  Iacchos :  bind  thy  Church  to  the
vine,  and  her  elect  to  the  choice' vine.

17.  And  let  them  wash  their  garments  in  wine,  and
their  vesture  in  the  blood  of  grapes.

Q

242  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

(2-)

18.  Evoi,  Tacchos:  Lord  of  the  body,  and  of  the
house  whose  symbol  is  the  fig  ;

19.  Whereof  the  image  is  the  figure  of  the  matrix,
and  the  leaf  as  a  man's  hand  :  whose  stems  bring
forth  milk.

20.  For  the  Woman  is  the  mother  of  the  living;
and  the  crown  and  perfection  of  humanity.

21.  Her  body  is  the  highest  step  in  the  ladder  of
incarnation,

22.  Which  leadeth  from  earth  to  Heaven  ;  upon
which  the  spirits  of  God  ascend  and  descend.

23.  Thou  art  not  perfected,  O  soul,  that  hast  not
known  womanhood.

24.  Evoi,  Iacchos :  for  the  day  comcth  wherein  thy
sons  shall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  fig  :  yea,  the  vine
shall  yield  new  grapes;  and  the  fig-tree  shall  be  no
more  barren.

25.  For  the  interpretation  of  hidden  things  is  at
hand;  and  men  shall  eat  of  the  precious  fruits  of  God.

26.  They  shall  eat  marina  from  heaven  ;  and  shall
drink  of  the  river  of  Salem.

27.  The  Lord  maketh  all  things  new  :  He  taketh
away  the  letter  to  establish  the  spirit.

28.  Then  spakest  thou  with  veiled  face,  in  parable
and  dark  saying  :  for  the  time  of  figs  was  not  yet

29.  And  the\-  who  came  unto  the  tree  of  life  sought
fruit  thereon  and  found  it  not.

30.  And  from  thenceforth  until  now  hath  no  man
eaten  of  the  fruit  of  that  tree.

Hymn  to  lacckos.  243

31.  But  now  is  the  gospel  of  interpretation  come,
and  the  kingdom  of  the  Mother  of  God.

32.  Evoi,  Iacchos,  Lord  of  the  body ;  who  art
crowned  with  the  vine  and  with  the  fig.

33.  For  as  the  fig  containeth  many  perfect  fruits  in
itself,  so  the  house  of  man  containeth  many  spirits.

34.  Within  thee,  O  man,  is  the  universe ;  the
thrones  of  all  the  Gods  are  in  thy  temple.

35.  I  have  said  unto  men,  Ye  are  Gods  ;  ye  are  all
in  the  image  of  the  Most  High.

36.  No  man  can  know  God  unless  he  first  under-
stand himself.

37-  God  is  nothing  that  man  is  not.

38.  What  man  is,  that  God  is  likewise.

39.  As  God  is  at  the  heart  of  the  outer  world,  so
also  is  God  at  the  heart  of  the  world  within  thee.

40.  When  the  God  within  thee  shall  be  wholly
united  to  the  God  without,  then  shalt  thou  be  one
with  the  Most  High.

41.  Thy  will  shall  be  God's  will,  and  the  Son  shall
be  as  the  Father.

42.  Thou  art  ruler  of  a  world,  O  man ;  thy  name
is  legion  ;  thou  hast  many  under  thee.

43.  Thou  sayest  to  this  one,  Go,  and  he  goeth  ;  and
to  another,  Come,  and  he  cometh  ;  and  to  another,
Do  this,  and  he  doeth  it.

44.  What  thou  knowest  is  told  thee  from  within  ;
what  thou  workest  is  worked  from  within.

45.  When  thou  prayest  thou  invokest  the  God
within  thee  ;  and  from  the  God  within  thee  thou  re-
ceivest  thy  good  things.

244  "  Clothed  with  the  Sim.1'

46.  Thy  manifestations  are  inward  ;  and  the
spirits  which  speak  unto  thee  are  of  thine  own
kingdom.

47.  And  the  spirit  which  is  greatest  in  thy  kingdom,
the  same  is  thy  Master  and  thy  Lord.

48.  Let  thy  Master  be  the  Christ  of  God,  whose
Father  is  the  Lord  Iacchos.  N

49.  And  Christ  shall  be  thy  lover  and  the  saviour
of  thy  body  ;°  yea,  He  shall  be  thy  Lord  God,  and
thou  shalt  adore  Him.

50.  But  if  thou  wilt  not,  then  a  stronger  than  thou
art  shall  bind  thee,  and  spoil  thine  house  and  thy
goods.

51.  An  uncleanly  temple  shalt  thou  be;  the  hold
of  all  manner  of  strife  and  evil  beasts.

52.  For  a  man's  foes  are  of  his  own  household.

53.  But  scourge  thou  thence  the  money-changers
and  the  merchants,  lest  the  house  of  thy  prayer  be-
come unto  thee  a  den  of  thieves.

(30

54.  Evoi,  Father  Iacchos  :  Lord  of  the  thyrsos  and
of  the  pine-cone.

55.  As  arc  the  involutions  of  the  leaves  of  the
cone,  so  is  the  spiral  of  generation, — the  progress  and
passing-through  o(  the  soul

56.  From  the  lower  to  the  higher  ;  from  the  coarse
to  the  fine  ;  from  the  base  to  the  apex  ;

57.  From  the  outer  to  the  inner  ;  yea.  from  the
dust  of  the  ground  to  the  throne  of  the  Most  High.

Hymn  to  Iacchos.  245

(4-)

58.  Evoi,  To  Nysaee  :  God  of  the  garden  and  of  the
tree  bearing  fruit.

59.  The  dry  land  is  thine,  and  all  the  beauty  of
earth  ;  the  vineyard,  the  garland,  and  the  valleys  of
corn.

60.  The  forests,  the  secrets  of  the  springs ;  the
hidden  wells,  and  the  treasures  of  the  caverns.

61.  The  harvest,  the  dance,  and  the  festival ;  the
snows  of  winter,  and  the  icy  winds  of  death.

62.  Yea,  Lord  Iacchos  ;  who  girdest  destruction
with  promise  and  graftest  comeliness  upon  ruin.

63.  As  the  green  ivy  covereth  the  blasted  tree,  and
the  waste  places  of  earth  where  no  grass  groweth  ;

64.  So  thy  touch  giveth  life  and  hope  and  meaning
to  decay.

65.  Whoso  understandeth  thy  mysteries,  O  Lord
of  the  Ivy,  hath  overcome  Death  and  the  fear  thereof.

(5-)

66.  Evoi,  Eather  Iacchos,  Lord  God  of  Egypt :
initiate  thy  servants  in  the  halls  of  thy  Temple  ;

67.  Upon  whose  walls  are  the  forms  of  every
creature  :  of  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  of  every
fowl  of  the  air  ;

68.  The  lynx,  and  the  lion,  and  the  bull :  the  ibis
and  the  serpent:  the  scorpion  and  every  flying
thing.

69.  And  the  columns  thereof  are  human  shapes ;
having  the  heads  of  eagles  and  the  hoofs  of  the  or

246  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

70.  All  these  are  of  thy  kingdom  :  they  are  the
chambers  of  ordeal,  and  the  houses  of  the  initiation
of  the  soul.

71.  For  the  soul  passeth  from  form  to  form  ;  and
the  mansions  of  her  pilgrimage  are  manifold.

72.  Thou  callest  her  from  the  deep,  and  from  the
secret  places  of  the  earth  ;  from  the  dust  of  the
ground,  and  from  the  herb  of  the  field.

73.  Thou  covcrcst  her  nakedness  with  an  apron  of
fig-leaves;  thou  clothest  her  with  the  skins  ofbeas

74.  Thou  art  from  of  old,  O  soul  of  man  ;  yea,
thou  art  from  the  everlasting*.

75.  Thou  puttest  oft'  thy  bodies  as  raiment  ;  and  as
vesture  dost  thou  fold  them  up.

y6.  They  perish,  but  thou  remainest  :  the  wind
rendeth  and  scattereth  them  ;  and  the  place  of  them
shall  no  more  be  known.

J  J.  For  the  wind  is  the  Spirit  of  God  in  man,  which
bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  nearest  the  sound
thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  nor
whither  it  shall  go.

yS.  Even  so  is  the  spirit  of  man,  which  cometh
from  afar  oft"  and  tarrieth  not,  but  passeth  away  to  a
place  thou  knowest  not.

(6.)

79.  Evoi,  Iacchos,  Lord  of  the  Sphinx :  who
linkest  the  lowest  to  the  highest  ;  the  loins  of  the
wild  beast  to  the  head  and  breast  of  the  woman.

80.  Thou  boldest  the  chalice  o(  divination  :  all  the
forms  of  nature  are  reflected  therein.

Hymn  to  Iacchos.  247

81.  Thou  turnest  man  to  destruction:  then  thou
sayest,  Come  again,  ye  children  of  my  hand.

82.  Yea,  blessed  and  holy  art  thou,  O  Master  of
Earth  :  Lord  of  the  cross  and  the  tree  of  salva-
tion.

83.  Vine  of  God,  whose  blood  redeemeth  ;  bread  of
heaven,  broken  on  the  altar  of  death.

84.  There  is  corn  in  Egypt ;  go  thou  down  into  her,
O  my  soul,  with  joy.

85.  For  in  the  kingdom  of  the  body  thou  shalt  eat
the  bread  of  thine  initiation.

86.  But  beware  lest  thou  become  subject  to  the
flesh,  and  a  bond-slave  in  the  land  of  thy  sojourn.

87.  Serve  not  the  idols  of  Egypt ;  and  let  not  the
senses  be  thy  taskmasters.

88.  For  they  will  bow  thy  neck  to  their  yoke  ;  they
will  bitterly  oppress  the  Israel  of  God.

89.  An  evil  time  shall  come  upon  thee  ;  and  the
Lord  shall  smite  Egypt  with  plagues  for  thy  sake.

90.  Thy  body  shall  be  broken  on  the  wheel  of  God  ;
thy  flesh  shall  see  trouble  and  the  worm.

91.  Thy  house  shall  be  smitten  with  grievous
plagues ;  blood,  and  pestilence,  and  great  darkness ;
fire  shall  devour  thy  goods  ;  and  thou  shalt  be  a  prey
to  the  locust  and  creeping  thing.

92.  Thy  glory  shall  be  brought  down  to  the  dust ;
hail  and  storm  shall  smite  thine  harvest ;  yea,  thy
beloved  and  thy  first-born  shall  the  hand  of  the  Lord
destroy ;

93.  Until  the  body  let  the  soul  go  free ;  that  she
may  serve  the  Lord  God.

248  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

94.  Arise  in  the  night,  O  soul,  and  fly,  lest  thou  be
consumed  in  Egypt.

95.  The  angel  of  the  understanding  shall  know  thee
for  his  elect,  if  thou  offer  unto  God  a  reasonable  faith.

96.  Savour  thy  reason  with  learning,  with  labour,
and  with  obedience.

97.  Let  the  rod  of  thy  desire  be  in  thy  right  hand  ;
put  the  sandals  of  Hermes  on  thy  feet;  and  gird  thy
loins  with  strength.

98.  Then  shalt  thou  pass  through  the  waters  of
cleansing,  which  is  the  first  death  in  the  body.

99.  The  waters  shall  be  a  wall  unto  thee  on  thy
right  hand  and  on  thy  left.

100.  And  Hermes  the  redeemer  shall  go  before
thee  ;  for  he  is  thy  cloud  of  darkness  by  day,  and  thy
pillar  of  fire  by  night.

101.  All  the  horsemen  of  Egypt  and  the  chariots
thereof;  her  princes,  her  counsellors,  and  her  mighty
men  :

102.  These  shall  pursue  thee,  O  soul,  that  fliest ;
and  shall  seek  to  bring  thee  back  into  bondage.

103.  Fly  for  thy  life  ;  fear  not  the  deep  ;  stretch
out  thy  rod  over  the  sea  ;  and  lift  thy  desire  unto
God.

104.  Thou  hast  learnt  wisdom  in  Egypt  ;  thou  hast
spoiled  the  Egyptians  ;  thou  hast  carried  away  their
fine  gold  and  their  precious  things.

105.  Thou  hast  enriched  thyself  in  the  body ;  but
the  body  shall  not  hold  thee  ;  neither  shall  the  waters
of  the  deep  swallow  thee  up.

106.  Thou  shalt  wash  thy  robes  in  the  sea  of  re-

Hymn  to  Iacchos,  249

generation  ;  the  blood  of  atonement  shall  redeem  thee
to  God.

107.  This  is  thy  chrism  and  anointing,  O  soul ;
this  is  the  first  death  ;  thou  art  the  Israel  of  the
Lord,

108.  Who  hath  redeemed  thee  from  the  dominion
of  the  body,  and  hath  called  thee  from  the  grave,  and
from  the  house  of  bondage,

109.  Unto  the  way  of  the  Cross,  and  to  the  path  in
the  midst  of  the  wilderness  ;

1 10.  Where  are  the  adder  and  the  serpent,  the
mirage  and  the  burning  sand.

in.  For  the  feet  of  the  saint  are  set  in  the  way  of
the  desert.

112.  But  be  thou  of  good  courage,  and  fail  thou  not ;
then  shall  thy  raiment  endure,  and  thy  sandals  shall
not  wax  old  upon  thee.

113.  And  thy  desire  shall  heal  thy  diseases;  it
shall  bring  streams  for  thee  out  of  the  stony  rock ;  it
shall  lead  thee  to  Paradise.

114.  Evoi,  Father  Iacchos,  Jehovah-Nissi ;  Lord  of
the  garden  and  of  the  vineyard  ;

115.  Initiator  and  lawgiver;  God  of  the  cloud  and
of  the  mount.

1 16.  Evoi,  Father  Iacchos ;  out  of  Egypt  hast  thou
called  thy  Son.

250  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

Part  2.

Hymns  to  the  Elemental  Divinities,

(a.)

To  HepJiaistos.

1.  The  spirits  of  the  elements  bear  thee  company,
Lord  Iacchos,  whose  wheels  encompass  thy  planet,
who  hold  the  four  corners  thereof.

2.  Hephaistos  the  Fire-King,  whose  symbol  is  the
red  lion,  Lord  of  the  serpent,  the  flame,  and  of  the
secret  parts  of  the  earth  ;

3.  Whose  veins  are  full  of  fire,  whose  breath  is
destruction  and  burning,  whose  finger  maketh  the
hills  to  smoke,

4.  Ah!  beware  how  thou  invoke  him  ;  as  a  lion  he
devoureth  ;  he  rendeth  and  swalloweth  as  a  furious
beast  of  pre)-.

5.  He  purifieth  and  laveth  waste  ;  the  land  is  as
the  Garden  of  Eden  before  him,  and  behind  him  a
desolate  wilderness.

6.  He  commandeth  the  inmost  zone  of  things;
his  hammer  is  the  Lightning,  and  his  anvil  the  load-
stone.

7.  He  maketh  all  bodies  therewith,  he  fuseth  and
deviseth ;  whether  in  the  small  or  in  the  great,
whether  in  the  outer  or  in  the  inner,  before  Demetej
is  Hephaistos.

8.  He  endoweth  all  metals  with  power,  and  fashion-
eth  all  manner  of  precious  amulets.

9.  The  gold  of  the  womb  of  earth  is  his,  the  mer-

Hymn  to  Hephaistos.  251

cury,  and  the  iron  of  the  mine,  the  sulphur,  the  onyx,
and  the  crystal.

10.  All  his  galleries  are  luminous  with  mirrors  of
fire,  wherein  are  manifold  and  wondrous  images  :  the
glory  of  princes,  the  wealth  of  nations,  yea,  the  splen-
dour of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world.

11.  He  blindeth  and  deludeth  the  eyes  of  men;  he
encompasseth  the  foolish  with  illusions,  and  smiteth
the  feeble  with  madness.

12.  Even  Lucifer,  Lord  of  the  Crystal,  which  hath
power  to  bind  the  children  of  earth,  for  therein  are
imprisoned  the  spirits  of  the  fire.

13.  Serve  not  the  fire  nor  the  crystal,  and  be  not
undone  by  their  sorcery.

14.  For  the  spirits  of  lust  and  illusion  obey  the
crystal,  and  they  who  love  the  light  of  it  shall  fall
under  the  dominion  of  Lucifer.

15.  Be  thou  master  of  the  fire,  and  command  it;
let  not  the  cloven  tongue  of  the  serpent  beguile  thee;
neither  barter  thy  liberty  for  the  fruit  of  enchant-
ment.

16.  For  the  fire  shall  be  quenched  by  the  water,
and  the  water  shall  be  resolved  into  spirit.

17.  But  if  the  fire  consume  thy  soul,  it  shall  be
scattered  abroad  as  ashes,  and  return  to  the  dust  of
the  earth.

18.  For  it  is  fire  that  tries  every  man's  work,  and
purifies  the  substance  of  all  souls.

19.  By  fire  is  the  initiate  baptised,  by  fire  the  obla-
tion is  salted ;  and  the  flame  shall  devour  the  dross
of  the  crucible.

252  "  Clothed  with  the  Szm.9

20.  That  which  endureth  unto  the  end,  the  same
shall  be  saved.

21.  Therefore  be  praised,  Hephaistos,  thou  and  thy
wheel ;  be  praised,  O  searching  and  purgatorial  Fire  !

03.)

Hymn  to  De meter,

1.  And  thou,  Dcmeter,  fair  Earth-Mother,  whose
bosom  the  patient  ox  treadcth,  whose  hands  are  full
of  plenty  and  blessing.

2.  Angel  of  the  crucible,  guardian  of  the  dead,
who  makest  and  unmakest,  who  combinest  and  dis-
solvest,  who  bringest  forth  life  out  of  death,  and
transformest  all  bodies.

3.  They  are  sown  as  seed  in  thy  furrows  ;  they  are
buried  therein,  as  the  droppings  of  the  ripened  ear;
from  thy  womb  they  came  forth,  and  to  thee  they
return,  O  Mother  of  birth  and  of  sleep  !

4.  Who  makest  the  volatile  to  be  fixed,  and  the
real  to  be  apparent,  whether  in  the  great  or  the  small,
whether  in  the  outer  or  the  inner.

5.  Who  yokest  the  cattle  of  the  field  to  thy  plough,
for  thy  dominion  is  of  the  held,  O  daughter  of  Time  ;
thou  bind  est  not  the  sons  of  the  air  and  the  sea.

6.  But  to  the  gross  thou  art  gross,  and  to  the  subtle
thou  art  subtle.

7.  Be  praised,  Demeter,  cunning  and  multiform
alchemist;  be  praised, — thou  and  thy  wheel,  O  fruit-
ful Spirit  of  Earth!

Hymn  to  Poseidon.  253

(y.)

Hymn  to  Poseidon.

1.  And  Poseidon,  Lord  of  the  Deep,  Master  of  the
substance  of  all  creatures,  who  weareth  the  face  of
an  angel,  for  he  is  the  Father  of  Souls. p

2.  His  brow  is  dark  with  storms,  his  voice  is  as
the  thunder  of  cataracts  in  the  mountains ;  he  is
subtle,  and  swift,  and  strong;  he  is  mightier  than
all  the  children  of  earth.

3.  All  things  are  of  the  sea-salt,  for  without  salt
matter  is  not,  whether  of  the  outer  or  of  the  inner,
whether  of  the  small  or  of  the  great.

4.  Behold  the  manifold  waves  of  the  sea,  which  rise
and  sink,  which  break  and  are  lost,  and  follow  each
other  continually;  even  as  these  are  the  transmuta-
tions of  the  soul.

5.  For  the  soul  is  one  substance,  as  is  the  water  of
the  deep,  whose  waves  thou  canst  not  number,  neither
tell  their  shapes,  for  the  form  of  them  passeth  away ;
even  as  these  are  the  incarnations  of  the  soul.

6.  And  the  secret  of  Thetis  is  the  mystery  of  the
Metamorphosis.

7.  Out  of  the  sea  the  horse  ariseth  ;  strength  and
intelligence  are  begotten  of  the  deep.

8.  She  is  the  mother  of  Avatars,  and  her  cup  is  the
chalice  of  bitterness :  whoso  drinketh  thereof  shall
taste  of  power  and  knowledge,  and  of  tears  of  salt.

9.  Be  thou  praised,  O  Poseidon,  thou  and  thy
wheel  ;  be  praised,  O  chrism  of  the  soul,  mighty  and
variable  Spirit  of  the  Sea  !

254  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!

05.)
Hymn  to  Pallas  Athena

1.  And  thou,  Athena,  blue-eyed  virgin,  Mistress  of
the  Air,  eagle-headed,  who  givest  to  all  bodies  the
breath  of  life :

2.  Immaculate  mother  of  the  word  of  prophecy,
symbol  oi  the  holy  essence,  goddess  of  the  segis  and
of  the  spear :

3.  Spirit  of  the  whirlwind,  secret  breather  of  wisdom,
fortifier  of  the  soul,  inspirer  of  armies  :

4.  Shining  maid,  by  whose  spear  we  vanquish,  for
interior  wisdom  thrusteth  all  things  through ;  by
whose  shield  we  are  covered,  for  interior  purity  pre-
serveth  from  all  contagion.

5.  By  thine  aid,  O  Athena,  strong  and  undefiled,  by
thine  aid  the  hero  overcometh  in  the  battle.

6.  By  thine  aid,  O  armed  and  winged  wisdom,  thy
servant  shall  smite  the  lust  of  the  world.

7.  Upon  whose  beauty,  whoso  looketh,  is  changed
into  stone;  who  feedeth  upon  the  souls  ot  men. Q

8.  Be  praised,  O  Atluni,  thou  and  thy  wheel  ;  be
praised  in  the  great  and  the  small,  in  the  outer  and
the  inner,  invisible  and  immaculate  Spirit  of  Life!

to

Efti

I.  These  are  the  four  great  Genii,  which  are  the
angels  of  the  Earth,  the  spirits  o(  the  elements  of  the
macrocosm  and  the  microcosm.

The  Fourth  of  the  Gods.  255

These  are  the  fourfold  Sphinx  of  the  four  states, —
of  the  flesh,  of  the  intermediary,  of  the  human, 'and
of  the  divine.

Of  the  house  of  bondage  in  the  land  of  Egypt ;

Of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  in  the  wilderness ;

Of  the  gate  and  the  tree  of  Eden  ;

Of  the  celestial  chariot  and  the  throne  of  Adonai.

And  the  wheels  of  their  fourfold  kingdom  encircle
the  whole  earth ;  and  are  full  within  and  without  of
the  eyes  of  life. R

No.  XIV.

THETA,   OR  (MYSTICALLY)  THE  FOURTH  OF

the  gods.l

Part  i.

The  Hymn  of  Aphrodite}

(1.)

I   AM  the  dawn,  daughter  of  heaven  and  of  the
deep  :  the  sea-mist  covers  my  beauty  with  a  veil
of  tremulous  light.

2.  I  am  Aphrodite,  the  sister  of  Phoibos,  opener  of
heaven's  gates,  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  the  herald  of
the  perfect  day.

3.  Long  had  darkness  covered  the  deep :  the  soul
of  all  things  slumbered  :  the  valleys  were  filled  with
shadows :  only  the  mountains  and  the  stars  held
commune  together.

1  Home,  received  in  sleep.      September  19,  1884.

> '/

256  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

4.  There  was  no  light  on  the  ways  of  the  earth :
the  rolling  world  moved  outward  on  her  axe :  gloom
and  mystery  shrouded  the  faces  of  the  Gods.

5.  Then  from  out  the  deep  I  arose,  dispeller  of
night:  the  firmament  of  heaven  kindled  with  joy
beholding  me.

6.  The  secrets  of  the  waters  were  revealed :  the
eyes  of  Zeus  looked  down  into  the  heart  thereof.

7.  Ruddy  as  wine  were  the  depths:  the  raiment  of
earth  was  transfigured;  as  one  arising  from  the  dead
She  arose,  full  of  favour  and  grace.

(2.)

8.  Of  God  and  the  soul  is  love  born :  in  the  silence
of  twilight  ;  in  the  mystery  of  sleep.

9.  In  the  fourth  dimension  of  space;  in  the  womb
of  the  heavenly  principle ;  in  the  heart  of  the  man  of
God  ; — there  is  love  enshrined.

10.  Yea,  I  am*  before  aU  things  :  desire  is  born  of
me  :  I  impel  the  springs  of  life  inward  unto  God  :  by
me  the  earth  and  heavens  are  drawn  together.

11.  But  I  am  hidden  until  the  time  of  the  day's
appearing  :  I  lie  beneath  the  waters  of  the  sea,  in  the
deeps  of  the  soul  :  the  bird  of  night  seeth  me  not,
the  herds  in  the  valleys,  nor  the  wild  goat  in  the  cleft
of  the  hill.

12.  As  the  fishes  of  the  sea  am  I  covered:  I  am
secret  and  veiled  from  sight  as  the  children  of  the
deep.

13.  That  which  is  occult  hath  the  fish  for  a  symbol ;
for  the  fish   is  hidden   in   darkness  and  silence :  he

Hymn  of  Aphrodite.  257

knoweth  the  secret  places  of  the  earth,  and  the  springs
of  the  hollow  sea.

14.  Even  so  love  reacheth  to  the  uttermost :  so  find
I  the  secrets  of  all  things  ;  having  my  beginning  and
my  end  in  the  Wisdom  of  God.

15.  The  Spirit  of  Counsel  is  begotten  in  the  soul:
even  as  the  fish  in  the  bosom  of  the  waters.

16.  From  the  sanctuary  of  the  deep  love  ariseth :
salvation  is  of  the  sea.

(3.)

17.  I  am  the  crown  of  manifold  births  and  deaths  :
I  am  the  interpreter  of  mysteries  and  the  enlightener
of  souls.

18.  In  the  elements  of  the  body  is  love  imprisoned  :
lying  asleep  in  the  caves  of  Iacchos ;  in  the  crib  of
the  oxen  of  Demeter.s

19.  But  when  the  day-star  of  the  soul  ariseth  over
the  earth,  then  is  the  epiphany  of  love.

20.  Therefore  until  the  labour  of  the  third  day  be
fulfilled,  the  light  of  love  is  unmanifest.

21.  Then  shall  I  unlock  the  gates  of  dawn;  and
the  glory  of  God  shall  ascend  before  the  eyes  of  men.

(4-)

22.  The  secret  of  the  angel  Anael  is  at  the  heart
of  the  world  :  the  "  Song  of  God  "  is  the  sound  of
the  stars  in  their  courses.

23.  O  love,  thou  art  the  latent  heat  of  the  earth  ;
the  strength  of  the  wine  ;  the  joy  of  the  orchard  and
the  cornfield  :  thou  art  the  spirit  of  song  and  laughter,
and  of  the  desire  of  life.

R

2 53  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

24.  By  thee,  O  goddess,  pure-eyed  and  golden,  the
sun  and  the  moon  are  revealed  :  love  is  the  counsellor
of  heaven.

25.  Cloud  and  vapour  melt  before  thee  :  thou  un-
veilest  to  earth  the  rulers  of  the  immeasurable  skies.

26.  Thou  makest  all  things  luminous  :  thou  dis-
coverest  all  deeps,

27.  From  the  womb  of  the  sea  to  the  heights  of
heaven  ;  from  the  shadow}-  abyss  to  the  throne  of
the  Lord.

28.  Thy  beloved  is  as  a  ring-dove,  wearing  the
ensign  of  the  spirit,  and  knowing  the  secrets  thereof.

29.  Fly,  fly,  O  Dove  ;  the  time  of  spring  cometh  ;
in  the  far  east  the  dawn  ariseth  ;  she  hath  a  message
for  thee  to  bear  from  earth  to  heaven  1  T

Part  2

A  Discourse  of  the  Communion  of  Sou/es,  and  of  the
Uses  of  Love   between   Creature  and    Creature:

being  Part  of  the  Go/dene  Booke  of  J  'euus.  x

1.  Herein  is  Love's  Secret,  and  the  Mysterie  of  the
Communion  o\'  Saintes.

2.  Love  redeemeth.  Love  lifteth  up,  Love  en-
lighteneth,  Love  advanceth  Soules.

1  Printed  as  read  in  a  book  in  German  text,  found  in  a  chamber
purporting  to  be  the  laboratory  of  William  Lilly,  theastn
century),  to  which  the  seercss  had  been  introduced  by  lie:
sleep  for  the  purpose  of  having  her  horoscope  told.      Failing  to  recover
the  whole  of  the  poem  on  the  first  attempt  to  write  it  down,  she  sought
pnd  obtained  access  to  the  book  again  on  the  following  night.

Hymn  of  Love.  259

3.  Love  dissolveth  not,  neither  forgetteth  ;  for  she
is  of  the  Soule  and  hath  everlasting  Remembrance.

4.  Verilie  Love  is  doubly  blessed;  for  She  enricheth
both  Giver  and  Receiver.

5.  Thou  who  lovest  givest  of  thyself  to  thy  Beloved,
and  he  is  dowered  withal.

6.  And  if  any  Creature  whom  thou  lovest  sufTereth
Death  and  departeth  from  thee  ;

7.  Fain  wouldst  thou  give  of  thine  Heartes  Blood
to  have  him  live  always  ;  to  sweeten  the  Changes
before  him,  or  to  lift  him  to  some  happie  Place.

8.  Thou  droppest  teares  on  the  broken  Body  of  thy
Beloved  ;  thy  Desire  goeth  after  him,  and  thou  criest
unto  his  Ghoste, —

9.  "O  Dearest!  would  God  that  I  might  be  with
thee  where  now  thou  art,  and  know  what  now  thou
doest !

10.  "  Would  God  that  I  might  still  guard  and
protect  thee ;  that  I  might  defend  thee  from  all
Pain,  and  Wrong,  and  Affliction  !

1 1.  "  But  what  Manner  of  Change  is  before  thee  I
know  not ;  neither  can  mine  Eyes  follow  thy  Steppes.

12.  "Many  are  the  Lives  set  before  thee,  and  the
Yeares,  O  Beloved,  are  long  and  weary  that  shall
part  us  !

13.  "  Shall  I  knowe  thee  again  when  I  see  thee,  and
will  the  Spirit  of  God  say  to  thee  in  that  day,  '  This
is  thy  Beloved  ?'

14.  "  O  Soule  of  my  Soule !  would  God  I  were  one
with  thee,  even  though  it  were  in  death !

15.  "Thou  hast  all  of  my  Love,  my  Desire,  and  my

260  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!*

Sorrowe  ;  yea,  my  Life  is  mingled  with  thine,  and  is
gone  forth  with  thee  !

16.  "Visit  me  in  Dreames ;  comfort  me  in  the
Night-watches ;  let  my  Ghoste  meet  thine  in  the
Land  of  Shadovves  and  of  Sleep  !

17.  "Every  nighte  with  fervent  Longing  will  I  seek
thee;  Persephone  and  Slumber  shall  give  me  back  the
Past

18.  "Yea,  Death  shall  not  take  thee  wholly  from
me  ;  for  Part  of  me  is  in  thee,  and  where  thou  goest,
Dearest,  there  my  Hearte  followeth  !  "

19.  So  weepest  thou  and  lamentest,  because  the
Soul  thou  lovest  is  taken  from  thy  Sight.

20.  And  Life  seemeth  to  thee  a  Bitter  Thing;  yea,
thou  cursest  the  Destiny  of  all  Living  Creature

21.  And  thou  deemest  thy  Love  of  no  Avail,  and
thy  Tcares  as  idle  Droppes.

22.  Behold,  Love  is  a  Ransome,  and  the  Teares
thereof  are  Prayeres.

23.  And  if  thou  have  lived  purely,  thy  fervent
Desire  shall  be  counted  Grace  to  the  Soule  of  thy
Dead.

24.  For  the  burning  and  continual  Prayere  of  the
Juste  availeth  much.

25.  Yea,  thy  Love  shall  enfold  the  Soule  which
thou  lovest  ;  it  shall  be  unto  him  a  wedding  Garment
and  a  Vesture  of  Blessing.

26.  The  Baptisme  of  thy  Sorrowe  shall  baptize  thy
Dead,  and  he  shall  rise  because  o(  it.

27.  Thy  Prayeres  shall  lift  him  up,  and  thy
Teares   shall    encompasse   his    Steppes ;    thy    Love

Hymn  of  Love.  261

shall  be  to  him  a  Light  shining  upon   the  upward
Waye.

28.  And  the  Angels  of  God  shall  say  unto  him,
"  O  happie  Soule,  that  art  so  well  beloved  ;  that  art
made  so  strong  with  all  these  Teares  and  Sighs.

29.  "  Praise  the  Father  of  Spirits  therefor,  for  this
great  Love  shall  save  thee  many  Incarnations.

30.  "  Thou  art  advanced  thereby ;  thou  art  drawn
aloft  and  carried  upward  by  Cordes  of  Grace."

31.  For  in  such  wise  do  Soules  profit  one  another
and  have  Communion,  and  receive  and  give  Blessing,
the  Departed  of  the  Living,  and  the  Living  of  the
Departed.

32.  And  so  much  J.ie  more  as  the  Hearte  within
them  is  clean,  and  the  Waye  of  their  Intention
is  innocent  in  the  Sight  of  God.

33.  Yea,  the  Saint  is  a  strong  Redeemer;  the
Spirit  of  God  striveth  within  him.

34.  And  God  withstandeth  not  God  ;  for  Love  and
God  are  One.

35.  As  the  Love  of  Christ  hath  Power  with  the
Elect,  so  hath  Power  in  its  degree  the  Love  of  a  Man
for  his  Friend.

36.  Yea,  though  the  Soule  beloved  be  little  and
mean,  a  Creature  not  made  in  the  Likenesse  of
Men.

37.  For  in  the  eyes  of  Love  there  is  nothing  little
nor  poor,  nor  unworthy  of  Prayere.

38.  O  little  Soule,  thou  art  mighty  if  a  Child  of
God  love  thee  ;  yea,  poor  and  simple  Soule,  thou  art
possessed  of  great  Riches.

262  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

39.  Better  is  thy  Portion  than  the  Portion  of  Kings
whom  the  Curse  of  the  Oppressed  pursueth.

40.  For  as  Love  is  strong  to  redeem  and  to
advance  a  Soule,  so  is  Hatred  strong  to  torment  and
to  detain.

41.  Blessed  is  the  Soule  whom  the  Juste  commemo-
rate before  God  ;  for  whom  the  Poor  and  the  Orphan
and  the  dumb  Creature  weep.

42.  And  thou,  O  Righteous  Man,  that  with  burning
Love  bewailest  the  Death  of  the  Innocent,  whom
thou  canst  not  save  from  the  Hands  of  the  Unjuste;

43.  Thou  who  wouldst  freely  give  of  thine  own
Blood  to  redeem  thy  Brother  and  to  loosen  the
Bonds  of  his  Paine  ;

44.  Know  that  in  the  Hour  of  thy  supreme  Desire,
God  accepteth  thine  Oblation.

45.  And  thy  Love  shall  not  return  unto  thee
empty  ;  according  to  the  Greatnesse  of  her  Degree,
she  shall  accomplish  thy  Will.

46.  And  thy  Sorrowe  and  Teares,  and  the  Travaile
of  thy  Spirit,  shall  be  Grace  and  Blessing  to  the  Soule
thou  wouldst  redeem.

47.  Count  not  as  lost  thy  Suffering  on  behalf  of
other  Soules  ;  for  every  Cry  is  a  Prayere,  and  all
Pray  ere  is  Power.

48.  That  thou  wiliest  to  do  is  clone;  thine  Intention
is  united  to  the  Will  of  Divine  Love.

49.  Nothing  is  lost  of  that  which  thou  layest  out
for  God  and  for  thy  Brother.

50.  And  it  is  Love  alone  who  redeemeth,  and  Love
hath  nothing  of  her  own.

The  Last  of  the  Gods.  263

No.  XV

LAMBDA,  OR  THE  LAST  OF  THE  GODS  J  U

being  the  Secret  of  Satan.

AND  on  the  seventh  day  there  went  forth  from
the  presence  of  God  a  mighty  angel,  full  of
wrath  and  consuming,  and  God  gave  unto  him  the
dominion  of  the  outermost  sphere.

2.  Eternity  brought  forth  time  ;  the  boundless  gave
birth  to  limit ;  being  descended  into  generation.

3.  As  lightning  I  beheld  Satan  fall  from  heaven,
splendid  in  strength  and  fury.

4.  Among  the  Gods  is  none  like  unto  Him,  into
whose  hand  are  committed  the  kingdoms,  the  power
and  the  glory  of  the  worlds  :

5.  Thrones  and  empires,  the  dynasties  of  kings,  the
fall  of  nations,  the  birth  of  churches,  the  triumphs  of
time.

6.  They  arise  and  pass,  they  were  and  are  not ;  the
sea  and  the  dust  and  the  immense  mystery  of  space
devour  them.

7.  The  tramp  of  armies,  the  voices  of  joy  and  of
pain,  the  cry  of  the  new-born  babe,  the  shout  of  the
warrior  mortally  smitten.

8.  Marriage,  divorce,  division,  violent  deaths,
martyrdoms,  tyrannous  ignorances,  the  impotence  of
passionate  protest,  and  the  mad  longing  for  oblivion :

9.  The  eyes  of  the  tiger  in  the  jungle,  the  fang  of

264  "  Clothed  with  the  Si  111."

the  snake,  the  foetor  of  slaughter-houses,  the  wail  of
innocent  beasts  in  pain  :

10.  The  innumerable  incarnations  of  spirit,  the
strife  towards  manhood,  the  ceaseless  pulse  and  cur-
rent of  desire  : —

11.  These  are  his  who  beareth  all  the  Gods  on  his
shoulders  ;v  who  establisheth  the  pillars  of  necessity
and  fate.

12.  Many  names  hath  God  given  him,  names  of
mystery,  secret  and  terrible.

13.  God  called  him  Satan  the  Adversary,  because
matter  opposeth  spirit,  and  time  accuseth  even. the
saints  of  the  Lord.

14.  And  the  Destroyer,  for  his  arm  breaketh  and
grindeth  to  pieces  ;  wherefore  the  fear  and  the  dread
of  him  are  upon  all  flesh.

15.  And  the  Avenger,  for  he  is  the  anger  of  God;
his  breath  shall  burn  up  all  the  souls  of  the  wicked.

16.  And  the  Sifter,  for  he  straineth  all  things
through  his  sieve,  dividing  the  husk  from  the  grain  ;
discovering  the  thoughts  of  the  heart ;  proving  and
purifying  the  spirit  o(  man.

17.  And  the  Deceiver,  for  he  maketh  the  false
appear  true,  and  concealeth  the  real  under  the  mask
of  illusion.

18.  And  the  Tempter,  for  he  setteth  snares  before
the  feet  of  the  elect :  he  beguileth  with  vain  shows,
and  seduceth  with  enchantments.

19.  Blessed  are  they  who  withstand  his  sub:
they  shall  be  called  the  Sons  of  God,  and  shall  enter
in  at  the  beautiful  ^ates.

The  Secret  of  Sa  tan.  265

20.  For  Satan  is  the  doorkeeper  of  the  temple  of
the  King  :  he  standeth  in  Solomon's  porch  ;  he  holdeth
the  keys  of  the  sanctuary ;

21.  That  no  man  may  enter  therein  save  the
Anointed,  having  the  arcanum  of  Hermes.

22.  For  Satan  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Fear  of  the  Lord,
which  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.

23.  He  is  the  devourer  of  the  unwise  and  the  evil:
they  shall  all  be  meat  and  drink  to  him.

24.  Whatsoever  he  devoureth,  that  shall  never  more
return  into  being.

25.  Fear  him,  for  after  he  hath  killed,  he  hath
power  to  cast  into  hell.

26.  But  he  is  the  servant  of  the  Sons  of  God,  and  of
the  children  of  light.

27.  They  shall  go  before  him,  and  he  shall  follow
the  steps  of  the  wise.

28.  Stand  in  awe  of  him  and  sin  not :  speak  his
name  with  trembling ;  and  beseech  God  daily  to
deliver  thee.

29.  For  Satan  is  the  magistrate  of  the  justice  of
God  :  he  beareth  the  balance  and  the  sword,

30.  To  execute  judgment  and  vengeance  upon  all
who  come  short  of  the  commandments  of  God  ;  to
weigh  their  works,  to  measure  their  desire,  and  to
number  their  days.

31.  For  to  him  are  committed  weight  and  measure
and  number ;

32.  And  all  things  must  pass  under  the  rod  and
through  the  balance,  and  be  fathomed  by  the  sound-
ing-lead.

266  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun''

33.  Therefore  Satan  is  the  minister  of  God,  Lord
of  the  seven  mansions  of  Hades,  the  angel  of  the
manifest  worlds.

34.  And  God  hath  put  a  girdle  about  his  loins,
and  the  name  of  the  girdle  is  Death.

35.  Threefold  are  its  coils,  for  threefold  is  the
power  of  Death,  dissolving  the  bod}-,  the  ghost,  and
the  soul.

36.  And  that  girdle  is  black  within,  but  where
Phoibos  strikes  it  is  silver.

37.  None  of  the  Gods  is  girt  save  Satan,  for  upon
him  only  is  the  shame  of  generation.

38.  He  hath  lost  his  virginal  estate  :  uncovering
heavenly  secrets,  he  hath  entered  into  bone:

39.  He  encompasseth  with  bonds  and  limits  all
things  which  are  made  :  he  putteth  chains  round
about  the  worlds,  and  determineth  their  orbits.

40.  By  him  are  creation  and  appearance  ;  by  him
birth  and  transformation  ;  the  day  of  begetting  and
the  night  of  death.

41.  The  glory  of  Satan  is  the  shadow  of  the  Lord  :
the  throne  of  Satan  is  the  footstool  of  Adonai.

42.  Twain  are  the  armies  of  God:  in  heaven  the
hosts  of  Michael  ;  in  the  abyss  the  legions  of  Satan.

43.  These  are  the  unmanifest  and  the  manifest;
the  free  and  the  bound  ;  the  virginal  and  the  fallen.

44.  And  both  are  the  ministers  of  the  Father,  ful-
filling the  word  divine.

45.  The  legions  of  Satan  are  the  creative  emana-
tions, having  the  shapes  of  dragons,  oi  Titans,  an
elemental  gods ;

The  Secret  of  Satan.  267

46.  Forsaking  the  intelligible  world,1  seeking  mani-
festation, renouncing  their  first  estate  ;

47.  Which  were  cast  out  into  chaos,  neither  was
their  place  found  any  more  in  heaven.

(2.)

48.  Evil  is  the  result  of  limitation,  and  Satan  is  the
Lord  of  limit.

49.  He  is  the  father  of  lies,  because  matter  is  the
cause  of  illusion.

50.  To  understand  the  secret  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  to  read  the  riddle  of  Maya,  this  is  to  have
Satan  under  foot.

51.  He  only  can  put  Satan  underfoot  who  is  re-
leased by  thought  from  the  bonds  of  desire.

52.  Nature  is  the  allegory  of  spirit :  all  that  appear-
eth  to  the  sense  is  deceit :  to  know  the  truth, — this
alone  shall  make  men  free.

53.  For  the  kingdom  of  Satan  is  the  house  of
matter:  yea,  his  mansion  is  the  sepulchre  of  Golgotha,
wherein  on  the  seventh  day  the  Lord  lay  sleeping,
keeping  the  Sabbath  of  the  unmanifest.

54.  For  the  day  of  Satan  is  the  night  of  spirit :  the
manifestation  of  the  worlds  of  form  is  the  rest  of  the
worlds  informulate.

55.  Holy  and  venerable  is  the  Sabbath  of  God:
blessed  and  sanctified  is  the  name  of  the  angel  of
Hades ;

56.  Whom  the  Anointed  shall  overcome,  rising
again  from  the  dead  on  the  first  day  of  the  week.

1  Of  which  the  sensible  world  is  the  antithesis.

268  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun?

57.  For  the  place  of  Satan  is  the  bourne  of  divine
impulsion  :  there  is  the  arrest  of  the  outgoing  force  ;
Luza,  the  station  of  pause  and  slumber  :

58.  Where  Jacob  lay  down  and  dreamed,  beholding
the  ladder  which  reached  from  earth  to  heaven.

59.  For  Jacob  is  the  planetary  angel  Iacchos,  the
Lord  of  the  body  ;

60.  Who  hath  left  his  father's  house,  and  is  gone
out  into  a  far  country.

61.  Yet  is  Luza  none  other  than  Bethel;  the  king-
dom of  Satan  is  become  the  kingdom  of  God  and  of
His  Chri.st.

62.  For  there  the  Anointed  awakeneth,  arising  from
sleep,  and  goeth  his  way  rejoicing  ;

63.  Having  seen  the  vision  of  God,  and  beheld  the
secret  of  Satan  ;

64.  Even  as  the  Lord  arose  from  the  dead  and
brake  the  seal  of  the  sepulchre  ;

65.  Which  is  the  portal  of  heaven,  Luza,  the  house
of  separation,  the  place  of  stony  sleep  ;

66.  Where  is  born  the  centripetal  force,  drawing
the  soul  upward  and  inward  to  God  ;

67.  Recalling  Existence  into  Being,  resuming  the
kingdoms  of  matter  in  spirit  ;  w

6S.  Until  Satan  return  unto  his  first  estate,  and
enter  again  into  the  heavenly  obedience  ;

69.  Having  fulfilled  the  will  oi  the  Father,  and
accomplished  his  holy  ministry  ;

70.  Which  was  ordained  of  God  before  the  worlds,
for  the  splendour  of  the  manifest,  and  for  the  genera-
tion of  Christ  our  Lord  ;  x

The  Seven  Spirits  of  God.

269

71.  Who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  putting
all  things  under  his  feet ;  whose  are  the  dominion,  the
power,  the  glory,  and  the  Amen. Y

XVI.

THE  SEVEN  SPIRITS  OF  GOD  AND  THEIR  CORRESPONDENCES.

Elohim  or  Arch-
angels.

Signification.

Gods.

Office.

I.

Uriel

=   Fire  of  God.

Phoibos  Apollo.

Angel  of  the  Sun.

2.

Raphael

=   Physician  of  God.

Hermes.

Angel  of  Mercury.

3-

Anael

=   Sweet  Song  of  God.    Aphrodite.

Angel  of  Venus.

4-

Salamiel

=   Acquired  of  God.

Dionysos.

Angel  of  the  Earth.

5-

Zacchariel

=  Man  of  God.

Ares.

Angel  of  Mars.

6.

Michael

=   Like  unto  God.

Zeus  and  Hera.

Angel  of  Jupiter.

7-

Orifiel  (or  Satan)  =   Hour  of  God.

Kronos.

Angel  of  Saturn.

Gabriel

=    Strength  of  God.

Artemis  or  Isis.

Angel      of      the
Moon.

Tincture  of  Ray.

The  Spirit  of

Tincture  of  Ray.

The  Spirit  of

1.

Red.

Wisdom.

6.   Purple.

Righteousness.

2.

Orange.

Understanding.

7.  Violet.

Divine  Awe.

3-

Yellow.

Counsel.

(HenceReverence

4-

Gveen.

Power.

and  Humility.)

5-

Blue.

Knowledge.

White,  being  the  combination  of  all  the  rays,  implies  full  illumination  and
intuition  of  God,  the  symbol  of  which  is  the  full  moon,  and  is  the  symbol  of
initiation,  Attaining  to  this  state,  the  soul  is  the  mystical  "  Woman  clothed
with  the  Sun,"  of  Apoc.  xii.  I.  Gabriel,  the  angel  of  this  state,  represents  the
reflective  principle  of  the  soul.  He  is  not  one  of  the  seven  E]  >him,  but  is  the
complement  of  them  all,  being  the  spirit  of  all  the  moons.

270

"  Clothed  Willi  the  Sum"

No.    XVII.

THE   MYSTERIES   OF   THE   KINGDOMS   OF   THE
SEVEN  SPHERES,

I    believe   in    the   Holy
Ghost,

Whose  seven  spirits  are  as
the  seven  rays  of  light  ;

The       Holy      Catholic
Church,

Or,      kingdom     of     heaven
within  man  ;

The      Communion      of

Saints,
Or,  the  elect ;

The  Forgiveness  of  Sins,
Or,  passing-through  of  souls  ;

The  Nous,  or  Sun,  of  the  micro-
cosm, the  Spirit  of  Wisdom,
the  ray  of  whose  angel,  Phoi-
bos,  is  the  red  of  the  inner-
most sphere.

Hermes,  or  Peter,  the  Spirit
of  Understanding,  and  rock
whereon  the  true  Church  is
built,  the  guardian  and  inter-
preter of  the  holy  mysteries.

Aphrodite,  Venus,  love,  the
Spirit  of  Counsel,  or  prin-
ciple of  sympathy,  harmony,
and  light,  whereby  heaven
and  earth  are  revealed  to
each  other  and  drawn  to-
gether.

Iacchos,  the  initiator,  Lord
of  transmigration,  whereby
alone  Karma  is  satisfied  and
sins  wiped  out  by  expiation
and  repentance.  As  the
Spirit  of  Power,  he  represents
the  force  whereby  creation
and  redemption  alike  are
accomplished,  the  direction
only  being  reversed.

The  Mysteries  of  the  Seven  Spheres.     2  7 1

The  Resurrection  (which
is  the  redemption)  of  the
body,

From  material  limitations ;

The  Life  Everlasting

And  the  Amen,

Or,  final  consummation.

Ares,  or  Mars,  the  war-god,
and  Spirit  of  Knowledge,  of
whom  comes  contention,  at
the  cost  of  suffering  and
death,  for  the  divine  know-
ledge whereby  man  learns
the  secret  of  transmutation,
which  is  the  crowning  con-
quest of  matter  by  spirit.

Zeus  and  Hera,  rulers  of  heaven,
the  dual  Spirit  of  Righteous-
ness or  godliness,  which  is
justice,  or  the  perfect  balance,
and  the  secret  of  eternal
generation.

Saturn,  or  Satan,  the  Spirit  of
the  Ftar  of  the  Lord,  being
the  angel — unfallen— of  the
outermost  sphere,  and  keeper
of  the  boundary  of  the  divine
kingdom,  within  which  is
the  perfection,  and  without
which,  the  negation  of  being.

[The  man  fully  regenerate  needs  no  "moon"  to  reflect  to  him
the  "sun."  Wherefore  Gabriel,  having  no  function  to  fulfil
in  the  perfected  kosmos,  is  indrawn,  and  does  not  appear  in
these  mysteries.  See  Part  I.,  No.  XIV.  part  2,  "  Concerning
the  Genius."]

PART  THE  THIRD.

CONCERNING  THE   DIVINE    IMAGE

OR

THE  VISION   OF  ADONAI.

CONCERNING  THE   DIVINE  IMAGE,  OR  THE  VISION
OF   ADONAI.

[Owing  at  once  to  the  sanctity  and  the  unpronounceability  of
the  Tetragrammaton,  or  word  of  four  letters  which  in  the
Hebrew  constitutes  the  name  Jehovah,  the  Hebrews  invariably
substitute  for  it  in  speaking  the  name  Adonai,  which  in  the  A.  V.
is  rendered  "  the  Lord."  These  names  are,  however,  substantially
identical,  in  that  they  alike  imply  a  duality  corresponding  to
that  of  the  sexes, — a  duality  which  arises,  necessarily,  from  the
nature  of  the  function  fulfilled  by  their  bearer,  which  is  that  of
the  expression,  word,  or  manifestor  of  Deity  in  the  dual  character
of  Father-Mother,  as  expounded  in  Nos.  VII.  and  VIII.  of
Part  II.  ;  from  which  it  follows  that  this  Person  of  the  Trinity
is,  properly,  not  "Son"  merely,  but  "Son-Daughter."  As  thus
exhib  ted,  the  Trinity  consists  of  Father,  Mother,  and  Child,
— (respective  ly  energy,  substance,  and  phenomenon), — and  repre-
sents a  mode  of  the  godhead  which,  logically  (not  chronologically,
time  having  no  relation  to  the  eternal),  is  antecedent  to  that
of  the  ecclesiastical  Trinity,  wherein  the  "  Son  "  appears  as  the
second  person,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  third.  For  in  this
aspect,  the  "Mother"  (substance)  is  merged  in  the  "Father"
(energy  or  will),  the  two  together  constituting  one  person, — the
first,  and  the  Son  appears  as  the  second,  while  the  third  is  the
Holy  Spirit,  or  divinity  in  its  dynamic  or  active  mode  as  dis-
tinguished from  its  static  or  passive  mode.  Proceeding  from
the  Father-Mother  through  the  Son,  and  identical  in  nature  with
them,  the  Holy  Spirit  is,  like  them,  dual,  and  consists  of  both
energy  and  substance.  For  which  reason  the  names  and  symbols
denoting  the  Holy  Spirit  are  masculine  or  feminine,  according
to  the  aspect  or  function  concerned.     On  its  procession  through

276  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

the  Son  the  Holy  Spirit  differentiates  into  the  seven  modes  or
potencies  called  the  Seven  Spirits  of  God  (as  described  in  Xos.
VI.,  VIII.,  and  X.  of  Part  II.)  dividing,  like  light  on  its  emer-
gence from  the  prism,  into  seven  rays.  These  are  the  Seven
Spirits  of  God,  the  creative  Elohim,  which,  with  the  three  persons
of  the  Trinity,  constitute  the  ten  Sephiroth  of  the  Kabala.
Functions  of  the  Supreme  and  essential  principles  in  the  Divine
nature,  they  are  styled,  on  entering  into  manifestation,  Gods  and
Archangels  ;  and  inasmuch  as  they  are  manifold  and  various  as
the  spheres  and  kingdoms  of  nature,  in  all  of  which  they  are
operative,  and  comprise  grades  and  distinctions  innumerable,
repeating  themselves  like  the  notes  of  the  musical  scale  in  mam-
keys  and  tones,  their  names  are  rather  titles  of  orders  than
designations  of  individuals.  In  no  case  can  they  be  apprehended
of  the  outer  senses,  but  to  souls  sufficiently  mature  and  sensitive
they  manifest  themselves  under  forms  personal  and  symbolical
of  their  offices,  being  both  seen  and  heard  of  the  interior  self-
hood. And  just  as  the  Rainbow  is  one,  though  rainbows  are
legion, — inasmuch  as  all  these  are  manifestations  of  one  and  the
same  principle  inhering  in  the  nature  of  light, — so  is  each  divinity
one,  however  multiplied  his  personality,  inasmuch  as  every
appearance  is  but  a  fresh  manifestation  of  one  and  the  same
principle  subsisting  in  the  divine  nature,  and  for  that  reason
subsisting  also  in  every  soul  that  is  able  to  polarise  divinity.
Thus  is  the  soul  "  Mother  of  God"  and  also  of  the  Gods,  and
u  Man  is  a  universe  in  himself,  having  the  thrones  of  all  the
Gods  in  his  temple."  And  of  their  cc-operation  is  the  edification
of  the  world  into  the  kingdom  of  Gcd,  and  of  man  in  the  Divine
image,  that  of  Adonai.  Attaining  to  this  image,  man  has  and  is
Christ,  Christ  being  the  correspondent,  equivalent,  or  counter-
part in  man,  of  Adonai  in  substance.  And,  saving  Adonai
himself,  they  are  the  highest  objects  of  the  sensible  perception
of  the  soul.  That  Adonai  is  the  highest  of  all  such  objects  is
because  he  is  the  image  beheld  in  the  point  of  the  focus  formed
by  the  convergence  of  all  the  consciousnesses  of  the  system  and
their  polarisation  to  the  highest  plane.  Beyond  him  is  the
"  Invisible  Light," — the  "  Divine  Dark  ■  of  the  early  Christian

Concerning  the  Divine  Image.  277

mystics,1 — the  boundless  sea  of  infinite  wisdom,  love,  and
power,  informulate  and  unmanifest,  the  universally -diffused
divinity ;  impersonal  in  the  radical  sense  of  the  word,  but
personal  in  the  highest  degree  in  its  true  sense,  that  of  essen-
tial consciousness  ;  and  in  Adonai  taking  form  and  personality
in  both  senses.

The  Jehovah  or  Adonai  of  the  Hebrews  is  thus  no  mere  "tribal"
god,  as  supposed  by  writers  more  learned  and  ingenious  than
experienced  or  percipient,  on  the  strength  of  the  defective  pre-
sentations of  Him  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  ;  nor  is  He  but  a
partial  aspect  only  of  deity,  or  a  being  unreal  and  imaginary.
He  is  actually  the  one  and  supreme  divinity,  the  central,  radiant,
and  pivotal  point  of  the  universe — its  spiritual  sun — the  God  of
Gods,  from  whom  all  others  proceed,  and  of  whom  all  others  are
modes  and  aspects.  And  He  is  this  absolutely  and  indefeasibly,
how  defective  and  misleading  soever  the  human  conceptions  and
presentations  of  Him.  And  being  recognised  as  such,  He  is
fitly  described  as  a  "jealous"  God,  in  that  he  reprobates  the
ascription  to  the  low  or  to  a  part,  of  the  honour  due  only  to  the
highest  and  to  the  whole  ;  and  He  is  this,  not  for  His  own  sake,
• — He  cannot  suffer  loss — but  for  the  sake  of  those  His  creatures
who,  by  limiting  their  ideal  of  the  Divine  perfection,  withhold
themselves  from  the  realisation  of  their  own  perfection,  and
thereby  from  being  made  in  the  Divine  image.  For  what  man
thinks,  that  he  is.

The  vision  about  to  be  described  of  Adonai,  was  received
without  any  previous  knowledge  on  the  part  of  its  recipient,
either  of  its  possibility,  or  of  its  having  always  been  claimed  as
a  recognised  fact  of  mystical  experience,  the  allusions  to  it  in
the  Bible,2  although  by  no  means  rare,  having  altogether  escaped
her  recognition  as  having  any  real  basis  in  the  consciousness.8

1  J£.g.,  St  Dionysius  "the  Areopagite."

2  Ex.  xxiv.  9-1 1 ;  Is.  vi.  I  j  Ezek.  viii.  2  ;  Dan,  vii.  9,  10;  Apoc.  iv.  ;
xx.  11.

3  The  reception  of  it  by  myself  a  lew  mouths  previously  had  been
similarly  independent  of  knowledge  or  anticipation,  and  I  had  been
constrained  to  maintain  an  absolute  reserve  in   regard    to   it.     The

278  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

On  this  occasion  she  had  been  forewarned  of  something  of  un-
usual solemnity  as  about  to  occur,  and  prompted  to  make
certain  ceremonial  preparations  obviously  calculated  to  impress
the  imagination.  The  access  came  upon  her  while  standing  by
the  open  window,  gazing  at  the  moon,  then  close  upon  the  full.1
The  first  effect  of  the  ajfl.itus  was  to  cause  her  to  kneel  and
pray  in  a  rapt  attitude,  with  her  arms  extended  towards  the
sky.  It  appeared  afterwards,  that  under  an  access  of  spiritual
exaltation,  she  had  yielded  to  a  sudden  and  uncontrollable
impulse  to  pray  that  she  might  be  taken  to  the  stars,  and  shown
all  the  glory  of  the  universe.  Presently  she  rose,  and  after
gazing  upwards  in  ecstasy  for  a  few  moments,  lowered  her  eyes,
and,  clasping  her  arms  around  her  head  as  if  to  shut  out  the
view,  uttered  in  tones  of  wonder,  mingled  with  moans  and  cries
of  anguish,  the  following  tokens  of  the  intolerable  splendour  of
the  vision  she  had  unwittingly  invited]  : —

"  Oh,  I  see  masses,  masses  of  stars  !  It  makes  me
giddy  to  look  at  them.  O  my  God,  what  masses!
Millions  and  millions!  Wheels  of  planets!2  O  my
God,  my  God,  why  didst  Thou  create  ?  It  was  by
Will,  all  Will,  that  Thou  didst  it.  Oh:  what  might,
what  might  of  Will !  Oh,  what  gulfs!  what  gulfs!
Millions    and    millions    of    miles    broad     and    deep!

account  in  The  Perfect  Way  (IX.  v.)  was  written  from  our  joint  ex-
periences. Many  of  our  experiences  were  thus  duplicated,  hers,  how-
ever, far  exceeding  mine  both  in  number  and  in  fulness  of  detail.  The
latter,  probably,  because  I  always  made  a  point  of  retaining  posses
of  the  external  consciousness,  in  order  to  observe  and  record  at  the  same
time,  and  not  knowing  the  result  of  letting  myself  go  altogether.

1  It  was  at  Paris,  July  23.  1877.

2  It  was  as  if  there  had  been  suddenly  opened  to  her  view  a
universe  of  inter-planetary  systems,  invisible  to  the  bodily  sight;  and
while  dazzlingly  bright  to  the  spiritual  eyes,  of  a  consistency  too  tenuous
to  intercept  or  refract  the  solar  ray5.  A  like  effect  would  also  be  pro-
duced by  entering  the  fourth  dimension  oi  space,  where  all  things  would
be  beheld  unmodified  by  distance  or  any  intervening  medium.

W

Concerning  the  Divine  Image.  279

Hold  me — hold  me  up !  I  shall  sink — I  shall  sink
into  the  gulfs.  I  am  sick  and  giddy,  as  on  a  billowy
sea.  I  am  on  a  sea,  an  ocean — the  ocean  of  infinite
space.  Oh,  what  depths  !  what  depths !  I  sink — I
fail !     I  cannot,  cannot  bear  it !

"  I  shall  never  come  back.  I  have  left  my  body
for  ever.  I  am  dying ;  I  believe  I  am  dead.  Im-
possible to  return  from  such  a  distance  !  Oh,  what
colossal  forms !  They  are  the  angels  of  the  planets.
Every  planet  has  its  angel  standing  erect  above  it.
And  what  beauty — what  marvellous  beauty  !  I  see
Raphael.  I  see  the  angel  of  the  earth.  He  has  six
wings.  He  is  a  god — the  god  of  our  planet.  I  see
my  genius,  who  called  himself  A.  Z. ;  but  his  name
is  Salathiel.1  Oh,  how  surpassingly  beautiful  he  is !
My  genius  is  a  male,  and  his  colour  is  ruby.  Yours,
Caro,2  is  a  female,  and  sapphire.  They  are  friends —
they  are  the  same — not  two,  but  one  ;  and  for  that
reason  they  have  associated  us  together,  and  speak  of
themselves  sometimes  as  /,  sometimes  as  We.  It  is
the  angel  of  the  earth  himself  that  is  your  genius  and
mine,  Caro.     He  it  was  who  inspired  you,  who  spoke

1  "  Lent  of  God."  Every  divinity  has  a  separate  name  for  each  office
fulfilled  by  him.  Salathiel  thus  denotes  the  angel  of  the  earth  in  his
capacity  as  head  of  the  order  of  Genii,  in  the  sense  of  being  the  supreme
spirit  (of  the  planet)  of  whom  each  genius  is  a  manifestation,  and  into
whom  they  return  on  the  accomplishment  of  their  mission.  As  the  first
and  last  letters  of  the  alphabet,  A  and  Z,  correspond  to  the  "  Alpha  and
Omega,"  in  the  sense  of  implying  comprehension  of  the  genii  of  all
orders  or  grades,  and  consequently  all  the  rays  of  the  spiritual  prism.

2  A  spiritual  or  ' '  initiation  "  name  that  had  been  given  to  me,  as  Mary
to  her.     The  latter,  however,  was  also  one  of  her  own  names.

280  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

to  you.1  And  they  call  me  Bitterness.  And  I  see
sorrow — oh,  what  unending  sorrow  do  I  behold !
Sorrow,  always  sorrow,  but  never  without  love.  I
shall  always  have  love.  How  dim  is  this  sphere !
Oh,  save  me — save  me !  It  is  my  demon  that  I  am
approaching.  It  is  Paris — Paris  himself,  once  of
Troy,  now  of  the  city  that  bears  his  name.  He  is
floating  recumbent.  He  turns  his  face  towards  me.
How  beautiful  and  dark  he  is !  Oh,  he  has  goat's
horns — he  has  goat's  horns  !  Save  me,  save  me  from
him  !  Ah,  he  sees  me  not.  I  forgot  I  am  invisible.
Now  I  have  passed  him.2

"  I  am  entering  a  brighter  region  now.  What
glorious  form  of  womanhood  is  that,  so  queenly,  so
serene,  and  endowed  with  all  wisdom  ?  It  is  Pallas
Athena, — a  real  personage  in  the  spiritual  world !
And  yonder  is  one  of  whom  I  have  no  need  to  ask.
I  am  passing  through  the  circle  of  the  Olympians.
It  is  Aphrodite,  mother  of  love  and  beauty.  O
Aphrodite,  spirit  of  the  waters,  firstborn  of  God,  how
could  I  adore  thee !  And  men  on  earth  now  deem
the  gods  and  goddesses  of  Greece  mere  fables  !  And  I
behold  them  living  and  moving  in  strength  and  beauty
before  me  !  I  see  also  the  genii  of  all  the  nations
dwelling  serenely  in  heavenly  circles.  What  crowds
and  crowds   of  gods  from   India  and   Egypt!     Who

1  The  reference  here  is  to  an  experience  of  my  own,  the  relation  of
which  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  book.

"  The  reference  here  is  to  sundry  visitations  by  which  she  had  been
harassed  previous  to  my  joining  her  in  Paris,  the  cause  of  which  she
thus  recognised  for  the  first  time,  and  whom  she  was  wont  to  call  her
demon,  using  the  term  in  its  conventional  sense.

one  a

■  j ling  the  Divine  Image.  281

are  those  with  the  giant  muscles  ?  They  are  Odin
and  Thor,  and  their  fellow-gods  of  Scandinavia.  Not
dead  and  lost ;  only  withdrawn  from  the  world
whereon  they  sought  in  vain  to  stamp  their  images
for  ever.

"  Oh,  the  dazzling,  dazzling  brightness  !  Hide  me,
hide  me  from  it !  I  cannot,  cannot  bear  it !  It  is
agony  supreme  to  look  upon.  O  God  !  O  God  !
Thou  art  slaying  me  with  Thy  light.  It  is  the  throne
itself,  the  great  white  throne  of  God  that  I  behold  !
Oh,  what  light!  what  light!  It  is  like  an  emerald  ?
a  sapphire  ?  No  ;  a  diamond.  In  its  midst  stands
Deity  erect,  His  right  hand  raised  aloft,  and  from  Him
pours  the  light  of  light.  Forth  from  His  right  hand
streams  the  universe,  projected  by  the  omnipotent
repulsion  of  His  will.  Back  to  His  left,  which  is  de-
pressed and  set  backwards,  returns  the  universe,  drawn
by  the  attraction  of  His  love.  Repulsion  and  at-
traction, will  and  love,  right  and  left,  these  are  the
forces,  centrifugal  and  centripetal,  male  and  female,
whereby  God  creates  and  redeems.  Adonai !  O
Adonai !  Lord  God  of  life,  made  of  the  substance  of
light,  how  beautiful  art  Thou  in  Thine  everlasting
youth  !  with  Thy  glowing  golden  locks,  how  adorable  !
And  I  had  thought  of  God  as  elderly  and  venerable  !
As  if  the  Eternal  could  grow  old  !  And  now  not  as
Man  only  do  I  behold  Thee !  For  now  Thou  art  to
me  as  Woman.  Lo,  Thou  art  both.  One,  and  Two
also.  And  thereby  dost  Thou  produce  creation.  O
God,  O  God  !  why  didst  Thou  create  this  stupen-
dous existence?     Surely,  surely,  it  had  been  better  in

282  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

love  to  have  restrained  Thy  will.  It  was  by  will  that
Thou  createdst,  by  will  alone,  not  by  love,  was  it  not  ?
— was  it  not  ?  I  cannot  see  clearly.  A  cloud  has
come  between.

"  I  see  Thee  now  as  Woman.  Maria  is  next  beside
Thee.  Thou  art  Maria.  Maria  is  God.  Oh  Maria  !
God  as  Woman  '.  Thee,  Thee  I  adore !  Maria
Aphrodite  !     Mother  !  Mother-God  !

"They  are  returning  with  me  now,  I  think.  But  I
shall  never  get  back.  What  strange  forms  !  how  huge
they  are !  All  angels  and  archangels.  Human  in
lorm,  yet  some  with  eagles'  heads.  All  the  planets
Lre  inhabited !  how  innumerable  is  the  variety  of
forms  !  O  universe  of  existence,  how  stupendous
W  existence !  Oh  !  take  me  not  near  the  sun  ;  I
cannot  bear  its  heat.  Already  do  I  feel  m\
burning.  Here  is  Jupiter!  It  has  nine  moons!
Yes.  nine.  Some  are  exceedingly  small.  And,  oh,
how  red  it  is !  It  has  so  much  iron.  And  what
enormous  men  and  women  !  There  is  evil  there
too.  For  evil  is  wherever  are  matter  and  limitation.
But  the  people  of  Jupiter  are  far  better  than  we  on
earth.  They  know  much  more;  they  are  much  wiser.
There  is  less  of  evil  in  their  planet.  Ah  !  and  they
have  another  sense.  What  is  it  ?  Xo,  I  cannot
describe  it.  I  cannot  tell  what  it  is.  It  differs  from
any  of  the  others.  We  have  nothing  like  it.  I
cannot  get  back  yet  I  believe  I  shall  never  get  back.
I  believe  I  am  dead.  It  is  only  my  body  you  are
holding.  It  has  crown  cold  for  want  of  me.  Vet
I    must    be    approaching      It    is    growing   shallower.

Concerning  the  Divine  Image,  283

We  are  passing  out  of  the  depths.     But  I  can  never
wholly  return — never — never."

[Her  apprehension  was  not  without  justification  ;  for  her  body
was  completely  torpid,  and  several  hours  passed  before  con-
sciousness was  fully  restored  to  it.

It  is  impossible  for  anyone  who  did  not  witness  the  intensely
dramatic  action  and  emphasis  with  which  these  ejaculations
were  uttered,  to  form  anything  like  an  adequate  conception  of
the  sense  of  reality  they  conveyed.  Able  as  I  was  from  my  own
experience  above  referred  to,  to  follow  her  in  her  journey  from
sphere  to  sphere  to  the  very  highest  and  inmost,  I  found  it  im-
possible to  doubt  that  the  seeress  was  in  the  right,  when,  re-
calling her  recollections,  she  declared  her  conviction  that  what
she  had  beheld  was  no  illusion,  but  the  reality  itself  of  the
universe.  There  was  for  both  of  us  the  same  sense  of  journeying
through  vast  abysses  of  space  and  traversing  various  spheres  of
being  ;  and  the  same  conviction  that  the  journey  was  at  once  to
the  centre  of  one's  own  and  to  that  of  all  consciousness.

She  described  the  attitude  and  expression  of  Adonai  as  those
of  the  absolute  calmness  and  repose  of  the  power  without  effort
which  is  predicable  only  of  the  Infinite.  Though  bearing  the
aspect  of  humanity,  it  was  impossible,  she  felt,  to  represent  the
form  in  fixed  outline,  and  declared  that  it  seemed  like  a  sacrilege
to  attempt  thus  to  portray  it.  She  nevertheless  made  the
attempt,  with  the  result  reproduced  below.  It  represents,  how-
ever, only  the  masculine  aspect,  the  impression  of  the  feminine
having  entirely  failed  to  reach  her  outer  consciousness  ;  and
this  had  been  the  case  also  on  the  only  other  occasion  on  which
she  had  beheld  it.  (See  p.  85.)  In  this  respect  our  experiences
differed.  She  was  most  strongly  impressed  by  the  masculine,
or  will,  element  in  Deity  ;  and  I  by  the  feminine,  or  love,  ele-
ment. In  another  respect,  too,  there  was  a  difference.  For  her
the  form  was  that  of  one  standing  erect,  and  though  calm,
energetic  :  for  me  it  was  that  of  the  "Sitter  on  the  Throne"
and  wholly  reposeful,  though  similarly  engaged  in  the  act
of  projection  and  recall.      These  differences  were  doubtless

284

"  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

due  to  difference  of  temperament  in  the  beholders.  The
soul  is  a  living  lens  which  invests  with  its  own  '•tincture"  the
objects  beheld  by  it.J

"Solve  et  Coagula"  (Dissolve  and  Resume,  cr  Project  and  Recall).

A  ncUni  Hermttic  Formula.

APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.

Note  A,  pages  45,  52,  210,  211,  269,  271.

THE  long-standing  controversy  respecting  the  meaning  of  Nirvftna
has  been  resolved  for  us  in  favour  of  both  the  interpretations  assigned
to  it.  This  is  to  sny  that,  while  it  means  extinction,  the  extinction
implied  is  of  two  different  kinds.  Of  these,  one,  called  the  celestial
Nirvana,  denotes  the  perfectionment  and  perpetuation  of  the  essential
selfhood  of  the  individual,  accompanied  by  the  extinction  of  the
external  and  phenomenal  selfhood.  Thus  indrawn  to  his  centre,  the
individual  ceases  to  ex-ist,  but  does  not  cease  to  be.  In  other  words,
he  is,  but  is  not  manifest,  the  term  existence,  as  opposed  to  being,
implying  the  standing-forth,  or  objectivisation,  of  that  which  is,
subjectively.  The  condition  implies  the  return  from  matter  to  sub-
stance or  spirit.

The  "Nirvana  of  the  Amen,"  on  the  contrary,  denotes  the  extinc-
tion, not  only  of  the  externality  of  the  individual,  but  of  the  individual
himself;  this  occurring  through  the  persistent  indulgence  of  a  perverse
will  to  the  outer  and  lower,  such  as  to  induce  a  complete  deprivation
of  the  inner  and  higher  constituents  of  man,  and  so  to  divest  his  system
of  its  binding  principle  as  to  render  not  only  possible,  but  inevitable,
complete  dissolution  and  disintegration,  to  the  total  extinction  of  the
individuality  concerned.     There  is  no  loss  of  substance  or  spirit.

The  term  Amen  in  this  relation  signifies  consummation  or  finality.

Note  B,  page  210.

Like  the  so-called  "damnatory"  clauses  of  the  "Athanasian
Creed,"  this  declaration  is  simply  a  solemn  recognition,  first,  of  the
doctrine  that  salvation  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  compulsory,  but  condi-
tional and  optional,  the  alternative  to  it  being  extinction  ;  and,  next,  of
the  Credo  as  a  summary  of  the  conditions  of  salvation.     These,  it  is

288  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun!9

true,  are  expressed  in  terms  which,  in  being  symbolical,  do  not  beat
their  meaning  upon  the  face  of  them  ;  but  none  the  less  are  the  condi-
tions themselves  so  simple  and  obvious  as  to  be  recognisable  as  self-
evident  and  necessarily  true.  That  is  to  say,  they  represent  the  steps
of  a  process  necessary  to  be  enacted  in  the  soul,  and  founded  in  the
nature  of  the  soul  itself;  so  that,  when  understood,  the  belief  in  them
makes  no  greater  strain  upon  the  faculties  than  does  the  belief  in  any
self-evident  proposition  whatever.  Rather  would  the  difficulty  be  to
disbelieve  them.

Wherefore — to  state  the  case  in  other  words — the  declaration  of  the
soul's  extinction  through  non  compliance  with  the  conditions  herein
affirmed  to  be  indispensable  to  its  perpetuation,  made  by  the  initiate
in  the  terms  of  the  Credo,  is  the  exact  parallel  and  counterpart  of  the
declaration  of  the  body's  extinction  through  non-compliance  with  the
conditions  indispensable  to  its  continuance,  made  by  the  physiologist
in  the  terms  of  his  craft.  The  language  is  in  each  case  technical,  but.
the  truths  it  conceals  (from  the  non-initiate)  are  incontestible  ;  and  so
far  from  their  being  disbelieved  by  those  who  do  not  understand  them,
they  are  invariably  acted  upon  by  all — who  are  of  sound  mind — to  the
best  of  their  ability,  despite  their  failure  to  understand  them.  For,
alike  for  soul  and  body,  there  is  that  within  man  which  does  believe,
and  which  accordingly  does  comply  with  the  conditions  requisite  for  his
welfare,  quite  independently  of  his  knowledge  of  processes  and  terms
spiritual  or  physiological,  and  which  needs  but  fair  play,  and  not  to  be
thwarted  by  his  own  perverse  will,  to  accomplish  his  salvation.

Wherefore  the  declaration  in  question  is  no  menace,  but  rather  is  it
a  promise, — a  promise  that  when  the  time  comes  to  understand  the
process  whereby  salvation  is  accomplished,  the  very  fact  that  it  is
understood  is  a  token  that  salvation  is  accomplished  ;  for  once  under-
stood, it  can  no  more  be  disbelieved  than  gravitation  or  any  other
certainty  of  the  physical  world.

Now,  to  have  this  understanding  is  to  be  "initiated.*

Note  C,  page  215.

On  the  conclusion  of  this  instruction,  the  better  to  enable  the  seeiess
to  comprehend  the  description  given  in  verses  9  and  16,  a  vision  was
given  her  of  two  human  forms,  having  their  molecules,  the  one  in  the
order  of  man  regenerate,   and  the  other  in  the  disorder  of  man  un-

Appendix.

289

regenerate,  as  on  the  two  sides,  A  and  B,  of  the  fig.  below,  which  repre-
sents a  combination  of  the  half  of  each  form  thus  beheld.  In  the  case  of
specific  organs,  the  rays  represent  the  magnetic  direction  of  each  organ
as  a  whole,  and  not  that  of  its  constituent  molecules,  since  the  orderly
polarisation  of  these  is  not  to  the  common  centre  of  the  system,  but
to  the  centre  of  their  own  particular  organ,  and  only  mediately  through
this  to  the  common  centre.

Similarly,  figs.  C  and  D  show  the  physiologic  unit  or  cell — the  type
of  every  kosmical  entity — the  former  in  its  fully-developed  and  healthy
state,  wherein  the  protoplasmic  contents  are  pure,  and  the  nucleus  and
nucleolus  (which  correspond  to  the  soul  and  spirit)  fully  developed,  and
the  magnetic  poles  convergent  ;  and  the  latter  in  a  rudimentary  and
disorderly  condition,  with  the  nucleolus  or  spirit  as  yet  unpolarised.
The  four  spheres  correspond  respectively  to  the  physical,  the  astral,
the  psychic,  and  the  spiritual ;  or  body,  mind,  soul,  and  spirit.

290  "  Clothed  with  the  SiuiP

Note  D,  page  226
This  must  be  taken  as  a  poetic  rather  than  as  a  scientific  expression.

Note  E,  page  231.

These  Hymns  of  the  Gods  were,  like  all  else  in  the  text,  rece
under  illumination,  occurring  chiefly  in  sleep,  over  a  number  of  years
commencing  in  1878.  They  consti^te  a  synthesis  of  the  Sacred
Mysteries  of  the  Egyptians,  the  Greeks,  the  Hebrews,  and  the
Christians, — the  last  three  of  which  were  derived  from  the  first,  and
are  substantially  identical  with  it  and  with  each  other ;  and  they  are
expressed  in  terms  derived  indifferently  from  them  all.

That  they  represent,  at  least  in  a  great  measure,  a  recovery  of  rituals
and  formulae,  oral  or  written,  which  were  actually  used  in  the  ancient
Mysteries,  and  of  which  the  writers  of  the  Bible  largely  availed  them-
selves, was  not  only  positively  declared  to  us,  but  was  indicated  by  the
circumstances  under  which  a  considerable  portion  of  them  was  ob-
tained. For  example,  No.  XIII.,  the  hymn  to  lacchos,  the  planet-
god,  was  chiefly  obtained  in  dreams,  wherein  the  secress  found  herself
re-enacting  what  she  felt,  and  was  positively  assured,  had  been  a  scene
in  one  of  her  own  former  existences,  when  she  had  chanted  it  in  chorus
as  one  of  a  body  of  priests  and  priestesses  making  solemn  procession
through  the  vast  aisle.-  of  an  Egyptian  temple.

Concerning  the  purpose  of  this  restoration  and  certain  other  par-
ticulars in  relation  to  the  Gods,  see  the  preface  and  the  note  on  \  age

Note  F,  page  235.

As  is  well  known  to  students  of  occult  science,  the  name  of  Hermes
has  from  prehistoric  times  been  for  the  Western  World  the  synonym  at
once  for  profound  problems  and  for  interpretative  insight,  his  claim  to
have  possessed  "  the  three  parts  of  the  knowledge  of  the  whole  kosmos"
— science,  philosophy,  and  religion — having  always  been  recc^:
Whether  the  name  originally  denoted  some  actual  man  from  whom,  for
his   eminence   in    knowledge,   it    was  I  to   the  divinity,

whether  it  originally  denoted  the  divinity,  and  was  assigned  to  some
man   supposedly   or   really    inspired    by   him,   there   is   no   historical
evidence  to  determine.      It  is  sufficient  to  know,  as  an  indul
historical  fact,  that  some  of  the  profoundest  of  the  sages  of  old  el.

Appendix.  291

Hermes  the  divinity  as  the  source  of  their  knowledge,  and  that  the
manner  of  its  reception  corresponded  in  all  respects  with  that  under
which  the  illuminations  in  this  book  were  received.  It  was  as  the
divine  principle  itself  of  understanding  that  he  was  recognised  by  the
Hermetists  in  the  saying —

"Est  in  Mercurio  quicquid  quserunt  sapientes;"1

and  by  the  authors  of  that  wondrous  compendium  of  Hebrew  transcend-
talism,  the  Kabala,  when  they  declared  that  "all  the  mysteries  are  in
Chockmah," — the  Nous  of  the  Greeks  ;  as  also  by  the  famous  Neopla-
tonist,  Proklos,  when  he  thus  wrote  : —

"  Hermes,  as  the  messenger  of  God,  reveals  to  us  His  paternal  Will,
and — developing  in  us  the  intuition — imparts  to  us  knowledge.  The
knowledge  which  descends  into  the  soul  from  above,  excels  any  that
can  be  attained  by  the  mere  exercise  of  the  intellect.  Intuition  is  the
operation  of  the  soul.  The  knowledge  received  through  it  from  above,
descending  into  the  soul,  fills  it  with  the  perception  of  the  interior
causes  of  things.  The  Gods  announce  it  by  their  presence,  and  by
illumination,  and  enable  us  to  discern  the  universal  order."

For  "in  the  Celestial,  all  things  are  Persons;"  and  it  is  as  Persons
that  the  divine  Principles  manifest  themselves  in  and  to  the  soul,  being
seen  and  heard  of  it,  when  duly  receptive  and  percipient.  That  the
forms  under  which  they  manifested  themselves  to  Anna  Kingsford
were  those  of  Egypt  and  Greece,  was — we  were  assured — because  she
had  been  an  initiate  of  the  Greco-Egyptian  mysteries,  and  those  forms
were  indelibly  impressed  upon  her.

Now  of  all  those  who  have  been  enlightened  by  Hermes,  the  doctrine
is  identical,  and  it  is  the  basic  doctrine  of  all  sacred  scriptures.

The  name  Hermes,  which  is  Greek,  signifies  both  rock  and  inter-
preter,— that  which  stands  under  and  that  which  understands.  And  (as
stated  in  "  The  Perfect  Way,"  i.  20)  it  was  to  Hermes  as  the  inspirer
and  prompter  of  the  confession  of  Simon,  and  not  to  the  man,  that
Jesus  addressed  the  apostrophe,  "  Thou  [the  Understanding]  art  the
Peter,  or  rock,  upon  which  I  build  my  church."  Called  Peter  as  the
utterer  of  the  confession,  Simon  has  always  been  claimed  as  himself
the  rock  of  the  church.  He  has  also  been  assigned  the  office — likewise
that  of  Hermes— of  guardian  of  the  mysteries.  But  he  has  yet  to
justify  his  claim  to  be  the  fulfiller  of  that  other  function  of  Hermes,

I  All  is  in  Hermes  that  the  wise  seek.

292  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

that  of  being  their  interpreter.  Hitherto,  as  represented  by  the  church
which  claims  him  as  its  especial  patron,  he  has  manifested  him-elf  only
in  his  New  Testament  role — rebuked  by  Jesus — of  the  cutter  off,  not  of
the  opener,  of  ears.

Note  G,  page  235.

As  the  Spirit  of  Understanding  it  is  the  function  of  Hermes  to  re-
cognise and  indicate  limits  and  distinctions  between  things  that  differ,
in  whatever  department  of  existence,  so  that  there  be  no  confusion  or
intrusion.  Hence,  on  the  physical  plane,  he  was  accounted  the  guardian
of  boundaries  and  landmarks.  But  though  thus  discerning  and  marking
limitations,  he  was  not  the  author  of  them.  That  was  the  function  of
the  angel  of  the  outermost  sphere,  the  "  last  of  the  Gods,''  Saturn  or
Satan,  as  explained  in  Note  U.

Note  II,  page  236.

Argus,  the  monster  with  a  hundred  eyes,  represents  the  "power  of
the  stars"  over  the  soul,— the  power,  that  is,  of  Karma,  or  the  destiny
acquired  by  the  soul  through  its  defects  of  conduct  during  the  unre-
generate  stages  of  its  existence.  As  it  is  for  want  of  understanding,
of  its  own  nature  and  that  of  existence,  that  the  soul  comes  thus  under
bondage,  it  falls  to  Hermes,  as  the  angel  of  the  understanding,  to  rescue
the  soul  by  imparting  to   it  the  r  its  perfection-

ment.  Thus  emancipated  by  Hermes  from  the  trammels  of  fate,  the
soul  rises  superior  to  all  limitations,  and,  becoming  as  a  "  woman
clothed  with  the  sun,"  wears  a>  jewels  in  her  crown  the  stars  over
which  she  has  triumphed,  each  of  which  thus  denotes  a  spiritual  g
or  gift  acquired  in  the  conflict  with  materiality.  And  so,  for  her,
Hermes  is  said  to  have  slain  A  further  information  on  this

subject  see  "  The  Perfect  Way,"  VII.  27  and  IX.  13-17.  And  for  the
importance  attached  by  the  Bible  to  the  office  of  Hermes,  see  the
numerous  ted  in  the  concordance  under  the  various  forms  of

the  word  :<

Note  I,  page  236.

Serpents  when  used  to  denote  wisdom  are  the  "seraphs"  or  rays  of
the  (spiritual)  sun,  i.e.,  they  are  divine  emanations.  The  "serpent
of  the  dust,"'  or  of  the  astral  and  lower  nature,  is  the  obverse  of  the

Appendix.  293

seraph,  and  represents  cunning  rather  than  wisdom,  as  shown  in  its
stealthy  and  sinuous  mode  of  progression.

Note  J,  page  237.

Atlas  implies  Discretion.  He  was  one  of  the  Titans,  or  mundane
spirits,  and  "brother"  of  Prometheus,  Epimetheus,  and  Menoitios,  or
Precaution,  Reflection,  and  Deliberation  bred  of,  and  exercised  in,
ignorance  and  distrust  of  God.  In  this  aspect  he  is  a  type  of  the  dis-
cretion taught  by  experience  of  the  crushing  weight  of  the  world  on
those  who  are  devoid  of  that  quality  especially  as  shown  by  their
inability  to  restrain  speech.

Note  K,  page  240.

The  occasion  made  use  of  to  give  us  this  "  exhortation"  was  one  of
peculiar  interest.  The  late  Laurence  Oliphant  was  at  that  time  the
English  representative  and  agent  of  Thomas  Lake  Harris,  the
founder  and  chief  of  a  certain  mystical  brotherhood  in  the  United
States.  And  having  heard  from  a  mutual  friend  of  our  spiritual  work
and  experiences,  and  desiring  to  gain  recruits  for  his  chief,  he  came
to  Paris  to  see  us,  when,  after  putting  to  us  sundry  questions,  he  de-
clared that  we  were  possessed  of  the  requisite  qualifications,  and  called
upon  us  to  renounce  everything  we  were  doing  and  place  ourselves  at
the  disposal  of  Harris,  whom  he  announced  as  the  prophet  and  king
of  the  new  dispensation,  and  in  short,  a  new  avatar  of  Christ.  Failing
to  do  this,  we  should,  he  assured  us,  infallibly  incur  dire  catastrophe.
Knowing  nothing  of  Harris's  doctrine,  but  respecting  him  for  his  un-
doubted poetic  faculty,  and  having  a  high  regard  for  his  emissary,  with
whom  I  had  some  previous  acquaintance,  we  begged  for  further  infor-
mation. This  was  accordingly  vouchsafed  us,  but  only  with  the  result
of  our  finding  ourselves  in  hopeless  disagreement,  on  account  of  what
we  deemed  its  fanciful  character,  its  failure  to  satisfy  the  needs  either
of  the  mind  or  of  the  soul,  and  the  nature  of  the  experiences  on  which  it
was  founded.  For,  though  recognising  these  as  real,  we  also  recognised
them  as  appertaining,  not  to  the  spiritual  and  divine  region  of  man's
nature,  but  to  the  magnetic  and  astral,  and  as  representing  a  disorderly
condition  of  this.  And  in  confirmation  of  this  view  Mrs  Kingsford  was
on  the  following  night  given  a  dream,  in  which  she  beheld  a  wilderness
teeming  with  sirens,  loreleis,  and  other  phantasmal  forms,  which  she  was

294  *  Clothed  with  the  Stin."

given  to  understand  were  of  the  order  of  those  who  pretended  to  be  the
"  counterpartal  angels"  and  "arch-natural  women"  of  Harris's  schc  ol
— afterwards  called  by  Oliphant  "  Sympneumata  " — but  which  were  the
morbid  products  of  that  part  of  man's  system  which  is  always  mystically
called  the  wilderness,  being  the  astral  region  which  intervenes  between
the  "  Egypt  "  of  the  purely  material,  and  the  "  Promised  Land  "  of  the
purely  spiritual ; — a  region,  indeed,  which  has  to  be  entered  and  tra-
versed by  all  seekers  after  perfection,  but  which  must  on  no  account
be  mistaken  for  the  goal  or  unduly  loitered  in.

A  second  visit  from  Oliphant  served  in  no  way  to  reconcile  us  to  his
views,  but  rather  the  contrary.  And  early  on  the  following  morning,
Mrs  Kingsford  received  the  "  exhortation  "  in  question,  in  response,
apparently,  to  an  earnest  request  of  mine,  made  without  her  cognisance,
for  some  definite  instruction  which  might  be  serviceable  to  our  visitor
as  well  as  to  ourselves.  This  hope  as  regarded  him  prored  vain  ;  as
after  the  receipt  of  a  copy  of  it  he  made  no  response,  nor  ever  again
approached  us.  The  chief  points  in  respect  of  which  it  condemns  the
doctrine  propounded  by  our  visitor  are —

(i.)  Its  rejection  of  mental  training  and  intellectual  knowledge — in
short,  of  the  Undemanding — in  favour  of  extraneous  influences  and
phenomenal  experiences,  as  the  source  and  criterion  of  truth.

(2.)  Its  exaltation  of  an  earthly  personage  as  spiritual  king  and  master.
/  (3.)  Its  failure  to  recognise  a  diet  ol  flesh  as  incompatible  with  the
highest  aspirations;  and,

(4.)  Its  fanciful  sex-relations  and  doctrine  of  "counterparts,"  which
last,  we  were  subsequently  instructed,  is  a  travesty,  due  to  delusive
spirits,  of  the  mystical  process  in  the  soul  called  the  "marriage  of
regeneration  ;" — the  errors  in  question  being  those  whereby  neophytes
are  peculiarly  liable  to  be  ensnared.

It  is  due  to  Oliphant  to  state  that  he  afterwards  seceded  from  Harris,
and  modified  his  teaching.  But  the  change  was  not  radical,  and  an
examination  of  his  later  views  failed  to  diminish  in  the  least  the  interval
be:  ween  us.

This  occasion  was  the  first  on  which  Hermes  expressly  avowed  him-
self, though  not  the  first  on  which  he  assumed  the  guidance  over  us
and  our  work,  while  leaving  us  to  identify  him  for  ourselves.  Two
of  Mrs  Kingsford's  earliest  experiences  in  this  respect  are  related  in
"Dreams  and  Dream-Stories,'"  Xos.  II.  and  IX.,  in  the  former  of
which  he  directed  us  to  combine  our  faculties  tor  the  prosecution  of  the

Appendix,  295

interpretative  work  to  which  I  had  already  been  long  devoted ;  and
in  the  latter  of  which  he  prescribed  rigid  abstinence,  especially  from
flesh  and  cooked  food,  as  an  essential  condition  for  the  full  perception
of  things  spiritual.  On  the  former  occasion  he  presented  himself  in
the  double  aspect  of  a  letter-carrier  and  of  John  the  Baptist ;  the  first
in  his  official  capacity  as  the  "  Messenger  of  the  Gods,"  and  the  last  in
intimation  of  the  necessity  of  our  application  of  the  principle  represented
by  the  Baptist — that  of  purification  in  body  and  mind — for  the  true
discernment  of  the  Christ-idea.  But  it  was  only  by  degrees  and  after  a
considerable  pdriod  that  the  full  significance  of  the  instruction  disclosed
itself  to  us,  so  far  in  advance  was  it  of  what  we  then  knew.

His  claim  to  the  power  of  conferring  the  divine  life  was,  in  itself
a  demonstration  of  his  own  divinity.  No  mere  human  soul,  nor  spirit
of  a  grade  below  the  divine,  could,  or  would  presume  to,  assert  such
a  claim.

The  true  "bi-unity"  of  the  mystic  man,  referred  to  in  verse  25,
consists  in  the  equilibration  of  the  mind  and  soul  as  shown  by  the  equal
use  of  the  mind's  two  modes,  the  intellect  and  the  intuition,  which  are,
respectively,  its  musculine  and  feminine  modes.

Note  L,  pages  240,  255

Alth  -ugh  Dionysos  and  Aphrodite  are  mystically  the  third  and  fourth
of  the  Gods,  they  are  actually  the  fourth  and  third,  this  being  their
relative  position  by  the  order  of  their  planets,  and  of  their  correspond-
ing rays  in  the  spectrum.  For  Venus,  which  holds  in  the  solar  system
the  place  of  the  yellow  in  the  prism,  and  is  the  brightest  both  of  the
planets  and  of  the  rays,  comes  next  outside  that  of  Hermes,  whose  ray
is  the  orange,  and  whose  planet  is  Mercury;  and  the  planet  of  Dionysos
or  Iacchos— the  Earth, — whose  ray  is  the  green,  comes  next  outside
Venus.  And  such  is  their  position  in  the  Greek  and  Hebrew  theo-
gonies  (for  the  latter  of  which  see  Isa.  xi.  2,  3,  the  Douay  rendering
for  preference)  and  in  the  "Apostles'  Creed."  But  in  the  Mosaic
theogony  and  cosmogony  this  order  is  inverted,  and  the  creation  of  the
earth,  which  is  represented  by  Dionysos,  is  placed  on  the  "third  day,"
while  the  work  of  Aphrodite  is  placed  on  the  "fourth  day."  And  in
this  order  these  hymns  were  received  and  are  here  given.  The  follow-
ing are  the  chief  reasons  for  this  arrangement : —

I.  As  the  Spirit  of  Love  or  Counsel,  Aphrodite  is  the  enlightener
of  the  spiritual  eyes  and  revealer  of  heaven  to  earth.     She  is  also  the

296  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

centripetal  force  whereby  man  is  drawn  inwards  to  God.  Wherefore
the  earth  must  have  being,  and  the  centrifugal  force  must  have  fulfilled
its  part  in  the  work  of  creation,  before  she  can  exercise  her  function  in
the  work  of  redemption.

2.  As  the  Spirit  of  Power,  and  representative  of  the  centrifugal
force  whereby  the  Divine  substance  is  projected  into  the  condition  of
matter,  and  the  earth  created,  Dionysos  must  exercise  his  function
before  the  centripetal  force,  which  is  Love,  can  manifest  itself.

3.  As  representative  of  the  soul,  which,  though  first  in  being  and  in
dignity,  is  the  last  to  find  recognition,  Aphrodite  remains  unperceived
until  polarised  by  means  of  the  bodily  elements.  So  that,  although
Love  really  subsists  prior  to  any  exercise  of  force,  inasmuch  as  she  is
the  source  of  the  desire  which  puts  force — whatever  its  kind,  physical
or  mental — in  action,  she  is  veiled  and  hidden  until  the  mind  recognises
the  need  of  her  and  acquires  the  power  to  discern  her.  For  which
reason  also  her  "day  "  or  manifestation  succeeds  that  of  Dionysos.

Note  M,  page  241.

The  meaning  of  this  and  the  less  obvious  of  the  foregoing  symbols  is
as  lol.ows  : —

V.  2.  "  Twice-bprn  "  denotes  regeneration.  The  first  birth  is  that
of  the  exterior  or  bodily  man  ;  the  second  is  that  of  the  interior  or
spiritual  man.  This  latter  is  produced  in  and  of  the  former,  and  is
thus  "  Son  of  man  ;"  but  whereas  its  true  parents  are  the  soul  and  the
Divine  Spirit,  and  the  soul  when  pure  is  mystically  termed  water  and
"Virgin  Maria,''  the  interior  or  spiritual  man  is  said  to  be  born  of
water  and  the  Spirit,  or  Virgin  Maria  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  is  at
once  Son  of  man  and  of  God.     See  "  Definitions,"  Regeneration.

Iacchos,  in  being  the  mystic  Baccbos,  denotes  the  planetary  Spirit
after  its  passage  through  this  process  in  and  by  means  of  the  human
soul ;  the  way  of  perfection  being  one  for  both  macrocosm  and  micro-
cosm.

"Beneath  the  earth,"  a  phrase  equivalent  to  the   "cave-  of

Iacchos"  (Part  II.  No.  XIV.  (3)),  and  implying  the  mysteries  of  the
body.

V.  3.  "  The  horns  of  the  ram,"  a  symbol  of  force,  especially  oi  in-
tellectual force.

"  Who  ridest  upon  an  ass,"  a  symbol  at  once  of  humility  and

patient  endurance.     This  animal  is  marked  on  the  lack  with  a  c:

V.  4.  The  "  Daughter  of  the    King  "  is   the  soul,  whether  in  the

Appendix.  297

individual  or  in  the  universal,  so-called  because  proceeding  from  the
higher  mind,  or  Nous,  mystically  styled  the  King.  The  planet-god  is
herein  recognised  as  proceeding  from  and  constituted  of  the  universal
life  and  substance.

Note  N,  page  244.
See  note  on  p.  193.

Note  O,  page  226,  244.

The  full  perfectionment,  while  yet  in  the  body,  of  the  process  de-
noted by  the  term  Christ,  involves  the  redemption  of  the  body  from  its
material  limitations,  through  the  reversion  of  its  constituents  from  the
condition  of  matter  to  that  of  spirit.  This  is  called  transmutation,
and  also  resurrection.  See  Part  II.  No.  IX.;  also  "Definitions,"
Resurrection,

Note  P,  page  253.

Poseidon  is  styled  "Father  of  souls,"  in  virtue  of  his  representing
the  masculine  energy  of  the  sea,  which  is  the  symbol  of  the  substance,
or  "  Mother,"  of  souls.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  he  is  chosen  as
emblem  of  the  third  gospel,  that  of  Luke,  which  deals  especially  with
the  relations  of  Christ  to  the  soul,  as  distinguished  from-the  other  three
elements  of  the  microcosm.     See  Note  R.

Note  Q,  page  254.

By  the  contemplation  of  wisdom  man  acquires  wisdom,  the  highest
product  of  which  is  the  "philosopher's  stone"  of  a  spirit  perfectly
quiescent,  and  inaccessible  to  assault  whether  from  within  or  from
without.  By  wisdom,  too,  the  soul  is  attracted  and  absorbed.  The
mystical  meaning  of  the  head  of  the  Gorgon  Medusa  is  thus — as  custom-
ary in  mystical  presentations — the  opposite  of  the  apparent  meaning.

Note  R,  page  255.

The  sapphire  throne  and  four  wheels  of  Ezekiel ;  the  Merkaba,  or
Car,  of  the  Kabala  ;  the  Kaabeh,  or  Cube,  of  Islam  ;  the  four  Rivers
of  F.den  ;  the  four  living  Creatures  of  Ezekiel,  the  Apocalypse,  and  the
book  of  Enoch,  and  which  also  are  the  symbols  of  the  four  Evangelists ;
and  the  celestial  chariot  of  Adonai, — all  these  alike  denote  the  fourfold
existence  in  which,  as  in  a  vehicle,  Deity  descends  into  manifestation  or

298  "  Clothed  with  the  S;:;i"

creation,  and  of  which  both  macrocosm  and  microcosm  are  constituted.
The  four  are,  respectively,  the  material,  the  astral,  the  psychic,  and  the
spiritual.  See  "The  Perfect  Way,"  VI.  Part  L,  and  VUL,  final  par.
of  Part  iii

Note  S,  page  257.

For  which  reason  the  Christ,  as  the  rea.isation  of  man's  divine
potentialities,  is  said  to  be  born  in  a  cave  and  a  stable.

Note  T,  page  25S.

V.  28.  The  choice  of  the  ring-dove  to  be  the  emblem  of  the  Holy
Spirit  is  due  to  the  hues  of  the  circle  round  its  throat,  the  colours  of
which  are  taken  to  represent  the  Seven  Spirits  of  God,  or  rays  of  the
prism  constituted  by  the  Trinity.

V.  29.  The  only  message  from  earth  that  can  look  to  find  accept-
ance in  heaven,  is  that  which  announces  the  consummation  of  the  pro-
phecy of  Apoc.  xvi.  12  : — That  M  the  water  of  the  great  river  Euphrates
is  dried  up,  and  the  way  prepared  for  the  kings  of  the  East."

For  the  Euphrates  is  the  will  of  man,1  and  until  this  is  "dried  up  "
and  sublimed  in  him,  and  is  no  longer  the  human  but  the  divine  will,
he  cannot  receive  the  divine  knowledges  of  which  the  bearers  arc
"kings  of  the   last,"  or  messengers  from  the  source  of  all  spiritual
light.     It  was  given  to  Anna  Kingsford  to  be  the  first  to  identify  these
"kings."     Christian   tradition    places   their   number   at   three.      She
gnised  them  as  the  three  principles  in  man,  without  whose  com-
bined operation  no  truth  can  be  discerned,  but  through  whose  com-
bined operation  all  truth  can  be  discerned,   namely,   the  Spirit,  the
Soul,  and  $ie  Mind,  operating  respectively  as  Right  Aspiration,  R
Perception,  and  Right  Judgment.      And   the  sequel  of  their  advent,
whether  for  the  individual  or  the  general,  is  ever  that  "
of  the  Lord,"  wherein  it  is  sail   "the   knowledge  of  the  Lord   -
cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,"  and  the  soul  is  at  p<-:.

For  those  who  recognise  and  appreciate  her  work,  it  is  hardly  possible
not  to  regard  her  very  names  as  a  prophecy  of  her  appointed  :
that  a  way  specially  prepared  for  kings  across  a  dried-up  river  is  no
other  than   a  A'l'n^s'  Ford ;   and  that  the  "good  time"  called   '
acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  "  is  no  other  than  an  Annus  Bonus,

t  See  page  34.

Appendix.  299

Among  other  striking  and  no  less  undesigned  coincidences,  so  far  as
concerns  human  agency,  was  that  of  the  names  given  to  her  on  her
reception  into  the  Roman  Communion, — long  anterior  to  her  spiritual
work, — for  they  were  the  names  of  all  the  women  who  were  by  the
Cross  or  at  the  Sepulchre.

To  this  step,  as  also  to  that  of  obtaining  a  medical  degree  at  the
University  of  Paris,  she  had — as  was  in  due  time  made  clear  to  us — ■
been  prompted  in  anticipation  of  her  destined  spiritual  work.  Having
for  its  object  the  downfall  of  the  world's  materialistic  system,  both  in
relgion  and  in  science,  it  was  requisite  that  the  instrument  of  that
work  should,  in  order  to  be  able  to  speak  with  full  knowledge,  undergo
initiation  in  the  chief  strongholds  of  the  doomed  system.

Note  U,  page  263.

There  are  two  processions  of  the  seven  primary  Gods,  or  Spirits  of
God,  the  first  by  emanation,  and  the  second  by  evolution,  but  the
evolution  is  not  of  the  Gods  themselves  but  of  their  manifestation  in
time.  The  direction  of  one  of  these  processions  is  the  reverse  of  that
of  the  other.  The  first  is  from  within  outwards,  and  occurs  through
the  operation  of  the  Deity  within  and  upon  itself.  By  this  operation
the  divine  potencies  are  projected  to  the  furthest  verge  of  the  destined
kosmos,  which — though  fourfold  as  to  elements — is  always  in  idea  a
globe  consisting  of  seven  concentric  spheres,  each  divinity  having  his
own  sphere,  and  the  outermost  being  assigned  to  Saturn  or  Satan,  who
is  thus  the  circumference  of  the  entity  concerned,  having  beyo.id  him
only  the  void.  Representing  the  seventh  and  outermost  sphere,  and
projected  after  all  the  others,  Saturn  is  called  the  seventh  and  last,
and  therefore — in  this  order — the  "youngest  of  the  gods."  Thus,  as
matter  is  the  antithetical  ultimate,  or  "adversary,"  of  Spirit,  yet  without
ceasing  to  be  Spirit,  so  is  Saturn — or  Satan— the  antithetical  ultimate,
or  "  adversary,"  of  God,  yet  without  ceasing  to  be  God.

In  this  sphere  manifestation  begins,  for  not  only  is  it  the  sphere  of
matter,  which  is  Spirit — by  the  force  of  the  Divine  Will  projected  into
conditions  and  limitations,  and  made  exteriorly  cognisable— but  Saturn
is  the  principle  itself  of  manifestation,  and  herein  of  matter,  time,  and
all  other  limiting  conditions.  Hence  he  is  the  principle  also  of  Indi-
viduation, whereby  from  being  universal  and  abstract,  Spirit  becomes
particular  and  concrete.  Himself  the  first  to  be  manifested  in  the
kosnv  s  thus  initiated,  Saturn  heads  the  procession  which  is  by  evolu-

300  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun.

tion,  and  hence,  in  this  order,  is  the  first  and  "eldest"  of  the  Gods.
And  upon  his  sphere  or  kingdom  as  basis  the  kosmos  is  built  up  from
without  inwards,  each  God  presiding  over  the  work  in  his  own  domain,
until  the  whole  is  completed  by  the  attainment  of  the  innermost  and
highest.  This  accomplished,  the  kosmos  is  made  in  the  divine  image,
the  Sabbath  of  perfection  is  attained,  and  "God  rests  from  His  work,"
so  far  as  regards  the  particular  entity  concerned.

These  two  processions,  which  are  in  perpetual  simultaneous  operation
for  the  whole  duration  of  the  manifest  universe,  represent  and  are  due
to  two  forces,  or  rather  two  modes  of  force,  which  constitute  two
streams  consisting  of  the  Divine  substance  and  energy.  Of  these  streams
one  flows  outwards  and  downwards,  and  the  other  inwards  and  up-
wards ;  one  is  centrifugal,  the  other  centripetal ;  one  is  projective,  the
other  attractive  ;  one  represents  Will,  the  other  Love  ;  one  results  in
Creation,  the  other  in  Redemption.  And  as  complements  of  each  other
they  are  as  indispensable  to  each  other  and  to  the  stability  of  the  kus-
mos,  as  are  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  modes  of  force  to  the  stability
of  the  solar  system;  and  whereas  one  is  masculine  and  the  other  femi-
nine, man  is  no  less  said  to  be  "  made  in  the  divine  image,  male  and
female,"  because  built  up  of  them  both,  than  because  also  built  up  of
the  Seven  Spirits  of  the  Divine  Duad.

The  substance  of  all  things  is  spirit,  is  consciousness.  Wherefore
all  things  are  modes  of  consciousness,  and  all  being  is  consciousness,
and  consciousness  is  being,  and  non-consciousness  is  non-being.  And
whereas  the  outermost  sphere  of  any  existing  entity  is  that  of  the
lowest  mode  of  consciousness,  wherein  it  touches  negation,  ihat  which
lies  without  such  sphere  is  non-consciousness,  and,  therefore,  non-
being,— a  state  the  entrance  into  which  constitutes  extinction  of  being.
At  once  the  negation  of  consciousness  and  of  being,  this  slate  consti-
tutes the  negation  of  God,  which  is  theologically  called  the  devil  (as
see  page  216).  *

The  transcendent  importance  of  the  functions  of  Satan,  and  their
absolute  necessity,  not  only  to  the  well-being,  but  to  the  very  being  of
the  individual,  become  specially  apparent  when  it  is  considered  (1)  that
as  the  "bourne  of  the  divine  impulsion,"'  he  is  the  circumferential  limit
whereby  life  and  substance  are  arrested  in  their  outward  course  and
made  to  return  to  their  centre,  thus  converting  into  a  permanent  kosmos
that  which,  but  for  his  intervention,  would  be  dissipated  in  space.  And
(2)  that  but  for  his  guardianship  of  the  outermost  sphere,  there  «
be  nought  to  hinder  the  irruption  irom  the  surrounding  void   into  the

Appendix.  301

kosmos,  of  its  deadly  foe  the  principle,  if  the  term  can  be  applied  to
a  nonentity,  of  the  negation  of  God,  and  therein,  of  all  being.

The  passages  in  which  the  Bible  seems  to  identify  Satan  with  the
devil,  constitute,  when  properly  considered,  no  contradiction  to  this
view,  even  without  the  counterbalancing  aid  of  passages  which  directly
favour  this  view.  For,  although  constituting  integral  parts  of  the  same
kosmos,  the  inner  and  spiritual  and  the  outer  and  material  are  in.  a
sense  antagonistic  to  each  other,  and  a  retrogression  from  the  former  to
the  latter,  h  hen  once  the  latter  has  been  transcended,  is  a  descent  which,
unless  timely  arrested,  lands  the  soul  in  the  region  of  negation.  The
sphere  of  Satan  and  of  the  devil  are  conterminous,  and  whe'e  a  down-
ward course  is  persisted  in,  Satan  becomes  the  minister  of  the  devil  in
that  in  ejecting  the  irredeemably  perverse  from  the  precincts  of  the
kingdom,  he  consigns  him  to  final  destruction.  But  his  enmity  is  not
for  the  sinner,  but  for  the  sin  ;  and  his  "  temptations"  are  for  the  trial,
not  for  the  condemnation,  of  the  subject  of  them,  and  to  test  his  fitness
for  the  kingdom.  The  apocalyptic  "binding  of  Satan  for  a  thousand
years"  is  but  an  expression  implying  the  exemption  of  the  saints
from  a  return  into  material  conditions  for  a  prolonged  period,  during
which  Satan  is  said  to  be  bound,  so  far  as  concerns  them.  But
even  if  it  had  been  the  intention  of  the  Bible-writers  to  identify  the
devil  and  Satan  in  the  manner  commonly  supposed,  no  authority  of
book  can  override  and  set  at  nought  a  necessary  and  self-evident  truth
clearly  discernible  as  founded  in  the  very  nature  of  existence,  such
as  that  of  the  interpretation  here  given.  And  indeed,  as  stated  in
the  preface  and  elsewhere,  one  of  the  main  purposes  of  the  restoration
represented  by  this  volume  is  to  "utterly  abolish  the  idols"  whether
they  consist  in  books,  persons,  traditions,  or  institutions.

But  there  is  not  the  smallest  reason  for  ascribing  to  the  Bible-writers
any  such  intention.  They  wrote  as  initiates  for  initiates,  and  knew
that  by  these  the  true  values  would  be  attached  to  the  terms  employed,
however  liable  to  be  mistaken  by  others  ;  and  a  sufficient  motive  for
such  concealment  of  the  truth  concerning  Satan  is  to  be  found  in  the
fact  that  it  was  the  most  jealously  guarded  of  all  the  mysteries,  being-
according  to  the  instructions  given  to  us — communicated  only  to  ini-
tiates of  the  very  highest  grade.  And  it  was  imparted  to  us  under
injunctions  of  our  observing  the  strictest  secrecy,  at  least  "until  the
word  be  completed  ;  "  and  only  during  Mrs  Kir.gsford's  last  illness  was
this  so  far  accomplished,  that  the  promulgation  was  permitted.  The
personality  assumed  by  the  illuminating  spirit  on  the  occasion  was  that

302  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

of  Phoibos  Apollo, — an  indication  that,  owing  to  its  profound  nature,
only  by  the  first  of  the  Gods  might  the  crowning  mystery  of  the  last  of
the  Gods  be  disclosed.

Note  V,  page  264.

Saturn,  as  Kronos  or  Time,  is  said  to  bear  all  the  Gods  on  his
shoulders  because  their  manifestation  occurs  in  and  through  time  ;  and
he  is,  himself,  the  first  to  be  manifested,  and  is  the  very  principle  of
time  and  manifestation.  Moreover,  the  faculties  in  man  by  means  of
which  they  find  recognition  by  man,  are  the  product  of  experience
acquired  in  time.  This  was  implied  in  the  vision  shown  to  Mrs  Kings-
ford  on  the  eve  of  her  receipt  of  the  first  instalment  of  this  instruction
concerning  Satan, — a  vision,  at  the  time  wholly  unintelligible,  in  which
she  beheld  Hermes  being  carried  through  space  on  the  back  of  Saturn.

Note  W,  page  268.

That  is,  from  the  condition  of  Existence  or  manifested  Being,  to  the
condition  of  pure,  or  unmanifested,  Being.

Note  X,  page  268.

The  spirit  of  the  regenerated  ego  in  and  by  whom  we  realise  the
divine  potentialities  of  our  nature,  is,  for  each  of  us,  "  Christ  our  Lord."
And  inasmuch  as  this  ego  is  generated  in  time,  and  is  the  crown  of
manifestation,  and  final  realisation  of  the  divine  idea  in  creation,  for
the  evolution  of  whom  the  whole  universe  works  together,  and  Satan
is  the  principle  of  manifestation,  the  ministry  of  Satan  is  said  to  have
been  "ordained  of  God  before  the  worlds,  for  the  splendour  (or  efful-
gence) of  the  manifest,  and  the  generation  of  Christ  our  Lord."  And
this  applies  to  Christ  from  the  point  of  view  alike  of  the  microcosm  or
individual,  and  of  the  macrocosm  or  universal.  For.  just  as  the  macro-
cosm itself  comprises  and  is  constituted  of  the  sum  total  of  the  micro-
cosms, so  the  macrocosmic  Christ  comprises  and  is  constituted  of  the
sum  total  of  the  microcosm1  c  Christs,  or  spirits  of  the  regenerated
human  egos,  all  these  throughout  the  universe  being  combined  and
blended  into  one  indefeasible  personality,  representing  the  individuals
sation  of  the  Supreme  Being,  or  personification  of  the  Divine  Imper-
sonal, through  man,  by  means  of  evolution.  Thus  "generated  ''  and
constituted,  Christ  is  the  "Son"  in  and  by  whom  the  "  Father"  rinds
His  ultimate  full  expression,  as  do  the  unmanifest  light  and  heat  of  the
system  in  and  by  the  solar  orb.

Appendix.  303

But  the  consciousness  or  potency  of  the  universal  Christ  must  not  be
regarded  as  limited  to  the  sum  total  of  the  associated  consciousnesses
of  the  human  egos  composing  him,  any  more  than  the  consciousness  of
the  individual  man  is  to  be  regarded  as  limited  to  the  sum  total  of  the
associated  consciousnesses  of  his  system.  For  just  as  the  human  ego
represents  all  the  consciousnesses  of  man's  system  centralised  into  a  unity
and  polarised  to  a  higher  plane,  so  does  the  macrocosmic  Christ  repre-
sent the  consciousnesses  of  all  the  microcosmic  Christs  centralised  into  a
unity  and  polarised  to  a  higher  plane.  Thus,  as — to  cite  "  The  Perfect
Way"  (V.  17) — "the  soul  of  the  planet  is  more  than  the  associated
essences  of  the  souls  composing  it ;  and  the  consciousness  of  the
system  is  more  than  that  of  the  associated  world-consciousnesses ;  and
the  consciousness  of  the  manifest  universe  is  more  than  that  of  the
corporate  systems,"  so  is  the  universal  Christ  more  than  the  sum  of  the
individual  Christs  or  Divine  Spirits  of  the  regenerated  human  egos  of
which  he  consists.  And  as  in  the  individual  microcosm  this  Christ  is
the  radiant  point,  or  "  One  Life,"  whence  the  Divine  effulgence  flows
to  illume  and  vivify  the  man,  so  in  the  universal  macrocosm  the  Christ
similarly  constituted  is  the  radiant  point  or  "One  Life,"  whence  the
Divine  effulgence  flows  to  vivify  and  illume  the  universal  Church,
invisible  and  visible,  of  the  elect,  which  is  the  nucleus  of  which  He  is
the  nucleolus,  or  body  of  which  Pie  is  the  soul.  And  that  wherein
He  differs  from  and  surpasses  all  other  Gods — even  while  constituted
like  them — is  that,  whereas  they  represent  but  partial  modes  or  aspects
ot  Deity,  each  one  being  but  as  a  single  ray  of  the  Divine  spectrum,
He  represents  Deity  in  its  integrity,  inasmuch  as  He  combines  in  Him-
self the  whole  of  the  Divine  rays,  being  the  result  of  the  operation
of  them  all.  Thus  generated  through  humanity,  and  therefore  Son
at  once  of  God  and  man,  and  "our  Lord,"  He  becomes  the  counter-
part or  replica  of  Adonai,  who — being  generated  in  substance — is  Son
of  God  only,  and  is  "  the  Lord."

Now,  "the  consciousness  of  the  unmanifest  Deity  is  greater  than  that
of  the  manifest,  for  the  manifest  does  not  exhaust  the  unmanifest."
Wherefore,  in  manifestation,  "the  Father  is  greater  than  the  Son;"
while  in  substance,  they  are  "  co-equal  and  co-eternaL"

NOTE  Y,  page  269.
The  difference  between  the  account  herein  given  of  the  Lord's  death
and  burial  (verses  53,  64),  and  that  of  Jesus  in  Part  I.,  No.  XXXIII.,
presents  no  difficulty  when  it  is  considered  that  the  foimer  deals,  as  do

304  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

the  gospels,  with  the  mystical  or  spiritual  history  of  the  typical  Man
Regenerate,  and  the  latter  with  his  physical  history,  and  that  it  is  quite
sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  the  narrative  that  the  correspondence
between  the  two  histories  be  general  only  and  not  particular.  The
object  of  the  gospels  was  not  to  exalt  an  individual  but  to  delineate  an
order,  the  order  of  ..he  "Sons  of  God,"  for  the  sake  of  exhibiting  the
highest  possibilities  of  humanity.  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  while
the  events  which  occurred  to  Jesus  were  used  and  adapted  to  illustrate
certain  doctrines,  they  were  not  followed  in  all  their  details.  To  have
so  followed  them  would  have  been  to  give  the  physical  history  of  but
one  of  the  "  Sons  of  God,"  instead  of  the  spiritual  history  of  them  all.

DEFINITIONS     and      EXPLANATIONS      of     TERMS     and

PHRASES    NOT    GENERALLY    FAMILIAR,    OR    USED    IN    AN    UN-
FAMILIAR SENSE.

Adam  and  Eve.  In  their  mystical  sense,  and  as  applied  to  the  indi-
vidual, Adam  and  Eve  are  respectively  the  exterior  selfhood,  or  sense
and  reason,  and  the  interior  selfhood,  or  soul  and  intuition,  which
together  constitute  the  human  being.  And  they  are  as  man  and  woman
to  each  other,  in  that  they  represent  respectively  the  centrifugal  or  force
element,  which  is  the  masculine,  and  the  centripetal  or  love  element,
which  is  the  feminine  clement  of  existence.  For  a  full  treatment  of  this
subject,  see  "The  Perfect  Way,"  Lectures  VI.  and  VII.

Arche}  a  Greek  term,  signifying  beginning,  first  cause,  origin,  and
said  to  have  been  first  used  by  Anaximander  (B.C.  5S0)  in  the  sense  of
principle  [principium)  to  denote  the  eternal  and  infinite  basis  or  sub-
stance [sMb-stans]  of  things,  and  which  is  therefore  not  itself  a  thing,
but  that  from  which  all  things  proceed,  and  of  which  they  aU  consist,
and  to  which  they  oil  return.  It  is  thus  the  containing,  and  therefore
the  feminine,  element  Or  mode  of  Deity,  as  distinguished  from  the  ener-
gising and  masculine  element  or  mode  ;  or  God  the  Mother  as  dis-
tinguished from  God  the  Father.  It  is  termed  also  the  fourth  dimen-
sion, or  the  within  of  space,  from  which  the  other  dimensions  pre.
and  the  nonmawn,  reality,  being,  or  "thing  in  itself,"  which  underlies
or  stib-stands  the  phenomenon,  appearance,  existence,  or  thing  per-
ceived.    As  original,   divine,  and  self-subsistent,   and    therein   distin-

1  In  Arche,  Aphrodite,  Persephone,  Psyche,  Herpe,  and  all  Greek  terms  ending
in  e.  the  final  letter  i>  sounded.     The  ck  is  usually  pronounce

Appendix.  305

guished  from  matter,  which  is  secondary,  derived,  and  created,  Arche
denotes  the  substance  alike  of  divinity  and  of  the  soul,  the  nucleus  of
the  nucleolus  in  both  God  and  man.  The  word  Ark  is  derived  from  it,
and  like  the  work  Ark,  the  Hebrew  for  which  is  tebah,  means  any
kind  of  containing  vessel.^  In  one  of  the  ancient  versions  of  the  Bible —
the  Coptic — thebi  is  used  instead  of  tebah,  a  form  which  relates  it  still
more  closely  to  Tibet,  Thebes,  and  other  places  similarly  so  named
apparently  as  being  homes  of  the  Mysteries,  and  as  representing,  Ihere-
fore,  the  Soul  as  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Spirit,  and  source  of  all
Divine  knowledges.1  Thus,  in  its  highest  application,  the  ark  of  Noah
denotes  the  original  Divine  substance  containing  in  its  bosom  the
"eight  persons,"  God  (the  Nous)  and  His  seven  spirits,  of  whom  all
the  universe  is  overspread.

Astral  fluid ;  the  universal  ether  of  space  and  immediate  sub-
stance of  the  manifested  universe,  which  becomes  the  various  elements
by  means  of  differentiality  of  polarisation.  It  is  not  the  substance
of  the  soul,  whether  unindividuate  or  individuate,  for  that  is  divine
and  uncreate ;  but  it  is  the  first  projection  of  soul-substance  into
the  material  of  creation,  and  is  as  the  veil  of  the  soul.  It  subsists
under  many  degrees  of  purity  or  tenuity,  and  is  the  abode  of  all
spirits  below  the  celestial.  In  man  it  constitutes  the  third  element
of  his  system,  counting  from  within  outwards,  and  coming  next  to  the
body,  acts  as  the  intervening  medium  between  it  and  the  soul.  As
thought-substance,  it  is  the  seat  of  the  mundane  mind  or  lower  reason  ;
and  a  disorderly  condition  of  it  is  a  frequent  cause  of  such  mental
derangements  as  are  not  due  to  lesions  of  the  organism.

Astral  Spirits.  While  the  astral  sphere  is  the  abode  of  all  spirits
below  the  celestial,  and  their  exterior  covering  or  ethereal  body  is  con-
stituted of  it,  there  are  spirits,  or  rather  entities  so-called,  which  are
constituted  entirely  of  it,  having  neither  a  spiritual  nor  a  material
nature.  These  have  no  existence  apart  from  man,  and  are  emanations
from  man,  being  to  him  as  reflects  of  himself,' but  devoid  of  substanti-
ality as  the  images  in  a  mirror.  As  with  morbid  growths  in  the  physical
system,  such  as  tumours,  they  become  new  centres  of  activity  in  the
system,  deriving  their  sustenance  from  the  system  generally,  to  the  deple-
tion and  emaciation  of  the  individual ;  and  only  by  a  healthy  regime  in
mind  and  body,  of  which  earnest  and  frequent  prayer  is  an  important
element,  can  they  be  subdued  and  the  vitality  absorbed  by  them  returned

*  See  page  89,  note  1.
U

306  u  Clothed  with  the  Sun*

into  its  proper  channels.  The  function  of  prayer  in  such  cases  consists
in  its  being  a  means  of  directing  the  mind  inwards  and  upwards  with
such  energy  as  to  convert  its  otherwise  lambent  and  diffused  substance
into  a  flame,  so  to  speak,  thereby  rendering  it  incapable  of  division
or  diversion, — a  condition  incompatible  with  astral  obsession.  The
astral  fluid  constitutes  the  perispirit,  double,  or  astral  body  of  man
in  life,  and  his  phantom,  ghost,  or  Ruach  after  death.  The  astral  body
is  called  also  the  magnetic  and  odic  body,  according  as  the  reference
is  to  the  substance,  the  force,  or  some  other  attribute.  The  term  odic
is  claimed  to  be  of  oriental  derivation.  The  Hindus  apply  the  term
Akasa  to  the  astral  ether  in  its  primordial  or  pre-cosmic  state.  The
astral  emanations  or  "  reflects"  of  persons  are  visible  to  the  lucid,  who
— unless  duly  instructed — is  unable  to  discriminate  between  them  and
genuine  extraneous  spirits,  so  life-like  are  their  impersonations.  The
merely  mechanical  "medium"  is  readily  responsive  to  their  influence.
And  many  besides  mediums  are  liable  to  receive  from  them  mental
suggestions — often  of  the  most  mischievous  character — and  to  mistake
them  for  suggestions  arising  from  a  divine  or  some  other  source  entitled
to  be  heeded.  The  astral  phantom  may  serve  as  a  medium  of  communi-
cation with  an  actual  departed  spirit ;  but  the  message  depends  for  its
value  upon  its  independence  of  the  transmitting  vehicle.  The  mere
phantom,  uncontrolled  by  the  soul,  is  no  trustworthy  instructor  or  guide,
and  inasmuch  as  the  astral  is  rather  an  emanation  from  the  body  than
a  distinct  element,  it  is  essential  to  clear  spiritual  vision  that  the  body
also  be  subjected  to  the  rule  of  purity,  especially  in  respect  of  diet.

Thus  far  concerning  the  astral  on  its  occult  side.  In  its  mystical
aspect  it  denotes  (as  explained  in  Note  K)  the  region  of  spiritual  weak-
ness, doubt,  temptation,  difficulty,  and  distress,  upon  which  the  aspirant
enters  on  his  emergence  from  the  "  Egypt "  of  things  material  merely
and  intellectual,  when  he  sets  his  face  towards  the  " Promised  Land"  of
spiritual  perfection.  For  the  wilderness  that  lies  between,  and  must  be
painfully  traversed,  is  no  other  than  the  astral  belt  within  his  own  sys-
tem, already  in  these  pages  so  exquisitely  presented  in  the  hymn  to  the
planet-god  [Part  II.,  XIIL,  (6)],  as  to  need  no  further  explanation  here.
Concerning  the  distinction  between  the  terms  mystical  and  occult,  see
the  explanation  given  under  Occultism.

The  Elect  is  a  term  the  misunderstanding  of  which  has  been  a
stumbling-block  and  a  curse  to  Christendom.  And  the  evil  has  arisen
through  the  suppression  of  the  doctrine  of  a  multiplicity  of  earth-lives,
otherwise  called  the  doctrine  of  re-incarnation  or  transmigration,  and

Appendix.  307

the  consequent  assumption  that  all  who  are  not  actually  of  the  elect  are
hopelessly  reprobate  and  lost ; — a  belief  which,  by  its  ascription  to  God
of  a  capricious,  arbitrary,  and  pitiless  character,  has  served  greatly  to
obscure  from  view  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  Nature.

The  truth  is  that  by  the  elect  are  denoted  only  those  in  whom  the
redemptive  process  has  already  proceeded  so  far  as  to  ensure  their
ultimate  salvation,  all  others  being  still  in  too  rudimentary  a  stage
of  their  evolution  to  have  attained  to  this  desirable  state,  and,  there-
fore, still  without  assurance  of  salvation,  and  consequently  liable  to
failure.

Seeing  how  small  a  proportion  of  persons  in  any  one  period  or  genera-
tion are  entitled  to  be  regarded  as  elect,  and  how  complex  and  pro-
longed the  process  requisite  for  the  elaboration  of  the  individual  from  his
beginning  in  the  lowest  forms  of  organic  life  to  the  summit  of  human
evolution,  where  humanity  unites  with  Deity, — the  denial  of  a  multiplicity
of  earth-lives  to  afford  the  requisite  opportunities  of  experience  would  be
a  sentence  of  perdition  upon  the  entire  race.  Whereas,  as  it  is, — according
to  the  ancient  and  universal  doctrine  now  newly  recovered — so  far  from
souls  having  their  beginning  at  some  arbitrary  stage  upon  the  ladder  of
evolution,  with  their  destiny  for  eternal  bliss  or  woe,  not  merely
dependent  upon  the  use  made  by  them  of  a  single  brief  existence,
amid  conditions  wholly  new  and  strange  to  them,  but  arbitrarily  fixed
independently  of  aught  that  they  can  do  or  desire, — they  begin  at  the
lowest  round,  and  returning  again  and  again  to  the  body,  have  ample
time  and  opportunity  to  determine  their  final  lot  for  themselves,
according  to  the  tendencies  voluntarily  encouraged  by  them.

Hades  (Heb.  Sheol  =  hell ;  lit.  in  darkness)  denotes  the  lower  spheres
of  the  consciousness,  the  material  and  astral,  to  be  in  which  is  to  the
soul,  which  belongs  by  its  nature  to  the  higher  and  celestial,  to  be  "  in
prison,"  or  "  beneath  the  altar."     See  p.  234.

lacchos,  Jacob,  and  Joachim.  The  last  of  these  three  names  is  that
which  Christian  tradition  assigns  to  the  father  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  in
obvious  recognition  of  her  derivation  as  the  soul,  from  him  as  the
planetary  Spirit.  The  names  themselves  are  not  only  related  to  each
other  in  form  and  meaning,  but  they  have  a  common  reference  to  the
special  functions  and  characteristics  of  the  god  of  the  fourth  sphere, —
the  earth,  matter,  or  body.  For  in  implying  force,  effort,  success,  and
triumph,  they  indicate  all  the  stages  through  which  spirit  passes,  from
its  first  projection  into  matter  to  its  redemption  and  final  exaltation  in
soul.      It  is  true  that  the  successes  of  Jacob  over  his  brother  Esau,

308  "   Clothed  with  the  Sun."

wherein  he  supplanted  him  in  his  birthright  and  blessing,  are  ascribed
to  craft,  and  only  his  success  when  he  "wrestled  with  God,  and  pre-
vailed," to  force.  But  inasmuch  as  the  brothers  are  types  respectively  of
the  exterior  and  the  interior  self-hood,  of  which  the  former  is  the  elder,
in  virtue  of  its  being  the  first  to  be  manifested  in  man,  the  craft  by  which
Jacob  obtained  his  advantage  denotes  precisely  that  superior  subtlety
of  nature  whereby  the  soul  surpasses  the  body,  and  demonstrates  itself
as  the  true  and  only  possible  inheritor  of  eternal  life.

The  Egyptian  origin  of  Joachim  (as  also  of  Jehovah)  is  indicated  in
2  Kings  xxiii.  34,  where  Pharaoh  is  said  to  have  changed  the  name  of
Eliakim  to  JehoizkXm.  (of  which  Joachim  is  an  equivalent) ;  while  the
identity  of  this  name  with  Iacchos  is  implied  in  the  fact  of  its  being
thus  imposed  by  the  conquering  upon  the  conquered  king,  since  only
the  names  of  the  gods  of  the  former  were  thus  imposed.

Karma.  By  the  recent  appropriation  of  this  Eastern  term  into  the
English  language,  a  most  valuable  addition  has  been  made  to  our
vocabulary  of  mystical  science.  It  is  not  yet  sufficiently  familiar,  how-
ever, to  render  a  definition  of  it  superfluous.  The  idea  implied  by  it,
namely,  the  persistence  after  death  of  the  effects  of  the  tendencies
encouraged  and  the  characteristics  acquired  in  life,  and  the  neces
where  these  have  been  bad,  of  expiation  and  amendment  by  the  subject
of  them,  is  involved  in  the  doctrine  of  purgatory  and  retribution.  But
inasmuch  as  by  Karma  is  meant  a  repeated  return  into  the  earth-life,
there  to  work  out  in  new  bodies  the  evil  consequences  of  past  lives,
and  by  means  of  multiplied  experiences  to  rectify  defects  of  character  ;
and  by  purgatory  is  meant  only  a  post-mortem  expiation  by  suffering,
and  no  experiential  development,  the  latter  term  is  in  no  sense  an
equivalent  for  the  former.

The  inability  of  the  vast  majority  of  persons  to  remember  their  pre-
vious existences  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  return  is  that  only  of  the
permanent  ego  or  soul,  and  not  of  the  external  personality ;  and  that
they  are  very  few  in  number  who  succeed  during  life  in  establishing
with  their  souls  relations  so  intimate  as  to  gain  cognisance  of  their  s
history.  But  the  fact  that  the  outer  personality  is  left  thus  uninformed
on  the  subject,  in  no  way  invalidates  either  the  truth  or  the  value
incarnation,  since  the  function  of  the  body  is  to  serve  as  an  instrument
by  and  through  which  the  soul  obtains  experiences,  and  the  end  01  those
experiences  is  attained  when  the  soul  applies  them  to  its  own  advance-
ment. Nor  is  the  fact — if  it  be  a  fact — that  but  comp;.  ew  of
the  spirits  with  whom  intercourse  is  held  admit  the  doctrine   valid  as

Appendix.  3°9

an  argument  against  it,  since  the  agent  of  such  communication  is  rarely
the  soul  itself  but  only  its  astral  envelope,  and  this  is  in  no  better
position  than  the  material  body  to  pronounce  upon  the  question.

Miracle.  In  default  of  a  prior  definition  of  the  terms  natural  and
human,  the  terms  supernatural  and  superhuman  must  be  rigidly  ex-
cluded from  any  attempt  to  define  miracle.  In  defining  miracle  as  the
"  natural  effect  of  an  exceptional  cause  "  (p.  91),  the  term  natural  is  used
simply  in  the  sense  of  orderly,  regular,  normal,  legitimate.  Wherefore
it  remains  only  to  show  in  what  sense  the  cause  is  exceptional.  This
term  derives  its  force  from  the  inequality  of  human  development  in
respect  of  human  capacities.  As  a  microcosm  of  the  macrocosm,  man
comprises  in  his  system,  either  actually  or  potentially,  all  that  is  in  the
universe  ;  and  in  virtue  of  his  having  obtained  the  consciousness  of  and
mastery  over  any  plane  within  himself,  he  is  able  to  attain  the  conscious-
ness of  and  mastery  over  the  corresponding  plane  without  himself.  The
fully  developed  man — he  who,  having  realised  all  the  potentialities  of
his  nature,  is  a  typical  Man — is  able  to  exercise  mastery  over  planes  of
being,  of  the  very  existence  of  which  the  undeveloped  man  is  ignorant,
finding  no  answering  consciousness  of  them  in  himself.  To  him,  there-
fore, the  manifest  tokens  of  such  mastery  constitute  miracles.  They
represent  for  him  a  region  and  a  power  which  by  virtue  of  their  trans-
cending his  own  range  of  observation  and  ability,  are  apt  to  be  regarded
by  him  as  also  transcending  nature,  and  as  being,  therefore,  miracu-
lous. But  neither  do  they  transcend  nature,  nor  are  they  miraculous
(using  these  terms  in  the  conventional  sense)  for  the  man  who  works
them,  because  he  knows  them  to  be  the  natural  effects  of  causes  which
are  exceptional  only  in  that  they  appertain  to  a  sphere  of  nature  known
to  but  a  comparative  few.  Nor  would  they  be  regarded  as  transcend-
ing nature  and  as  being  miraculous  even  by  the  undeveloped  witness  of
them,  save  for  the  liability  of  the  undeveloped  man  to  regard  himself
and  his  compeers  as  typical  men,  and  as  the  measure  of  nature  and  of
humanity,  and  to  consider  all  that  transcends  their  own  limits  as  also
transcending  nature  and  man.  Their  mistake  lies,  of  course,  in  re-
stricting their  conception  of  nature  and  man  to  the  material  and
physical,  and  then  either  assuming  that  the  psychical  and  spiritual  are
beyond  nature  and  man,  or  denying  to  them  any  real  being.

Now,  the  undeveloped  man  subsists  under  two  modes.  In  one  of
these  he  is  altogether  rudimentary  in  respect  of  all  faculties  which  sur-
pass the  physical,  namely,  the  intellectual,  the  moral,  and  the  spiritual.
And  in  the  other,  he  is  developed — possibly  to  an  extraordinary  degree

310  u  Clothed  with  the  San'*

—in  respect  of  some  one  of  the  spheres  of  consciousness  denoted  by  th^se
terms,  and  yet  is  altogether  rudimentary  as  regards  the  others.  The
typical  scientist  of  the  day,  for  instance,  is  one  who  is  highly  developed
in  respect  of  the  intellectual  faculty  so  far  as  regards  the  consciousness
of  things  material  ;  but  as  regards  that  of  things  moral  and  spiritual  he
is  altogether  rudimentary,  and  his  attitude  towards  experiences  of  the
order  commonly  accounted  miraculous  and  supernatural,  is  one  of  such
determined  antagonism — through  his  inability  to  recognise  the  cor-
responding regions  in  himself — as  to  render  him  wholly  inaccessible  to
reason  and  evidence  in  their  behalf.  This  is  to  say,  he  has  a  fixed  idea
which  no  reason  or  evidence  can  overcome.  Now,  it  is  a  significant  fact
that  the  possession  of  a  fixed  idea,  which  no  reason  or  evidence  can
overcome,  is  by  materialistic  scientists  themselves — those  whose  speciality
is  medicine — accounted  a  sufficient  plea  for  certifying  its  possessor  as
insane  and  unfit  to  be  at  large.

It  is  by  persons  similarly  rudimentary  in  respect  of  the  spiritual  con-
sciousness that  the  important  function  of  literary  criticism  is  for  by  far
the  most  part  exercised  ;  the  result  being  that  the  confession  of  spiritual
experiences  is  treated  in  a  tone  of  contempt  and  ribaldry  such  as  largely
to  deter  from  the  promulgation  of  this  class  of  experiences  ;  their
recipients  shrinking  alike  from  exposing  their  "pearls n  to  profar
ami  themselves  to  contumely  and  affront.  Hence  it  has  come  that,
between  the  physician  and  the  literary  critic,  the  confession  of  experi-
ences indicative  of  man's  higher  potentialities— and,  in  such  sense,
"miraculous" — has  in  our  day  been   ma..  .   and  the  world

has  in  consequence  been  deprived  of  testimony  which  would  have  gone
far  to  save  it  from  the  abyss  of  unreason  and  negation  into  which  it  has
fallen.  And  this  repression  and  rejection  of  experience  in  deference
to  an  hypothesis— it  is  curious  to  note— has  occurred  in  an  age  which
vaunts  itself  superior  to  all  other  ages,  especially  on  the  ground  that  it
takes  nothing  lor  granted,  but  makes  experience  the  sole  basis  of
know!

Such  denial  of  man's  higher  potentialities  is,  moreover,  utterly  incon-
sistent with  the  belief  in  evolution  as  the  method  of  creation,  combined
as  that  belief  is  with  the  confession  of  absolute  ignorance  respecting  the
nature  o\  the  substance  in  which  evolution  o>.

Mysticism  (in  religion)  has  for  its  antithesis  son  (in  religion),

in  that  it  deals  with  those  realities  and  verities  which  are  spiritual,
eternal,  and  o(  the  soul  — that  is,  with  principles.  -

appertaining  to  the  interior  consciousness — instead   of  with   pen

Appendix.  311

places,  and  events  which  are  physical,  historical,  and  of  the  senses ;

and  regards  the  sacred  writings  when  expressed  in  terms  derived  from
the  latter  as  really  referring  to  the  former,  and  valuable  only  in
so  far  as  they  do  refer  to  the  former.  For  which  reason  the  re-
ligious mystic  cares  for  the  letter  of  Scripture  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  a
vehicle  for  the  spirit,  and  makes  it  his  study  to  discern  the  spirit
through  the  letter,  and  by  all  means  to  avoid  limiting  the  spirit  by  the
letter  ;  considering  that  to  the  substitution  of  the  literal  for  the  spiritual
sense  of  Scripture  has  been  due  the  perversion  of  Christianity  into  a  fetish
at  once  monstrous,  idolatrous,  and  dishonouring  both  to  God  and  to
man.  Wherefore  in  the  condition  hitherto  prevailing  in  Christendom,
the  mystic  sees  the  fulfilment  as  of  a  prophecy,  of  the  saying  that  "  the
letter  kills,"  so  completely  has  the  worship  of  it  killed  the  faculty  of  the
perception  of  divine  things.  And  he  insists  accordingly  that  only
through  the  revival  of  Mysticism  can  the  true  Christianity — that,  namely,
of  Christ — be  restored.

Mysticism  and  Occultism.  These  terms  are  so  far  identical  in  that
they  are  respectively  the  Greek  and  the  Latin  for  that  which,  by  its
nature,  is  hidden  or  secret  as  concerns  the  outer  perceptions.  But  they
differ  essentially  in  respect  of  the  particular  region  or  department  of  the
hidden  and  secret  to  which  they  respectively  refer.  Occultism  deals
with  the  region  and  its  phenomena,  which,  being  interior  to  the  body
and  exterior  to  the  soul,  constitutes  the  astral  or  magnetic  circulus
which  separates  one  from  the  other,  and  is  the  immediate  environment
of  the  soul.  And  Mysticism  deals  with  principles,  processes,  and  states
which,  being  interior  to  the  soul  and  comprising  the  spirit,  determine
the  soul's  progress  and  condition.  This  is  to  say,  that  Occultism  implies
transcendental  physics,  and  belongs  to  the  kingdom  of  science  and  the
intellect,  and  is  "human."  And  Mysticism  implies  transcendental  meta-
physics, and  belongs  to  the  kingdom  of  religion  and  the  intuition,  and
is  divine.  Of  these  two  kingdoms  the  typical  representatives  are,
respectively,  the  Adept  and  the  Christ.  By  which  explanation  is
illustrated  this  utterance  made  to  Anna  Kingsford  by  her  divine
illuminator :  "If  Occultism  were  all,  and  held  the  key  of  heaven,
there  would  be  no  need  of  Christ.  ...  If  the  adepts  in  Occultism  or
in  physical  science  could  suffice  to  man,  I  would  have  committed  no
message  to  you  "  (pp.  99,  100).

Noumenon.     See  under  Arcke.

Polarisation.  Every  particle  of  matter,  however  minute  or  tenuous,
whether  fixed  or  fluidic,  has  two  magnetic  poles,  a  positive  and  a

312  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun"

negative.  Polarisation,  as  the  term  is  applied  in  this  book  and  in
"  The  Perfect  Way,"  consists  in  the  arrangement  of  the  particles  con-
stituting any  entity,  in  such  order  as  to  bring  each  pole  of  every  particle
into  immediate  conjunction  with  the  opposite  pole  of  another  particle
— the  positive  in  one  joining  on  to  the  negative  in  another — so  as  to
admit  of  the  passage  of  a  continuous  current  of  energy  throughout  the
whole  series.

Regeneration.  This  term  implies  much  more  than  is  ascribed  to  it
by  the  theological  dictionaries,  and  the  failure  to  understand  it  has  been
the  cause  of  all  the  perversions  of  Christianity.  For,  had  the  doctrine
of  salvation  through  regeneration,  so  emphatically  asserted  by  Jesus  to
Nicodemus,  been  duly  comprehended,  no  place  had  been  found  for  the
orthodox  presentation  either  of  the  Incarnation  or  of  the  atonement.
For  it  means  simply  and  purely  the  re-formation  or  reconstitution  of  the
individual  out  of  the  spiritual  substance  of  his  soul,  instead  of  the  created
material  of  his  body.  Such  a  man  is  interior,  mystic,  spiritual,  and  the
elaboration  of  him  occurs  in  the  body  as  in  a  matrix  constituted  of
coarser  elements,  the  efficient  cause  being  the  operation  of  the  Divine
Spirit  in  the  soul,  he  himself  co-operating  with  it ;  and  when  fully
elaborated  he  can  dispense  altogether  with  the  body  as  well  as  with  all
other  elements  exterior  to  the  soul ;  or,  if  the  process  be  accomplished
while  in  the  body,  he  can  indraw  and  transmute  his  body  into  spirit
The  individual  thus  produced  is  said  to  be  son  at  once  of  God  and  of
man.  IK-  is  son  of  man,  because  a  product  of  humanity;  and  Ik-  is
Son  of  God  because  generated  immediately  by  the  Divine  energy.
And  he  is  said  to  be  also  son  of  a  woman,  and  this  a  virgin,  because  he
luced  of  the  soul  and  constituted  of  the  substance  of  the  soul,
and  the  soul  is  mystically  called  the  woman,  as  being  the  feminine
element  in  man's  nature,  and  "  mother  "  of  the  man,  and  when  pure
from  materiality  is  called  virgin,  being  named  Maria  after  the  boon
sea  of  -pace,  the  substance  at  once  of  herself  and  of  D*.

Wherefore  the  says:  nust  be  born  again  of  Water  and

of  the  Spirit,"  is  a  declaration,  first,  that  it  is  nece.-sary  to  ever)-  one
who  would  be  saved,  sooner  or  later  to  be  born  in  the  manner  in  which
He  Himself,  as  a  typical  Man  Regenerate,  is  said  to  have  been  born;
and,  next,  that  the  gospel  narrative  of  His  birth  ■  presenta-

tion, symbolical  and  dramatic,  of  the  process  of  r<.^
physical  significance  whatever,  the  C  :n  and  through  whom

salvation  occurs,  being  no  other  than  the  regenerated  spiritual  selfhood
in  each  person.     ^See  "  The  I  .;.,'"  V.  45.)

Appendix.  313

Failing  to  comprehend  the  true  doctrine  of  atonement,  and  to  recog-
nise its  identity  with  that  of  regeneration,  the  church  visible  has  alto-
gether set  aside  regeneration,  and  in  the  place  both  of  regeneration  and
the  true  at-one-ment  with  God  thereby,  has  rested  everything  on  the
false  doctrine  of  the  atonement.

Resurrection.  This  term  is  used  in  Scripture  in  various  senses,  none
of  which  is  that  commonly  supposed,  since  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the
dead  and  disintegrated  body.  The  current  belief  has  arisen  through
the  preference  of  the  letter  to  the  spirit,  exercised  in  complete  disre-
gard both  of  the  ideas  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  writers  of  the
mystical  Scriptures,  and  of  the  facts  of  existence.  Thus,  the  "  graves  "
of  John  v.  28  imply  only  the  lowermost  strata,  or  modes,  of  conscious-
ness, the  material  and  astral,  in  which  during  its  earth-life  the  soul  is
regarded  as  buried,  and  the  resurrection  of  verse  29  is  the  soul's  awaken-
ing to  the  recognition  of  the  destiny  it  has  incurred  through  its  behaviour
during  such  period.  There  is  a  resurrection  that  occurs  while  in  the
body, — the  resurrection  from  the  "death  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  to
the  consciousness  of  things  spiritual  and  to  a  consequent  life  of  holiness.
The  "  First  Resurrection"  (Apoc.  xx.  5,  6)  consists  in  the  redemption
of  the  body,  while  yet  alive,  from  liability  to  death,  by  means  of  its
transmutation  or  indrawal  into  its  original  spiritual  substance  (see  Part
I.,  No.  XXL,  and  II.,  No.  V.).  They  who  attain  to  this  resurrection  are
called  first-fruits— first,  that  is,  in  rank  (Apoc.  xiv.  4).  They  are  the  '
fully  manifested  Christs  who  are  glorified  in  the  hymn  to  Phoibos.
Paul  craved  this  distinction,  but  failed  through  his  inability  to  obtain
the  requisite  mastery  over  the  elements  of  his  body.

The  other,  or  second,  resurrection,  consists  in  the  investment  of  the
soul  with  a  spiritual  body  which  shall  serve  it  as  an  indestructible  en-
vironment after  the  termination  of  its  association  with  the  material
and  astral.  Being  evolved  immediately  from  the  soul  itself  it  con-
stitutes, not  a  body  raised,  but  a  raised  body.

Second  Coming  of  Christ.  A  careful  reading  of  verses  54  and  58  of
Part  II.,  No.  V.,  shows  that  they  do  not  necessarily  imply  a  return  of
the  actual  Jesus  of  the  Gospels,  but  that  their  sense  will  be  satisfied  by
such  a  manifestation  anew  of  the  Christ-principle  as  shall  comprise  an
exhibition  of  power  such  as  that  which  constituted  the  "Ascension."
This  is  the  "  Resurrection  " — in  the  sense  of  the  transmutation— of  the
body  through  its  indrawal  by  the  Spirit.  For  they  in  and  by  whom  this
process  is  enacted,  are  of  the  order,  and  bear  the  title,  of  Christ  Jesus.

Such  an  event  would  not  itself  constitute  the  "  Second  Coming,"  but

314  "  Clothed  with  the  Sun."

only  the  crowning  demonstration  of  that  coming.  The  coming  will
consist  in  the  revelation  anew  of  the  Christ-idea  in  such  wise  that  it
shall  be  so  fully  understood  as  shall  render  possible  the  demonstration
above  described.  In  this  sense  the  Second  Coming  may  be  affirmed  to
be  already  actually  in  progress,  seeing  that  the  Christ-idea  is  now,  for
the  first  time  in  the  Church's  history,  being  understood  and  male  known
in  its  true  sense.  This  is  the  sense  in  which  it  constitutes  the
"eternal  gospel"  of  the  passage  chosen  for  motto  to  this  book,  inas-
much as  that  only  is  eternal  which,  in  virtue  of  its  being  purely  spiritual,
and  inherent  in  the  nature  of  Being,  and  therefore  perfectly  logical,
subsists  independently  of  time,  person,  and  place,  and  even  of  matter
itself  (as  see  Part  I.,  No.  III.).  This  passage  has  been  widely  accepted
as  referring  to  the  promulgation  of  the  Scriptures  under  the  Reforma-
tion. But  seeing  that  only  their  letter  was  then  promulgated,  while
their  spirit  was  altogether  reserved,  its  proper  reference  must  be  to  a
promulgation  which  for  its  disclosure  of  the  latter,  can  alone  be
accounted  a  real  promulgation.  In  this  view  it  is  the  intelligent
appreciation  of  the  Christ-idea,  now  first  made  known,  that  is  implied
in  the  declaration  that  "  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  seen  coming  in  the
clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great  glory;" — "heaven,"  and  the
"clouds  of  heaven"  being  mystical  terms  denoting  man's  higher  reason,
;he  microcosmic  heaven  within  the  individual.
So^is  of  God.     See  under  Regeneration.

H   84     82  <*

*  4*  **   ♦,

*b      -...•A  <►      -TXT*      e>*  'o      '...»     A
