An Essay on Phlogiston, and the Constitution of Acids (Richard Kirwan, 1787)
============================================================================
Richard Kirwan — 1787 first edition. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (b30793361).

\ 


\ 


■  — — -  1  '  ' 

/  / 

— . . . 

A  N 

1 

E  S 

S  A 

Y 

i 

O  N 

P  H  L  0 

■> 

G  I  S  T  O 

. . . . ■«■■■■  w. 

N. 


I 


:• 


* 


i 


\ 


I 


\ 


t 


\ 


\ 


/ 


/ 


) 


v 


J 


/ 


I 


1  ■ 

\ 

A  N 


O  N 

P  H  L  O  G  I  S  T  O  N, 


AND  THE 


CONSTITUTION  OF  ACIDS. 


B  Y 

RICHARD  KIR  W  A  N,  Efq.  F.  R.  S. 

%  , 

&S  EMBER.  OF  THI  ACADEMIES  OF  STOCKHOLM,  UPSAL,  DIJON, 
DUBLIN,  PHILADELPHIA,  MANCHESTER,  &C. 

- gnraEMM— ~ — - — - - 


LONDON 

PRINTED  BY  J.  DAVIS, 

,  \ 

FOR  Pe  ELMS  L  Y,  IN  THE  STRAND* 


M.DCC.LXXXVII 


I 


/ 


/ 1 


» 


1 


l 


\ 


\ 


■ 


\ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 

l 

Wellcome  Library 


i 


4 


https://archive.org/details/b30793361 


i 


INTRODUCTION. 


^T^HOUGH  combuftion,  together  with 
feveral  of  the  moft  ftriking  phenomena 
of  chymiftry,  and  particularly  of  metallurgy, 
were  known  to  mankind  from  the  earlieft 
ages,  yet  it  does  not  appear  that  any  general 
conclufions  were  deduced  from  them,  or  any 
theory  attempted  before  the  9th  century  ;  in 
the  dark  interval  between  that  and  the  13th, 
the  qualities  of  bodies  began  to  be  clafTed 
both  by  phylicians  and  alchy mills,  and,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  general  fpirit  of  the  philofo- 
phy  of  thofe  times,  attributed  to  thofe  pecu¬ 
liar  fubftances  that  feemed  to  poflefs  them  in 
the  moft  eminent  degree.  In  this  diftribution 
of  qualities,  that  of  inflammability  was  af- 
figned  to  fulphur ,  and  in  a  loofe  fenfe,  this 
was  eredted  into  one  of  the  live  chymical 
principles  ;  but  about  the  middle  of  the  laft 
century,  the  Cartefian  philofophy  then  pre- 

IB  vailing, 


/ 


t 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

vailing,  vague  qualities  were  every  where  pro 
fcribed,  and  more  exaT  and  precife  notions 
eagerly  fought.  Beecher,  a  German  metallur- 
gift  of  great  fagacity,  and  perfectly  acquainted 
with  all  the  chymical  fadls  then  extant,  which 
were  much  more  numerous  than  is  commonly 
believed,  perceiving  that  fulphur,  properly  lo 
called,  did  not  exift  in  animal  or  vegetable 
lubftances  though  inflammable,  firft  afierted, 
that  fulphur  was  not  the  principle  of  inflam¬ 
mability,  but  that  this  quality  refided  in  a  fub- 
llance  common  to  fulphur,  and  to  vegetable, 
animal,  and  various  mineral  bodies  :  this  fub- 
ftance  he  fuppofed  to  be  of  a  dry  nature,  and 
therefore  called  it  an  earth,  on  which,  by  way 
of  diftindtion,  he  bellowed  the  name  of  Phlo- 
gift  on.  * 

This  doTrine,  fome  years  after,  was  adopted, 
improved,  and  extended  by  the  celebrated 
Stahl,  and  a  theory  formed  which  foon  pro¬ 
duced  a  variety  of  curious  and  itfeful  dif- 
coveries :  moll  chymical  phenomena  were 
fo  happily  illuftrated  and  regularly  con¬ 
nected  by  this  theory,  that  fince  the  year 
1736,  it  was  univerfally  received  all  over 
Europe. 

It  muft  be  owned,  however,  that  this  do&rine 
relied  on  the  fuppolition  that  inflammable  bo¬ 
dies  contain  fome  fubllance  which  uninflam¬ 
mable  bodies  do  not ;  nor  have  chymills,  un¬ 
til  within  thefe  few  fears,  been  able  to  afford 
any  proof  that  this  fuppofition  was  well  found¬ 
ed, 


INTRODUCTION*  3 

/  ed,  as  they  were  never  able  to  exhibit  this 
fubftance  fingly  and  by  Itfelf,  for  which  in¬ 
ability  they  accounted  by  faying,  that  on 
quitting  one  body  it  always  united  to  another* 
With  this  reafoning  1110ft  chymifts  acquiefced, 
and  the  rather,  as  they  found  it  impoffible  to 
fubftitute  a  better  theory  in  its  place.  Even 
the  weight  which  many  metallic  fubftances 
were  known  to  gain  when  they  were  faid  to 
have  loft  their  phlogifton,  did  not  for  a  long 
time  fhake  the  credit  of  this  favourite  hypo¬ 
thecs  :  it  was  held  by  fome,  that  this  increafe 
of  weight  was  owing  to  the  acceffion  of  igneous 
particles  ;  by  others,  that  phlogifton  was  a 
principle  of  levity.  Rey,  in  the  laft  century, 
afcribed  it  to  its  true  caufe,  the  abforption  of 
air,  but  on  fuch  weak  grounds,  that  he  is 
as  little  intitled  to  the  honour  of  a  difcoverer, 
as  a  fuccefsful  dreamer  to  that  of  a  prophet : 
nor  can  I  with  juftice  afcribe  this  honour  to 
Dr.  Hales,  though  he  firft  extracted  air  from 
minium  ; ,  as  he  imputed  the  increafe  of  weight 
not  only  to  the  air,  but  alfo  to  fulphur,  which 
he  imagined  it  abforbed  from  the  fire.  Mr. 
Lavoifier  was  undoubtedly  the  fi  rft  who  proved, 
by  diredt  and  exadt  experiments,  that  the  weight 
which  metals  gain  by  calcination  correfponds 
with  that  of  the  air  which  they  abforb  ;  he 
was  alfo  the  firft  who  publiftied  that  the  at- 
mofphere  confifts  of  two  diftindt  fluids,  the 
one  fit  for  the  purpofes  of  refpiration  and  com- 
biiftion,  which  he  therefore  calls  vital  ox  pure 

B  2  air  ; 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

air  ;  the  other  unfit  for  either  purpofe,  and 
thence  called  foul  or  mephitic  air  ;  and  that  in 
the  atmofphere  the  proportion  of  the  firft  was 
to  that  of  the  laft  nearly  as  i  to  4  ;  he  alfo 
proved  after  Dr.  Crawford,  that  pure  air  (a 
fubftance  which  Dr.  Prieftley  firft  difcovered, 
and  called  dephlogifticated  air)  contained  more 
fire  than  any  other  air,  and  that  during  com- 
buftion,  it  gave  out  this  fire  in  the  form  of 
heat  and  light. 

On  thefe  grounds  Mr.  Lavoifier  reverfed 
the  ancient  hypothefis  ;  inftead  of  fupp.ofing 
that  inflammable  bodies  contained  a  peculiar 
fubftance  which  uninflammable  bodies  do  not ; 
he  fuppofes  that  inflammable  bodies  are  fuch 
as  have  in  a  certain  degree  of  heat  a  ftrong  af¬ 
finity  to  pure  air  ;  and  he  proved  by  experi¬ 
ment,  that  the  remains  of  thefe  bodies  after 
inflammation,  and  metallic  bodies  after  calci¬ 
nation,  contain  a  fubftance  which  they  did 
not  contain  before  ;  and  hence  he  at  firft  mo- 
deftly  propofed  his  doubts,  whether  the  flip- 
pofition  of  inch  a  fubftance,  as  the  chymifts 
called  phlogifton,  were  not  entirely  fuper- 
fluous :  But  as  the  nature  of  aerial  fluids 
yearly  received  a  fuller  illuftration  from  the 
numerous  and  ingenious  experiments  of  Dr. 
Prieftley,  it  was  inferred  from  many  of  them, 
as  well  as  from  an  attentive  confideration  of 
various  chymical  phenomena,  that  inflam¬ 
mable  air,  before  its  extrication  from  the  bodies 
in  which  it  exifts  in  a  concrete  ftate,  was  the 

very  ‘ 


INTRODUCTION.  s 

very  fubftance  to  which  all  the  characters 
and  properties  of  the  phlogifton  of  the 
ancient  chymifts  actually  belonged,  and  con- 
fequently  that  it  was  no  longer  to  be 
regarded  as  a  mere  hypothetical  fubftance^ 
fmce  it  could  be  exhibited  in  an  aerial  form, 
in  as  great  a  degree  of  purity  as  any  other 
air. 

This  opinion  feems  to  have  met  the  appro¬ 
bation  of  the  moft  diftinguifhed  philofophers, 
both  at  home  and  abroad  *  ;  nor  can  I  fee 
what  Mr.  Lavoifier  could  reply,  before  the 
important  difcovery  of  the  compofition  of 
water  made  by  Mr.  Cavendifh.  This  furnifhed 
him  with  a  new  and  unexpected  fource  from 
which  he  could  derive  the  inflammable  air,  ex¬ 
tricated  in  various  operations  on  inflammable 
and  metallic  bodies.  However,  in  adopting 
this  explanation,  Mr.  Lavoifier  departs  from 
thofe  laws  of  philofopliic  reafoning  with  the 
breach  of  which  he  before  reproached  his  op¬ 
ponents  :  that  water  is  a  compound  fubftance, 
has  been  proved  by  direCt  experiment,  but 
that  it  is  decompofed  in  any  chymical  opera¬ 
tion,  is  a  mere  gratuitous  fuppofition  ;  nor  can 
he  fay  that  it  is  an  equal  chance  whether  the 
inflammable  air  extricated  during  the  folution 

*  Dr.  Prieftley,  Mr.  Bewly,  Mr.  Bergman,  Mr. 
Morveau,  De  La  Metherie,  Chaptal,  Crell,  Wiegleb, 
Weftrumb,  Hermfladt,  Kaerften,  &c0 

B  3 


of 


6  IN  TROD  U  C  T  I  O  N. 

of  a  metal  proceeds  from  the  decompofition  of 
water,  or  from  the  decompofition  of  the  metal ; 
for  the  metals  that  principally  afford  it,  as  iron 
and  zinc,  are  by  themfelves,  and  in  the  total 
abfence  of  water,  perfectly  inflammable,  and 
therefore  fhould  be  deemed  to  poffefs  the 
fame  principle  of  inflammability  as  vegetable 
and  animal  fubftances,  whofe  inflammability, 
without  any  controverfy,  is  attributed  to 
the  prefence  of  inflammable  air,  whereas  wa¬ 
ter  can  be  inflamed  in  no  circumftances  what¬ 
soever. 

The  fubftances  which  Mr.  Lavoifier  allows 
to  contain  the  inflammable  principle  diftindt 
from  water,  are  oils,  refins,  fpirit  of  wine 
and  volatile  alkalis  f ,  and  confequently  all  ve¬ 
getable  and  animal  fubftances ;  even  charcoal 
he  allowed  at  firft  to  be  an  unknown  modification 
of  the  inflammable  principle,  though  atprefenthe 
feems  to  think  otherwife  ;  if  he  allows  it  to  con¬ 
tain  the  inflammable  principle  confoiidated  by 
unknown  means,  as  ice  is  a.  modification  of  wa¬ 
ter,  we  fhall  hardly  difpute  it,  though  in 
reality,  it,  together  with  that,  contains  alfo 
fixed  air,  as  will  appear  in  the  fequel. 

The  controverfy  is  therefore  at  prefent  con¬ 
fined  to  a  few  points,  namely,  whether  the 
inflammable  principle  be  found  in  what  are  called 


%  Mem.  Par.  1781,  p.  401,  492 ♦ 
f  29  Roz.  p.  175. 


INTRODUCTION,  7 

phlogifticated  acids,  vegetable  acids,  fixed  air, 
fulphur,  phofphorus,  fugar,  charcoal,  and 
metals. 

Limited  as  this  controverfy  appears  to  be 
to  a  fmall  number  of  bodies,  it  is  neverthelefs 
of  great  importance,  if  an  exad  arrangement 
of  our  ideas,  and  a  diftind  and  true  view  of 
the  operations  of  nature,  be  of  any  im¬ 
portance.  The  bodies  above-mentioned  are  the 
fubjed  of  many,  and  the  inflruments  of  al« 
moft  all  chymical  operations :  without  a 
knowledge  of  their  compofition,  and  a  clear 
perception  of  their  mode  of  adion,  it  will 
be  impoffible  to  form  even  an  approximation 
to  a  folid  theory  of  this  fcience  ;  the  daily 
accumulation  of  fads  will  only  increafe  per¬ 
plexity  and  confufion,  and  if  any  ufeful  dis¬ 
covery  be  made,  it  will  be  the  mere  refult  of 
chance. 

Many  flrong  prejudices,  I  am  well  aware, 
favour  the  new  opinion  (which  I  fhall  take  the 
liberty  of  calling  the  Ant iphlo gift ic  hypothelis, 
and  its  fupporters  Antiphlogijlians ,  not  by  way 
of  obloquy,  but  to  prevent  circumlocution)  :  it 
has  been  advanced  in  an  enlightened  age  and 
country,  it  is  recoin mendable  by  its  fimpiicity, 
and  it  owes  its  origin  to  a  philofopher  of  great 
eminence,  who  was  the  firft  that  introduced  an 
almofi:  mathematical  precifion  into  experimen¬ 
tal  philofophy  ;  but  the  old  fyftem  prefents  alfo 
many  ftrong  prejudices  in  its  favour  ;  it  origi¬ 
nated,  it  is  true,  in  a  lefs  enlightened  age,  but 

B  4  it 


8  INTRODUCTION, 

it  originated  in  a  country  in  which  chymical 
knowledge  then  was,  and  ftill  is,  further  ad¬ 
vanced  than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe.  It 
is  to  Germany  that  all  modern  nations  mull 
refort,  to  improve  in  mineralogy  and  metallurgy, 
as  the  ancients  did  to  Greece  to  improve  in 
oratory.  By  the  Germans,  as  alfo  by  the  Swedes, 
the  old  dodbrine  fias  gradually  been  improved 
and  refined,  and  their  attachment  to  it  is  ftill 
unfhaken.  We  mu  ft  not  be  deluded  by  a 
falfe  fhewr  of  fimplicity  ;  when  all  is  well  con- 
fidered,  the  ancient  doctrine  will  be  found 
the  more  uniform  of  the  two ;  in  this,  pure 
air  is  never  faid  to  unite  to  any  fubftance,  but 
to  the  principle  of  inflammability  with  which 
it  is  evidently  feen  to  unite  in  the  defla¬ 
gration  of  inflammable  air ;  in  the  mo¬ 
dern,  without  being  an  acid,  or  affording 
any  fign  of  falinity,  the  principal  prerogative 
of  acid  fubftances,  that  of  uniting  to  almoft 
all  bodies,  is  affigned  to  it. 

But  prejudices  of  every  kind  fhould  cer¬ 
tainly  be  laid  afide  in  all  fcientifical  inquiries ; 
truth,  if  it  can  evidently  be  traced,  or  if  not, 
the  internal  probability  of  any  principle,  fhould 
be  the  only  motive  of  our  attachment  to 
it.  Now,  that  doftrine  muft  be  accounted 
the  leaft  probable  which  fails  ofteneft  in  ex¬ 
plaining  the  phenomena,  is  more  arbitrary 
in  its  application,  and  lefs  countenanced  by 
the  general  rules  of  philofophic  reafoning ; 

that 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

that  this  is  the  cafe  of  the  antiphlogiftic 
hypothefis,  I  flatter  myfelf  will  appear  after 
an  attentive  perufal  of  the  following  flec¬ 
tions. 


SECTION 


V 


I 


V 


- 1 


i 


•  .  • .  • 


/ 


y 


v 


"  *  / 


X 


l 


/ 


/ 


I 


f 


\ 


SECTION  I. 


OF  THE 

W  EIGHT 

'  -i 

O  F 

.  \ 

DIFFERENT  SORTS  of  AIR. 

AS  I  fhall  have  frequent  occafion  to  cal¬ 
culate  the  weight  of  different  kinds  of 
air,  in  the  fequel  of  this  treatife,  it  is  proper 
to  premife  the  means  I  ufed  to  afcertain  this 
weight. 


Of  Common  Air. 

Sir  George  Shuckburgh,  by  a  feries  of  ex¬ 
periments  made  with  a  well-conftru£ted  ba¬ 
rometer,  difcovered  the  length  of  a  column  of 
air,  equiponderant  with  TV  of  an  inch  of  mer- 

*  cury, 


12 


Of  the  Weight  of  Airs . 

cury,  whofe  fpecific  gravity  was  13,6,  at  dif¬ 
ferent  barometrical  heights,  and  in  different  tem¬ 
peratures;  the  weight  of -j1- of  an  inch  of  mercury 
of  that  fpecific  gravity  (which  may  be  looked 
upon  as  conftant,  its  variation  being  exceed¬ 
ing  fmall  in  the  ufual  temperatures  of  the  at- 
mofphere)  is  344,32  gr.  Purfuing  this  calcu¬ 
lation,  it  will  be  found  that  100  cubic  inches 


Gr. 

■  3°?929 

-  31,612 

-  3°?4x4 

-  3X?I24 

Mean  weight  -  -  31,0197 

As  the  barometer,  both  here  and  at  Paris, 
generally  hands  at  or  between  29,5  and  30,  and 
the  temperature  in  our  apartments  is  generally 
between  50  and  6o°,  I  fhall  confider  the 
mean  ufual  weight  of  atmofpheric  air  as  31 
grains  for  every  100  cubic  inches. 

100  cubic  inches  of  water  weigh  25318 
grains,  and  as  1 00  cubic  inches  of  common  air 
weigh  3 1  grains,  it  follows  that  common  air  is 
about  816  times  lighter  in  the  circumftances 
above-mentioned  than  water.  I  have  frequently 
weighed  air  in  a  glafs  globe  containing  about 
1 1 6  cubic  inches,  and  in  general  found  the 

1  refults 


of  common  air  weigh 


Bar.  Therm. 


3° 


29’5 


6  o' 

5° 

60 

5° 


} 

} 


Of  the  Weight  of  Airs*  1 3 

refults  to  differ  but  little  from  thofe  refuldng 
from  Sir  George  Shuckburgh’s  calculation, 
only  always  fomewhat  lighter,  which  I  be¬ 
lieve  .denotes  an  error  rather  in  this  method 
than  in  the  barometrical :  when  Sauffure’s  hy¬ 
grometer  was  above  90°  the  air  was  caeterh 
paribus  lighted:* 

1 

Dephlogifticated  air. 

I  procured  this  air  from  precipitate  per  fe 
its  goodnefs  was  fuch,  that  one  meafure  of  it 
and  two  of  nitrous  air  left  but  -do  of  a  meafure  : 
when  1 1 6  cubic  inches  of  common  air  weighed 
35,38  grains,  116  of  this  dephlogifticated  air 
weighed  39,0 3  grains,  confequentiy  its  weight 
is  to  that  of  common  air  as  1103  to  1000 
nearly. 

To  find  the  quantity  of  moifture  in  this 
air  when  produced  over  water,  I  filled  a  large 
jar,  containing  8 1  cubic  inches,  with  this  air, 
and  then  railing  it  out  of  the  water,  I  laid  it  on 
mercury  over  a  faucer  of  three  inches  diame¬ 
ter,  containing  256,8  grains  of  oil  of  vitriol, 
whofe  fpecific  gravity  was  1,863,  an(i 
them  together  24  hours ;  on  withdrawing  the 
faucer  1  found  it  to  have  gained  3,47  grains, 
confequentiy  100  cubic  inches  may  contain 
4,32  of  water.  The  temperature  of  the  room 
was  58. 


To 


14  Of  the  Weight  of  Airs . 

To  try  whether  the  bulk  of  this  air  would  be 
greater  when  obtained  over  water  than  when 
obtained  over  mercury,  I  diftiiled  at  the  fame 
time  240  grains  of  red  precipitate  over  wa¬ 
ter,  and  in  another  retort  of  the  fame  fize, 
240  grains  over  mercury,  and  found  the 
quantity  of  air  exactly  the  fame.  I  could  not 
fill  fo  large  a  jar  as  one  of  the  capacity  of  81 
cubic  inches  with  mercury ;  but  from  this  ex¬ 
periment,  I  am  induced  to  think  that  dephlo- 
gifticated  air  does  not  in  a  fhort  time  abforb 
more  moifture  when  received  over  water  than 
when  received  over  mercury. 


Inflammable  air* 

The  inflammable  air  ufed  in  this  experi¬ 
ment  was  extracted  from  clean,  newly  made 
filings  of  foft  iron,  in  the  temperature  of  590, 
by  vitriolic  acid,  whofe  fpecific  gravity  was 
x30973,  and  obtained  over  mercury;  it  had 
fcarce  any  fmell,  and  that  which  it  gave  was 
very  different  from  the  ufual  fmell  of  inflam¬ 
mable  air. 

The  barometer  being  29,9,  and  the  ther¬ 
mometer  6o°,  I  found  the  weight  of  this  air  to 
be  to  that  of  common  air  as  84,3  to  1 000, 
confequently  nearly  12  times  lighter. 

I  found  that  the  bulk  of  inflammable  air 
obtained  from  the  fame  fort  and  quantity  of 

materials, 


Of  the  Weight  of  Airs .  i  j 

materials,  with  the  affiftance  of  heat  towards 
the  end,  was  nearly  i.  greater  when  it  was  ob¬ 
tained  over  water  than  when  obtained  over 
mercury.  I  have  not  weighed  inflammable 
air  thus  obtained  over  water,  but  it  is  well 
known  to  be  at  moft  but  8  or  9  times  lighter 
than  common  air. 

From  85  cubic  inches  of  inflammable  air 
received  over  water,  I  extradfed  by  oil  of 
vitriol,  in  the  manner  above  mentioned,  in 
55  hours,  2  grains  of  water  ;  and  though  un¬ 
doubtedly  there  is  an  error  in  all  thefe  experi¬ 
ments,  yet  there  can  be  little  doubt  but  this 
inflammable  air  contained  f  its  weight  of  wa¬ 
ter  ;  the  inflammable  air  by  the  fubtradfion 
of  its  water  loft  its  fmell,  but  continued  as  in¬ 
flammable  as  ever,  and  therefore  there  is  no 
reafon  to  think  it  was  decompofed,  or  that 
water  is  any  way  eflential  to  it. 

Phlogifticated  air. 

By  expofmg  common  air  to  a  mixture  of 
filings  of  iron  and  fulphur  made  into  a  pafte, 
over  mercury,  I  obtained  air  fo  far  phlogifti¬ 
cated  that  it  was  not  in  the  leaft  diminiihed  by 
nitrous  air ;  I  dried  it  by  frequently  intro¬ 
ducing  dry  filtering  paper  under  the  jar  that 
contained  it,  and  found  its  weight  to  be  to  that 
of  common  air  as  985  to  1000,  the  barometer 
ft  an  ding  at  30,46,  and  the  thermometer  at 


I 


1 6  Of  the  Weight  of  Airs ; 

6o° :  care  mud  be  taken  that  this  air  do  not 
ftand  too  long  over  the  martial  pafte,  elfe  in¬ 
flammable  air  will  be  produced. 


Alkaline  air. 

I  found  the  weight  of  alkaline  air  to  that 
of  common  air,  to  be  as  600  to  1000,  ba¬ 
rometer  30,  thermometer  6i°  :  its  weight  pro¬ 
bably  varies  in  proportion  to  the  moifture  it 

contains,  which  muft  be  very  confiderable. 

> 

‘  < 

Nitrous  air. 

As  nitrous  air  would  infallibly  diforder  the 
metallic  apparatus  of  my  globe  for  weighing 
airs,  I  endeavoured  to  find  its  weight  by  com¬ 
paring  the  lofs  of  weight  of  the  materials 
which  produced  it,  viz.  50  gr.  of  copper,  and 
580  of  nitrous  acid,  whofe  fpecific  gravity  was 
1,1389,  with  the  volume  of  air  produced. 
With  this  view  I  produced  over  mercury  in 
the  temperature  of  64,  barometer  29,6  in 
81  hours,  38,74  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air, 
at  the  expence  of  14  gr.  of  the  materials  ; 
therefore  100  cubic  inches  of  this  air  would 
weigh  36,1  gr.  but  100  cubic  inches  of  com¬ 
mon  air  would  weigh  but  30,2  gr.  therefore 
the  weight  of  nitrous  is  to  that  of  common 
air  as  1195  to  1000. 

s 


If 


Of  the  Weight  of  Airs ;  i  7 

If  this  air  had  been  obtained  over  water,  or 
in  ftrong  heat,  its  weight  would  probably  have 
been  very  different,  as  it  is  liable  to  be  mixed 
with  phlogifticated  air,  nitrous  vapour,  and  a 
variable  quantity  of  water,  nitrous  vapour 
would  render  it  heavier,  and  phlogifticated 
air  or  water  probably  lighter. 


Fixed  Air, 

The  barometer  being  at  29,85,  and  the 
thermometer  64°,  I  found  the  weight  of  fixed 
air  extraded  from  calcareous  fpar,  by  marine 
acid,  whofe  fpecific  gravity  was  1,0145,  and 
obtained  over  mercury,  to  be  to  that  of  com* 
mon  air  as  1500  to  1000. 

Notwithftanding  that  this  air  was  obtained 
in  the  drieft  manner  poffible,  and  that  the 
globe  which  contained  it  appeared  perfectly 
dry,  yet  when  I  carried  it  into  a  room  27  de¬ 
grees  colder,  the  infide  of  the  globe  was  co¬ 
vered  with  dew,  which  foon  formed  vifiblo 
drops. 


Vitriolic  Acid  Air, 

I  extraded  this  air  in  a  ftrong  heat  from 
copper,  by  means  of  vitriolic  acid,  whofe  fpe¬ 
cific  gravity  was  1,704,  *ts  weight  was  to  that 

C  of 


I 


1 8  Of  the  Weight  of  Airs . 

of  common  air  as  2265  to  1000,  barometer 
30,13,  thermometer  6o°. 

The  weight  of  this  air  muft  be  fomewhat 
variable,  as  it  contains  a  variable  proportion 
of  water,  and  alfo  of  fulphur. 


Hepatic  Ain 

That  extracted  from  fulphurated  iron,  is  to 
common  air  as  1106  to  1000  ;  but  as  it  con¬ 
tained  a  little  metallic  inflammable  air,  it  is  pro¬ 
bably  lighter  than  that  drawn  from  alkaline  or 
calcareous  hepars. 

Table  of  the  abfolute  weight  of  100  cubic 
inches  of  different  kinds  of  air,  and  their 
proportions  to  common  air. 


100  Cubic  Inches. 

Gr. 

Proportion  to  common 

Common  air 

31 

IOOO 

Dephlogifticated 

34 

1103 

Phlogifticated 

3°, 535 

985 

Nitrous 

37 

”94 

Vitriolic 

7°>2I5 

2265 

Fixed 

4  6,5 

1500 

Hepatic 

34,286 

1 106 

Alkaline 

l8,l6 

600 

Inflammable 

2,613 

84  >3 

By  means  of  the  3d  column,  the  weight  of 
common  air  being  rigoroufly  given,  that  of  any 

arti- 


Of  the  Weight  of  Airs.  1 9 

artificial  air  in  the  fame  temperature,  and  under 
the  fame  preffure,  may  be  had  pretty  nearly ; 
for  it  muft  be  owned  their  expanfibility  in  dif¬ 
ferent  temperatures  has  not  been  as  yet  accu¬ 
rately  determined  :  in  point  of  compreffibility, 
the  difference  is  inconfiderable.  I  have  fet 
down  the  weight  of  dephlogifticated  and  ni¬ 
trous  air  fomewhat  lower  than  I  found  them, 
for  the  fake  of  abridging  calculation,  and  be- 
caufe  others  have  found  their  weight  ftill 
lower. 

The  mean  weight  of  common  air  by  Mr, 
Lavbifier’s  calculation,  differs  very  little  from 
that  which  I  aflign  to  it,  that  is  to  fay,  only 
by  7  Troy  grains,  in  a  1000  Englifh  cubic 
inches,  his  calculation  exceeding  mine  by  fo 
much  ;  but  with  refpeT  to  other  airs,  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  us  is  greater,  as  may  be  feen 
by  the  following  table. 


ioo  French  cubic  inches 


by  my  calculation. 

French  Gr. 

By  Mr,  Lavoifier, 

Common  air 

45 >69 

46,8 1 

Dephlogifticated 

5° 

47)3!  7 

Fixed  air 

68,74 

69,50 

Nitrous 

54)53 

40, 

The  weight  of  each  of  thefe  airs  being  fo 
different  from  that  on  which  I  grounded  my 
former  calculation  of  the  proportion  of  their 
ingredients,  I  have  been  obliged  to  re-calculate 
the  whole.  To  inflammable  air,  I  ftill  affign 

C  2  *  the 


20 


Of  the  Weight  of  Airs , 

the  fame  weight  as  before,  as  it  has  not  the 
great  levity  I  found  it  to  have,  except  it  be 
made  with  particular  care,  fo  that  I  confider  it 
in  the  ufual  ftate  as  only  ten  times  lighter  than 
common  air ;  I  alfo  confider  thefe  airs  as 
united  with  their  ufual  proportion  of  water, 
and  not  as  perfectly  pure.  In  fuch  circumftanees 

ioo  cubic  inches  of  Gr.  Gr. 

Nitrous  air  contain  6,7  of  phlogifton  and  30  of  nitrous  balls 
Fixed  air  -  8,14  -  38,36  dephlog.  air 

joo  Gr.  of 

Nitrous  air  18  -  82  nitrous  bafis 

fixed  air  17  ^  83  dephlog.  air« 


/ 


SECT. 


Of  the  Compofition  of  Acids ,  &c»  21 

* 

SECT*  It 

Of  the  Compofition  of  Acids ,  and  General  Prin - 
ciples  of  the  New  theory % 

WITH  refpeCt  to  the  nature  and  internal 
compofition  of  acids,  it  muft  be  owned 
that  the  theory  of  chymiftry  has  been  much 
advanced  by  the  deductions  and  reafonings  of 
Mr.  Lavoilier  :  that  a  certain  quantity  of  pure 
air  difappeared  during  the  combuftion  of  ful- 
phur  and  phofphorus,  and  on  uniting  pure 
air  with  nitrous  air,  was  firft  difcovered  by 
Dr.  Prieftley ;  but  the  connection  and  relation 
of  this  air  to  the  refulting  acids,  was  firft  at¬ 
tended  to  by  Mr.  Lavoifier.  I  have  fhewn  in 
different  papers,  in  the  Philofophical  Tranfac- 
tions,  that  this  air  always  unites  to  the  phlogiftic 
principle,  and  is  converted  into  fixed  air,  but 
I  neglected  tracing  it  any  farther  ;  I  am  now 
of  opinion  that  it  becomes  an  effential  con- 
ftituent  part  of  acids. 

All  adds  confift  of  two  principles*  one  pe¬ 
culiar  to  each,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
antiphlogiftians,  has  not  as  yet  been  decom- 
pofed,  and  confequently  muft  be  looked  upon^ 
relatively  to  the  prefent  ftate  of  our  knowledge, 
as  a  fiimple  fubftance  ;  and  the  other,  pure  air 
in  a  concrete  ftate,  that  is,  deprived  of  the 

C  3  greater 


22  Of  the  Compojitlon  of  Acids ,  &c. 

greater  part  of  its  fpecific  heat,  and  condenfed 
into  a  fmaller  volume  ;  the  firft  they  call  the 
acid  bafis ,  the  laid,  the  oxygenous  principle  ;  thus 
the  vitriolic  acid,  according  to  them,  confifts 
of  fulphur  as  its  bafis,  and  pure  air,  in  a  con¬ 
crete  ftate,  as  its  acidifying  or  oxygenous  princi¬ 
ple. 

This  dodtrine  of  the  compofition  of  acids 
has  been  admitted  by  home  of  the  ableft  de¬ 
fenders  of  phlogifton,  and  particularly  by 
that  diftinguifhed  philofophic  chymift  Mr.  de 
Morveau,  with  this  {ingle  modification,  that 
the  bafes  of  acids  contain  phlogifton,  which 
they  lofe  on  uniting  to  pure  air  ;  yet  it  feems 
to  me  very  difficult  to  conceive  how  pure  air 
can  unite  to  phlogifton,  a  fubftance  to  which 
it  has  the  gr  date  ft  affinity,  without  forming  a 
new  compound,  endowed  with  very  different 
properties  from  thofe  which  it  poffeffed  be¬ 
fore  fuch  union ;  it  feems,  therefore,  more 
re afo n able  to  conclude,  either  that  it  forms 
water,  as  Mr.  Cavendifh  thinks,  or  fixed  air, 
as  I  fhall  endeavour  to  prove  in  the  following 
fedtions.  It  muft  be  allowed,  that  the  con- 
ftant  extradtion  of  fixed  air  from  the  vegetable 
acids,  and  the  impoffibility  of  procuring  pure 
air  from  them,  forms  a  ftrong  prefumption  in 
favour  of  this  laft  opinion. 


Table 


Of  the  Compofitlon  of  Acids,  tSc,  25 

Table  of  the  affinities  of  the  oxygenous  prior 
ciple,  according  to  Mr.  Lavoifier3  Mem* 
Par.  1782,  p.  535. 

Refulting  Compounds. 


Safes. 

.  ...  .J  ■  *v  •  V  -* 

Bafis  of  the  marine  acid 
Charcoal  -  ’ 

Zinc 
Iron 

Inflammable  principle 
Rep-ulus  of  manganefe 
Cobalt 
Nickel 
Lead 
Tin 

Phofphoms 
Copper 
Bifmuth 

Regulus  of  antimony 
Mercury 
Silver 

Regulus  of  arfenic  - 
Sugar 
Sulphur 
Nitrous  air  - 
Principle  of  heat 
Gold 

Smoking  marine  acid 
Nitrous  acid 
Black  calx  of  manganefe 


Dephlog.  marine  acid 
Fixed  air 
Calx  of  zinc 
Calx  of  iron 
Water 

Calx  of  manganefe 
Calx  of  cobalt 
Calx  of  nickel 
Calx  of  lead 

. 

Calx  of  tin 
Phofphoric  acid 
Calx  of  copper 
Calx  of  bifmuth 
Calx  of  antimony 
Calx  of  mercury 
Calx  of  filver 
Calx  of  arfenic 
Acid  of  fugar 
Acid  of  vitriol 
Acid  of  nitre 
Dephlogifticated  air 
Calx  of  gold 


This 


24  Of  the  Compojitioh  of  Acids ,  &c\ 

This  table  is  liable  to  numerous  objections, 
which  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  mention  in  the 
fequel ;  I  fhall  here  mention  only  a  few  which 
apply  generally  to  the  whole  table. 

i  ft.  Of  the  firft  19  fubftances  which  have 
the  greateft*  affinity  to  the  oxygenous  principle, 
not  one  unites  to  it  in  the  common  temperature 
of  the  atmofphere  ;  and  yet  nothing  prevents 
this  union  but  the  affinity  of  the  principle  of 
heat  with  the  oxygenous  principle,  which  af¬ 
finity  is  laid  down  in  this  table  as  weaker  than 
that  of  any  of  the  nineteen  fubftances  that  pre¬ 
cede  it. 

2dly.  The  only  fubftance  which  unites  to 
the  oxygenous  principle  in  every  temperature, 
and  conftantly  expels  the  principle  of  heat,  is 
nitrous  air,  which  yet,  in  this  table,  is  fet  down 
as  having  almoft  the  weakeft  affinity  with  the 
oxygenous  principle. 

3dly.  No  proof  is  given  that  pure  air,  while 
pure  air  and  uncombined  with  any  other  fub¬ 
ftance,  unites  to  any  thing  except  inflammable 
air ;  nor  has  it  been  produced  from  any  fub¬ 
ftance  except  the  calces  of  the  perfed  metals, 
mercury  and  lead,  unlefs  they  were  previoufly 
combined  with  fome  acid. 


Of 


25 


Of  the  Compojition  of  Acids ,  &c» 


Of  the  Compofition  and  Decompofition  of 

Water. 

The  experiments  of  Mr*  Cavendifh,  and  of 
Mr.  Monge,  appear  to  me  to  leave  no  room  to 
doubt  that  when  very  pure  dephlogifticated  air 
and  inflammable  are  inflamed,  the  product  is 
mere  water ;  for  when  thefe  airs  are  employed 
in  the  proper  proportion,  only  TV  of  the  mix¬ 
ture  of  both  airs  retains  its  aerial  form  * ;  now 
it  is  impoflible  to  fuppofe  that  all  the  water 
obtained  pre-exifted  in  thefe  airs,  that  is,  that 
49  parts  in  50  were  water. 


According  to  Mr.  Lavoifier,  100  parts  of 


water  by  weight,  contain  about  87  of  de¬ 
phlogifticated  air,  and  13  of  inflammable  air, 
that  is,  nearly  in  the  proportion  of  7  to  1  ; 
and  fuppoftng  the  weight  of  thefe  airs  to  be 
inch  as  given  in  the  firft  fedtion,  100  troy  gr. 
of  water  will  contain  254,4  cubic  inches  of 
dephlogifticated  air,  and  497  of  inflammable 
air,  that  is  nearly  as  1  to  2  ;  however,  this 
calculation  is  fomewhat  precarious,  as  it  is 
grounded  chiefly  on  the  experiment  of  Mr. 
Monge,  the  moft  accurate  of  thole  made  in 
France ;  and  his  inflammable  air  was  certainly 
faturated  with  water,  its  fpecific  gravity  being 

V 

*  Philofophical  Tranf.  17 84,  p,  134, 


1 


not 


■2  6  Of  the  Compoftion  of  Acids  ^  &c. 

not  quite  feven  times  below  that  of  common 
air 

The  only  clrcumftance  in  which  water  has 
clearly  been  proved  to  refult  from  the  union 
of  inflammable  and  dephlogifticated  air,  is  that 
in  which  one  or  both  were  expofed  to  a  red 
heat,  but  it  cannot  fairly  be  inferred  that  water 
refults  from  their  union  in  any  lower  heat ;  on 
the  contrary,  it  appears  that  another  compound 
of  both,  viz.  fixed  air,  is  then  formed  •  thus 
mercury  and  fulphur  in  a  low'  heat  form 
asthiops,  and  in  a  greater  cinnabar ;  yet  it  is 
certain  that  in  low  heats,  both  thefe  airs  may 
remain  long  together  without  forming  any 
union,  and  when  they  do  unite,  it  is  becaufe 
one  of  them  has  not  its  whole  quantity  of  fpe¬ 
cific  fire  ;  but  in  high  degrees  of  heat,  their 
fpecific  becomes  fenjible  heat,  as  Mr.  Watt  has 
difcovered  j\  How  great  an  impediment  fpecific 
heat  is  to  the  union  of  bodies,  when  the  com¬ 
pound  that  fhould  refult  from  fuch  union  muft 
contain  much  lefs  of  it  than  either  of  the  in¬ 
gredients,  I  have  elfewhere  fliewn  by  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  fixed  air  and  quicklime,  and  oil  of 
vitriol  and  water  4. 

Another  principle  affirmed  by  the  patrons  of 
the  new  theory,  and  which  indeed  is  the  cor¬ 
ner  ftone  of  their  whole  fyftem,  is  the  decom - 

*  Mem.  Par.  1783,  p.  79. 

t  Philofophical  Tranf.  1784,  p.  335. 

t  Philofophical  Tranf.  1^84,  p.  168. 

4 


pofiion 


( 


Of  the  Compojttlon  of  Adds ,  &c*  27 

poftion  of  water,  but  of  which  the  maintainors 
of  the  old  dodxine  have  as  yet  received  no 
fatisfadtory  proof;  according  to  Mr.  Lavoifier’s 
table,  water  ihould  be  decompofed  by  charcoal 
at  leaf!:  in  a  boiling  heat,  which  is  full  fuffi- 
cient  to  communicate  as  much  fpecific  heat  to 
the  inflammable  part  of  water  as  is  neceflary 
to  its  aerial  form :  yet  water  has  not  yet  been 
decompofed  in  that  manner ;  whereas  water 
and  iron  will  produce  inflammable  air  in  the 
temperature  of  the  atmofphere,  though  iron 
has  in  his  fyftem  lefs  affinity  to  the  oxygenous 
principle  than  charcoal  has  to  that  principle,  an 
evident  fign  that  it  is  not  from  the  water,  but 
from  the  iron,  that  the  inflammable  air  pro¬ 
ceeds. 


SECT, 


sS 


Of  the  Vitriolic  Acid 1 


S  E  C  T.  III. 


Of  the  Vitriolic  Acid . 


A  C  COR  DING  to  the  new  theory,  this  acid 
confidered  abftradfedly  from  the  water 
which  it  always  contains,  confifts  of  fulphur 
(which  is  confidered  as  a  fimple  fubftance), 
united  to  a  large  proportion  of  the  oxygenous 
principle.  In  my  opinion,  it  confifts  of  a 
hafts  or  radical  principle,  which,  when  faturated 
with  phlogifton,  conftitutes  fulphur  ;  when  fa¬ 
turated  with  fixed  air,  becomes  common  fixed 
vitriolic  acid ;  and  when  combined  partly  with 
the  one  and  partly  with  the  other,  becomes 
volatile  vitriolic  acid :  fo  that  vitriolic  acid  is  no¬ 
thing  elfe  but  common  vitriolic  acid  holding 
fulphur  in  folution.  This  view  of  the  volatile 
acid  I  owe  to  Mr.  Berthoilet,  audit  feems  to  be 
the  only  improvement  made  in  its  theory  fince 
the  days  of  Stahl. 

That  fulphur  during  its  converfion  into  vi¬ 
triolic  acid,  unites  to  air  of  fome  fort  or  other, 
is  evident  from  the  quantity  of  air  which  it 
abforbs  in  whatever  way  that  converfion  is 
brought  about.  Thus,  firft,  during  combuftion 
in  refpirable  air,  I  have  fhewn  that  i  oo  gr.  of 
fulphur  abforb  420  cubic  inches  of  pure  air, 

or 


Oj  the  Vitriolic  Acid .  20 

or  about  1 43  gr.  but  the  proportion  of  this 
pure  air  actually  united  with  a  given  quantity 
of  fulphur,  is  not  eafily  determined,  becaufe 
it  is  vitriolic  air  that  is  conftantly  formed,  and 
this  air  eflentially  contains  fome  portion  of  ful¬ 
phur  in  folution,  which  portion  is  variable. 
Secondly,  Pyrites,  during  their  decompofition, 
abforb  a  confiderable  proportion  of  pure  air, 
as  Mr.  Lavoifier  has  obferved,  fo  alfo  does 
liver  of  fulphur  expofed  to  the  atmofphere, 
for  after  fome  time  it  is  converted  into  tartar 
vitriolate. 

But  whether  the  pure  air  thus  abforbed 
remains  pure  air,  or  is  converted  into  fixed 
air  or  water,  is  not  agreed  upon  :  that  it  is  con¬ 
verted  into  fixed  air  feerns  to  me  mod  probable 
from  the  following  fadts  : 

1  ft.  I  took  60  gr.  of  red  precipitate,  and  12 
of  flowers  ot  fulphur,  and  having  well  mixed 
them,  I  diftilled  them  with  a  gentle  heat  from 
a  glafs  retort,  whofe  capacity  with  that  of  its 
adopter  was  6, 1 8  cubic  inches,  and  received 
the  air  over  mercury:  if  cubic  inch  firft palled, 
which  was  nothing  elfe  but  part  of  the  air  of 
the  vefiels  ;  after  this  a  flight  inflammation 
took  place  in  the  retort,  accompanied  with  a 
rapid  production  of  air  and  white  fumes,  and 
part  of  the  mafs  fublimed  into  the  neck  of  the 
retort.  The  quantity  of  air  now  obtained,  ad¬ 
ded  to  that  had  before  inflammation,  amounted 
to  cubic  inches,  tnen  changing  the  receiver 
by  a  greater  heat,  and  without  any  inflammation, 

10  cubic 


3° 


Of  the  Vitriolic  Acid 1 

i  o  cubic  inches  of  air  pafted  clear  and  colour- 
lefs.  Of  the  1 6f  cubic  inches  thus  produced, 
I  found  14  to  be  vitriolic  air5  being  abforbed 
by  the  folution  of  marine  barofelenite ;  one 
continued  unabforbed  until  lime  water  was 
added  ;  the  remainder  was  worfe  than  com¬ 
mon  air. 

From  this  experiment,  I  infer  that  the  air 
that  united  to  the  fulphur  was  fixed  air,  for  if 
it  had  been  pure  air,  the  combuftion  muft  have 
continued  during  the  whole  time  of  their 
union.  It  is  to  no  purpofe  to  fay  that  this  com¬ 
buftion  was  prevented  by  the  prefence  of  the 
vitriolic  air,  for  if  this  air  could  prevent  the 
combuftion  (that  is,  the  expulfion  of  heat  and 
light  from  the  pure  air),  it  ihould  alfo  prevent 
the  union  of  the  pure  air  and  fulphur,  juft  as  it 
does  when  fulphur  is  burned  in  pure  air  ;  but 
fince  an  union  took  place  without  the  expulfion 
of  heat  and  light,  it  is  evident  that  the  air 
which  entered  into  this  union  was  not  pure  air, 
and  by  the  fame  reafoning,  it  follows  that  water 
was  not  produced  ;  the  firft  inflammation  arofe 
from  the  common  air  of  the  veffeL  The  di¬ 
minution  by  lime  water  fhews  alfo  that  fome 
uncombined  fixed  air  remained.  In  this  ex¬ 
periment  the  fulphur  was  decompofed,  its 
phlogifton  uniting  to  the  mercury,  and  its 
bafis  to  the  fixed  air  contained  in  the  mer¬ 
curial  calx  :  fome  part  remained  undecompofed, 
and  contributed  to  the  formation  of  the  vitriolic 
air. 


2dly.  I 


Of  the  Vitriolic  Acid,  3  i 

2  dly.  I  have  already  mentioned,  in  my  Treatife 
on  Hepatic  Air,  that  6  cubic  inches  of  vitriolic 
air,  and  5  of  hepatic  air,  left  a  refiduum  of 
iixed  air,  which  mull  have  been  contained  in 
the  vitriolic  air. 

3dly.  Dodtor  Prieftley  conftantly  obtained  a 
refiduum  of  fixed  air  from  the  diftillations  of 
the  vitriols  of  iron,  copper,  or  Mercury.  3  Prieft¬ 
ley,  216,227.  Mr.  Lavoifier  obferved,  that  the 
dephlogifticated  air  obtained  from  vitriol  of 
mercury  precipitates  lime  water.  Mem.  Par. 
1777,  P-  327*  ^  fulphur  be  burned  in  a 

large  quantity  of  dephlogifticated  air,  fome 
fixed  air  is  always  found  in  the  refiduum. 
6  Pr.  267.- 

4thly.  If  the  vapour  of  oil  of  vitriol  be  made 
to  pafs  through  a  red  hot  earthen  tube,  a 
quantity  of  fixed  air  will  be  obtained.  1 
Chy.  Annals  1785,  p.  523. 

5thly.  If  fulphur  be  digefted  in  oil  of  tur¬ 
pentine,  and  then  ilowly  diftilled  for  10  or 
12  days5  it  will  be  converted  into  vitriolic 
acid,  according  to  Homberg.  Mem.  Par.  1703. 
Here  it  appears  that  the  fulphur  is  firft  dephlo- 
gifbicated,  and  then  unites  to  the  fixed  air  of 
the  oil :  it  evidently  can  receive  no  pure  air 
from  it.  It  muft  be  remembered,  that  if  this 
experiment  be  not  cautioufly  conduced,  it  is 
very  dangerous. 

Thefe  faffs  leave  no  reafonable  doubt,  but 
that  fixed  air  is  produced  by  the  combuftion 
pf  fulphur,  and  becomes  a  conftituent  part  of 

the 


3  2  Of  the  Vitriolic  Acid, 

the  vitriolic  acid.  The  following  tends  to  prove 
that  fulphur  contains  phlogifton,  which  may 
alfo  be  eafily  inferred  from  the  foregoing. 

i  ft.  Doctor  Prieftley  converted  oil  of  vitriol 
into  fulphur,  by  evaporating  it  to  drynefs 
under  a  receiver  filled  with  inflammable  air. 
6  Pr.  22  :  but  as  this  experiment  maybe  ex¬ 
plained  otherwife,  I  lay  no  great  ftrefs  upon  it, 
though  it  is  perfectly  fatisfa&ory  to  thofe  who 
do  not  receive  the  antiphlogiftic  theory. 

2d.  The  fame  excellent  philofopher,  by 
means  of  a  burning  glafs,  melted  fome  iron  in 
vitriolic  air  ;  fulphur  was  immediately  formed, 
part  of  which  united  to  the  iron  and  rendered 
it  brittle,  and  part  fublimed  :  the  refiduary  air 
was  partly  fixed  and  partly  inflammable  air*. 
Here  the  vitriolic  air  was  converted  into  ful¬ 
phur  by  the  inflammable  air  of  the  iron,  and  the 
fixed  air  found  was  that  which  was  expelled 
from  the  vitriolic  air  in  the  inftant  of  its  con¬ 
vention  into  fulphur  ;  fo  that  this  curious  ex¬ 
periment  demonftrates  both  points  of  my 
theory  .  I  am  fenfible  the  antiphiogiftians  will 
reply,  that  the  inflammable  air  proceeds  from 
the  decompofition  of  the  water  contained  in 
the  vitriolic  air,  and  the  fixed  air  from  the 
plumbago  of  the  iron  ;  but  not  to  anticipate 
what  I  fhall  hereafter  urge  againft  the  decom- 
poiition  of  water,  I  fhall  only  fay,  that  it  is 
not  poffible  to  afcribe  the  fixed  air  to  the  de- 


*  Pr,  ji6. 


competition 


Of  the  Vitriolic  Acid \  3  3 

compofition  of  the  plumbago ;  for  Bocftor 
Pri  eft  ley’s  burning  glafs  cannot  melt  above  20 
grains  of  iron,  and  according  to  Mr.  Bergman 
100  gr.  of  iron  contain  but  0,12  of  a  gr.  of 
plumbago,  and  confequently  the  whole  20  gr. 
contain  but  024  of  a  gr.  and  of  this  only 
iis  fixed  air,  a  quantity  almoft  imperceptible. 

3d.  If  the  moft  dephlogifticated  calx  of  iron, 
and  on  that  account  perfectly  infoluble  in  de¬ 
phlogifticated  nitrous  acid,  be  made  into  a  pafte 
with  fulphur  and  water,  and  (lightly  heated,  it 
will  become  foiuble  in  the  nitrous  acid,  having 
taken  phlogifton  from  the  fulphur.*  It  cannot 
be  faid  that  fulphur  took  part  of  the  oxygen¬ 
ous  principle  from  the  iron  ;  for  by  Mr. 
Lavoifier’s  table,  iron  has  far  a  greater  affinity 
to  that  principle  than  fulphur  has. 

4th.  If  fulphur  be  inclofed  in  a  heated  earthen 
tube,  and  the  vapour  of  water  made  to  pafs 
through  it,  the  fulphur  will  be  decompofed,  and 
inflammable  air  obtained,  f  It  cannot  be  faid 
that  the  water  was  decompofed ;  for,  by  Mr. 
Lavoifier’s  table,  the  oxygenous  principle  has 
a  (Longer  affinity  to  the  inflammable  than  to 
fulphur. 

5th.  It  is  allowed  by  the  antiphlogiftians, 
that  volatile  alkalis  contain  phlogifton  ;  now, 
if  vitriolic  ammoniac  be  fublimed,  part  of  it 
will  be  decompofed,  and  the  acid  becomes 
fulphureous.  J 

*  Stahl,  300  Obferv.  p.  352. 

%  Mem.  Par.  1783,  p.  736. 

D 


t  6  Pr.  150. 

6th.  Mr. 


34  Of  the  Vitriolic  Acid. 

6th.  Mr.  Weftrumb  threw  about  a  drachm  of 
calcined  magnefia  into  an  ounce  of  concen¬ 
trated  black  vitriolic  acid  ;  in  an  infiant  both 
heated,  and  a  bright  flame  appeared  ;  but  with 
dephlogifticated  vitriolic  acid,  or  ftrong  nitrous 
acid,  this  did  not  happen.'1"  Here  the  vitriolic 
acid  having  a  ftrong  affinity  to  the  magnefia^ 
and  its  phlogifton  a  ftrong  affinity  to  the  com¬ 
mon  air,  a  feparation  and  double  union  ra¬ 
pidly  enfued,  and  hence  the  flame.  But  as 
the  dephlogifticated  vitriolic  acid  contained  no 
phlogifton,  flame  could  not  be  produced. 

yth.  If  fulphur  be  digefted  in  the  nitrous 
acid,  it  is  gradually  decompofed ;  the  nitrous 
acid  becomes  phlogifticated,  and  is  in  great 
meafure  converted  into  nitrous  air,  while  the 
greater  part  of  the  fulphur  is  converted  into 
vitriolic  acid.  4  Now,  nitrous  acid  cannot  be 
converted  into  nitrous  air,  without  the  addition 
of  phlogifton,  as  will  be  feen  in  the  next  fetdion. 

The  vitriolic  acid  impregnated  with  nitrous 
air,  has  lets  affinity  to  water,  and  may  fubfift 
in  a  dry  ftate.  \ 

*  Chy.  Annals,  1784,  p.  432.  f  Chaptal.  p. 

and  Cornetts  Mem.  Far.  1779,  p.  484.  [[4  Pr.  p.  26.  % 


1 


SECT. 


3 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid. 


S  E  C  T  IV. 

Of  the  Nitrous  Acid. 

\ 

*  ip  H  E  important  difcovery  of  the  fub- 
fiances  which  contribute  to  the  artifi¬ 
cial  production  of  the  nitrous  acid,  made  by 
Mr.  Cavendifh,  and  of  thofe  which  nature 
employs,  made  by  Mr.  Thouvenel,  together 
with  the  numerous  and  ingenious  experiments 
contained  in  Dr.  Prieftley’s  laft  publication, 
have  at  laft  diffipated  moft  of  the  obfcurity  at¬ 
tending  its  operations,  and  the  nature  of  its 
modifications.  Nor  have  the  labours  of  the 
antiphlogiftians  been  ufelefs  ;  both  Mr.  Lavoi- 
fier  and  Berthollet,  by  carefully  diftinguifhing 
the  component  parts,  particularly  of  nitrous 
air,  have  thrown  great  light  on  the  fubjeCt, 
though  by  neglecting  one  effential  part,  name¬ 
ly,  the  phlogifton,  they  have  obliged  me  to 
differ  from  them  in  fome  particulars.  By  thefe 
helps  I  am  enabled  to  give  a  new,  and  to  me 
at  leaft  a  more  fatisfa&ory  theory  of  this  fin- 
gular  acid  than  has  yet  appeared  ;  and  at  the 
fame  time,  to  lhew  the  weaknefs  of  the  anti- 
phlogiftic  doCtrine. 

Mr.  Cavendifh  has  fhewn,  that  the  nitrous 
acid  may  be  formed  by  taking  the  eleCtric 
fpark  in  a  mixture  of  3  meafures  of  phlogifti- 

D  2  cated 


36  Of  the  'Nitrous  Acid, 

eated  air,  and  7  of  dephlogifticated  air,  or  irf 
weight,  1  part  of  the  former,  and  about  2,6  of 
the  latter.  -  . . 

According  to  Mr.  Lavoifier,  nitrous  acid 
confifts  of  nitrous  air,  as  its  bafis^  united  to  the 
oxygenous  principle.  And  100  grains  of  dry  ni¬ 
trous  acid  confifts  of  64  grains  of  nitrous  ah\ 
united  to  36  grains  of  pure  air  deprived  of  its 
fpecific  fire— that  is,  by  meafure,  according  to 
My  calculation,  173  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air , 
and  105  of  pure  air. 

But  nitrous  air  itfelf,  as  he  well  remarked, 
is  a  compound  ;  100  grains  of  it,  according 
to  him,  contain  32  of  phlogifticated,  and  68  of 
pure  air.  And,  confequently,  64  grains  of  it 
contain  20,5  of  phlogifticated  air,  and  43,5  of 
pure  air.*  Hence,  according  to  him,  10 0 
grains  of  dry  nitrous  acid  contain  79!  pure  air, 
and  20 \  phlogifticated  air. 

This  proportion  of  pure  air  and  phlogifticated 
air  differs,  as  we  fee,  very  conftderahly  from 
that  of  Mr.  Cavendifh  ;  but,  as  Mr.  Lavoifier 
well  remarks,  the  nitrous  acid  is  not  always  in 
the  fame  condition,  the  red  fort  differing  very 
conftderahly  from  the  pale  and  colourlefs  ;  the 
former  contains  more  nitrous  air,  which  may 
be  feparated  front  it  by  mere  heat,  and,  therefore, 
mult  contain  more  phlogifticated  air  than  the 
latter ;  and  in  fad:,  the  nitrons  acid  produced 
by  Mr.  Cavendifh.  was  of  the  red  fort,  or  that 

11  Mem.  Scav,  Etrang.  p.  629. 


■which 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid, .  37 

which  we  call  highly  phlogifticated,  and,  con- 
fequently,  muft  have  contained  more  phlogif- 
ticated  air  than  the  pale  or  colourlefs.  In  my 
opinion  100  gr.  of  pure,  dry,  colourlefs ,  nitrous 
acid  contain  38,17  gr.  of  fixed  air  as  its  aci¬ 
difying  principle,  57,06  of  nitrous  bafts ,  and 
4,77  of  phlogifton  united  to  the  nitrous  balls. 
“As  to  the  nitrous  bafis,  of  its  weight  is  phlo-* 
gifticated  air,  and  f  dephlogifticated  or  pure  air, 
both  in  a  concrete  ft  ate.  It  has  an  affinity  both 
to  fixed  air,  and  to  phlogifton. 

Nitrous  bafis  faturated  with  phlogifton  con- 
ftitutes  nitrous  air  :  1 00  gr.  of  this  bafis  take  up 
nearly  22  of  phlogifton.  The  proofs  of  this 
theory  will  prefently  be  feen. 

Hence  the  conftituent  principles  of  nitrous 
acid  are  fixed  air,  dephlogifticated  air,  phlo- 
gifticated  air,  and  inflammable  air,  all  in  their 
concrete  ftate. 

Red,  yellow ,  green ,  and  blue  nitrous  acids, 
when  thofe  colours  are  intenfe,  owe  their  ori¬ 
gin  to  the  abforption  of  nitrous  air,  and,  con- 
fequently,  the  proportion  of  their  principles 
are  variable,  though  all  have  the  dephlogifti¬ 
cated  acid  for  their  ground.  Thus  Dr.  Prieftley 
having  expofed  ftrong  pale  yellow  nitrous  acid, 
whofe  fpecific  gravity  could  not  be  lefs  than 
1,400  to  nitrous  air,  found  that  100  gr.  of 
this  acid  abforbed  in  2  days  247  cubic  inches 
of  nitrous  air;  now  100  gr.  of  this  fpirit  of  nitre 
muft  have  contained,  by  my  calculation,  about 
21  gr.  of  dry  acid,  and  thefe  21  gr.  took  up 
9 1 5,39  Sr*  °f  nitrous  air.  When  about  20 
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air  were  abforbed  (that 

D,3  '  '  is 


3  8  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid. 

is,  about  7  gi\),  the  acid  became  of  an  orange 
colour;  when  50  cubic  inches  were  abforbed 
(about  18  gr.)  it  became  green ;  and  when 
nearly  the  whole  was  abforbed,  it  evaporated 
in  the  form  of  nitrous  vapour,  carrying  off  part 
of  the  water  with  it.* 

Hence  we  fee  that  nitrous  vapour  confifts  of 
nitrous  acid,  united  to  3  or  4  times  its  “weight 
of  nitrous  air,  and  a  little  water.  This  vapour 
is  always  of  a  red  colour.  We  fee  alfo  that  the 
nitrous  acid  is  phlogifticated  by  abforbing  ni¬ 
trous  air.  This  red  vapour  muff  carefully  be 
diftinguifhed  from  another  colourlefs  invifible 
vapour,  which  Dr.  Prieftley  often  mentions, 
and  which  is  nothing  elfe  but  the  nitrous  acid 
itlelf  difengaged  from  water. 

Nitrous  air  is  feldom  perfectly  pure  ;  it  is 
fubjedt  to  two  contaminations,  one  from  ni¬ 
trous  vapour,  and  the  other  from  phlogifticated 
air,  whole  origin  I  fhall  here  explain  :  When 
a  metal  or  any  phlogifticated  fubftance  is  dif- 
folved  in  the  nitrous  acid,  this  fubftance  at¬ 
tracts  the  acidifying  principle  of  the  nitrous 
acid,  and  its  phlogifton  is  attracted  by  the  ni¬ 
trous  bails ;  and  thus  by  a  double  affinity  the 
nitrous  acid  is  in  part  decompofed,  and  nitrous 
air  formed.  Part  of  this  nitrous  air  efcapes  out 
of  the  folution,  but  a  part  of  it  unites  to  the 
undecompoied  acid,  particularly  if  this  acid 
were  dephlogifticated,  and  with  it  forms  ni¬ 
trous  vapour ;  of  this  nitrous  vapour  part 
Unites  to  the  metallic  fait  or  calx,  and  part  flies 


Of  the  'Nitrous  Acid 1  39 

•off  mixed  with  the  nitrous  air,  which  it  contami¬ 
nates  :  from  the  union  of  the  nitrous  air  with 
the  undecompofed  acid  and  metallic  calx,  pro¬ 
ceed  the  various  colours  which  ftrike  the  be- . 
holder  during  the  folution  of  mercury  in  ftrong 
nitrous  acid.  Again,  when  iron,  and  particu¬ 
larly  zinc,  tin,  or  regulus  of  antimony,  are 
rapidly  diffolved  in  nitrous  acid,  as  thefe  fuff* 
fiances  give  out  their  phlogifton  very  copioufly, 
or  at  leaf!  very  readily,  not  only  the  acidifying 
principle,  or  fixed  air,  unites  to  them  ;  but  the 
nitrous  bafis  itfelf,  by  reafon  of  the  heat  ge¬ 
nerated,  and  the  fudden  eruption  of  phlogif¬ 
ton,  is  decompofed,  its  pure  air  uniting  to  the 
phlogifton,  and  forming  fixed  air,  while  the 
phlogifticated  air  flies  off,  mixes  with  and  con¬ 
taminates  the  nitrous  air. 

The  nitrous  bafis ,  free  from  the  acidifying 
principle  and  adventitious  phlogifton,  fprms 
that  fpecies  of  air  which  Dr.  Prieflley  calls 
de phlogifticated  nitrous  air ,  and  to  which  I  have 
given  the  name  of  deacidijied  nitrous  air ;  both 
appellations  confidered  in  a  proper  view,  are 
equally  juft  ;  for  when  it  is  fo  pure  as  to  admit 
a  candle  to  burn  with  an  enlarged  flame,  it  is 
equally  free  from  the  fmall  portion  of  phlogifton 
which  ufually  adheres  to  it,  and  from  nitrous 
vapour.  The  dephlogifticated  air  it  contains 
is  fo  ftrongly  combined  with  the  phlogifticated 
air,  that  they  cannot  be  feparated  but  in  a  red 
heat,  or  by  a  double  affinity :  And  hence, 
though  it  admits  a  candle  to  burn  more  or  lefs 
perfectly,  as  it  is  more  or  lefs  pure,  yet  an 

1)  a  animal 


40  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid \ 

animal  cannot  live  in  it.  A  fare  fign  that  it  ge¬ 
nerally  contains  a  final!  portion  of  phlogifton, 
is  its  reddening  with  dephlogifticated  air ;  but 
it  will  not  decompofe  nitrous  air,  becaufe  its 
pure  air  is  already  united  to  phlogiflicated  air. 
It  may  appear  extraordinary  that  this  air,  which 
■(fmce  it  is  a  part  of  the  nitrous  acid)  is  formed 
by  the  electric  fpark,  fhould  alfo  be  decom- 
pofed  in  a  red  heat  ;  but  it  fhould  be  remem¬ 
bered,  that  during  its  formation,  the  pure  air 
meets  with  no  phiogiftbn  but  that  contained 
in  the  phlogiflicated  air,  which  is  incapa¬ 
ble  of  inflammation ;  but  when  the  flame 
of  a  candle  is  prefented  to  it,  it  meets  with  un¬ 
combined  phlogifton,  with  which  in  that  heat 
it  can  readily  unite. 

Having  explained  thefe  modifications  of  the 
nitrous  acid  in  a  general  way  (for  a  detail  of 
particulars  would  be  much  too  prolix);  it  now 
remains  for  me  to  prove  the  prefence  of  phlo¬ 
gifton  in  phlogiflicated  air  and  in  nitrous  air,  and 
alfo  the  exiftence  of  fixed  air  in  nitrous  acid ; 
in  doing  which  it  will  appear  that  dephlogifti¬ 
cated  air  and  nitrous  air  fhould  not  be  looked 
upon  as  its  conftituent  principles  :  after  which 
I  fhall  examine  the  moft  remarkable  experi¬ 
ments  that  have  beeffmade  with  this  acid. 

With  refpedr  to  phlogiflicated  ah\  it  muft  be 
owned  we  have  no  dired  proof  that  it  con¬ 
tains  phlogifton, as  no  inflammable  air  has  as  yet 
been  extraded  from  it,  nor  is  it  the  general 
refult  of  phlogiftic  procefles  ;  but  fmce  the  ni¬ 
trous 


f 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid.  41 

trous  acid  formed  of  this  air  and  dephlogifti- 
cated  air,  was  found  ftrongly  phlogifticated,  and 
fince  the  phlogifticated  nitrous  acid  is  conftl- 
tuted  fuch,  by  its  union  with  nitrous  air,  it  is 
evident  that  phlogifticated  air  mull  contain 
phlogifton,  if  nitrous  air  contains  any. 

That  nitrous  air  contains  phlogifton,  appears 
by  the  following  experiments  : 

1  ft.  The  nitrous  acid  dephlogiixicates  fulphur , 
and  in  fo  doing,  is  converted  in  great  mea- 
fure  into  nitrous  air ;  now  it  has  been  already 
proved  that  fulphur  contains  phlogifton  :  it  alfo 
dephlogifticates  phofphorus,  fugar,  and  metals, 
in  which  the  prefence  of  that  principle  will 
hereafter  be  (hewn. 

2d.  If  the  eledtric  fpark  be  taken  in  nitrous 
air,  it  will  be  reduced  to  4  of  its  bulk,  and  the 
refiduum  is  mere  phlogifticated  air,'*'  and  a  lit¬ 
tle  acid  is  depofited.  Now  the  antiphlogrftians 
own  that  nitrous  air  contains  both  pure  air  and 
phlogifticated  air ;  fince,  therefore,  this  pure 
air  difappears,  is  it  not  evident  that  it  was  con¬ 
verted  into  water  ?  and  fince  the  formation  of 
water  requires  the  prefence  of  inflammable  air, 
does  it  not  follow  that  the  nitrous  air  contained 
this  alfo  ?  and  will  not  then  the  phlogifticated 
air  remain  fingle  and  alone  ?  As  to  the  acid  de¬ 
pofited,  it  evidently  proceeds  from  the  nitrous 
vapour  almoft  always  difperfed  through  ni¬ 
trous  air. 

*  6  Pr.  430,  and  312  Van  Marum,  27  Roz.  150. 

Analogous 


42  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid . 

Analogous  to  this,  is  the  following  experi¬ 
ment  made  by  Dr.  Prieftley :  If  a  few  grains 
of  iron  be  melted  in  nitrous  air,  the  iron  in- 
creafes  in  weight,  and  nothing  but  phlogifti- 
cated  air  remains.*  Here  the  nitrous  air  is  in 
the  fame  manner  decompofed,  the  phlogifton 
of  the  iron  and  its  own  uniting  to  the  pure 
air,  form  water,  which,  uniting  to  the  iron, 
increafes  its  weight,  and  only  the  phlogifticated 
air  remains. 

3d.  Dr.  Prieftley  having  thrown  the  focus 
of  a  burning  glafs  on  nitrated  lead,  in  a  receiver 
filled  with  inflammable  air,  found  the  inflamma¬ 
ble  air  to  difappear  ;  the  lead  in  great  meafure 
revived,  and  ■§  of  the  receiver  filled  with  nitrous 
air  ;  in  this  cafe,  therefore,  the  inflammable  air 
was  taken  up  partly  by  the  metal  which  it  revived, 
and  partly  by  the  decompofed  nitrous  acid,  whole 
bafts  is  converted  into  nitrous  air.  The  anti- 
phlogiftians  will,  probably,  reply,  that  the  acid 
was  decompofed,  the  inflammable  air  uniting 
to  its  oxygenous  principle,  and  forming  wa¬ 
ter,  while  the  nitrous  air  was  barely  let  loofe, 
and  not  formed.  This  anfwer  fuppofes  that 
nitrous  air  is  a  conllituent  principle  of  the  ni¬ 
trous  acid,  which  we  fhall  prefently  prove  to 
be  falfe,  and  is  indeed  inconfiftent  with  their 
own  principles,  for  it  would  follow  from  thence 
that  the  nitrous  acid  fiiould  be  decompofed, 
and  nitrous  air  produced  by  boiling  charcoal 
in  this  acid;  fince,  by  the  antiphlogiftic  table, 

t 

*  6  Pr.  304 

$ 


charcoal 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid.  43 

charcoal  has  far  a  greater  affinity  to  the  oxy¬ 
genous  principle  than  nitrous  air  has.  Yet 
Mr.  Lichtenftein  has  lately  fliewn  that  char¬ 
coal  rather  retains  than  fets  loofe  nitrous  air.^ 
The  following  experiments  fhew  that  ni¬ 
trous  air  is  not  a  conftituent  principle  of  the 
nitrous  acid  ;  but  that  fixed  air  is,  which  is  the 
3d.  point  that  remained  to  be  proved. 

ill.  There  is  not  a  doubt,  but  that  pure  ni¬ 
trous  acid  enters  intire,  and  without  decompo- 
fition  into  fixed  alkalis,  and  forms  nitre.  Now 
if  nitre  be  diftilled  in  a  good  earthen  retort,  it 
will  be  wholly  decompofed,  and  fo  alfo  will 
the  acid  itfelf,  except  a  few  drops  which  pais 
in  the  beginning  of  the  diftillation  ;f  and  no¬ 
thing  but  dephlogifticated  air  more  or  lefs  pure 
(and,  confequently,  intermixed  with  phlogif- 
ticated  air),  and  a  flight  proportion  of  fixed 
air,  will  be  found  :  thefe,  therefore,  are  its  true 
conftituent  parts,  when  difengaged  from  fub- 
ftances  that  cannot  communicate  phlogifton  to 
it  in  any  remarkable  quantity,  fuch  as  alkalis 
and  earths  ;  but  if  it  be  feparated  from  fub- 
ftances  that  contain  phlogifton,  fuch  as  metals, 
it  will  then  indeed  be  refolved  into  nitrous  air, 
and  dephlogifticated  air  more  or  lefs  pure,  the 
phlogifton  of  the  fixed  air  being  detained  by 
the  metal.  Thefe  fades  being  of  great  confe- 
quence  towards  underftanding  the  compofition 
of  this  acid,  require  to  be  more  fully  ftated. 


*  Chy.  Annal.  1786.  p.  217, 
f  Mem.  Par.  1781.  p.  23. 


44  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid . 

Mr.  Berthollet,  who  feems  to  have  made 
this  experiment  with  mo  ft  exadtnefs,  from 
472,5  grs.  troy,  of  nitre,  obtained  701,22 
Englifh  cubic  inches  of  air,  that  is,  at  the  rate 
of  714  from  a  troy  ounce  of  nitre. ^  This 
air  is  far  from  being  of  the  pureft  kind,  fince 
the  ftandard  of  the  greater  part  of  it  is  0,95, 
by  Dr.  Prieftley’s  teft,  whereas  that  of  the 
heft  is  0,03,  therefore  it  contains  phlogifticated 
air.  And  both  Dr.  Prieftley,  Mr.  Berthollet, 
and  Mr.  Succow,  obferved  that  the  portion  of 
air  which  firft  pafles,  contains  fixed  air,  ren¬ 
dering  lime-water  turbid,  f  Mr.  Succow  ob¬ 
ferved  it  alfo  in  the  laft  portion  of  this  air. 
Here,  then,  we  have  the  three  conftituent  parts 
of  nitrous  acid,  with  fcarce  any  nitrous  air, 
•which  the  antiphlogiftians  fuppofe  to  be  one 
of  its  conftituent  parts,  and  to  make  4  of  the 
bulk  of  the  acid,  when  exhibited  in  an  aerial 
form. 

However,  a  finall  quantity  of  nitrous  vapour 
is  generally  diffufed  through  the  air  thus  ob¬ 
tained,  becaufe  the  acid,  as  well  as  the  alkali, 
of  which  nitre  is  formed,  are  both  feme  what 
phlogifticated  ;  the  alkali  being  common  pot- 
afh,  which  is  more  or  lefs  in  a  faponaceous 
ftate,  or  mixed  with  coal,  and  the  acid  as  being 
generally  extracted  from  calcareous  earths, 
mixed  with  animal  fubftances.  I11  the  begin- 

%  Mem.  Par.  1781.  p.  23. 

f  4  bf.  252.  Mem.  Par.  ibid.  i  Chym.  Anna].  1785. 
p.  104. 


V 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid ,  45 

Bing  of  the  diftillation,  part  of  the  acid  pafles 
undecompofed,  by  favour  of  the  water  of 
ehryftallization. 

It  may  be  laid  with  great  appearance  of 
truth,  that  the  proportion  of  fixed  air,  thus 
obtained,  is  too  fmall  to  deferve  to  be  ranked 
among  the  conftituent  parts  of  the  nitrous 
acid.  Before  I  anfwer  this  objection,  it  will 
be  proper  to  determine  in  what  proportion  it 
fhould  be  contained  in  this  acid  ;  this  propor¬ 
tion,  as  we  have  already  feen,  is  variable,  the 
phlogifticated  acid  containing  leaft,  and  the 
dephlogiftieated  moll  5  but,  in  general,  we 
may  rate  it  at  4  of  the  acid,  as  exifting  in 
nitre.  When  the  nitre  is  expofed  to  a  red 
heat,  the  union  of  the  conftituent  parts  of  the 
acid  is  gradually  broken  ;  that  part  of  the  acid 
which  is  at  the  furface  of  the  alkali,  being  in 
contact  with  the  water,  which  is  the  molt 
volatile  ingredient,  is  not  fo  ftrongly  afted 
upon  by  heat,  but  pafles  undecompofed.  The 
refiduary  nitrous  acid  becoming  now  more 
and  more  concentrated,  decompofes  its  own 
fixed  air,  and  thereby  becomes  more  and  more 
phlogifticated.^  This  phlogiftication  conti¬ 
nues  to  the  laft,  the  retained  part  always  de- 
phlogifticating  that  which  efcapes,  until  it  is 

Of  this  phlogiftication  of  the  nitrous  acid,  by  re~a£tion 
on  itfelf,  we  have  a  full  proof,  in  the  red  colour  which  it 
affumes  when  heated  in  glafs  tubes,  hermetically  fealed. 
3  Pn  187. 


itfelf 


46  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid . 

itfelf  at  laft  forced  out  ;  and  hence  the  laft  por¬ 
tion  is  the  moft  impure,  and  even  contains 
nitrous  air. 

That  fixed  air  may  be  decompofed  in  this 
manner,  appears  from  fundry  other  experi¬ 
ments  ;  for  inftance,  that  in  which  Dr. 
Prieftley  obtained  dephlogifticated  air  from 
acetous  felenite,  6  Pr.  292,  and  alfo,  that  in 
which  both  he  and  Mr.  Lafione  obtained  air 
nearly  of  the  goodnefs  of  common  air,  from 
limeftone,  after  the  greater  part  of  the  fixed 
air  had  paffed.  6  Pr.  227. 

To  make  this  matter  ftill  more  intelligible, 
it  muff  be  obferved,  that  if  nitre  be  heated 
ever  fo  long,  yet  if  we  examine  it  at  any  pe¬ 
riod  before  its  total  decompofition,  no  part  of 
the  acid  will  be  found  phlogifticated,  but  that 
near  the  furface,  which,  in  the  inftant  of  its 
extrication,  is  dephlogifticated  by  the  portion 
of  the  acid  next  under  it,  which  then  becomes 
phlogifticated,  and  is  in  the  fame  manner  de¬ 
compofed  in  its  turn,  by  the  next  inferior  ftra- 
turn ;  and  this  procefs  continues  until  the 
whole  is  decompofed.  This  I  have  found,  by 
pouring  nitrous  acid  on  melted  nitre,  which 
never  expelled  any  more  than  a  fmall  por¬ 
tion  of  nitrous  vapour  ;  hence,  Mr.  Berthollet 
imagined  that  Mr.  Bergman  was  deceived,  in 
aflerting  that  phlogifticated  nitre  might  be 
decompofed  by  the  acetous  acid  ;  for,  in  effedt, 
it  can  clecompofe  but  a  fmall  part  of  it,  as  only 
a  fmall  part  of  any  portion  of  melted  nitre  is 

really 


I 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid.  47 

really  phlogifticated  ;  even  dephlogifticated 
air  from  red  precipitate,  contains  a  portion  of 
fixed  air,  as  Dr.  Prieftley,  Mr.  Lavoifier,  and 
Mr.  Monge  have  obferved.* 

2d.  Mr.  Berthollet  diftilled  472,5  grs.  of 
nitre  with  4  that  weight  of  filings  of  iron,  and 
obtained  453,37  Englifh  cubic  inches  of  air, 
nearly  of  the  fame  goodnefs  as  common  air, 
that  is,  containing  a  mixture  of  pure,  and 
phlogifticated  air,  and  not  a  particle  of  nitrous 
air  ;  but  the  alkaline  mafs  that  remained,  con¬ 
tained  fixed  air.J  It  were  abfurd  to  attribute 
this  fixed  air  to  the  plumbago  of  the  iron, 
of  which  Mr.  Bergman  fays,  ferrum  ductile 
fere  nihil  plumbaginis  fovet ,§  But  it  may,  in 
this  cafe,  come  either  from  the  decompolition 
of  the  nitrous  acid,  or  from  the  union  of 
the  phlogifton  of  the  iron,  with  the  dephlogifti¬ 
cated  air  of  the  nitre,  but  mod  probably  from 
both.  When  equal  weights  of  nitre  and 
filings  of  iron  were  ufed,  if  ill  there  was  not  a 
particle  of  nitrous  air  ;  becaufe,  in  eftedt,  the 
iron  was  not  attacked  by  the  undecompofed 
nitrous  acid,  but  there  was  a  greater  mixture 
of  phlogifticated  air,  becaufe  the  nitre  was, 
by  reafon  of  the  prefence  of  iron,  decom- 
pofed  by  a  more  moderate  heat,  and  the  al¬ 
kali,  for  the  fame  reafon,  contained  ftill  more 
fixed  air  than  in  the  former  cafe. 

*  2.  Pr.  I17.  Mem.  Par.  An.  1782.  p*  495,  and  1783. 
p.  85. 

X  Mem.  Par.  1781.  p.  234. 

§  3  Bergm.  49. 

The 


4  §  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid* 

The  fame  experiment  fucceeded  In  the 
fame  manner  with  Mr.  Achard  he  found 
fixed  air  not  only  in  the  alkalized  nitre,  but 
alfo  in  the  air  that  efcaped,  having  probably 
ufed  a  greater  heat,  by  which  more  fixed  air 
was  produced  than  the  alkali  could  retain  in 
that  heat.  Mr*  Berthollet  found  a  mixture  of 
120  grs.  of  nitre,  and  6o  of  zinc,  to  produce 
fo  much  fixed  air,  during  detonation,  as  to 
precipitate  3  or  4  quarts  of  lime-water ;  he 
alfo  found  a  mixture  of  nitre  and  copper  to 
produce  fixed  air, '  though  they  fcarcely  de¬ 
tonated,  as  copper  difficultly  parts  with  its 
phlogiflon.  Mr.  Cavallo  found  a  mixture  of 
3  parts  nitre,  1  of  fulphur,  and  1  of  copper, 
to  afford  fixed  air,  and  phlogifticated  air; 

.  the  fixed  air  was  -Po  °f  the  whole.d*  Hence 
1  think  it  evidently  follows,  that  fixed  air  is  a 
conftituent  part  of  the  nitrous  acid ;  yet  I 
have  often  thrown  nitre  on  red  hot  filings  of 
iron,  and  always  found  the  alkali  cauftic,  the 
reafon  of  which  may  be,  either  that  water,  and 
not  fixed  air,  is  produced  in  a  red  heat,  or 
that  the  dry  alkali  could  not  retain  the  fixed 
air  in  fo  high  a  heat. 

Sixty  grs.  of  nitre,  and  3  of  charcoal,  dif- 
tilled,  produce  fixed  air  and  phlogifticated  air ; 
60  grs.  of  nitre  and  6  of  charcoal,  flightly  de¬ 
tonated,  and  produced  alfo  fixed  air,  and 

*  Chy.  Annal.  1784.  p.  493. 

f  Cavallo  on  Air,  g.  815. 

more 


t 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid, 


49 


Snore  of  phlogifticated  air,  but  no  nitrous  air 
here  the  fixed  air  is  partly  an  edu£t,  and  partly 
a  product.  The  quantity  of  phlogifticated  air 
is  greater,  when  more  charcoal  is  ufed,  he- 
caufe  the  nitrous  acid  is  decompofed  in  a 
more  moderate  heat,  and  the  phlogifticated 
air  it  contains  is  not  decompofed  ;  for  I  do 
not  efteem  it  a  produQ:  of  the  operation*  But 
as  the  nitrous  acid  is  decompofed  before  it 
unites  with  the  charcoal,  no  nitrous  air  can. 
be  formed. 

But  the  refult  is  very  different,  when  nitre  is 
diftilled  with  a  fmall  proportion  of  fulphur  :  J 
here  nitrous  air  is  the  principal  product,  and  a 
fmall  portion  of  dephiogifticated  air,  which, 
being  immediately  converted  into  nitrous  acid* 
by  contact  with  a  fmall  portion  of  the  nitrous 
air,  cannot  be  had  feparate,  but  fubfifts  in  a  ftate 
of  vapour,  in  the  remainder  of  the  nitrous  air. 
The  reafon  why  nitrous  air  is  produced  in  this 
cafe  is  (as  will  be  fhewn  more  fully  further  on), 
that  part  of  the  fulphur  being  inflamed  in  the 
beginning,  and  converted  into  vitriolic  acid, this 
acid  reacfts  on  the  nitre,  and  expels  its  acid 
without  decompofttion  ;  but  the  expelled  acid 
meeting  the  uninflamed  fulphur,  is  immedi¬ 
ately  decompofed  by  it,  and  robbed  of  its  fix¬ 
ed  air,  at  the  fame  time  that  it  robs  the  bafts 
of  the  fulphur  of  its  phlogifton,  and  is  there¬ 
by  converted  into  nitrous  air.  The  vitriolic 


*  Mem,  Par,  1781.  p,  231,  %  Ibid* 

E 


acid 


go-  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid \ 

acid,  thus  formed  of  the  fixed  air  of  the  m* 
irons  acid,  and  of  the  bafis  of  the  fulphur,  ex¬ 
pels  more  nitrons  acid,  which  is  deeompofed 
in  the  fame  manner,  until  the  nitre  is  con¬ 
verted  into  tartar  vitriolate  5  towards  the 
end,  a  fmall  part  of  the  nitre  is  deeompofed 
by  heat  alone,  and  hence  the  dephlogifticated 
air  arifes. 

If  mercury,  &c.  be  diffolved  in  nitrous 
acid,  and  the  folution  diftilled  to  drynefs,  ni¬ 
trous  air  will  be  produced  in  the  beginning* 
and  at  the  laft  dephlogifticated  air.  The  ni¬ 
trous  air  is  here  formed  of  the  union  of  the 
phlogifton  of  the  metal  with  the  nitrous  bafis* 
while  the  fixed  air  unites  to  the  metallic  calx  5 
at  the  end  the  fixed  air  is  deeompofed,  its  de¬ 
phlogifticated  part  fet  loofe,  while  its  phlo« 
gifton  revives  the  metal,  as  will  prefently  be 
feen  more  at  large. 

3.  if  fpirit  of  nitre  be  made  to  boil,  and 
its  vapour  received  through  a  red  hot  earthen 
tube,  it  will  be  converted  into  dephlogifticated 
air,  in  which  a  portion  both  of  phlogifticated 
and  fixed  air  is  found,  as  Dr.  Prieftley  has  difeo-* 
vered :  the  water  through  which  this  air 
paffes  will  contain  alfo  fixed  air. 

Here  then  are  feveral  ways  of  decom- 
poling  the  nitrous  acid,  and  in  one  only  it  is 
refolved  into  nitrous  and  dephlogifticated  air, 
and  in  this  way  it  may,  at  leaft,  be  ftrongiy 
iufpedfted  to  reqeive  an  addition  of  another 
principle  ;  why  then  ftiould  thefe  be  regarded 


t)f  '.the  Nitrous  Ariel. 

as  its  conftituent  principle  ?  and  as  in  the  two 
fimpleft  methods  of  decompofition,  in  which 
the  reaction  of  no  foreign  fubftance  can  be 
fufpedted,  it  appears  in  the  form  of  dephlo- 
gifticated,  phlogifticated,  and  fixed  air  (the 
former  always  containing  a  mixture  of  the 
two  laft),  why  fhould  not  thefe  be  accounted 
its  true  conftituent  parts  ? 

4.  This  theory  is  further  confirmed  by  re¬ 
flecting  on  the  manner  in  which  nitrous  acid 
is  generated  by  nature.  Mr.  Thouveriel  * 
found  that  this  acid  is  conftantly  produced 
when  chalk  is  expofed  to  a  mixture  of  putrid 
air  and  common  air,  or  putrid  air  and  de- 
phlogifticated  air  ;  but  if  the  putrid  air  be 
palled  through  lime-water,  it  is  never  gene¬ 
rated,  and  that  it  is  rarely  produced  by  ex- 
pofure  of  quicklime,  or  fixed  alkalis,  to  thefe 
airs.  Does  not  this  experiment  imply  that  fixed 
air  is  an  eflential  ingredient  in  this  production  ? 
The  reafon  that  alkalis,  though  aerated,  are  not 
fo  proper,  is,  that  they  do  not  combine  with 
phlogifticated  air,  as  calcareous  earths  do. 
Mr.  Cavendifh,  indeed,  produced  nitrous  acid^ 
without  any  apparent  mixture  of  fixed  air ; 
but  the  atom  of  fixed  air,  neceflary  for  the 
formation  of  the  fmall  quantity  of  nitrous 
acid  he  produced  (about  x  of  a  grain),  might 
well  be  contained  in  the  phlogifticated  air  he 
ufed,  or  perhaps  formed  in  the  operation ; 


*  n  S^av.  Etrang,  p,  126,  128, 

E  2 


for 


\ 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid, 

for  it  is  impoffible  to  deny  all  credit  to  thofe 
who  afferted  that  lime-water  was  precipitated 
by  taking  the  electric  fpark  in  common  air, 
though  it  did  not  fucceed  with  him,  either 
from  his  ufing  an  inftrument  of  different 
power  from  that  ufed  by  others,  or  air  phlo- 
gifticated  by  a  different  procefs. 

5.  Having  diffolved,  or  rather  calcined,  371 
gr.  of  clean  iron  filings  in  1451  gr.  of  red 
nitrous  acid,  whofe  fpecific  gravity  was  1*456, 
which  I  flightly  diluted,  and  let  the  nitrous 
air  efcape,  I  diftilled  the  folution  with  a  gra¬ 
dual  heat  until  the  retort  was  perfectly  red 
hot,  and  received  the  air  over  mercury,  hav¬ 
ing  an  apparatus  for  receiving  the  acid  liquor 
apart.  After  fome  common  and  nitrous  air 
had  paffed,  I  obtained  air  fomewhat  worfe 
than  common,  in  4  portions,  each  portion 
containing  fixed  air ;  the  next  day  adding 
more  water,  I  obtained  ftill  more  fixed  air 
as  long  as  any  liquor  remained. 

6.  Dr.  Prieftley  having  diftilled  a  quantity 
of  iron  filings,  converted  into  perfect  ruft  by 
long  expofure  to  nitrous  air,  obtained  from 
them  a  large  quantity  of  air,  the  far  greater 
part  of  which  was  fixed  air,  mixed  with  a 
little  phlogifticated  air,  and  at  laft  pure  air. 
6  Pr.  319.  The  fixed  air  here  proceeded  for 
the  moft  part  from  the  decompofition  of  the 
nitrous  air,  its  dephlogifticated  part  taking 
phlogifton  from  the  iron . 


i  fhall 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid 1  53 

1  fhall  now  examine  the  explanation  of 
thefe  phenomena  given  by  other  philofophers, 
and  particularly  by  the  antiphlogiftians. 

My  ingenious  friend  Mr,  Watt,  and  alfo 
Mr.  Cavendifh,  *  are  of  opinion,  that  the 
whole  quantity  of  dephlogifticated  air,  pro¬ 
duced  from  the  diftillation  of  nitre,  arifes 
from  the  dephlogiftication  of  the  water  it  con¬ 
tains,  it  being  decompofed  by  the  nitrous  acid 
which  then  becomes  phlogifticated.  This  opi¬ 
nion  is  expofed  to  infurmountable  difficulties ; 
for  in  the  firft  place,  nitre  affords  dephlo¬ 
gifticated  air  at  the  rate  of  146,125  cubic 
inches  for  every  hundred  grains  of  nitre  ;  and 
fuppofmg  1 00  cubic  inches  of  dephlogifticated 
air  to  weigh  but  32  gr.  which  is  the  loweft  com¬ 
putation,  and  may  be  allowed  on  account  of 
the  mixture  of  phlogifticated  air,  146,125 
cubic  inches  Ihould  weigh  46,77  gr.  but  then, 
dephlogifticated  air  is  only  one  of  the  confti- 
tuent  parts  of  water ;  for  it  contains  1 3  per 
cent,  of  inflammable  air,  that  is  to  fay,  87  gr. 
of  dephlogifticated  air :  to  form  100  gr.  of 
water  requires  an  addition  of  13  gr.  of  in¬ 
flammable  air,  confequently  46,77  gr.  of  de¬ 
phlogifticated  air  require  nearly  7  of  inflam¬ 
mable  air,  and  would  then  form  53,77  S1%  °? 
water,  which  exceeds  half  the  v/eight  of  the 
pitre,  as  Mr.  Watt  candidly  owns,  which  quan¬ 
tity  pf  water  is  certainly  inadmiffible  ;  for  it 

f  Phil.  Tranf.  1784,  ps  144  and  337, 

E  3  cyU 


^4  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid, 

evidently  contains  at  leaft  f  its  weight  of  al¬ 
kali,  and  then  no  room  would  be  left  for  the 
acid  ;  befides,  the  phlogifticated  air  cannot  be 
derived  from  the  water,  and  it  makes  up 
about  j  of  the  whole,  fo  that  of  neceflity  the 
acid  rnuft  be  decompofed  :  belides,  no  fatis- 
fadtory  account  is  given  of  what  becomes  of 
the  acid.  Mr.  Watt  found  that  the  water  over 
which  the  air  proceeding  from  the  decompofi- 
tion  of  960  gr.  of  nitre,  had  been  received,  con¬ 
tained  only  the  acid  belonging  to  1 20  gr.  of  ni¬ 
tre,  and  even  this  final!  quantity  he  inferred  only 
from  my  experiments ;  but  my  experiments 
are  totally  inapplicable  in  this  cafe,  for  I  ufed 
only  the  dephlogifticated  nitrous  acid,  and  al¬ 
kalis  ar,e  faturable  by  a  much  fmaller  quantity 
of  phlogifticated  than  of  dephlogifticated  acids, 
as  is  evident  in  the  cafe  of  the  dephlogifticated 
marine  acid,  as  Stahl  long  ago  obferved  ;  for 
he  fays  that  the  volatile  acid  of  fulphur  fatu- 
rates  10  times  as  much  alkali  as  the  fixed.  * 
Mr.  Bergman  and  alfo  Seheele  obferved,  that 
melted  nitre  is  ftill  neutral,  though  it  is  phlogif¬ 
ticated  ;  therefore  it  is  air,  and  not  water, 
which  it  wants;  accordingly  Dr.  Prieftley  found 
it  to  injure  common  air,  by  attracting  its  de¬ 
phlogifticated  part  :  but  if  it  be  kept  fome 
time  in  fufion,  it  lofes  its  acid,  and  becomes 
alkaline,  and  the  air  it  recovers  muft  furely 

*  See  his  Treatife  on  Salts,  p.  160  of  the  French  edi¬ 
tion.  '  .  "  "  1  1  ;  ■  • 

be 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid*  55 

be  deemed  rather  to  recompofe  the  acid  than, 
to  form  water,  of  whofe  formation  in  the  tem¬ 
perature  of  the  atmofphere  we  have  no  fort 
.of  proof.  On  the  contrary,  the  impoffibility 
of  accounting  for  the  Iofs  of  acid  in  this  cafe, 
is  an  evident  proof  of  the  fallacy  of  that  hy- 
pothefis. 

By  Mr.  Lavoiiier’s  analyfis*  100  gr.  of 
nitre  contain  57  of  eauftic  alkali  ;  by  Mr* 
Bergman’s,  49  ;  by  Mr.  Wenzel’s,  52;  by  Mr. 
Wiegleb’s,  461 ;  by  mine  63  ;  the  mean  of  all 
which  is  532,  which  leaves  46,5,  for  acid 
and  water,  which  is  very  nearly  the  weight  of 
the  air  expelled.  The  different  quantity  of 
acid  aiTigned  by  different  perfons  to  nitre,  is, 
in  part,  owing  to  its  degree  of  phlogiftication 
in  nitre  f.  I  believe  at  prefect  that  100  gr. 
of  nitre  contain  34  of  acid,  and  about  1 2  of 
water,  including  the  water  in  the  acid,  and 
that  of  chrvftallization. 

The  antiphlogiftians  have  as  yet  given  no 
explanation  of  the  decomp ofition  of  nitre  by 
heat. 

The  detonation  of  nitre  with  charcoal  was 
well  executed,  and  the  different  aerial  products 
well  difcriminated,  though  in  my  opinion  not 
fo  well  explained  by  Mr.  Lavoifier.  J 

*  11  Scar.  Etrang.  627.  f  For  of  the  dephlogifticated 
acid,  as  it  becomes  phlogiilicated  in  uniting  to  the  alkali5 
lefs  is  required.  J  1 1  Mem.  Scav.  Etrang.  p.  626.  Here, 
as  in  moft  other  places,  the  French  weights  and  meafures 
are  converted  into  Englifh. 

E  4  Having 


I 


56  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid \ 

Having  reduced  to  a  fubtil  powder,  and 
well  mixed  together,  708,6  gr.  of  nitre  and 
93*52  of  charcoal,  he  prefled  them  into  a 
copper  tube  ;  and  after  inflammation,  plunged 
the  tube,  with  its  aperture  turned  down,  un¬ 
der  a  jar  of  water,  where  it  remained  until 
the  whole  of  the  charcoal  was  confumed,  and 
the  nitre  decompofed.  The  products  wrere  as 
follows  : 

Materials,  Products.  Cub.  Inches.  W eight. 


Gr„  Gr. 

Nitre  708,6  Fixed  air  -  708,25  -  329,33 

Charcoal  93,52  Phlog.  air  -  195,56  -  59,8 

— - —  Cauftic  alkali  -  -  406,5 

802,12  — - — 

Total  of  the  products  -  795,63 

Lofs  —  6,49 


Mr.  Lavoifier  thinks  that  the  whole  of  the 
air  of  the  nitre,  except  the  59,8  cubic  inches 
of  phlogifticated  air,  united  to  the  charcoal, 
and  with  it  formed  the  fixed  air  ;  and  yet  we 
find  a  deficiency  of  6,49  gr.  which  does  not  ap¬ 
pear  in  his  account,  becaufe  he  eftimated  the 
weight  of  the  fixed  air  too  high.  I  fhall  not 
at  prefent  examine  v/hether  charcoal  in  fpecie 
unites  to  pure  air,  and  forms  fixed  air,  as 
that  matter  will  be  amply  difeufled  in  another 
fedlion. 

In  my  theory  this  experiment  may  be  ex¬ 
plained  as  follows  :  In  the  firft  place  708,6 
gr9  of  nitre  contains  240,9  gr.  of  real  acid  : 
of  this  59,8  gr.  (allowing  fame  water  com. 

tamed 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid.  57 

t&ined  in  this  air)  are  phlogifticated  air ;  the 
remainder  181,1  gr.  are  dephlogifticated  air, 
or,  which  is  the  fame  in  effect,  pure  air  mixed 
with  fixed  air.  This  air,  if  totally  pure, 
would  take  from  the  charcoal  37  gr.  of  phlo- 
gifton,  and  then  form  218,1  gr.  of  fixed  air, 
to  which  adding  the  fixed  air  in  the  charcoal 
itfelf,  we  have  274,62  gr.  of  fixed  air,  and 
adding  to  this  4  of  its  weight  of  water,  we 
fhall  have  329,62  gr.  of  fixed  air.  The  par¬ 
ticulars  may  be  feen  i^  the  following  detail* 

Cr, 

Total  weight  of  the  air  '  m  nitre  -  240,9 

Subtradf  for  plilo,  fir  -  59,8 

{r  .Wiifrw 

DephlogifticatedX  &  n^tre  "  181,1 

Add  to  this  inflammable  air  from  the  charcoal  37 

* . . 

Fixed  air  formed  -  2iB,i 
Jlefiduumof  the  charcoal,  beipg  ff>±d  air  93,52— 37  zz  56,52 
Total  fixed  air:  » £1 8, %  +  56,52 zz 274,62 
Add  4  of  its  weight  of  water  zz  55 

Total  weight  of  fixed  air  329,62 
Weight  of  phlogifticated  air  -  59,8 

Cauftic  alkali  r  -  406,5 


795>92 

This  experiment,  though  not  altogether 
exact,  as  the  quantity  of  water  in  different 
airs  has  not  as  yet  been  exactly  determined, 
has  great  merit.  Mr.  Lavoifier  has  judicioufly 
inferred  from  it  that  nitrous  acid  contains 
about  4  of  its  weight  of  pfilogifticated  air, 

even 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid, 

even  before  Mr.  Cavendifh’s  difcovery.  It 
mud  alfo  be  allowed  to  be  a  complete  proof 
of  the  formation  of  fixed  air  from  de- 
plilogifticated  and  inflammable  air,  by  all  thofe 
that  believe  charcoal  to  be  a  compound ;  for 
the  whole  of  the  fixed  air  here  found  could 
not  by  any  poffibility  exift  in  the  charcoal,  it 
being  more  than  triple  its  weight.  We  may 
alfo  infer  from  it,  that  phlogiflicated  air  may 
be  decoinpofed  and  burht  during  the  diftilla- 
tion  of  nitre  per  for  the  refulting  air  never 
contains  fr  of  *  ted  air. 

The  detona  4re  with  fulphur,  has 

alfo  been  well  ^’4  by  Mr.  Berthollet.  He 
found  that  if  r  Jfrmd  fulphur  be  well  mixed 
In  the  proportion^of  2  of  the  former  to  1  of 
the  latter,  there  is  always  a  detonation  ;  but 
if  the  proportion  of  hilphur  be  to  that  of 
nitre,  as  1  to  4,  the  \  xe  is  decompofed  with¬ 
out  detonation,  and  Wltrous  air  is  produced. 
Thus  he  found  that  30  gr.  of  fulphur  diftil- 
led  with  120  of  nitre,  produced  108,8  cubic 
inches  of  nitrous  air,  that  is  40.27  gr.  and  the 
nitre  was  totally  decompofed.  This  experiment 
is  thus  explained  in  my  principles : 

1 00  gr.  of  nitre  contain  about  46  of  acid, 
comprehending  the  water  which  always  ac¬ 
companies  it,  and  which  cannot  be  feparated  ; 
therefore  120  gr.  of  nitre  contain  55  of  acid. 

2  of  the  nitrous  acid  in  nitre  is  nitrous  bafis. 
Now  the  4  of  55  is  36,6,  therefore  in  this 
cafe  we  have  36,(5  of  nitrous  bails, 

n 
0 


But 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid.  yg 

But  nitrous  air  confifts  of  nitrous  bails 
united  to  o,i8  of  its  weight  of  phlogifton. 
Now  o,i  8  of  36,6  is  6,6,  then  36,6  +  6,6  ™ 
43,2,  then  43,2  fhould  be  the  quantity  of  ni¬ 
trous  air. 

Again,  of  the  nitrous  acid  in  nitre  is  fixed 
air;  therefore,  55  gr.  of  this  acid  fhould  con¬ 
tain  18  of  fixed  air,  which  it  imparts  to  the 
fulphur  at  the  fame  time  that  it  robs  it  of  6,6 
gr.  of  phlogifton  ;  but  1 8  gr.  of  fixed  air  are 
far  too  little  to  convert  23,34  gr.  of  fulphur, 
or  rather  of  dephlogifticated  fulphur  into  fixed 
vitriolic  acid  :  it  converts  it  therefore  into  vi¬ 
triolic  air,  and  faturates  the  alkaline  bails  of 
the  nitre. 

In  this  cafe,  therefore,  there  not  being  more 
phlogifton  than  is  neceflary  for  the  conveffiort 
of  the  acids  into  nitrous  air  and  vitriolic  air,  a 
gradual  production  of  thefe  airs  enfue  in  the 
manner  explained,  p.  49. 

But  if  a  greater  proportion  of  fulphur  be 
ufed,  then  the  nitrous  bafts  itfelf  is  decom- 
pofed,  meeting  with  a  larger  proportion  of 
phlogifton,  and  hence  fcarce  any  nitrous  air 
is  found,  but  only  phlogifticated,  dephlogif- 
ticated,  and  vitriolic  air ;  and  as  a  larger  quan¬ 
tity  of  air  is  fuddenly  let  loofe  in  a  confined 
fituation,  a  flight  detonation  neceflarily  en« 
lues. 

This  experiment  fhews  that  nitrous  air  does 
not  confift  of  nitrous  acid,  to  which  phlo¬ 
gifton  is  fuperadded,  as  Mr.  Gavendifli  and  I 

xnyfelf 


6o 


i 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid. 

uxyfelf  formerly  thought*  According  to  Mr* 
Cavendifh,  87,5  gr.  of  nitre  contain  the  acid 
of  98,53  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air,  and  con- 
fequently  120  fhould  contain  the  acid  of  134 
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air :  yet  in  this  expe¬ 
riment,  though  the  nitre  was  totally  decom- 
pofed,  only  108,8  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air 
are  produced.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that 
the  nitrous  acid  lofes  one  of  its  conftituent 
parts  when  it  acquires  the  phlogifton  that  con¬ 
verts  it  into  nitrous  air,  and  acquires  that  fame 
conftituent  part,  when,  by  the  addition  of  pure 
air,  nitrous  air  is  converted  into  nitrous  acid* 
therefore  the  phlogifton  and  pure  air  are  not 
merely  converted  into  water* 

Before  I  exiter  on  an  explanation  of  Mr. 
Lavoifier's  experiments  on  the  decompofition 
of  the  nitrous  acid  by  mercury,  it  will  be  ne- 
ceffary  to  explain  fome  particulars  relative  to 
the  formation  of  nitrous  acid,  from  nitrous 
air  and  dephlogifticated  air. 

When  x  meafure  of  what  is  generally  called 
very  pure  dephlogifticated  air,  is  carefully  mixed 
with  2  meafures  of  good  nitrous  air,  they 
unite  fo  perfectly,  that  only  0,27  of  a  mea- 
fure  remains :  1  meafure  of  dephlogifticated 
air,  therefore,  takes  up  1,73  of  nitrous  air, 
but  moft  commonly  only  1,7.  Yet  in  one 
cafe  Dr.  Prieftley  found  both  airs  fo  pure,  and 
mixed  them  fo  fkilfully,  that  only  ,03  of  a 
meafure  remained ;  therefore,  we  may  well 
fqppofe,  that  if  both  airs  wTere  perfectly  pure 

and 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid.  6 1 

and  properly  mixed,  nothing  would  remain 
imabforbed,  and  eonfequently  that  200  cubic 
inches  of  nitrous  air  would  abforb  100  cubic 
inches  of  dephlogifticated  air  :  however  they 
unite,  they  always  unite  in  this  proportion, 
and  the  acid,  thus  formed,  has  all  the  pure  air 
it  is  capable  of  taking  up,  and  is  what  is  called 
dephlogifticated  nitrous  acid. 

Hence  200  cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air  re¬ 
quire  for  their  thorough  faturation  100  cubic 
inches  of  dephlogifticated  air;  and  fmce  the  weight 
of  that  quantity  of  the  former  is  74  gr.  and 
of  the  latter  34,  the  weight  of  the  refilling 
acid  is  108  gr.  And  as  112,8  cubic  inches  of 
dephlogifticated  air  take  8,14  gr.  of  phlo- 
gifton*,  100  cubic  inches  of  it  fhould  take 
7,216  of  phlogifton. 

Now  100  cubic  inches  of  dephlogifticated 
air  =  34  gr.  to  which  adding  7,2 1 6  of  phlo¬ 
gifton,  wre  have  41,216  of  fixed  air  in  108  of 
dephlogifticated  nitrous  acid:  and  if  108  of 
filch  acid  contain  41,216,  100  gr.  of  this  acid 
will  contain  38,16  of  fixed  air.  But  it  is  fel- 
dom  that  given  quantities  of  nitrous  air  and  de¬ 
phlogifticated  air  unite fo  completely ;  for  asfoon 
as  any  part  of  the  nitrous  acid  is  formed  by  the 
union  of  the  two  airs,  fome  part  of  the  nitrous 
air  unites  to  the  newly  formed  acid,  and  fome 
part  of  the  dephlogifticated  air  remains  unfa- 

*  See  p.  20.  and  Phil.  Tranf.  thefe  112,8  enter  into 
loo  cubic  inches  of  fixed  air, 

turated ; 


€2  Of  the  Nhrous  Acid, 

turated :  hence  if  the  two  airs  do  not  imme¬ 
diately  come  into  full  and  perfect  contact,  the 
diminution  is  not  fo  great  as  it  fhould  be,  in 
proportion  to  the  purity  of  both  airs.  Hence 
the  acid  thus  formed  is  more  or  lefs  phlo- 
gifticated  according  to  the  quantity  of  unfa- 
turated  nitrous  air  combined  with  it,  and  this  is 
a  great  fource  of  uncertainty  in  eudiometricai 
experiments. 

From  what  has  been  faid*  we  may  fee  that 
even  dephiogifticated  nitrous  #acid  contains 
fome  phlogifton,  independent  of  that  which 
is  contained  in  the  fixed  air  and  phlogifticated 
air,  which  are  its  conftituent  parts :  for  200 
cubic  inches  of  nitrous  air  contain  13,4  of 
phlogifton,  and  100  cubic  inches  of  dephio¬ 
gifticated  air  deprives  thefe  of  only  7,2 1 6  gr.  of 
this  phlogifton;  therefore  6,184  ftill  remain 
in  108  gr.  of  this  acid,  and  confequently  100 
gr.  of  the  acid  retain  5,72  of  phlogifton,  ftill 
united  to  the  nitrous  bafis.  By  acid  I  always 
mean  the  dry  acid,  or  at  leaft  that  which  con¬ 
tains  no  more  water  than  the  air  of  which  it 
was  formed. 

* 

I  now  proceed  to  the  celebrated  experiment 
of  Mr.  Lavoifier,  which  firft  gave  rife  to  the 
antiphlogiftic  theory,  and  on  which  it  is  ftill 
chiefly  founded. 

To  945  gr.  of  nitrous  acid,  whole  fpecific 
gravity  was  1,316,  Mr.  Lavoifier  added  1104 
gr.  of  mercury.*  Nitrous  air  was  produced 

*  Mem.  Par.  1776,  p.  673. 

to 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid*  •  6  j 

to  the  amount  of  273,234  cubic  inches;  heat 
being  applied,  and  the  mercurial  fait  diftilled 
to  drynefs,  when  it  became  red,  dephlogifti- 
eated  air  appeared,  and  continued  until  ah 
moft  the  whole  of  the  mercury  was  revived : 
it  amounted  to  287,742  cubic  inches. 

Hence  Mr.  Lavoifier  concluded,  ift.  That 
the  nitrous  acid  was  totally  decompofed,  fmce 
it  was  refolved  into  2  fpecies  of  air,  by  the 
reunion  of  which  it  might  again  be  recom- 
pofed,  and  confequently  that  the  weight  of 
thefe  two  airs  gives  the  weight  of  real  acid 
contained  in  945  gn  of  fpirit  of  nitre,  whole 
fpecific  gravity  is  1,316:  sdly.  That  fmce  the 
mercury  was  recovered  without  any  lofs  or  ah 
teration,  there  is  no  reafoii  to  fuppofe  that  it 
loft  any  thing  during  its  folution  in  the  acid, 
but  that  it  was  reduced  to  a  calx  merely  by  its 
union  with  pure  air,  fmce  in  proportion  as 
this  pure  air  was  expelled,  it  recovered  its  me¬ 
tallic  form. 

To  juftify  the  firjl  conclufon ,  three  points 
fhould  have  been  proved;  ift.  That  during 
the  diftillation  no  part  of  the  nitrous  acid  had 
efcaped  into  the  water  over  which  the  airs 
were  diftilled  :  2dly.  That  the  nitrous  air  pro¬ 
duced  during  the  folution,  was  not  produced 
at  the  expence  of  fome  conftituent  part  of 
the  mercury,  efpecially  as  this  was  the  point 
contefted  :  3dly.  That  by  the  reunion  of  the 
two  airs,  the  fame  quantity  of  acid  might  be 
reproduced,  which  might  cafily  be  fhewn  by 

its 


/ 


C>4  Of  the  Nitrous  Add, 

its  again  diflblving  the  fame  weight  of  mer¬ 
cury  ;  and  if  this  were  done,  the  firft  point 
would  be  fufficiently  clear. 

Each  of  thefe  points  is  fo  far  from  being 
proved,  that  it  is  clearly  contradicted  by  ex¬ 
periment.  To  fay  nothing  of  my  own  expe¬ 
riments,  nor  of  thofe  of  Mr.  Watt,*  Mr.  La- 
voifier  himfelf  found  that  a  part  of  the  acid 
always  paffes  undecompofed  during  the  diftil- 
lation  of  a  folution  of  mercury;  f  adly.  Ni¬ 
trous  air  does  contain  one  of  the  conftituent 
parts  of  mercury,  fmce  the  nitrous  acid  never 
affords  nitrous  air,  but  when  it  is  diftilled 

from  a  fubfiance  that  contains  the  fame  con- 

% 

ftituent  part  that  is  attributed  to  mercury, 
namely,  the  inflammable  principle.  Thus  ni¬ 
trous  acid  treated  with  fpirit  of  wine,  oils,  or 
refins,  which  the  antiphlogiftians  allow  to 
contain  inflammable  air,  affords  nitrous  air,  ac¬ 
companied  with  other  forts  of  air  produced 
from  thofe  fubftances  ;  J  but  diftilled  from  al¬ 
kalis,  or  earths,  it  yields  none :  3dly.  Not 
only  the  quantity  of  acid  really  decompofed, 
cannot  be  reftored  by  the  union  of  the  two 
airs  obtained,  but  there  is  a  large  excefs  of 
one  of  them,  which  cannot  be  accounted  for 
in  the  antiphlogiftic  hypothefis ;  for  the  ni¬ 
trous  air  obtained  amounted  to  273,234  cubic 
inches,  or  101,09  Sr*  and  the  dephiogifticated 

*  Phil.  Tranf.  1784,  p.  339,  f  Mem.  Par.  1782, 
p.  495.  J  2  Pr.  126,  &c. 

air. 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid .  65 

air*  to  287,742  cubic  inches,  or  97,83  gr.  and 
the  fum  of  the  weights  of  both  airs  arifmg 
from  the  decompofed  acid  was  198,92  gi% 
Now  if  we  mix  both  thefe  airs  together,  they 
will  unite,  according  to  Mr.  Lavoifier  (and 
this  is  the  moll  favourable  fuppofition),  in 
the  proportion  of  69  of  nitrous  to  40  cubic 
inches  of  dephlogifticated  air/"  Then  as  69  : 
40  :  :  273,234  :  143,8  :  therefore  144  cubic 
inches,  at  moll,  of  dephlogifticated  air  will  be 
taken  up,  the  weight  of  which  is  48,96,  or  49 
gr.  consequently  the  quantity  of  rejiored  acid 
is  almoft  101,09+49=150,09  gr.  though 
the  weight  of  both  airs  be  198,92  gr. 

198,92 
—  i5°5°9 

Deficit  48,83,  that  is,  above  d  of  the  whole* 

Again,  if  from  the  whole  quantity  of  de¬ 
phlogifticated  air  produced  (that  is  287,74 
cubic  inches)  we  fubtradt  the  quantity,  which 
enters  into  union  with  the  nitrous  air,  we 
fhall  find  an  excefs  of  143,742  cubic  inches, 
which  is  about  \  of  the  whole.  This  half 
muft,  according  to  Mr.  Lavoifier  himfelf,  have 
exifted  in  the  nitrous  acid,  united  to  fome- 
thing  elfe,  which  is  now  miffing.  I  afk  to 
what  ?  nor  do  I  fee  what  can  be  reafonabiy 

•*  p 

/ 

*  Mem.  Par.  1782.  p.  488,. 

B  an- 


I 


66  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid l 

anfwered :  the  nitrous  acid  has  therefore  loft 
fomething,  which  this  new  hypothefis  does  not 
account  for. 

It  is  true,  Mr,  Lavoifier  makes  two  attempts 
to  obviate  this  objection.  In  the  Memoirs  of 
the  Academy  for  1776,  he  fays  this  fpfrit  of 
nitre  was  extracted  by  means  of  clay,  and 
that  fuch  acid  always  contains  an  excefs  of 
pure  air;  but  can  a  principle  actually  com¬ 
bined  with  the  nitrous  acid,  and  which  fo  far 
from  weakening,  ftrengthens  and  increafes  its 
acid  properties,  be  called  an  excefs  ?  His  fe- 
cond  attempt  is  to  be  found  in  the  Memoirs  of 
1782  :  here  he  afferts,  contrary  to  all  expe¬ 
rience,  that  nitrous  acid  confifts  of  equal  parts 
by  weight,  of  nitrous  air  and  pure  air,  and 
by  fo  doing,  gives  up  the  feeming  advantage 
he  had,  by  recompofmg  the  nitrous  acid  from 
both  airs,  for  equal  weights  of  both  can  by 
no  art  be  brought  to  unite. 

To  ground  \htfecond conclufoni  Mr.  Lavoifier 
fhould  fhew  that  mercury,  during  its  revivi¬ 
fication,  took  nothing  from  the  fubftance  to 
which  it  was  united  while  a  calx,  of  which 
fubftance  the  pure  air  might  have  been  a  com¬ 
ponent  part :  this  cannot  be  fhewn  by  ftating 
the  equality  of  weight  of  the  calx,  with  that 
of  the  mercury  and  air  together  ;  for  1  up- 
poling  the  mercurial  calx  to  have  weighed 
100  gr,  the  revived  calx  90,  and  the  air  pro¬ 
duced  10  gr.  we  fhould  then  have  100  =  90 
-f  10,  and  in  this  way  Mr.  Lavoifier  would 

have 


the  Nitrous  Acid. 


have  the  matter  underftood :  but  the  fame 
equality  will  be  found,  if  we  fuppofe  the 
mercurial  part  of  the  calx,  before  its  revivi¬ 
fication,  to  weigh  89  gn  and  the  aerial  part 
to  weigh  1 1  gr.  and  that  during  the  revivi¬ 
fication,  the  calx  attracts  1  gr.  from  the  aerial 
part,  for  then  the  products  will  be  equally 
90  x  10^  It  is  true  negatives  in  general  need 
not  be  proved  ;  but  here  there  is  a  ftrong  pre- 
fumption  that  the  aerial  part  has  really  loft 
fomething  during  its  production,  finee  it  is 
incapable  of  forming  a  part  of  the  fame  acid 
with  which  it  was  before  combined  ;  not,  as 
happens  in  other  cafes,  by  reafon  of  its  fpe- 
cific  heat,  finee  a  part  of  it  will  enter  into 
fuch  combination,  but  for  want  of  fome 
other  ingredient,  which  is  loft:,  and  given  up 
to  the  metal ;  and  we  may  rather  fay  there 
is  a  defeCt  of  nitrous  air,  than  an  excefs  of  pure 
air. 

The  mod  reafonable  account  of  the  above 
experiment  feems  to  me  to  be  the  following. 

945  gr.  of  fpirit  of  nitre,  whofe  fpecific 
gravity  is  1,316,  contain  by  my  table  219  gr, 
of  real  acid. 

The  weight  of  the  acid  actually  combined 
with  the  mercury  during  the  folution,  muft 
agree  with  that  of  the  airs  obtained;  for  though 
the  phlogifton  of  the  nitrous  air  was  taken  from 
the  metal,  and  therefore  foreign  to  the  acid  ; 
yet  as  the  metal  was  at  laft  revived,  it  muft 
have  taken  from  the  acid  as  much  phlogifton, 

F  2  as 


6$  Of  tht  Nitrous  Acid 1 

as  it  gave  to  it :  the  weight  of  both  the  a!r§ 
obtained  amounts  to  198,92  gr.  therefore  only 
about  200  gr.  of  the  acid  were  decompofed, 
and  19  gr.  mull  have  palled  over  during  the 
diftillation,  as  Mr.  Watt  alfo  found ;  and,  in 
fad,  I  found  that  22  gr.  of  real  acid  diffolve 
with  the  afhftance  of  heat  100  gr.  of  mercury, 
and  confequently  in  this  cafe,  only  900  gr.  of 
mercury  were  diffolved,  and  104  remained 
tmdiffolved,  which  might  well  efcape  notice.^ 

The  nitrous  air  we  have  already  feen  to 
amount  to  101,09  gr.  and  the  dephlogifticated 
to  97,83  ;  this  quantity  of  nitrous  air  contains 
1 8,i  8  gr.  of  phlogifton,  and  confequently  82,9 1 
gr,  of  nitrous  balls. 

Let  us  now  examine  the  proportion  and 
quantity  of  the  conftituent  parts  of  the  200 
gr.  of  acid  that  were  decompofed.  I  fay  200, 
to  avoid  fradions,  as  *98592  approaches  very 
nearly  to  that  quantity. 

This  acid,  according  to  Mr.  L  avoid  er’s  ex- 
preffion,  contained  an  excefs  of  pure  air,  that 
is,  it  was  what  we  called  dephlogifticated  nitrous 
acid;  100  gr.  of  fuch  acid  we  have  already  feen 
to  contain  38  gr.  of  fixed  air,  and  62  of  nitrous 
bafts,  therefore  the  200  gr.  here  decompofed, 
contained  76  gr.  of  fixed  air,  and  124  of  ni¬ 
trous  balls;  of  thefe  124  gr.  of  nitrous  bafts, 
82,91  united  immediately  to  part  of  the  plilo- 
gifton  of  the  metal,  namely?  to  18,18  gr.  of 

Mr.  Scheele  alfo  obferved  that  fome  mercury  in  its 
metallic  ftate  always  remains  in  the  nitrous  folution  of 
mercury.  P.  222  of  the  French  edition  of  his  works. 

it, 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid  69 

t,  and  formed  with  it  101,09  gr.  of  nitrous 
air,  which  were  caught  in  the  receiver.  The 
remainder  of  the  nitrous  bails,  that  is,  41,09 
gr.  remained  in  the  folution,  and  were  de- 
compofed  towards  the  middle  of  the  opera¬ 
tion.  To  underhand  this  decompofition,  it  is 
neceffary  to  recollect  that  metallic  fubftances, 
in  uniting  to  nitrous  acid,  unite  to  it  principally 
through  their  affinity  to  the  acidifying  principle, 
namely,  to  fixed  air,  and  take  up  the  bafis  chiefly 
by  reafon  of  the  union  of  this  bafis  to  the 
acidifying  principle.  During  the  middle  pe¬ 
riod  of  this  experiment,  the  metal  being  heated 
gives  out  more  phlogifton  than  can  be  taken 
up  by  the  undecompofed  nitrous  bafis.  This 
furplus  is  taken  up  by  the  pure  air  contained 
in  the  nitrous  bafis,  which  pure  air  is  thereby 
converted  into  fixed  air,  and  unites  to  the  me¬ 
tallic  calx  1  the  phlogifticated  air  is  therefore 
fet  loofe. 

As  the  nitrous  bafis  confifts  of  pure  air,  and 
phlogifticated  air  in  the  proportion  of  2  to  1, 
the  41,09  gr.  of  nitrous  bafis  which  remained 
in  the  folution,  contained  27,42  of  pure  air, 
and  13,67  gr.  of  phlogifticated  air;  the  pure 
air  was  converted  into  fixed  air,  by  the  phlo¬ 
gifton  of  the  metal,  and  the  phlogifticated  air 
mixed  partly  with  the  nitrous  air  that  efcaped3 
and  partly  with  the  fixed  air  that  remained 
with  the  metal ;  and  when  this  was  decompofect 
during  the  revivification  of  the  metal,  a  final! 
part  of  the  phlogifticated  air  was  alfo  decora- 

F  3  poled ; 


~o  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid. 

pofed  :  in  this  manner,  all  the  phenomena  are 
exadtly  accounted  for. 

Thus  we  have,  ift.  —  —  101,09  gr,  of  nit.  air* 

2d.  Pure  air  contained  in 
76  gr.  of  fixed  air 

Pure  air  in  the  nitrous  1 
bafis  1 

9°>5° 

3d.  Mixture  of  phlogif.  air,"|  7,33 
and  pure  air,  from  the  decom-  >  — - —  97,83  dephlogif. air* 
pofition  of  part  of  it  J  97,83  — — ■ 

Total  weight  of  air  198,92  grains. 

Further,  the  mercury  loft  1 8 , 1 8  gr.  of  phlo- 
gifton,  carried  off  in  the  nitrous  air;  but  this 
quantity  was  reftored  to  it  by  the  decompo- 
fition  of  the  76  gr.  of  fixed  air,  originally  con¬ 
tained  in  the  nitrous  acid,  which  contained 
12,92  gr.  of  phlogifton,  and  by  the  abforp- 
tion  of  that  quantity  of  phlogifton,  which 
200  gr.  of  this  fort  of  acid  holds,  which  we 
have  feen  to  amount  to  1 1 ,44  gr.  fo  that  there  is 
an  excels  of  6,2  gr.  which  compenfate  for  the 
phlogiftication  of  the  1 9  gr.  of  undecompofed 
acid,  which  were  phlogifticated  at  the  ex¬ 
pence  of  the  metal,  and  pafled  over  into  the 
receiver  as  already  mentioned. 

But  it  may  be  faid,  that  according  to  my  table 
of  the  abfolute  weight  of  phlogifton  in  metals, 
100  gr,  of  mercury  contain  4,56  gr.  of  phlogif¬ 
ton,  and,  conlequently,  900  gr.  fhould  con¬ 
tain  41,04,  and  therefore  much  more  fhould  be 
reftored  to  it,  than  was  here  fet  forth.  To 
which  I  anfwer,  that  part  of  it  was  employed 


Of  the  Nitrous  Acid,  71 

in  the  converfion  of  27,42  gr*  of  pure  air  in 
the  decompofed  nitrous  bafis,  into  fixed  air, 
and  part  united  to  the  compound  of  acid  and 
calx,  which,  as  Scheele  remarked,  takes  up 
more  phlogifton  than  either  fingly,  and  in  the 
end  the  whole  was  reforbed  by  the  metal* 

Here  it  will  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  the 
fame  decompofition  of  the  nitrous  bafis,  which 
happens  during  the  folution  of  mercury  with 
heat,  takes  place  in  a  much  greater  degree  dui% 
ing  the  folution  of  zinc,  tin,  iron,  and  regulus 
of  antimony* 

Mr.  Watt,  and  a  few  others,  fufped  that 
the  dephlogifticated  air,  in  this  and  all  other 
cafes  where  the  nitrous  acid  feems  to  be  de¬ 
compofed,  arifes  entirely  from  the  dephlogif- 
tication  of  water,  whofe  phlogifton,  they  fay, 
is  taken  up  by  the  nitrous  acid,  or  by  the  me¬ 
tal  1  but  furely  the  mixture  of  phlogifticated 
air,  which  is  always  found  with  the  deplilo-* 
gifticated  air,  cannot  be  derived  from  the  wa¬ 
ter.  Befides*  the  fame  quantity  of  acid  and 
water  cannot  be  recovered  by  the  union  of  both 
airs,  as  it  fhould  were  this  theory  exadt,  for 
fome  dephlogifticated  air  always  remains,  that 
cannot  be  combined  5  and  that  the  acid  is  de¬ 
compofed  is  evident,  for  the  half  of  it  cannot 
be  recovered* 

Independently  of  metallic  fubftances  which 
give  a  tinge  to  nitrous  acid,  its  colour  depends, 
as  has  been  already  faid,  on  the  proportion  or 
nitrous  air  combined  with  it  Hence,  if  a 
fcottle  i  full  of  eolourlefs  nitrous  acid,  be  ex- 

F  4  poled 


7  2  Of  the  Nitrous  Acid. 

pofed  to  the  light,  it  becomes  of  a  greenifh 
yellow,  and  dephlogifticated  air  is  produced  ; 
for  light  has  the  property  of  increafmg  the 
capacity  of  the  dephlogifticated  part  of  fixed  air 
for  containing  fire,  and,  confequently,  of  di- 
uiinifhing  its  union  with  phlogifton  ;  the  phlo¬ 
gifton  then  unites  to  a  part  of  the  nitrous  ba¬ 
fts,  and  becomes  nitrous  air,  which  combines 
with  the  nitrous  acid,  and  tinges  it.  When 
the  bottle  is  full,  the  dephlogifticated  air  cannot 
be  feparated,  and,  confequently,  no  decompo- 
fition  can  take  place. 

If  nitrous  air  be  mixed  with  its  own 
weight  of  hepatic  air,  the  hepatic  air  attracts 
the  nitrous  vapour  generally  diffufed  through 
the  nitrous  air,  and  this  vapour  drags  with  it 
the  phlogifton  of  the  nitrous  air.  By  thefe 
attractions  the  capacities  are  changed,  and  the 
quantity  of  fire  neceflary  to  the  fluid  ftate 
efcapes;  confequently,  both  the  fulphur,  the  ni¬ 
trous  vapour,  and  much  of  the  phlogifton  are 
precipitated.  Hence  the  water  with  which 
this  precipitate  is  waffled,  precipitates  the  ni¬ 
trous  folution  of  filver  white,*  which  Mr.  Ca- 
vendifh  difcovered  to  be  a  character  of  the 
phlogifticated  nitrous  acid.  The  nitrous  bafis 
is  then  left  almoft  perfectly  pure  and  dephlo¬ 
gifticated  ;  and  as  it  contains  double  the  por¬ 
tion  of  dephlogifticated  air  that  it  does  of  phlo¬ 
gifticated,  it  admits  a  candle  to  burn  naturally, 

*  This  is  mentioned  in  my  Diflertation  on  Hepatic  Air, 

or 


the  Nitrous  Acid. 

or  even  better  than  in  common  air5  according 
as  it  is  more  or  lefs  perfectly  deacidified  and 
dephlogifticated  ;  the  deacidification^  and  con- 
fequent  dephlogiftication,  is  brought  about  in 
the  fame  manner  by  expofure  to  iron  or  live! 
of  fulphur. 


i- 


5  E  C  T. 


Of  the  Marine  Acid, . 


SECT.  V. 


Of  the  Marine  Acid . 


^  O  M  M  O  N  marine  acid  appears  to  me 


j  to  confift  of  a  peculiar  bafis  united  to 


phlogifton,  and  a  certain  proportion  of  fixed 
air,  to  both  of  which  the  bafis  feems  to  have  a 
ftrong  affinity. 

If  the  marine  bafis  be  deprived  of  its  phlo¬ 
gifton,  its  affinity  to  fixed  air  becomes  much 
ftronger ;  it  unites  to  fo  large  a  portion  of  it, 
that  the  affinities  of  the  refulting  acid,  to  bodies 
that  contain  little  or  no  phlogifton,  become 
nearly  as  weak  as  thofe  of  fixed  air  itfelf, 
equally  condenfed  :  but  with  refpedt  to  bodies 
that  contain  a  confiderable  proportion  of  phlo- 
gifion,  its  affinities  are  much  ftronger,  as  its 
bafis  attracts  the  phlogifton,  while  thofe  bodies 
attract  its  excels  of  fixed  air.  The  acid  refult¬ 
ing  from  the  union  of  the  dephlogifticated  ba¬ 
fis,  with  an  excefs  of  fixed  air,  is  called  the 
dephlogifticated  marine  acid. 

Before  the  difcoveries  of  Mr.  Berthollet,  the 
properties  of  this  acid  feemed  to  me  to  furnifh 
ftrong  proofs  of  the  falfehood  of  the  antiphlo- 
giftic  theory ;  but  they  appear  in  quite  a  dif¬ 
ferent  light  fince  the  publication  of  the  experi¬ 


ments 


Of  the  Marine  Acid.  y  j 

merits  of  this  excellent  chymift,  in  fo  much 
that,  I  muft  own,  they  alone  feem  to  me  to 
afford  any  plaufible  ground  for  that  hypothefis* 
According  to  the  antiphlogiftians,  then,  the 
common  marine  acid  confifts  of  a  peculiar  ba¬ 
ils  united  to  a  fmall  proportion  of  pure  air,  or 
oxygenous  principle,  and  the  dephlogifticated 
marine  acid  differs  from  it,  only  by  containing 
an  excefs  of  this  principle. 

If  the  common  marine  acid  be  diftilled  over 
the  black  calx  of  manganefe,  or  minium,  it  be¬ 
comes  dephlogifticated,  as  the  immortal  Scheele 
has  firft  difcovered ;  but  then  it  unites  to  a 
confiderable  proportion  of  the  air  contained  in 
thofe  calces,  as  appears  by  the  experiments  of 
Meffrs.  Berthollet  and  Pelletier.'*5,  According 
to  Mr.  Laveifter’s  table,  the  bafts  of  the  ma¬ 
rine  acid  has  a  ftronger  affinity  to  the  oxygen¬ 
ous  principle  than  any  metallic  calx,  or  the 
bafts  of  any  acid,  has  to  that  principle  ;  why 
then  does  it  not  become  dephlogifticated  by 
diftillation  over  the  calces  of  iron  or  over  the  vi¬ 
triolic  acid  ?  and  why  does  it  not  convert  this 
acid  into  fulphur  ?  is  it  not  becaufe  thefe  fub- 
ftances  cannot  dephlogifticate  it  ? 

The  dephlogifticated  marine  acid  unites  to 
water  aimoft  as  difficultly  as  fixed  air,  becaufe 
being  over  faturated  with  that  air,  it  partici¬ 
pates  in  a  great  degree  of  its  properties. 

This  acid  does  not  expel  fixed  air  from 

*  26  Roz.  322,  and  389, 

aerated 


7  6  Of  the  Marine  Acidn 

aerated  fixed  alkalis  or  earths,  until  it  is  heat¬ 
ed,  and  then  dephlogifticated  air  feparates  from 
It,  and  it  becomes  in  all  refpe£ts  common  mar 
line  acid.  For  as  it  contains  an  excefs  of  fixed 
air,  it  ads  nearly  as  an  acid  of  the  fame  nature ; 
but  when  heat  is  applied,  its  bafis  dephlogifti- 
cates  its  own  fixed  air,  which  then  becomes 
dephlogifticated  air,  at  the  fame  time  that  the 
acid  becomes  common  marine  acid ,  and  ads  as 
fuch.  Heat  alone  would  not  dephlogifticate  this 
acid,  becaufe  of  its  volatility;  its  affinity  to  alkalis 
detains  it,  and  helps  its  decompofition.  But  the 
dephlogifticated  marine  acid  unites  and  effer- 
vefces  with  volatile  alkalis,  whether  aerat¬ 
ed  or  cauftic,  becaufe  theie  alkalis  are  com- 
pofed  of  inflammable  air,  and  phiogifticated 
air ;  the  marine  bafis  feizes  the  inflammable, 
and  fets  loofe  the  phiogifticated  air. 

It  deftroys  vegetable  colours,  by  depriving 
the  colouring  matter  of  its  phlogifton,  and  fa¬ 
in  rating  it  with  fixed  air.  And  hence  the 
colour  is  not  reftored  by  the  addition  of  an 
alkali,  as  the  alkalis  cannot  reftore  the  phlo- 
gifton.  , 

All  metallic  fubftances  are  foluble  in  the  de¬ 
phlogifticated  acid,  without  affording  inflam¬ 
mable  air  ;  becaufe  the  phlogifton  feparated 
irom  them,  is  ahforbed  by  the  marine  bafis, 
and  the  compound  of  acid  and  calx. 

If  a  folution  of  mercury  in  the  nitrous  acid 
be  dropped  into  common  marine  acid,  it  forms 
a  white  precipitate,  which  is  phiogifticated, 

fince 


Of  the  Marine  Acid,  \  -yj 

li'rice  it  affords  red  vapours,  when  re-diffolved  iii 
the  nitrous  acid.  But  if  the  nitrous  folution  of 
mercury  be  dropped  into  dephlogifticated  ma¬ 
rine  acid,  it  forms  fublimate  corrofive,  which 
does  not  give  red  vapours  when  the  nitrous 
acid  is  poured  on  it.  The  reafon  is,  becaufe  in 
the  firft  cafe,  the  quantity  of  nitrous  acid  is 
too  fmali  to  dephlogifdcate  the  marine  which 
expels  it ;  but  in  the  fecond  cafe,  the  marine  is 
already  dephlogifticated.  This  is  the  teft  Mr. 
Berthollet  ufes  for  diftinguiihing  the  dephlo¬ 
gifticated  marine  acid. 

The  experiments  which  chiefly  induce  the 
antiphlogiftians  to  maintain  the  prefence  of 
pure  air  in  the  dephlogifticated  marine  acid^ 
are  the  following : 

i  ft.  Becaufe  this  acid  is  procured  by  diftilling 
it  from  manganefe,  and  the  manganefe,  if  dif- 
tilled  by  itfelf,  before  the  acid  is  diftilled  from 
it,  affords  dephlogifticated  air  ;  but  after  the 
acid  is  diftilled  from  it,  it  gives  none. 

But  this  experiment  proves  no  more,  but 
that  the  manganefe  contains  fome  air  which  is 
dephlogifticated  during  calcination,  and  that 
this  air  is  fixed  air,  appears  from  the  following 
confiderations.  The  black  calx  of  manganefe 
almoft  always  gives  out  fixed  air  at  firft,  before 
any  dephlogifticated  /  air  appears,  whence  it  is 
natural  to  think  that  the  dephlogifticated  air 
proceeds  from  the  dephlogiftication  of  the 
fixed.  And  hence  if  it  be  diftilled  with  filings 
of  iron,  or  in  a  gun  barrel,  it  fcarce  gives  out 

any 


j8  0 f  the  Marine  Acid, 

any  other  than  fixed  air  if  at  any  time  it  gives 
out  dephlogifticated  air,  with  little  or  no  mix¬ 
ture  of  fixed  air,  this  is  owing  to  a  very  per¬ 
fect  dephlogiftication  of  the  calx,  and  to  its 
containing  very  little  moifture ;  thus  Dn 
Prieftley  having  palfed  the  fleam  of  boiling 
water  through  manganefe  heated  in  an  earthen 
tube,  obtained  a  very  large  quantity  of  fixed  air, 
and  fcarce  any  other' f;  though,  on  repeating  this 
experiment  with  manganefe  well  freed  from 
calcareous  earth,  I  obtained  a  large  proportion 
of  dephlogifticated  air ;  but  I  believe  much 
depends  on  the  degree  of  heat  to  which  the 
tube  is  fubjeded.  But  having  diftilled  man¬ 
ganefe,  which  yielded  of  itfelf  fome  fixed  air, 
with  common  fpirit  of  fait,  I  obtained  dephlo¬ 
gifticated  marine  acid,  and  not  a  particle  of  fixed 
air,  which  ihews  that  this  laft  combined  with 
the  dephlogifticated  bafis,  and  formed  the  de¬ 
phlogifticated  acid.  Mr.  Hermftadt,  a  Ger¬ 
man  chymift  of  the  higheft  reputation,  hav¬ 
ing  diffolved  the  black  calx  in  common  marine 
acid,  and  precipitated  it  with  an  aerated  fixed  al¬ 
kali,  obtained,  as  ufual,  a  white  precipitate, 
which,  when  heated,  afforded  a  great  part  of 
the  fixed  air  it  had  abforbed  from  the  alkali ;  but 
when  heated  to  fuch  a  degree  as  to  be  of  a 
brown  red  colour,  and  confequently  dephlo¬ 
gifticated,  it  converted  common  fpirit  of  fait 
into  a  dephlogifticated  acid,  which  could  pro- 

*  4,Pr.  239.  1  Hermit.  Phyf.  Chym.  Verfuche,  p.  277. 

t  6  Pr.  354,  i  Hermit,  173, 

3  ceed 


Of  the  Marine  Acuk  yq 

teed  only  from  feme  fixed  air,  yet  unexpelled. 
Yet  if  fal  ammoniac  be  diftiiled  with  the  black 
calx  of  manganefe,  it  will  be  expelled  in  a 
cauftic  ftate  ;  for  the  fixed  air  unites  to  the 
dephlogifticated  marine  bafts  in  preference  to 
the  volatile  alkali. 

If  equal  quantities  of  inflammable  air  and 
dephlogifticated  marine  air  be  mixed,  a  denfe 
white  cloud  immediately  appears,  f  of  the 
bulk  of  both  airs  is  foon  abforbed,  and  is 
found  to  be  common  marine  acid.  The  re~ 
fiduum  is  faid  to  detonate  like  a  mixture  of 
inflammable  and  dephlogifticated  air.*  As 
this  experiment  feemed  to  be  of  great  im¬ 
portance,  I  repeated  it ;  and  having  mixed  6 
cubic  inches  of  inflammable  air  with  6  of  de¬ 
phlogifticated  marine  air  over  water,  I  ob~ 
ferved  a  denfe  white  cloud  immediately  form¬ 
ed,  attended  with  a  diminution  of  i  cubic  inch  ; 
but  in  i  an  hour  7  cubic  inches  were  abforbed  : 
into  the  refiduum,  I  put  a  bit  of  phofphoms 
ftuck  on  an  iron  wire,  and  endeavoured  in 
vain  to  fire  it  by  approaching  a  red  hot  iron 
on  the  outfide.  It  fhone  and  even  fmoked 
and  fublimed,  but  no  detonation  took  place, 
fo  that  clearly  the  refiduum  was  not  a  mixture 
of  inflammable  and  dephlogifticated  air :  the  de¬ 
tonation  obferved  by  Mr.  Pelletier,  muft  ra¬ 
ther  have  proceeded  from  the  union  of  the  in¬ 
flammable  and  dephlogifticated  marine  air. 


*  26  Rqz.  4 53, 


For 


8o  .  Of  the  Marine  Acid* 

For  greater  certainty  I  again  mixed  equal  qtian« 
titles  of  both  airs,  and  after  more  than  £  dif- 
appeared,  I  hred  the  reiiduum  in  a  narrow¬ 
mouthed  bottle,  and  found  it  to  give  4  fuc- 
ceffive  expiofions,  which  evidently  proves  it 
was  mere  inflammable  air,  and  not  a  mixture 
of  inflammable  and  dephlogifticated  air.  This 
experiment  eftablifties,  beyond  all  doubt,  that 
inflammable  air  unites  to  dephlogifticated  ma¬ 
rine  air,  and  converts  it  into  common  marine 
acid.  To  try  whether  the  dephlogifticated 
marine  air  were  united  to  fixed  air,  I  mixed 
6  cubic  inches  of  inflammable  air  once  more, 
with  6  of  marine  air,  over  lime-water ;  in 
about  1  o  minutes  after  the  greater  part  of  the 
diminution  had  taken  place,  a  white  cloud 
appeared  on  the  furface  of  the  lime-water, 
and  by  agitation  it  became  ftill  more  turbid  : 
as  it  was  poflible  that  the  manganefe  might 
be  mixed  with  calcareous  earth,  I  extracted 
from  another  portion  of  it,  fome  dephlo- 
gifticated  marine  air,  and  received  it  on  lime- 
water,  but  it  was  wholly  abforbed,  without 
forming  the  leaft  cloud,  though  there  was  lime 
enough ;  for  on  adding  aerated  water,  a  cloud 
appeared.  This  experiment  therefore  fully 
confirms  my  opinion,  and  fubverts  that  of  the 
antiphlogiftians.  Even  if  the  manganefe  had 
contained  calcareous  earth,  this  would  not 
aflPedt  my  theory,  for  I  have  obtained  dephlo¬ 
gifticated  marine  acid  from  chalk,  and  Mr. 
Gallilh  obtained  it  from  magnelia ;  for  the 

fixed 


1 


Of  the  Marine  Acid \  8 1 

i 

fixed  air  unites  to  the  acid  as  foon  as  it  parts 
with  its  phlogiftom 

If  nitrous  air  be  mixed  with  dephlogifticated 
marine  air  over  water,  both  immediately  be- 
come  vifible  and  are  abforbed.^  Here  a 
double  decompofition  takes  place,  by  virtue  of 
which,  the  common  marine  acid,  and  the  ni¬ 
trous  acid,  are  regenerated  :  the  marine  air 
dephlogifticates  the  nitrous  air,  and  at  the 
fame  time  gives  to  the  nitrous  balls  its  aci¬ 
difying  principle. 

If  fulphur  be  expofed  to  the  adion  of  the 
concentrated  dephlogifticated  marine  acid,  it 
is  decompofed,  and  the  marine  acid  becomes 
common  fpirit  of  fait,  f  This  Ihews  that  ful¬ 
phur  contains  the  fame  principle  as  inflam¬ 
mable  air,  which,  as  we  have  juft  feen,  re- 
ftores  the  dephlogifticated  acid  to  its  common 
ftate.  Phofphorus  alfo  is  decompofed  with 
the  affiftance  of  heat. 

If  dephlogifticated  marine  acid  be  expofed' 
to  the  folar  light,  it  emits  dephlogifticated  air, 
and  becomes  common  marine  acid  ;  J  the  fixed 
air  being  decompofed,  as  already  feen,  p.  72. 

Mr.  Berthollet  and  Morveau  tried  in  vain  to 
combine  dephlogifticated  air  directly  with  the 
common  marine  acid.  1  Encyclop.  p.  254. 

i 

*  26  Roz.  393.  per  Pelletier,  f  1  Nouvelle  Ency- 
clop.  252.  Chy.  Beytr,  1  Band.  3  Stuck, 

J  29  Roz,  82, 


G 


SECT, 


Of  Aqua  Regia * 


SECT,  VI 


Of  Aqua  Regia 


F  the  common  marine  acid  be  mixed  with 


J[  an  equal  bulk  of  ftrong  colourlefs  nitrous 
acid,  the  marine  will  deacidify  in  great  mea- 
fure  the  nitrous,  while  the  nitrous  dephlo- 
gifticates  the  marine ;  that  is  to  fay,  the  ma¬ 
rine  will  take  up  a  great  part  of  the  fixed  air 
of  the  nitrous  acid,  while  the  nitrous  will 
take  up  the  phlogifton  of  the  marine.  Hence 
part  of  the  nitrous  acid  is  converted  into  nitrous 
air,  which  Immediately  unites  to  the  unde- 
compofed  part  of  the  nitrous  acid,  and  forms 
phlogifticated  nitrous  acid,  and  hence  the  red 
colour  of  the  liquor. 

If  the  nitrous  acid  be  in  fmall  proportion,  it 
wtIH  be  wholly  decompofed ;  for  the  marine 
bails,  and  the  phlogifton  of  that  part  which  is 
converted  into  nitrous  air,  both  folicit  the  pure 
air  in  the  nitrous  bails,  which,  when  difen- 
gaged,  is  converted  into  fixed  air,  and  unites 
to  the  marine  bafis,  and  the  phlogifticated  air 
is  fet  loofe.^ 

*  See  the  curious  Experiments  of  Mr.  Pelletier,  26 
Roz.  393. 


Thence 


Of  Aqua  Regia*  §3 

Thence  if  the  marine  acid  be  made  to  im¬ 
bibe  nitrous  vapour5  a  very  ftrong  aqua  regia 
will  be  produced,  as  Dr.  Prieftley  has  difco- 
vcrcd ;  for  nitrous  vapour  contains  a  large 
proportion  of  nitrous  balls,  as  already  fliewn, 
and  very  little  water,  and  this  bafis  being  de- 
compofed  a  ffords  a  larger  quantity  of  fixed  air 
to  the  marine  bafis,  than  triple  the  bulk  of 
aqueous  nitrous  acid. 

Shortly  after  the  mixture  of  the  nitrous  and 
marine  acids,  an  air  arifes  which  is  immedi¬ 
ately  abforbed  by  water,  26  Roz.  323  ;  be- 
caufe  it  is  a  mixture  of  dephlogifticated  ma¬ 
rine  air  and  of  nitrous  air,  and  thefe  decom- 
pofe  each  other,  and  form  nitrous  and  com¬ 
mon  marine  acids. 

When  aqua  regia  is  made  with  a  certain 
proportion  of  fal  ammoniac,  the  volatile  al- 
,  kali  is  deftroyed  ;  for  when  the  marine  acid  is 
dephlogifticated,  it  reads  upon  and  dec 0111* 
pofes  the  volatile  alkali. 

But  as  water  in  the  common  temperature 
of  the  atmofphere,  can  retain  but  a  very  in- 
considerable  quantity  of  dephlogifticated  ma¬ 
rine  acid,  it  feems  very  difficult  to  explain 
why  in  aqua  regia  fo  confiderable  a  quantity  of 
that  acid  remains.  This  appears  to  me  to  be 
occafioned  by  its  affinity  to  the  undecompofed 
nitrous  acid  ;  to  fee  if  that  were  the  cafe,  I 
mixed  the  nitrous  and  marine  acids  in  dif¬ 
ferent  proportions,  and  examined  whether  the 
fpecific  gravity  of  the  mixture  were  greater 

G  2  than 


■H*  •  *  -  •  \ 

84  Of  Aqua  Regia \ 

than  the  mean  that  ffiould  refult,  and  I  always 
found  it  lefs ;  but  as  during  the  union  of 
the  two  acids,  and  while  weighing,  a  great 
quantity  of  air  efcapes,  no  conclufion  can  be 
drawn  from  thefe  experiments. 

The  antiphlogiftic  explanation  of  thefe  phe¬ 
nomena  appears  to  me  perplexed  and  difficult 
to  underhand.  According  to  Mr.  Berthollet,* 
though  nitrous  air  attracts  the  oxygenous 
principle  more  ftrongly  than  marine  acid  at¬ 
tracts  it,  “  yet  by  a  double  affinity  on  the 
u  one  hand  the  nitrous  air  combines  with  the 
<c  marine  acid,  and  nitrous  acid  of  the  aqua 
<c  regia,  and  on  the  other,  the  vital  air  of 
“  part  of  the  nitrous  acid  combines  with  part 
“  of  the  marine  acid.’ 9  With  refpeCl  to  the 
affinity  of  nitrous  air  to  marine  acid,  it  can 
fcarce  be  allowed  ;  for,  according  to  the  expe¬ 
riments  of  Dr.  Prieftley,the  marine  acid  fcarcely 
abforbs  any  in  a  Jhort  time,  and  not  above  4 
of  its  bulk  even  in  2  months,  4  whereas  aqua 
regia  is  made  in  f  an  hour  ;  and  upon  the 
whole,  this  explanation  fays  no  more  than  that 
the  two  acids  unite,  fmce  the  marine  acid 
unites  to  both  principles  of  the  nitrous  acid* 
viz.  the  nitrous  air  and  vital  air ;  yet  that 
fomething  more  happens  is  evident  even  by 
the  Irnell,  for  this  is  the  fame  as  that  of  ma¬ 
rine  acid  digefted  with  manganefe. 

*  1  Encyclop,  259.  f  3  Pr,  129. 


S  E  C  T. 


Of  the  Phofphork  Acid, . 


S  E  C  T.  VIE 


Of  the  Phofphork  Acid , 


FROM  various  experiments,  and  parti¬ 
cularly  thofe  of  Mr.  Lavoiiier,  which 
appear  to  have  been  made  with  great  accu¬ 
racy,  it  appears  that  the  phofphoric  acid  con- 
fifts  of  a  peculiar  bafis  united  to  2,265  of  its 
weight  of  the  acidifying  principle,  that  is„ 
fixed  air ;  or  in  other  words,  1 00  gr.  of  dry 
phofphoric  acid  contain  about  69  of  fixed 
air,  and  3 1  of  its  peculiar  bafis  :  1 00  gr.  of 
the  phofphoric  bafis  take  up  226,5  of  fixed 
air,  or  32,9  of  phlogifton,  wriien  it  becomes 
phofphorus  ;  and  1 00  gr.  of  phofphorus  con¬ 
tain  75,24  of  bafis  and  24,76  of  phlogifton. 

The  antiphlogiftians  think  that  the  phof¬ 
phoric  acid  confifts  of  phofphorus  itfelf  united 
to  tfie  oxygenous  principle,  and  that  phof¬ 
phorus  does  not  contain  phlogifton. 

Mr.  Morveau  made  an  experiment  that  evi¬ 
dently  proves  the  dephlogiftication  of  this  fub- 
fiance  during  its  acidification,  and  that  pure 
air  becomes  fixed  air  before  it  unites  to  it : 
Having  left  a  piece  of  phofphorus  in  a  large 
glafs  veffel  wrell  flopped  for  3  or  4  days,  ex- 

G  3  pofed 


86  Of  the  Phofphoric  Acid, \ 

pofed  to  a  temperature  of  70  or  72°,  and  af¬ 
terwards  opened  it  in  lime-water,  the  lime- 
water  entered  and  became  turbid,  and  being 
filtered,  left  a  precipitate  which  effervefced 
with  the  nitrous  acid,  and  confequently  the 
precipitation  did  not  arife  from  the  union  of 
the  lime  with  the  phofphoric  acid.  1  Encyclop. 

p.  22G. 

Mr.  Lavoifier  having  gradually  introduced  a 
quantity  of  phofphorus  into  nitrous  acid,  whofe 
fpecific  gravity  was  1,299  heated  to  1 330,  ob« 
ferved  a  large  quantity  of  nitrous  air  to  be  pro¬ 
duced,  and  the  phofphorus  almoft  wholly  con¬ 
verted  into  phofphoric  acid,  and  increafed  in 
weight  above  the  double.*  As  I  have  already 
fhewn  that  nitrous  air  contains  a  large  quan¬ 
tity  of  phlogifton,  and  that  it  does  not  pre- 
exift  in  nitrous  acid,  I  muft  confider  that  pro¬ 
duced  on  this  occafion,  as  a  proof  that  phof¬ 
phorus  contains  phlogifton,  and  that  it  took 
fixed  air  from  the  nitrous  acid  ;  but  the  furplus 
weight  which  the  phofphoric  fubftance  poi- 
feffed  after  the  operation,  cannot  be  entirely 
derived  from  the  nitrous  acid,  as  much  com¬ 
mon  air  muft  have  been  admitted  during  the 
gradual  introduction  of  the  phofphorus. 

The  celebrated  Mr.  Sage  has  fhewn  that 
phofphorus  precipitates  copper,  filver,  and 
other  metals  from  their  diluted  folutions  in 
their  metallic  form,  and  that  at  the  fame  time 


*  Mem.  Far.  1780,  p,  350. 


Of  the  Phof phone  Acid, 

it  is  converted  into  an  acid.  *  This  is  a  *?§. 
proof  that  phofphorus  contains  phlogifton,  if 
metals  contain  any,  when  in  their  metallic  form. 
If  the  phofphoric  acid  be  diftilled  with  zinc, 
it  will  be  converted  into  phofphorus,  i  Margr. 
146  ;  fo  it  will  if  diftilled  with  tin,  which 
contradicts  Mr.  Lavoifier’s  table  of  affinities. 

The  bafis  of  the  phofphoric  acid,  as  Mr. 
Morveau  well  remarks,  is  the  only  one  which 
can  be  procured  free,  both  from  phlogifton  and 
the  acidifying  principle :  it  is  what  is  called 
(though  improperly,  fince  it  is  not  foluble  in 
water)  the  glacial  phofphoric  acid. 

%  18  Roz.  263* 


G  4 


1 


SECT. 


?  - 

( 


Of  the  Saccharine  Acid , 


i 

SECT.  VIII. 

I 

Of  the  Saccharine  Acid. 


VEGETABLE  fubftances  in  general  are 
refolvable  into  water,  fixed,  inflamma¬ 
ble,  and  phlogifticated  airs ;  in  the  number, 
proportion,  and  degree  of  condenfation  of 
each  of  thefe,  the  foie  difference  betwixt  them 
lies  ;  and  if  we  fuppofe  each  of  them  to  be 
capable  of  only  io  degrees  of  condenfation, 
we  fhall  have  40  principles,  exclufive  perhaps 
of  fixed  alkalis,  whofe  compofition  is  not  yet 
known  :  the  combinations  of  which  thefe  are 
capable,  are  fully  fufficient  to  furnifh  all  the 
varieties  that  can  be  fuppofed  to  exifl.  Every 
combination  of  two  or  more  of  thefe,  and  alfo 
every  degree  of  condenfation,  feems  to  have 
properties  peculiar  to  it ;  but  as  we  are  in 
a  great  degree  ignorant  of  the  manner  of 
combining  or  condenfing  thefe  principles,  we 
are  as  yet  unable  to  recompofe  even  unor¬ 
ganized  vegetable  fubftances. 

Sugar  is  a  compound  of  fixed  air  with  a 
much  larger  proportion  of  inflammable  air 
and  fome  water,  all  condenfed  to  a  degree  of 
which  we  are  ignorant,  but  retaining  upon 

the 


Of  the  Saccharine  Acid.  v.  89 

the  whole  much  more  fpecific  heat  than  either 
oil  or  charcoal ;  this  laft  indeed  feems  to  ex¬ 
clude  water  from  its  compofitiam  Mr.  Mor- 
veau  conjectures,  with  great  probability,  that 
fugar  has  for  its  bafis  a  fine  sethereal  oil,  to 
which  a  large  proportion  of  condenfed  in¬ 
flammable  air  is  fuperadded. 

The  acid  of  fugar  confifts  then  of  this  pe¬ 
culiar  bafis,  ftripped  of  its  fuperadded  phlo- 
gifton,  and  united  to  a  large  proportion  of 
fixed  air  in  a  condenfed  ftate :  the  faccharirie 
acid  therefore  does  not  pre-exift  in  fugar,  but 
is  formed  by  the  operation  that  exhibits  it ; 
and  thus  it  differs  from  neutral  falts,  foaps, 
and  phlogifticated  mineral  acids. 

This  acid  derives  the  greater  part  of  its 
acidifiable  principle  from  the  nitrous  acid, 
which,  as  well  as  the  fugar  itfelf,  is  dec'om- 
pofed  during  the  operation  that  produces  the 
acid  of  fugar  :  the  nitrous  bails  takes  up  the 
phlogifton  of  the  fugar,  while  the  fixed  air 
of  the  nitrous  acid  combines  with  the  faccha- 
rine  bafis. 

In  explaining  many  of  the  phenomena  of 
the  mineral  acids,  the  antiphlogiftic  theory 
appears  to  great  advantage  from  its  feeming 
fimplicity ;  but  in  explaining  thofe  of  the 
analyfis  and  production  of  the  vegetable  acids, 
this  advantage  is  entirely  loft,  and  its  infuf- 
ficiency  becomes  very  apparent. 

Mr.  Lavoifier  diftilled  236,25  gr.  of  fugar, 
with  945  gr.  of  nitrous  acid,  whofe  fpecific 

gravity 


90  Of  the  Saccharine  Acid. 

gravity  was  1 ,3 1 6,  diluted,  with  945  gr.  of  wa¬ 
ter,  in  an  apparatus  for  receiving  airs,  and  an 
intermediate  bottle  for  receiving  the  liquor  that 
might  pafs  over  during  diftillation.  The  total 
amount  of  the  materials  was  therefore  2126,25 
gr.  and  when  the  operation  was  over,  the 
amount  was 


Grains. 


Nit.  air  229,71  cubic  inches 
Fixed  air  108,81  =- 

Inflam,  air  30,22  zz 

Liquor  and  fait  in  the  retort 
Weight  gained  by  the  in¬ 
termediate  bottle 


—  85  which  contain  15  of 
50,6  phlogilton,  and 

1  6,7  of  nitrous 

1316  bafis* 

}  599 


Total  2051,6 

Original  Weight  2126,25  gr. 
Dedudt  2051,6 


Lcfs  74,65 


This  lofs  is  fo  confiderahle,  that  it  were 
fuperfluous  to  enter  into  an  account  of  the 
quantity  of  nitrous  acid  decompofed,*  and  fo 
much  the  more  as  the  decompolition  of  the 
nitrous  acid  is  not  contefted.  But  he  takes  for 
granted  what  cannot  be  allowed,  that  the  ni¬ 
trous  air  pre-exifted  in  the  nitrous  acid,  and 
even  that  this  acid  contained  an  equal  bulk  of 


*  Mem.  Par.  1778,  p.  541.  There  feems  to  be  a  con- 
tradidtion  in  Mr.  Lavoifier’s  account,  for  he  fays,  the  in¬ 
termediate  bottle  gained  1  oz.  2  gros  and  12  gr.  and 
a  few  lines  after,  that  only  3  gros  and  56  gr.  had  pafled 

into  it. 

nitrous 


Of  the  Saccharine  Acid \  o  i 

nitrous  and  pure  air,  which  has  been  already 
fhewn  to  be  impoffible. 

However,  he  infers  from  this  experiment 
that  fugar  is  a  fort  of  charcoal,  which  uniting 
with  the  oxygenous  principle  of  the  nitrous  acid, 
decompofes  that  acid,  fets  loofe  the  nitrous  air, 
and  forms  the  faccharine  acid  ;  but  towards  the 
end  of  the  operation,  the  faccharine  acid  itfelf 
is,  as  he  thinks,  decompofed,  and  hence  the  ori¬ 
gin  of  the  fixed  air,  which  is  nothing  elfe  but 
the  oxygenous  principle  united  to  charcoal. 

On  this  I  remark,  i  ft.  That  according  to  this 
theory,  the  acid  of  fugar  and  fixed  air  fhould 
be  one  and  the  fame  thing,  fince  both  are 
compofed  of  the  oxygenous  principle  united 
to  charcoal.  Mr.  Lavoifier  may  reply,  that 
the  acid  of  fugar,  befides  charcoal,  and  the 
oxygenous  principle,  contains  alfo  inflammable 
air;  but  then; he  muft  own  that  fugar  con¬ 
tained  a  larger  proportion  of  inflammable  air, 
than  was  given  out  during  the  formation  of 
the  acid  of  fugar,  and  cannot  deny  that  part 
of  this  inflammable  air  united  with  the  nitrous 
bafis,  and  formed  nitrous  air.  He  may  per¬ 
haps  alfo  fay,  that  this  charcoal  is  different 
from  common  charcoal ;  but  if  fo,  how  came 
it  to  make  fixed  air  like  common  charcoal  ? 
Befides,  if  it  were  a  different  fort  of  charcoal, 
the  acid  of  fugar  fhould,  in  his  fyftem,  be  de¬ 
compofed  by  common  charcoal  and  fugar  re¬ 
generated;  for,  according  to  his  table,  .char¬ 
coal  has  a  much  ftronger  affinity  to  the  oxy¬ 
genous 


Q  2  Of  the  Saccharine  Acid. 

genous  principle  than  fugar  has  to  that  prin¬ 
ciple.  Nay,  fugar  fhould  be  regenerated  by 
various  metallic  fubftances,  which,  by  his 
table,  ftand  before  it  in  the  order  of  attraction 
to  the  oxygenous  principle. 

2d.  If  the  acid  of  fugar  confided  of  fugar 
itfelf  united  to  the  oxygenous  principle,  this 
acid  fhould  weigh  more  than  the  fugar  itfelf 
of  which  it  is  formed,  notwithstanding  that 
feme  fixed  air  and  inflammable  air  efcape  from 
it.  For  in  Mr.  Lavoifier’s  experiment,  the 
quantity  of  fugar  employed  was  236,25  gr. 
the  quantity  of  oxygenous  principle  taken  up 
was  83  gr.  fo  that  if  there  had  been  no  lofs, 
the  whole  quantity  of  faccharine  acid  fhould 
have  been  319,25  gr.  and  if  we  dedud:  the 
lofs  of  50  gr.  of  fixed  air,  and  1  gr.  of  inflam¬ 
mable  air,  we  ftill  have  268,25  gr.  that  is,  32 
gr.  more  than  the  weight  of  the  fugar.  But 
this  increafe  of  weight  is  contrary  to  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  all  who  have  examined  the  matter 
with  any  accuracy.  Mr.  Bergman  from  3  parts 
of  fugar  obtained  but  1  of  faccharine  acid*; 
Mr.  Ghaptal,  from  j  to  f  of  the  quantity  of 
fugar  employed  ;+  Mr.  Sage  only  2®  and 
yet  if  we  confider  the  proportion  and  firength 
of  the  acid  employed  by  Mr.  Lavoifier,  we 
fhall  find  it  very  improbable  that  even  the  whole 
of  the  fugar  he  employed  was  converted  into 
faccharine  acid. 

*  r  Bergman,  253.  f  Chaptal,  6i« 

I  Mem.  Far.  1777,  p.  437. 

3d.  If 


Of  the  Saccharine  Acid*  U 

3d.  If  the  faccharine  acid  confifted  of  fugar 
undecompofed,  and  barely  united  to  the  oxy¬ 
genous  principle,  then  it  fhould  be  formed  by 
treating  fugar  with  the  black  calx  of  manga- 
nefe,  or  with  dephlogifticated  marine  acid ; 

-  for  both  thefe  fubftances  contain  abundance  of 
the  oxygenous  principle,  and  eafily  give  it 
out :  yet  after  various  trials,  neither  Mr. 
Scheele  nor  Mr.  Morveau  were  able  to  form 
a  particle  of  the  faccharine  acid,  by  means  of 
either  of  thefe  fubftances.  Let  it  not  be 
thought  that  this  arifes  from  want  of  affinity 
in  the  oxygenous  principle  to  fugar,  for  by 
Mr.  Lavoifier’s  table,  it  has  a  ftronger  affinity 
to  fugar  than  to  either  of  thefe  fubftances,  and 
paffes  from  them  to  fulphur  (to  which,  by  that, 
table,  it  has  a  wreaker  affinity),  as  Mr.  Mor¬ 
veau  has  fhewn.  The  only  reafon  then,  why 
fugar  cannot  be  converted  into  an  acid  by  thefe 
fubftances,  is,  becaufe  neither  of  them  can 
ftrip  it,  and  carry  off  that  quantity  of  phlogif- 
ton  which  it  muft  lofe  before  it  can  become  an 
acid. 

Laftly,  If  the  acid  of  fugar  be  diftilled,  it 
is  wholly  converted  into  water,  fixed  and  in¬ 
flammable  air,  and  not  a  particle  either  of 
coal  or  dephlogifticated  air  is  found  in  it.  It 
is  not  therefore  reafonable  to  look  on  either 
of  them  as  its  conftituent  principles ;  but  as 
fixed  air  alone  can  be  extracted  from  all  ve¬ 
getable  acids,  it  feems  to  be  the  true  acidifi- 
able  principle. 


SEC  T, 


Of  Calcination* 


SECT.  IX. 


Of  the  Calcination  and  Reduction  of  Metals ,  and 
the  Formation  of  Fixed  Air. 


rp  O  calcine  a  metal  is  to  deprive  it  of  its 

H  metallic  fplendor,  or  reduce  it  to  a 
brittle,  lefs  coherent  and  pulverent  form  :  mal¬ 
leable  metals  thereby  lofe  their  malleability, 
and  mercury  its  liquidity.  To  reduce  a  metal 
is  to  reft  ore"  to  it  the  metallic  luftre,  and  the 
degree  of  coherence  and  malleability  that  are 
peculiar  to  it. 

Metallic  calces  are  heavier  than  the  metal 
of  which  they  are  formed,  and  hence  are  evi¬ 
dently  united  to  fome  new  fubftance  ;  but  they 
are  fpecifieally  lighter  than  before  calcination, 
and  hence  this  new  fubftance  is  lighter  than 
that  to  which  they  were  united  before  calcina¬ 
tion,  if  they  were  united  to  any. 

The  different  fubftances,  by  wdiofe  means  in 
different  degrees  of  heat,  different  metallic  iub- 
ftances  may  be  calcined,  are  refpirable  air, 
water,  acids,  alkalis,  mercury,  with  the  affift- 
ance  of  refpirable  air,  and  various  other  me¬ 
tallic  fubftances  in  different  circumftances. 

According  to  the  new  theory,  metallic  fub¬ 
ftances  lofe  no  peculiar  fubftance  during  cal¬ 
cination, 


Of  Calcination .  g$ 

cination,  but  barely  take  in,  and  unite  to  the 
oxygenous  principle,  that  is,  pure  air  deprived 
of  the  greater  part  of  its  fpecific  heat. 

Thofe  who  'admit  the  exiftence  of  the  in¬ 
flammable  principle  in  metals,  are  moftly 
agreed,  that  during  calcination  it  is  feparated 
from  them ;  but  with  regard  to  the  new  fub- 
ftance  which  metals  take  in,  few  of  the  pre¬ 
lent  adherers  to  the  old  fyftem  have  as  yet  de¬ 
clared  their  fentiments.  I  fhal!  forbear  enter¬ 
ing  on  a  difcuflion  of  antiquated  opinions  long 
ago  exploded,  and  alfo  of  that  of  Mr.  Scheele, 
which  has  fcarcely  been  embraced  by  any  body, 
and  has,  been  fufficiently  refuted  by  Mr.  La- 
voifier,  and  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Fordyce. 

Mr.  Cavendifh  inclines  to  think  that  the 
imperfect  metals  lofe  their  principle  of  inflam¬ 
mability  or  phlogifton,  during  calcination,  and 
take  in  water  in  its  head.  But  with  refpect  to 
the  calces  of  mercury  (and  of  the  perfect  metals) 
he  thinks  it  ridiculous  to  decide,  whether  the 
mercury,  and  not  the  water,  or  the  water,  and 
not  the  mercury,  have  loft  the  principle  of  in¬ 
flammability. 

Hence,  in  the  antiphlogiftic  fyftem,  to  re¬ 
duce  a  calcined  metal,  is  barely  to  deprive  it  of 
the  oxygenous  principle ;  and  in  that  of  Mr. 
Cavendifh,  it  is  in  mo  ft  cafes  barely  requifite 
to  decompofe  the  water  to  which  -the  calx  is 
united  ;  the  inflammable  principle  of  the  wa¬ 
ter  uniting  to  the  metal  and  the  pure  air,  its 
other  ingredient  being  fet  loofe. 


96  Of  Calcination * 

In  my  opinion,  metallic  fubftances  by  calcic 
nation  lofe  their  phlogifton,  which  is  nothing 
elfe  but  pure  inflammable  air  in  a  concrete 
ftate,  and  at  the  fame  time  unite  mod  com¬ 
monly  to  fixed  air,  formed  during  the  opera¬ 
tion  ;  but  fometimes  fome  of  them  unite  to 
water  and  other  fubftances,  by  whofe  means 
they  are  calcined.  The  calces  of  the  perfect 
metals  may  therefore  be  reduced  by  the  de~ 
compofition  of  their  fixed  air,  and  thofe  of 
the  imperfect,  and  fe mi-metals,  partly  by  the 
decompofition  of  their  fixed  air,  and  partly  by 
its  expulfion,  and  that  of  the  other  foreign 
bodies  they  had  abforbed,  and  their  fimultane- 
ous  reunion  to  the  inflammable  principle. 

To  fubftantiate  this  opinion,  it  is  neceflary 
to  prove,  that  phlogifton,  or  inflammable  air  in 
a  concrete  form,  exifts  in  metallic  bodies  en¬ 
dowed  with  their  metallic  fplendof  and  peculiar 
coherence.  This,  I  flatter  myfelf,  I  have  fuf- 
ficiently  performed  on  another  occafion.*  I 
have  there  fhewn,  ift.  That  many  metals, 
during  their  i elution  in  acids,  produce  inflam¬ 
mable  air  ;  yet  that  the  fame  metals  placed  in 
the  folution  of  other  metals  in  the  fame  acids, 
though  they  are  diflolved,  yield  no  inflamma¬ 
ble  air  ;  but  at  the  fame  time,  and  in  the  fame 
proportion,  the  metal  before  diflolved  and  cal¬ 
cined,  is  reftored  to  its  metallic  luftre ;  from 
whence  I  inferred,  that  the  fubftance  which  the 

*  Phil.  Tranf.  1782.  p.  195. 

added 


Of  Calcination «  gy 

added  metal  would,  if  alone,  give  out  in  the 
form  of  inflammable  air*  is,  on  this  occafion, 
imbibed  and  abforbed  by  that  which  is  reftored 
to  its  metallic  luftre. 

2dly.  That  metallic  calces  are  reduced  to  me¬ 
tals,  by  merely  heating  them  in  inflammable 
air,  which  they  vifibly  abforb.  3dly.  That  in¬ 
flammable  air  has  been  expelled  from  them  in 
vacuo ,  by  mere  heat,  at  lead  with  the  afli fi¬ 
ance  of  moifture.  And  qthly.  That  imperfed 
metallic  fubftances  are  never  reftored  to  their 
perfed  metallic  ftate,  but  by  fubftances  that 
contain  the  inflammable  principle.  I  fhall, 
therefore,  now  do  little  more  than  reply  to  the 
objections  that  have  been  made  to  the  general 
conclufion,  and  to  my  theory  of  fixed  air,  by 
whofe  decompofition  the  calces  of  mercury  are 
revived.  » 

In  the  firft  place,  the  antiphlogiftians  contend 
that  the  inflammable  air  produced  during  the 
folution  of  metals,  proceeds  from  the  decom¬ 
pofition  of  water.  “  For”  (fays  that  eminent 
mathematician  and  philofopher,  Mr.  De  la 
Place,  who  firft  fuggefted  this  improvement 
on  the  antiphlogiftic  fyftem)  “  by  the  adion  of 
u  acids  the  metal  is  calcined,  that  is,  united  to 
“  vital  air.”  Thefe  expreflions  are  not  yet 
allowed  to  be  fynonimous.  u  That  no  part  of 
“  the  vitriolic  acid  is  altered  by  iron,  appears 
u  by  Mr.  Lavoifier’s  experiments,  who  found 
“  it  to  faturate  the  fame  quantity  of  alkali  as 
u  before,”  This,  if  admitted,  only  proves  that 

H  the 


Of  Calcination • 


the  inflammable  air  does  not  proceed  from  the 
acid.  “  If  the  inflammable  air  originated  from 
u  the  metal,  we  fhould  obtain  it  like  wife  by 
“  means  of  the  nitrous  acid.”  By  no  means ; 
the  nitrous  acid  is  evidently  decompofed,  the 
inflammable  air  unites  to  its  balls,  and  forms 
nitrous  air.  “  If  it  formed  nitrous  air,  it  fhould 
<c  appear  on  uniting  nitrous  air  with  pure  air.’9 
No,  it  unites  to  the  pure  air,  and  forms  fixed 
air.  “  Moreover  the  adtion  of  nitrous  acid 
u  on  mercury,  developes  nitrous  air,  yet  it 
a  does  not  appear  that  the  mercury  imparts 
u  inflammable  air,  fince  the  refulting  calx  of 
u  mercury  is  revived  without  the  addition  of 
u  inflammable  air.”  This  revivification  has 
been  explained  at  large,  at  the  end  of  the 
fourth  lection.  That  it  is  due  to  inflammable 
air  will  again  be  feen  in  the  ninth. 

And  in  effedt,  if  we  coniider  the  decompofi- 
tion  of  water  in  this  cafe,  in  a  chymical  point  of 
view,  it  cannot  but  appear  exceeding  improba-  ' 
ble ;  every  decompofition  arifes  either  from  a 
fingle  or  a  double  affinity  ;  therefore,  if  during 
the  diffolution  of  iron  in  the  dilute  vitriolic  acid, 
water  is  decompofed,  this  mult  happen  either 
by  virtue  of  a  fingle  or  of  a  double  affinity ; 
yet  neither  can  be  faid  to  take  place  :  Not 
a  double  affinity,  fince  the  inflammable  air 
efcapes  without  uniting  to  the  acid ;  not  a 
fingle  affinity,  fince  there  is  no  proof  that 
any  fuch  affinity  exifts  in  this  cafe,  and  if 
it  did  exift,  water  fhould  as  eafily  be  de¬ 
compofed  by  iron  without  an  acid,  as  when 

2  an 


Of  Calcination*  gg 

an  acid  is  prefent,  or  rather  more  eafily, 
iince  the  affinity  of  water  to  the  acid  muff  di« 
minifh  its  tendency,  or  that  of  any  of  its  com¬ 
ponent  parts,  to  unite  to  any  other  fubftance, 

and  on  that  account  we  find  a  variety  of  folu- 

0 

tions  precipitated  by  the  vitriolic  acid,  merely 
becaufe  it  attrafis  the  water  necefiary  to  hold 
them  in  folution.^  I  would  be  glad  to  know 
v/hat  part  the  acid  a£ts  here ;  in  the  new 
theory  it  feems  to  be  quite  idle,  and  contri¬ 
butes  nothing  to  the  folution.  Why  does 
not  its  oxygenous  principle  unite  to  the  in¬ 
flammable  air  of  the  wrater,  at  the  fame  time 
that  the  oxygenous  principle  of  the  water 
unites  to  the  metal  ?  fince,  by  the  table  of  Mr, 
Lavoifier,  this  principle  has  a  greater  affinity 
to  inflammable  air,  than  to  fulphur.  How 
comes  it  that  volatile  vitriolic  acid  difengages 
inflammable  air  from  iron  ?  fince  its  own  oxy¬ 
genous  principle  is  fufficiently  developed,  and 
fufficiently  copious  to  unite  to  iron,  without 
having  recourfe  to  that  of  water.  How  does 
fixed  air  expel  inflammable  air  from  iron  ?  Do 
all  acids  help  the  decompofition  of  water,  and 
yet  remain  inert  ? 

Befides,  though  iron  and  zinc  are  the  only 
metals  which  by  Mr.  Lavoifier’s  table  have  a 
greater  affinity  to  the  oxygenous  principle,  than 
inflammable  air  has  to  that  principle  ;  yet  in¬ 
flammable  air  is  alfo  fet  loofe  during  the  fo¬ 
lution  of  other  metals,  which  by  that  table 

*  As  tartar  vitriolate,  alum,  &c.  See  i  Mem.  Scav. 
ttrang.  p.  105,  and  Vogel,  §  769, 

H  2 


have 


loo  Of  Calcination . 

have  a  weaker  affinity  to  the  oxygenous  prin¬ 
ciple  than  inflammable  air  has  to  it.  Thus  in¬ 
flammable  air  is  produced  by  the  folution  of 
manganefe  in  the  dilute  vitriolic  acid,*  and  by 
the  folution  of  tin  in  the  marine  acid  ;  by  this 
table  alfo  vitriolic  acid  and  charcoal  fhould  de- 
compofe  water,  in  the  fame  circumftances  in 
which  vitriolic  acid  and  iron  decompofe  its 
which  yet  is  not  pretended. 

I  am  very  fenfible  that  all  general  reafonings 
fhould  give  way  to  faffs  ;  but  furely,  when  ad¬ 
duced  againft  mere  inference  and  conjeffure ,  they 
mu  ft  have  their  due  weight. 

To  deftroy  this  fuppofition  ftill  more  effec¬ 
tually,  I  made  the  following  experiment :  Hav¬ 
ing  heated  fome  pounds  of  mercury  to  2 1 2°, 
and  kept  it  in  that  heat  for  6  hours,  often  flir¬ 
ting  it  to  diffipate  all  moifture,  I  amalgamated 
one  pound  of  it  by  frequent  agitation  with 
360  gr.  of  filings  of  zinc,  which  had  been  pre- 
vioufly  heated  nearly  to  rednefs,  in  a  dry  glafs 
bottle.,  and  poured  the  whole,  with  about  40 
gr.  more  of  zinc  ftrewed  over  its  furface,  into 
a  coated  glafs  retort  made  as  dry  as  poffible, 
and  which  with  its  adopter  contained  about  20 
cubic  inches.  I  then  diftilled  the  whole  with 
a  gentle  heat,  and  received  the  air  in  5  por¬ 
tions  over  mercury:  the  firft  and  fecond  por¬ 
tions,  each  about  5  cubic  inches,  were  common 
air  ;  the  third,  nearly  5  cubic  inches,  was  in- 

*  2  Bergm.  210. 

flammable 


Of  Calcination,  l  o  I 

flammable  air,  and  detonated  with  common 
air ;  the  4th,  alfo  about  5  cubic  inches,  made 
4  fucceflive  explofions,  after  which  a  confider- 
able  abforption  took  place,  and  the  mer¬ 
cury  began  to  diftil  over ;  a  fifth  portion  of 
air  pa(Ted  flowly,  §  of  which  was  fixed  air, 
and  the  other  \  flightly  reddened  with  nitrous 
air. — In  this  experiment,  the  faireft  I  could  de~ 
vife,  moiflure  was  avoided  as  much  as  pofi- 
fible,  and  none  could  be  prefent,  but  that  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  air  necefiarily  abforbed  during 
the  amalgamation  :  the  inflammable  air  feems 
then  to  have  proceeded  from  the  zinc,  which, 
like  all  other  imperfeCf  metals,  is  in  fome  mea- 
fure  calcined  during  its  union  with  mercury, 
and  thrown  into  an  aerial  form  by  the  heat  ap¬ 
plied,  when  there  was  but  little  common  air 
in  the  retort :  this  air  had  a  very  peculiar 
fmell. 

It  is  true  that  vitriol  of  iron,  when  diftiiled, 
gives  at  lafl  dephlogifticated  air ;  but  this  air 
evidently  proceeds  from  the  decompofition  of 
part  of  the  acid,  and  not  from  that  of  the 
water  ;  for  its  production  is  always  preceded 
by  a  large  quantity  of  vitriolic  air,*  arifing 
from  the  abforption  of  part  of  the  fixed  air  of 
that  acid,  by  the  metallic  calx. 

To  prove  the  decompofition  of  water,  Mr. 
Lavoifier  made  the  following  experiments  : 
jfL  He  let  up  a  mixture  of  water  and  filings 


*  4  Prieftley,  216.  220. 

h  3 


lot  Of  Calcination . 

of  iron,  into  a  tube  filled  with  mercury,  and 
in  a  few  days  obtained  a  fin  all  quantity  of  in¬ 
flammable  air.  2dly.  Having  paffed  the  fleam 
of  boiling  water  through  a  red  hot  iron  tube, 
he  obtained  a  large  quantity  of  inflammable 
air  ;  the  inner  furface  of  the  tube  was  cal¬ 
cined,  and  had  the  appearance  of  what  is 
called  the  fpecular ,  or  tejfular  iron  ore ,  of  great 
hardnefs,  iearcely  magnetic,  and  affording  no 
air  with  acids. ^  The  iron  increafed  in  weight 
from  25  to  30  per  cent. 

Thefe  experiments  feem  to  me  to  prove  no¬ 
thing  more  than  that  water  unites  to  iron,  and 
expels  inflammable  air  from  it,  which  is  further 
confirmed  by  the  following  confiderations  :  If 
a  little  water  be  thrown  on  a  large  heap  of 
filings  of  iron,  a  confiderable  heat  is  foon 
produced, f  which  appears  to  proceed  from  the 
condenfation  of  the  water  while  uniting  to  the 
iron  ;  the  heat  given  out,  exceeding  that  ab- 
iorbed  by  the  inflammable  air,  whofe  weight  is 
exceeding  final!.  In  Mr.  Lavoifier’s  hypo- 
thefis,  it  is  only  the  oxygenous  principle  of 
the  water,  which  is  abforbed  by  the  iron ;  and 
as  this  is  already  exceedingly  condenfed  in 
water,  it  does  not  appear  to  me  likely  to  give 
out  much  heat.  2dly.  This  calx  is  very  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  formed  by  the  abforption  of 
air,  finch  as  ruft ;  for  fixed  air  may  be  ex¬ 
tracted  from  this,  and  even  dephlogifticated 

*  Mem.  Pan  1781.  p.  271,  272,  and  487.  t  3  Bergm.  94. 

air ; 


Of  Calcination .  103 

air ;  but  no  air  of  any  fort  can  be  extracted 
from  iron  calcined  by  water. 

Dr.  Prieftley  has  alfo  made  many  curious 
experiments  on  this  fubjedt,  which  deferve  par¬ 
ticular  attention,  as  their  refults  are  incompa¬ 
tible  with  the  new  theory,  and  fet  the  ab- 
iorption  of  water  in  jpecie ,  beyond  contra¬ 
diction.  By  the  help  of  a  burning  glafs  he 
heated  a  bit  of  iron  in  dephlogifticated  air, 
extracted  from  precipitate  per  fe ,  and  prefently 
perceived  the  air  to  be  diminished,  and  vifibly 
abforbed  by  the  iron,  which  was  converted 
into  a  flag,  and  gained  a  weight  very  nearly 
correfponding  to  that  of  the  air  which  was  ab¬ 
forbed  ;  but  when  he  afterwards  heated  this 
flag  in  inflammable  air,  the  inflammable  air 
alio  difappeared,  a  considerable  quantity  of 
water  was  produced,  the  iron  recovered  its 
metallic  Slate,  and  loft  a  weight  nearly  equal 
to  that  of  the  water  it  had  given  out.*  In 
the  firft  experiment  the  phlogifton  of  the  iron 
united  to  the  dephlogifticated  air,  and  formed 
water,  which  the  iron  abforbed,  became  a 
flag,  and  muft  thereby  have  gained  the 
weight  of  the  dephlogifticated  air.  In  the 
Second  experiment  the  water  was  expelled,  and 
converted  into  vapour,  while  the  inflammable 
air  was  abforbed,  and  the  iron  thereby  re¬ 
stored  to  its  original  ftate  and  weight.  In 
the  antiphlogistic  hypothefis  it  muft  be  faid, 


*  6  Pr.  73— -85, 

H  4 


that 


1 04  Of  Calcination , 

that  in  the  firft  experiment  the  pure  air  united 
to  the  iron,  and  formed  a  flag ;  but  in  the 
fecond,  the  dephlogifticated  air  quitted  the  iron, 
united  to  the  inflammable  air,  and  formed 
water :  but  this  contradicts  Mr.  Lavoifier’s 
table,  where  pure  air  is  reprefented  as  having 
a  ftronger  affinity  to  iron  than  to  inflammable 
air  ;  nor  can  heat  be  faid  to  be  the  caufe  of 
the  expulfion  of  pure  air  from  iron,  and  its 
reunion  to  inflammable  air,  fince  this  expub- 
fion  takes  place  in  the  very  circumftance  in 
which  water  is  faid  to  be  decompofed  by  the 
avulfion  of  the  oxygenous  principle  from  in¬ 
flammable  air,  and  the  union  of  the  oxyge¬ 
nous  principle  to  iron  :  if  it  be  replied  that 
we  alfo  affert  that  water  is  expelled  from  iron 
by  inflammable  air,  in  the  very  circumftance 
in  which  wre  before  afferted  that  inflammable 
air  was  expelled  from  it  by  water,  I  ftiall  an- 
fwer  that  the  circumftances  are  not  the  fame ; 
when  water  expels  inflammable  air  from  iron, 
the  water  contains  much  more  fpecific  heat 
than  either  iron  or  its  phlogifton,  and  the 
phlogifton  has  room  to  efcape  in  the  form  of 
inflammable  air  ;  hut  when  inflammable  air 
expels  water  from  iron,  the  inflammable  air  is 
confined,  and  having  an  equal  affinity  to  iron, 
and  more  fpecific  heat  than  the  condenfed 
water,  and  preffing  upon  the  iron  wfith.  con- 
fiderable  force  by  reafon  of  its  heat  and  corn 
finement.  it  gives  out  its  heat  to  the  water, 
which  is  immediately  converted  into  vapour, 

and 


Of  Calcination.  105 

and  condenfed  on  the  fides  of  the  glafs.  In 
the  antiphlogiftic  hypothefis  this  reafon  will 
not  apply,  becaufe  according  to  it,  the  oxy¬ 
genous  principle  has  a  ftrong  affinity  to  iron, 
and  the  inflammable  air  none  at  all ;  fo  that 
there  is  no  fubftance  at  all  that  tends  to  expel 
the  former,  and  the  communication  of  fpe- 
cific  heat  to  the  oxygenous  principle,  fhould 
rather  impede  than  promote  its  union  with  the 
inflammable,  fmce  this  heat  mull  be  given  out 
before  that  union  can  take  place. 

If  the  above  mentioned  flag  (that  is,  iron 
calcined  by  the  fleam  of  water)  be  mixed  with 
charcoal  perfectly  dried,  and  out  of  which  all 
loofe  inflammable  air  has  been  expelled,  and 
then  diftilled  in  an  earthen  retort  well  baked 
and  glazed  on  the  outfide,  fixed  and  inflam¬ 
mable  air  will  be  produced,  and  the  iron  re¬ 
duced  to  its  metallic  form,*  Here  I  afk  from 
whence  the  inflammable  air  proceeded  ?  The  an- 
tiphlogiftians  cannot  fay  it  proceeds  from  the 
charcoal,  for  they  deny  it  to  contain  any  ;  nor 
can  they  have  recourfe  to  the  decompofition  of 
water  ;  for,  according  to  them,  the  flag  con¬ 
tains  the  oxygenous  principle  fingly,  and  not 
water :  this  decifive  argument  is  urged  againft 
them  by  Dr.  Prieftley. 

The  next  fet  of  experiments,  which  Mr.  La- 
voider  adduces  in  proof  of  the  decompofition 
pf  water,  are  thofe  which  he  made  on  chat> 

'  1 

*  §  Pried.  109, 

coal 


1 


%c  6  Of  Calcination , 

coal,  which  I  fhall  examine  in  conjunction 
with  thofe  of  Dr.  Prieftley,  on  the  fame  fub- 
jea. 

Mr.  Lavoifier  placed  248,62  gr.  troy  of 
charcoal,  out  of  which  all  adventitious  air 
and  moifture  had  been  expelled,  in  an  iron 
tube  lined  with  copper  (water  having  no  ac¬ 
tion  on  copper)  ;  and  having  paflfed  through 
It  the  fleam  of  boiling,  water,  to  the  amount 
of  1122  gr.  the  refult  was  that  6644  cubic 
Inches  of  inflammable  air  were  produced, 
whofe  weight  he  eftimates  at  550  gr.  :  by  in¬ 
troducing  a  cauftic  alkali,  he  found  i.  of  the 
bulk  of  this  air  to  confift  of  fixed  air,  and 
there  remained  5  gr.  of  afhes :  as  the  weight 
of  this  produCt  was  more  than  double  that  of 
the  charcoal  employed,  he  infers  that  the  wa¬ 
ter  muft  have  been  decompofed ;  its  inflam¬ 
mable  principle  forming  the  inflammable  air, 
and  its  oxygenous  principle  uniting  to  the 
charcoal,  forming  the  fixed  air.*5* 

On  this  experiment  I  remark,  ift.  That 
Mr.  Lavoifier  fuppofes  that  the  inflammable 
air  and  fixed  air  here  produced,  were  free  from 
water,  a  fuppofition,  which  neither  Mr..  Sauf- 
fare’s  experiments,  nor  my  own,  can  allow; 
and  if  we  fuppofe  that  above  f  of  the  weight 
of  thefe  airs  was  water,  a  fuppofition  fully 
juftified  by  my  experiments,  there  will  be 
no  neceffity  for  inferring  that  water  was  de- 

*  Mem.  Par.  1781,  p.  280. 


com- 


Of  Calcination*  107 

eompofed,  but  only  the  charcoal,  which  was 
refolved  in  great  meafure  into  its  confti- 
tuent  principles,  inflammable  air  and  fixed  air ; 
and  even  this  refolution  is  not  quite  perfect* 
the  inflammable  air  being  flill  combined  with 
a  quantity  of  fixed  air,  as  appeared  by  its 
weight,  and  its  burning  with  a  blue  flame. 

adly.  1  obferve  that  the  iron  tube  was  not 
fo  completely  coated,  as  to  prevent  the  iron 
from  being  calcined  f  fome  part  therefore 
of  the  inflammable  air  mu  ft  have  been  de¬ 
rived  from  the  iron  ;  therefore  no  calculation 
founded  on  this  experiment  can  be  conclu- 
five. 

3dly.  The  weight  of  the  fixed  air  (fup- 
pofmg  it  to  make  ~  of  the  whole  volume  of 
the  air  obtained)  muft  have  exceeded  that  of 
the  whole ;  for  the  whole  is  faid  to  have 
weighed  but  550  gr,  but  the  fixed  air  amount¬ 
ing  to  “i  661  cubic  inches,  fhould  weigh 

772  gr.  eftimating  100  cubic  inches  at  46,5 

grains. 

Dr.  Prieftley  in  making  fimilar  experiments 
found  confiderable  variations  in  the  refults.f 
When  he  palled  no  more  water  than  was  fuf- 
ficient  for  the  produdion  of  the  air,  he  never 
found  any  uncombined  fixed  air ;  but  the 
whole  was  inflammable  air.  When  a  greater 
quantity  of  water  was  ufed,  the  uncombined 
fixed  air  conliituted  from  Tk.  to  -  of  the  whole ; 

*  Mem,  Par.  1781,  p.  280.  f  6  Pr,  95. 

the 


io8  Of  Calcination. 

the  inflammable  air  was  more  than  |  lighter 
than  common  air,  100  cubic  inches  of  it 
weighing  14  grains. 

In  the  experiment  he  moft  depended  upon, 
he  found  that  94  gr.  of  charcoal,  from  which  all 
imcombined  air  had  previoufly  been  expelled 
by  heat,  afforded,  by  the  help  of  240  gr.  of  wa¬ 
ter,  294  gr.  of  air,  or  1591  cubic  inches,  4 
of  which  by  bulk,  was  fixed  air.  However, 
as  this  weight  wras  not  deduced  from  a  diredt 
experiment,  no  great  flrefs  can  be  laid  upon 
it,  as  the  Dodfcor  himfelf  allows :  it  mud  be 
remembered  that  charcoal  perfectly  firipped 
of  its  adventitious  air,  rapidly  re-attradis  it, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  exactly  weighed,  and 
after  being  weighed,  flill  continues  to  attract 
more  of  it :  and  if  to  this  caufe  of  inaccu¬ 
racy  we  add  the  weight  of  the  air  of  the  vef- 
fels,  and  of  the  water  abforbed,  we  may  well 
account  for  the  great  excefs  of  weight  of  the 
air  obtained,  over  that  of  the  charcoal. 

Thefe  are  all  the  experiments  hitherto  ad¬ 
duced  to  prove  the  decompofition  of  water ; 
and  we  have  feen  that  when  well  confidered 
they  have  no  fuch  tendency,  but  only  prove 
the  power  that  fleam  has  of  decompofmg  both 
charcoal  and  iron,  and  of  uniting  in  great 
plenty  with  the  air  produced  from  the  former, 
and  when  no  more  water  is  ufed  than  is 
barely  neceffary,  the  air  produced  feems  to  be 
nothing  elfe  but  charcoal  itfelf  in  an  aerial 
form,  united  to  a  quantity  of  water  :  but  the 

follow- 


Of  Calcination.  log 

following  experiments  fhew  that  charcoal  is 
compofed  of  inflammable  and  fixed  air. 

i  ft.  Mr.  Scheele  diftilled  cauftic  fixed  al- 

i  ■ 

kali  with  charcoal,  and  obtained  inflammable 
air,  at  the  fame  time  that  the  alkali  became 
effervefcent. 

sdly.  I  heated  about  I  an  ounce  of  dry 
powdered  charcoal  to  rednefs,  in  a  fmall  loofely 
covered  crucible,  which  it  nearly  filled,  for  fe« 
veral  hours  ;  the  cover  had  a  hole,  through 
which  the  air  produced  might  iflue.  I  found 
it  to  yield  inflammable  air,  which  burned 
with  a  blue  flame  during  the  whole  time, 
which  I  tried,  by  firing  it  from  time  to  time 
with  a  lighted  paper :  it  is  impoffible  to  af- 
cribe  this  continual  flow  of  inflammable  air  to 
any  foreign  quantity  of  it  which  the  charcoal 
might  contain. 

The  fecond  proof  which  I  alleged  in  favour 
of  the  exiftence  of  phlogifton  in  metals,  was 
deduced  from  the  reduction  of  their  calces  to 
a  metallic  ftate,  when  heated  in  inflammable 
air,  and  the  concomitant  abforption  of  that 
air :  to  elude  this  proof,  Mr.  Lavoifier  re¬ 
plied,  that  metallic  calces,  when  heated,  give 
out  pure  air,  and  that  this  air  meeting  the  in¬ 
flammable  air,  formed  water.  As  moft  of  thefe 
calces  were  heated  to  rednefs  in  Dr.  Prieftley’s 
experiments,  I  allow  water  to  have  been  form¬ 
ed  by  part  of  the  inflammable  air,  while  ano¬ 
ther  part  united  to  the  calces,  and  therefore 
this  experiment  is  not  now  as  conclufive  as  it 

was  1 

'*r 


no  Of  Calcination 9 

\ 

was  when  I  alleged  it,  the  competition  of 
water  being  then  unknown ;  but  the  expe¬ 
riment  of  Mr.  Pelletier  ftill  fupports  the  con- 
clufion,  as  there  is  no  reafon  to  think  that 
water  can  be  formed  by  the  union  of  inflam¬ 
mable  and  pure  air  in  the  temperature  of  the 
atmofphere. 

That  metallic  calces  are  immediately  united 
to  pure  air,  is  admitted  by  many,  who  yet 
are  of  opinion  that  metals  contain  phlogifton: 
yet  this  admiffion  feems  to  me  inconfiftent 
with  the  latter  opinion  ;  for  they  allow  that 
metals  during  their  calcination  give  out  phlo¬ 
gifton,  and  that  they  are  incapable  of  calci¬ 
nation  in  any  other  than  pure  air ;  this  air 
therefore  meets  the  phlogifton,  and  muft,  with 
it,  form  either  fixed  air  or  water,  one  or  both 
of  which  are  abforbed  by  the  calx,  and  aug¬ 
ments  its  weight. 

Calcination  by  fire ,  is  performed  in  a  low 
heat  below  rednefs,  or  in  a  red  heat.  Maf- 
ficot,  minium,  precipitate  per  fie ,  and  ruft,  are 
formed  in  low  heats,  and  confequently  con¬ 
tain  fixed  air,  and  fome  water  which  they  im¬ 
bibe  after  calcination ;  but  litharge,  flowers  of 
zinc,  iron  feales,  which  Dr.  Prieftley  calls 
finery  cinder,  being  formed  in  a  red  heat,  ab- 
forb  the  water  formed  during  their  calcination, 
and  fome  fixed  air  alfo :  the  metallic  fub- 
ftances  that  abforb  fixed  air,  will  (according 
to  the  affinity  of  the  metal  to  phlogifton)  de- 
compofe  either  the  whole,  or  the  greater  part 


Of  Calcination ,  j  %  % 

of  that  air,  when  they  are  heated  to  a  higher 
degree  than  that  at  which  they  abforbed  it ; 
and  in  an  exceeding  high  degree  of  heat,  as 
that  to  which  calces  of  iron  are  expofed,  in 
the  focus  of  a  burning  glafs,  it  may  poffibly 
happen  that  even  the  water  they  contain  may 
be  decompofed.  This  theory  appears  to  me  de~ 
ducible  from  the  following  phenomena. 

i  ft,  Mafficot,  and  the  grey  calx  of  lead 
when  moiftened  and  heated,  give  out  no  other 
but  fixed  air,  as  Dr.  Prieftley  allures  us.  When 
dry,  I  found  them  rather  to  abforb  air  by  un¬ 
dergoing  a  further  calcination. 

edly.  Minium  alfo  gives  out  a  large  portion 
of  fixed  air,  about  1  of  its  whole  aerial  con¬ 
tents,  as  Mr.  Lavoifier  owns ;  and  to  this 
air  it  feems  to  owe  its  colour,  which  it  lofes 
the  inftant  it  is  deprived  of  it,  and  regains 
when  it  recovers  it,  as  Mr.  Abich  has  iliewn. 
It  does  not  derive  it  from  either  flame  or 
fmoke  ;  for  by  Mr.  Abich’s  experiments,  that 
which  is  formed  without  contact  of  either,  is 
much  redder,  and  more  perfed,  than  that 
formed  in  a  reverberatory  furnace.* 

It  has  been  faid  that  minium,  newly  made, 
affords  no  air  at  all :  to  try  this,  I  made  feme 
ounces  of  it,  and  in  fad  neither  by  diftilling 
it  with  or  without  water,  could  any  air  be  ob¬ 
tained  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  abforbed  air,  and  was 
converted  into  litharge  and  glafs,  and  paffed 

*  i  Chym,  Annal.  1784,  p.  and  407* 

through 


I 


HZ  Of  Calcination . 

through  the  retort;  but  we  muft  not  infer  from 
thence  that  it  contains  no  air,  for  having  mix¬ 
ed  120  gr.  of  the  fame  minium  with  18  of 
fulphur,  I  obtained  14  cubic  inches  of  vitriolic 
air.  The  former  experiment  therefore  proves 
no  more,  than  that  no  air  can  be  expelled  from 
any  fubftance  until  it  has  abforbed  fome  moif- 
ture,  of  which  we  have  a  clear  proof  in  the 
cafe  of  native  aerated  barofelenite,  which  will 
fooner  vitrify  than  yield  any  air,  though 
acids  expel  fixed  air  from  it  very  readily. 

3dly.  Ruft  is  well  known  to  yield  no  other 
than  fixed  air,  and  precipitate  per  fe  yields  fome 
traces  of  it*. 

Thence  if  marine  acid  be  digefted  with 
minium,  or  precipitate  per  Je,  it  becomes  de- 
phlogifticated,  as  it  takes  up  fixed  air  and  parts 
with  a  portion  of  its  own  phlogifton  to  thefe 
calces :  but  if  it  be  diftilled  over  calces  that 
contain  chiefly  water,  as  the  calces  of  zinc, 
antimony,  litharge,  or  iron,  it  does  not 
become  dephlogifticated,  or  only  in  a  very 
flight  degree +,  which  Ihews  the  great  differ¬ 
ence  between  thefe  calces  and  the  former. 

.  It  is  impoffible  to  fuppofe,  that  metallic 
calces  formed  in  the  dry  way,  fhould  give  out 
any  more  than  a  fmall  quantity  of  fixed  air 
undecompofed,  if  we  allow  that  the  affinity 
of  metallic  fubftances  to  phlogifton  increafes 
when  they  are  expofed  to  a  very  ftrong  heat ; 

*  2  Pr.  217.  3Pr.  16.  and  poll  p.  t  *  Hermfh  176, 

and 


Of  Calcination .  1 1 3 

and  this  we  have  ftrong  reafon  to  believe, 
fince  fcaree  any  of  them  is  reducible  by  con- 
tad;  with  phlogiftic  fubftances,  but  in  a  ftrong 
heat,  and  the  moil  perfed;  calces  of  iron  are 
in  fome  meafure  revived  in  the  focus  of  a 
powerful  lens. 

The  only  proof  therefore  which  can  be  ex- 
peded  that  calces  formed  in  the  dry  way  in  a 
low  heat,  contain  no  other  but  fixed  air,  is, 
that  the  quantity  of  this  air  fhould  be  greater, 
when  the  calces  can  take  phlogifton  from  fome 
other  fubftances,  or  at  leaf!;  have  their  decom- 
pofed  fixed  air  recompofed  by  the  phlogifton 
of  fome  other  fubftance,  and  of  this  we  have 
fome  inftances. 

1  ft.  Mr.  Hermftadt  has  fhewn,  that  the 
black  calx  of  manganefe  gives  abundance  of 
fixed  air  when  diftilled  with  certain  propor¬ 
tions  of  iron  or  zinc.  * 

2d.  From  1  ounce  of  red  precipitate,  and 
1  of  filings  of  iron,  Dr.  Prieftley  obtained  38 
cubic  inches  of  fixed  air,  of  which  not  above  £ 
remained  unabforbed  by  water  ;  and  the  refult 
was  equally  conclusive  when  he  ufed  brafs 
or  zinc  inftead  of  iron,  or  turpeth  mineral 
inftead  of  red  precipitate,  f  Mr.  Scheele  and 
Mr.  Cavendifh  alfo  obtained  a  confiderable 
quantity  of  fixed  air  by  this  method.  | 

\  V 

*  Hermftadt,  277.  f  6  Pr.  253. 

J  1  Cbym.  Annal.  1785,  p.  154. 

I 


My 


x 1 4  Of  Calcination . 

My  fuccefs  in  repeating  this  experiment  was 
feme  what  different;  from  a  mixture  of  300gr.  of 
iron  newly  filed,  and  240  of  red  precipitate,  I 
obtained  no  air  at  all;on  the  contrary,  there  was 
a  confiderable  abforption.  Thinking  that  wha¬ 
ler  might  be  necefiary,  I  repeated  this  experi¬ 
ment,  ufrng  precipitate  per  fe  inftead  of  red 
precipitate,  and  varying  the  proportion.  From. 
240  gr.  of  this  and  120  of  newly-made  fil¬ 
ings  of  iron,  diflilled  in  a  very  fmall  coated 
glafs  retort,  and  fprinkled  over  with  water,  I 
got  4,5  cubic  inches  of  fixed  air,  and  36  of  a 
mixture  of  dephlogifticated  air  and  inflammable 
air:  the  iron  after  the  operation  weighed  144 
grains. 

Mr.  de  la  Metherie,  from  equal  parts  of 
filings  of  iron  and  red  precipitate  obtained 
only  the  air  of  the  veffels  ;  and  from  2  ounces 
of  red  precipitate  and  1  drachm  of  filings  of 
iron,  he  obtained  a  fmall  quantity  of  fixed 
air,  the  greater  part  being  dephlogifticated.  * 
I  believe  much  to  depend  on  the  fize  of  the 
retort  and  the  purity  of  the  filings  :  when  the 
retort  is  large,  there  is  air  enough  to  calcine 
the  filings  to  feme  degree  before  the  precipi¬ 
tate  is  decompofed ;  if  fmall,  the  fixed  air 
unites  to  the  iron  in  proportion  as  it  is  formed. 
In  my  laft  experiment  it  appears  that  water 
unites  to  iron  more  readily  than  fixed  air  does, 
and  that  mercury  decomp ofes  its  own  air  more 


I 


*  27  Roz.  146. 


readily 


Of  Calcination .  ,  f  i  y 

readily  than  it  takes  up  inflammable  air,  as 
being  more  intimately  united  to  it,  and  as 
it  is  already  condenfed. 

240  gr.  of  leaf  and  240  of  red  precipitate, 
afforded  me  no  air ;  the  lead  was  calcined  for 
the  moft  part. 

400  gr.  of  tin9  and  460  of  red  precipitate* 
inflamed  in  the  retort  and  burft  it. 

240  gr.  of  bifmuth ,  and  the  fame  quantity 
of  red  precipitate,  diftilled  with  a  very  low 
heat,  afforded  only  five  cubic  inches  of  air, 
of  which  two  were  fixed  air.  The  fame  mix¬ 
ture  diftilled  with  a  rapid  heat,  afforded  19 
cubic  inches  of  air,  of  which  one  was  fixed 
air,  the  remainder  fo  me  what  better  than  com¬ 
mon  air :  the  bifmuth  was  converted  into  li¬ 
tharge. 

240  gr,  of  %inc9  and  the  fame  weight  of  red 
precipitate,  being  treated  in  the  fame  manner, 
the  zinc  fubiimed,  flopped  the  neck  of  the 
retort,  inflamed  and  broke  it.  The  fame 
mixture,  in  a  huger  retort,  and  flower  heat, 
produced  no  air.  60  gr.  of  the  reftduum, 
mixed  with  240  of  red  precipitate,  inflamed 
and  burft  the  retort. 

200  gr.  of  copper,  and  240  of  red  preci¬ 
pitate,  gave  no  air,  though  the  mercury  dif¬ 
tilled  over. 

Hence  it  appears,  that  in  fome  cafes,  parti¬ 
cularly  when  water  is  ufed,  a  quantity  of  fixed 
air  paffes  undecompofed,  but  that  in  g;enerai 
mercury  decoinpofes  its  own  fixed  air,  and  the 

I  2  dephlo- 


t 1 6  Of  Calcination * 

dephlogifticated  air  produced,  unites  to  the 
nafcent  inflammable  air  of  the  metals  with 
which  it  comes  in  contaft,  and  is  abforbed  by 
them. 

Calces  formed  in  the  moift  way  by  water, 
or  amalgamation,  afford  much  clearer  proofs 
of  the  principles  of  fixed  air,  and  that  this  air 
or  water  are  the  only  fubftances  that  metals 
take  up  in  calcination. 

On  the  2 2d  of  June,  1785,  I  put  3  ounces 
of  filings  of  lead)  and  {  an  ounce  of  diftilled 
water,  into  a  glafs  bottle,  whofe  capacity  was 
433  cubic  inches,  and  clofed  it  with  a  glafs 
ftopper ;  in  a  few  days  the  furface  of  the  lead 
became  white.  I  agitated  it  from  time  to 
time ;  after  a  few  weeks,  I  with  much  diffi¬ 
culty  opened  the  bottle  to  let  in  more  air,  and 
on  the  5th  of  September  I  withdrew  the  con¬ 
tents,  of  wThich  the  greater  part  was  calcined, 
and  feparating  this  part  from  the  reft,  by  the 
help  of  a  large  quantity  of  diftilled  water,  I 
evaporated  it  to  the  confiftence  and  colour  of 
ftarch,  but  fomewhat  bluer,  and  then  diftilling 
472  gr.  of  it,  obtained  24  cubic  inches  of 
fixed  air,  with  fcarce  any  refiduum  :  what  re¬ 
mained  in  the  retort  was  converted  into  li¬ 
tharge. 

A  quantity  of  filings  of  iron,  treated  in  the 
fame  manner,  afforded  no  air  at  all.  —  From 
%tnc  calcined  in  this  manner,  I  obtained  fome 
fixed  air,  but  by  accident  the  greater  part  of  it 
was  loft, 


N.  B  The 


•  Of  Calcination.  1 1 7 

N.  B.  The  water  in  which  zinc  had  been 
calcined,  became  fapid,  and  with  aerated  fixed 
alkali,  afforded  a  precipitate  ;  but  Pruffian  al¬ 
kali  produced  no  change  in  it. 

Again,  having  made  an  amalgama  of  forne 
pounds  of  mercury,  and  300  gr.  of  zinc,  by 
fhaking  them  in  a  large  bottle  with  feme  dis¬ 
tilled  water,  and  leaving  -1  of  the  bottle  empty, 
I  feparated  857  gr.  of  a  whitifh-grey  calx,  and 
by  diftillation  procured  from  it  15  cubic  inches 
of  fixed  air.  When  this  ceafed  to  be  produced, 
and  an  abforption  began  to  take  place,  I  ad¬ 
mitted  more  common  air,  but  after  feme  time 
the  zinc  inflamed,  which  fhews  that  feme 
part  of  it  remained  uncalcined. 

From  a  black  powder,  obtained  from  a  fi- . 
milar  treatment  of  480  gr.  of  lead  filings,  and 
feme  pounds  of  mercury,  I  obtained  8  cubic 
inches  of  fixed  air,  and  6  of  air  feme  what  bet¬ 
ter  than  common  air.  The  lead  in  the  re¬ 
tort  was  partly  in  the  ftate  of  maflicot,  partly 
minium,  and  the  greater  part  litharge.  Dr. 
Prieftley,  who  firft  made  this  experiment,  re¬ 
peated  it  fevera!  times  with  the  mod  (crapu¬ 
lous  attention,  and  conftantly  obtained  a  large 
portion  of  fixed  air,  and  at  the  end  feme  de~ 
phlogifticated  air.'" 

Thefe  experiments  induce  me  to  believe, 
not  only  that  fixed  air  is  formed  during  the 
calcination  of  metals,  and  abforbed  by-  them. 


*  6  Pr.  256. 

1  3 


/ 


n8  Of  Calcination . 

but  alfo  that  its  conftituent  principles  are  de- 
phlogifticated  air  and  phlogifton.  As  an  ana¬ 
lytical  confirmation  of  this  opinion,  I  fhall 
mention  the  two  following  experiments. 

i  ft.  Mr.  Hermftadt  having  exhaufted  a 
quantity  of  manganefe  of  all  its  pure  air,  by 
a  ftrong  and  long-continued  heat,  he  placed 
it  in  an  earthen  tube,  and  heating  this  tube 
to  rednefs,  he  paffed  through  it  150  cubic 
inches  of  fixed  air  8  times,  at  laft  it  became 
fo  pure,  that  it  admitted  a  candle  to  bum  in  it, 

and  many  white  fpots  appeared  in  the  man- 

* 

cdly.  Mr.  Monge  having  taken  the  eledtric 
fpark  in  fixed  air,  found,  ift.  That  the  air  by 
this  operation  increafed  in  bulk  To  and  its  vo¬ 
lume  continued  to  increafe  even  after  the 
eledtric  fpark  ceafed  to  be  taken  in  it.  2dly. 
That  the  iron  condudtor  wras  calcined ;  but  this 
circumftance  need  not  Be  confidered,  as  the 
principal  eiTedt  was  the  fame  when  a  condudtor 
of  pi  atina,  which  could  not  be  calcined,  was 
ufed.  3dly.  That  on  expofing  the  air  after  the 
operation,  to  cauftic  fixed  alkali,  3  parts  out  of 
5  wrere  abforbed,  but  the  refiduum  was  inflam¬ 
mable  air.  f  This  experiment  he  explains 
thus  :  1  ft.  All  fixed  air  contains  water,  and 
this  Water  increafes  its  bulk.  cdly.  The  mer¬ 
cury  being  heated  by  the  eledtric  fpark,  de¬ 
co  rnpofes  the  water  and  fets  loofe  the  inflam- 

t  1  Hermit,  280.  f  29  Roz.  277. 

mable 


Of  Calcination ,  1 1  g 

triable  air.  3clly.  The  fixed  air  diffolves  a 
portion  of  mercury  and  water,  but  when  the 
operation  is  over,  it  depofits  it  and  diffolves 
more  mercury,  and  the  mercury  thus  diffolved 
increafes  its  bulk.  This  explanation  appears 
to  me  very  unfatisfa&ory  •;  for  in  the  firil 
place,  if  the  inflammable  air  and  increafe  of 
bulk  arofe  from  the  decompofition  of  water  by 
mercury,  then  inflammable  air  fhould  equally 
be  produced  by  taking  the  elediric  fpark  in  phlo» 
gifticated  or  dephlogifticated  airs,  for  thefe  alfo 
contain  water ;  and  yet  Mr.  Cavendifh  could 
not  produce  the  leaft  alteration  by  taking  the 
eledhic  fpark  in  them,  2dly.  The  dimenfions  of 
inflammable  air  were  not  altered  by  taking  the 
electric  fpark  in  it,  as  appears  by  the  experiments 
of  Dr.  Prieftley  and  Mr.  Van  Marum;*  yet  this 
air  contains  more  water  than  any  other.  3dly. 
There  is  no  fort  of  proof  that  mercury  is  foluble 
in  fixed  air,  any  more  than  in  phlogifticated, 
dephlogifticated  or  inflammable  air,  wliofe  di¬ 
menfions  remain  unaltered ;  and  if  fixed  air 
could  diffolve  any,  and  increafe  in  bulk,  it 
fhould  furely  diffolve  more  while  hot  than  after 
the  operation,  when  it  becomes  cold,  qthly. 
If  fixed  air  could  diffolve  mercury,  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  bulk  of  this  air  fhould  be  in- 
creafed,  but  rather  diminifhed,  as  Mr.  Ber- 
thollet  found  that  of  inflammable  air  to  be 
by  diffolving  plumbago,  5thly.  That  men 


*  4  Pr.  367.  27  Roz.  151, 

i4 


any 


120  Of  Calcination . 

cury  fhould  decompofe  water,  is  contrary  to 
Mr.  Lavoifier’s  table  of  affinities,  according  to 
which,  the  inflammable  principle  has  a  ftronger 
affinity  to  the  oxygenous  than  mercury  has ; 
and  let  it  not  be  (aid,  that  this  is  only  true  in 
low  heats,  for  in  low  heats  neither  of  them 
unite  to  the  oxygenous  principle,  and  in  very 
high  heats  the  mercury  rather  expels  than 
abforbs  that  principle.  6thly.  It  is  highly 
improbable,  if  not  incredible,  that  the  furface 
of  the  mercury  fhould  be  fo  heated  as  to  in¬ 
cline  to  calcination,  while  the  remainder  of  its 
mafs  is  cold. 

It  feems  therefore  much  more  probable,  that 
fixed  air  itfelf  is  decompofed  in  this  experi¬ 
ment,  and  water  formed ;  but  as  fixed  air 
contains  more  phlogifton  that  water  does,  part 
of  the  phlogifton  is  let  loofe  and  the  bulk 
thereby  increafed  :  the  water  mixing  with  the 
mercury  forms  the  black  powder,  as  Dr.  Prieft- 
ley  often  obferved.  The  increafe  of  bulk  af¬ 
ter  the  operation  may  arife  from  the  re-union 
of  feveral  fmall  bubbles  of  air,  difperfed 
through  the  mercury  during  the  commotion 
attending  the  eleciric  fpark. 

The  Antiphlogiftians  are  of  opinion,  that 
fixed  air  arifes  from  the  union  of  dephlogifti- 
cated  air  with  charcoal.  An  obvious,  and  ir 
my  opinion  an  infurmountable  objection  to  thl 
opinion,  ariies  from  its  formation  in  many 
cafes  where  charcoal  cannot  be  fuppofed  to  be 
prefent ;  as  in  the  calcination  of  metals,  in 

refpira- 


Of  Calcination .  12  i 

refpiration,  in  vegetation,  &c.  charcoal  is  no 
farther  concerned  than  as  it  contains  inflamma¬ 
ble  air. 

Mr.  Lavoifier  placed  a  certain  quantity  of 
charcoal  in  a  box,  with  a  bit  of  tinder  and 
phofphorus ;  this  box  he  introduced  under  a 
jar  filled  with  dephlogifticated  air,  and  Hand¬ 
ing  on  mercury,  and  then  fired  It  by  means 
of  a  red-hot  iron :  the  operation  being  over, 
he  found  the  charcoal  to  have  loft  1 7,2  gr.  * 
but  that  67,1787  gr.  of  fixed  air  were  pro¬ 
duced,  and  that  of  the  original  quantity  of 
dephlogifticated  air,  namely,  95,745  gr.  only 
34,075  gr.  remained  :  but  on  comparing  the 
weight  of  the  charcoal  confumed,  and  that  of 
the  original  quantity  of  dephlogifticated  air, 
with  that  of  the  fixed  air  produced,  and  that 
of  the  unconfumed  dephlogifticated  air,  he 
found  a  difference  of  about  1 1  gr.  which  he 
afcribes  to  the  formation  of  water,  from  the 
union  of  fome  aqueous  inflammable  air  remain¬ 
ing  in  the  coal,  with  part  of  the  dephlogifticated 
air.  + 

This  experiment  proves  no  more  than  that 
fixed  air  is  formed  of  the  union  of  dephlo¬ 
gifticated  air  with  one  of  the  conftituent  parts 
of  charcoal,  namely,  the  phlogifton  or  inflam¬ 
mable  air,  which  I  have  conftantly  contended 
for,  and  which  all  chymifts,  who  admit  phlo¬ 
gifton,  and  that  charcoal  is  a  compound  of 

*  French  weight  and  meafures  are  here  given, 
f  Mem.  Par.  1781,  p.  448. 

phi  . 


\ 


i22  Of  Calcination . 

pTilogifton  and  fixed  air,  mini  alfo  allow ;  for 
here  the  weight  of  the  fixed  air  produced, 
is  more  than  triple  that  of  the  charcoal  em¬ 
ployed. 

That  fixed  air  is  formed,  not  by  the  union 
of  dephlogifticated  air  with  charcoal  in  the 
aggregate,  but  with  the  inflammable  air  it  con¬ 
tains,  appears  from  the  experiments  of  Dr. 
Prieflley ;  for  having  driven  the  fleam  of  wa¬ 
ter  through  charcoal  in  a  red  hot  earthen  tube, 
he  obtained  a  large  quantity  of  inflammable 
air,  together  with  fome  uncombined  fixed  air, 
as  already  mentioned  :  but  after  feparating  this 
fixed  air,  taking  the  eledtric  fpark  in  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  this  inflammable,  with  an  equal  bulk 
of  dephlogifticated  air,  he  produced  a  bulk  of 
fixed  air  fuperior  in  weight  to  the  inflammable 
air  employed;’^  fo  that  here,  either  fixed  air 
is  formed,  or  fixed  air  is  pre-contained  in  this 
inflammable  air  and  fet  loofe,  while  the  real 
inflammable  part  is  converted  into  water,  and 
eaufes  the  increafe  of  weight,  which  I  am  in¬ 
clined  to  think  is  wliat  really  happens,  and 
confirms  the  opinion  I  advanced  in  p.  106;  but 
if  this  fixed  air  pre-exifts,  then  charcoal  con¬ 
tains  fixed  air,  whofe  weight  may  be  increafed 
to  the  double  by  the  mere  production  of 
water,  which  deftroys  Mr.  Lavoilier’s  infe¬ 
rences. 

The  antiphlogiftians  explain  the  reduction 


*  6  Pr.  97.  172. 


of 


Of  Calcination . 

of  metallic  calces  with  charcoal,  by  a  flaming 
that  the  charcoal  does  nothing  more  than  at¬ 
tract  the  oxygenous  principle  from  them  by 
its  fuperior  affinity;  yet  the  acid  of  fugar, 
which  they  allow  to  contain  the  inflammable 
principle,  and  contains  no  charcoal,  and  is  even 
irreducible  to  charcoal,  will  alfo,  I  doubt  not, 
reduce  metallic  calces,  in  a  flrong  heat. 

To  the  arguments  already  adduced  to  prove 
that  metallic  calces  are  reduced  by  union  with 
inflammable  air,  I  fhall  add  one  more  that 
appears  to  me  unanfwerable.  If  to  a  folution 
of  mercury  in  the  Pruffian  acid,  fome  filings 
of  iron  be  added,  and  a  fmall  quantity  of  vi¬ 
triolic  acid,  this  acid  will  immediately  difen- 
gage  inflammable  air  from  the  iron,  and  this 
air  uniting  to  the  mercurial  calx,  will  expel 
the  Pruffian  acid  and  revive  the  mercury,  as 
Mr.  Scheele  has  difcovered.*  This  experi¬ 
ment  I  repeated.  Now  let  it  be  confidered, 
that  the  Pruffian  acid  does  not  contain  dephlo- 
gi  flic  ate  d  air,  but  is  a  compound  of  fixed  air, 
inflammable  air,  and  volatile  alkali,  intimately 
combined  together,  and  buffers  no  decompofi- 
tion  or  alteration  by  being  expelled  from  the 
mercury,  therefore  the  inflammable  air  does 
not  affeft  it,  but  barely  expels  it  by  its  fupe¬ 
rior  affinity  to  the  mercurial  calx,  which  at 
the  fame  time  it  reduces. 

\ 

*  Scheele,  p.  162,  French  tranflation. 

SECT. 


Of  the  Dijjolufion  of  Metals, 


124 


SEC  TV  X. 

•> 

Of  the  Diffolution  of  Metals . 


T'  H  E  general  opinion  of  chymifts,  fince 
the  beginning  of  this  century,  has  al¬ 
ways  been,  that  the  folution.of  metals  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  their  affinity  to  the  menftruums  that 
diffolve  them ;  yet,  as  they  have  alfo  a  ftrong 
affinity  to  phlogifton,  and  mu  ft  be  deprived  of 
part  of  it  before  they  can  be  diffblved,  I  found  it 
neceffary  to  explain  this  matter  more  circum- 
ftantially  in  a  paper  contained  in  the  Philofo- 
phical  Tranfadtions  of  the  year  1784;  but 
being  at  that  time  unacquainted  with  the  con- 
ftitution  of  the  mineral  acids  (a  more  intimate 
acquaintance  with  which  I  acknowledge  to 
have  derived  from  attention  to  the  writings  of 
Mr.  Lavoifier,  and  Berthollet),  I  negledied  men¬ 
tioning,  that  the  nitrous  acid  is  always  partially 
decompofed  in  the  adt  of  diffolving  metals  ;  that 
its  fixed  air  and  part  of  the  undecompofed  acid 
unites  to  the  metal,  while  another  part  of  the  de¬ 
compofed  acid,  namely,  its  bafts,  uniting  with  the 
phlogifton  of  the  metal,  forms  nitrous  air,  part  of 
which  flies  off  and  part  is  retained  :  the  vitrio¬ 
lic  acid,  on  the  contrary,  is  fometimes  partially 

decom- 


Of  the  t)l/Jiluuon  of  Metals*  125 

decompoSed,  and  Sometimes  not,  according 
to  its  proportion  of  water.  If  it  be  concen¬ 
trated  and  heated,  its  fixed  air,  and  part  of  its 
imdecompofed  acid,  will  unite  to  the  metallic 
body,  while  its  bafis  will  unite  to  the  phlogis¬ 
ton  of  the  metal,  and  form  fulphur ;  or  it 
will  only  be  partially  decompofed,  its  bafis 
retaining  part  of  its  fixed  air,  and  partly 
uniting  to  the  phlogiston  of  the  metal,  and 
thus  forming  vitriolic  air,  which  generally 
holds  fulphur  in  Solution,  part  of  this  air 
will  efcape  and  part  will  be  retained.  But 
if  the  vitriolic  acid  be  dilute,  it  will  not  unite 
to  the  phlogifton,  nor  confequently  be  decom¬ 
pofed,  but  will  expel  the  phlogifton  in  the 
form  of  inflammable  air,  and  unite  to  the 
metal.  The  arfenical  and  phofphoric  acids  are 
alfo  capable  of  phlogiftication,  but  not  the 
marine  acid,  nor  the  vegetable  acids,  as  far 
as  I  can  recoiled!. 

The  antiphlogiftians  think  that  metals  are 
Soluble  in  acids,  merely  by  their  affinity  to  the 
oxygenous  principle,*  with  which,  during  So¬ 
lution,  they  become  Saturated :  confequently 
all  acids  are  decompofed  in  diffolving  metals, 
or  at  leaft  promote  the  decomposition  of  wa¬ 
ter,  a  fuppofition  which  I  have  already  Shewn 
to  be  deftitute  of  foundation. 

If  metals  become  Soluble  by  Saturation  with 
the  oxygenous  principle,  I  would  afk, 

*  Mem.  Par.  1782,  p.  492, 


i  ft.  Why 


1 2  G  Of  the  DJfoiutim  of  Metals, 

i  ft.  Why  calces,  faturated  with  the  oxy¬ 
genous  principle,  are  not  folubie  in  water,  nor 
even  in  vitriolic  acid  ? 

2dly.  Why  the  calces  of  iron,  tin,  and  re¬ 
gains  of  antimony,  faturated  with  the  oxy¬ 
genous  principle,  are  infoluble  in  the  nitrous 
acid,  w'hereas,  when  unfaturated,  they  are  fo¬ 
lubie  in  that  acid  ?  whereas  the  calces  of  lead, 
filver,  and  mercury,  when  faturated  are  folu¬ 
bie  in  that  acid.  Do  not  thefe  differences  in¬ 
dicate  another  affinity  beficles  that  of  the  oxy¬ 
genous  principle? 

3dly.  Why  the  calces  of  iron  are  more 
eafily  diffolved  by  the  marine  than  by  the 
nitrous  acid  even  when  unfaturated? 

4thly.  Why  moil  calces  are  more  eafily 
halved  by  the  vegetable  acids,  than  their  re¬ 
aped:  ive  metals  ? 

ythly.  Why  a  folution  of  iron  in  dilute  vi¬ 
triolic  acid  is  decompofed  by  expofure  to  the 
air  ?  and  why  an  excefs  of  add  re-diffolves  the 
calx,  or  prevents  its  precipitation  ? 

6th!y.  Why  a  folution  of  zinc  in  the  di¬ 
lute  vitriolic  acid  is  not  fo  eafily  decompofed 
by  expofure  to  the  air  ? 

ythly.  Why  a  folution  of  iron  in  the  ma¬ 
rine  acid  is  not  eafily  decompofed  by  expo¬ 
fure  to  the  air  ? 

Stilly.  Why  regulus  of  antimony  totally 
decompofes  the  nitrous  acid,  while  copper, 
which  has  a  greater  affinity  to  the  oxygenous 
principle,  does  not  decompofe  it  totally? 

9thly.  How 


Of  the  Dljjolution  of  Metals .  127 

gthly.  How  comes  it  to  pafs,  that  calces 
of  gold  are  fallible  in  the  nitrous  acid,  and 
calces  of  iron  infoluble  ?  Do  not  all  thefe 
phenomena  prove,  that  another  affinity  inter¬ 
venes,  befides  that  of  metals,  to  the  oxygenous 
principle  ? 

iothly.  Whence  do  copper,  lead,  and  zinc, 
diffolved  in  cauftic  fixed  alkali,  and  copper  in 
cauftic  volatile  alkali,  derive  the  oxygenous 
principle  ? 

1 1  thly.  Since  zinc  and  iron  are  foluble  in 
the  concentrated  vitriolic  acid,  only  by  the  af¬ 
fiftance  of  heat,  and  in  the  dilute  acid,  with¬ 
out  heat,  the  antiphlogiftians  muft  fay,  that 
zinc  and  iron  take  away  the  oxygenous  prin¬ 
ciple  from  fulphur,  only  by  the  affiftance  of 
heat,  but  are  able  to  take  it  from  the  inflam¬ 
mable  principle  without  the  affiftance  of  heat; 
yet  by  their  own  doctrine,  the  oxygenous 
principle  has  a  far  greater  affinity  to  the  in¬ 
flammable  principle  than  to  fulphur.  How  is 
this  confiftent  ? 


SECT. 


;|28  Of  the  Precipitation  of  Metals • 


SECT.  XL 


Of  the  Precipitation  of  Metals  by  each  other* 

TO  explain  the  precipitation  of  metals 
diffolved  In  acids,  by  other  metals,  Mr. 
Lavoifier  thinks  it  fufficient  that  the  oxygenous 
principle  ffiould  have  a  greater  affinity  to  the 
precipitant  than  to  the  precipitated  metal ;  thus, 
in  his  fyftem,  copper  precipitates  mercury,  be- 
caufe  copper  has  a  greater  affinity  to  the  oxy¬ 
genous  principle,  than  mercury  has  to  that 
principle.*^ 

As  to  the  proportion  of  the  oxygenous  prin¬ 
ciple  neceifary  to  the  folution  of  different  me¬ 
tals,  he  deduces  it  from  the  quantity  of  one 
metal  neceffary  to  the  precipitation  of  a  given 
quantity  of  another  metal  by  this  analogy  :  As 
the  quantity  of  the  precipitant  is  to  that  of  the 
precipitated  metal ,  fo  is  the  quantity  of  the 
oxygenous  principle  neceffary  for  the  folution  of  the 
precipitated ,  to  that  neceffary  for  the  folution  of 
the  precipitant.  Thus,  fince  135  gr.  of  mer¬ 
cury  are  neceffary  for  the  precipitation  of  100 
gr.  of  filver  from  the  nitrous  acid,  it  is  evi- 


*  Mem.  Par,  1782,  p.  512. 


dent 


Of  the  Precipitation  of  Met  alt*  329 

dent  that  135  gr.  of  mercury  require  for  their 
iolution  the  fame  quantity  of  the  oxygenous 
principle  as  100  gr.  of  fiver,  and  therefore  that 
the  quantity  neceffary  to  diffolve  100  gr,  of 
mercury,  is  to  that  neceffary  for  the  folution 
of  1  00  gr.  of  fiver,  as  100  to  135.  Now  by 
his  own  experiments,  8  gr.  of  the  oxygenous 
principle  are  neceffary  to  diffolve  100  gr.  of 
mercury,  therefore  10,8  are  neceffary  for  the 
folution  of  100  gr.  of  fiver.  The  proportion 
of  th z  precipitant  s  to  the  precipitate f  he  finds, 
in  all  cafes,  by  Mr.  Bergman’s  experiments  ; 
his  general  formula  may  be  expreffed  thus : 

Let  the  weight  of  the  precipitant  be  P,  that 
of  the  precipitated  p,  that  of  the  oxygenous 
principle  neceffary  for  the  folution  of  the  pre¬ 
cipitant  O,  and  that  neceffary  for  the  folution 
of  the  precipitated  o  ;  then,  as  P.  p  :  ;  o.  O. 

By  thefe  means  he  found  the  abfolute  quan¬ 
tity  of  the  oxygenous  principle  neceffary  for 
the  folution  by  precipitation  of  100  gr.  of  the 
different  metals,  to  be  as  expreffed  in  the  fecond 
column  of  the  annexed  table,  and  that  necef- 
lary  for  folution  only,  as  in  the  third  column. 


Metals. 


130 


Of  the  Precipitation  of  Metals. 

Metals.  Oxygenous  principle. 


Gr.  For 

Flatina 

8 1 3690 

Gold 

43,612 

Iron 

27? 

373 

Copper 

36,000 

Cobalt 

29,190 

Manganefe 

21,176 

Zinc 

19,637 

Nike! 

14,721 

Reg.  of  ant. 

1 3,746 

1  in 

14 

Remofarfc  \ 

!  JC739 

0  j 

l  24?743 

Silver 

xo,8oo 

Bifmuth 

9,622 

Mercury 

■  8,000 

Lead 

4,47° 

15,85 


22,383 

23,555 


14,190 


But  the  phenomena  of  precipitation  are 
much  more  complicated  ;  I  have  already  en¬ 
deavoured  to  explain  many  of  them  on  a 
former  occafton,  of  which  I  ih all  feiedt  a  few, 
and  would  wifh  to  know  how  they  may  be  ex¬ 
plained  on  the  principles  of  the  new  theory. 

1  ft.  A  folution  of  gold  in  aqua  regia  is 
precipitable  in  its  metallic  form,  by  a  frefti 
made  folution  of  vitriol  of  iron ;  but  not  by 
a  folution  of  vitriol  of  copper,  or  of  any  other 
metal.-  The  antiphlogiftians  will  probably  re- 

1  *  "  ply, 


Of  the  Precipitation  of  Metals .  1 3 1 

'ply,  that  gold,  during  its  folution,  takes  up 
43  parts  per  cent .  of  the  oxygenous  principle 
and  iron,  though  capable  of  taking  37,  yet 
when  newly  diffolved,  takes  only  27  ;  and  as  it 
has  a  far  greater  affinity  to  the  oxygenous  prin¬ 
ciple  than  gold  has,  it  takes  from  the  folution 
of  this  latter,  the  difference  between  27  an 
37.  And  hence,  to  deprive  the  gold  totally 
of  the  oxygenous  principle,  and  reduce  it 
to  its  metallic  form,  the  vitriol  fhould  be 
in  1  o  or  1 2  times  a  larger  quantity  than  the 
gold.  ' 

But  this  anfwer  is  infufficient.  For,  ift.  Cop¬ 
per  by  folution  in  acids  takes  up  only  15, 85  parts 
of  the  oxygenous  principle,  and  yet  is  capable, 
by  precipitation,  of  taking  up  36, ;  it  has  alfo, 
by  Mr.  Lavoifier’s  table,  p,  23,  far  a  greater  af¬ 
finity  to  that  principle  than  gold  has,  and  yet 
the  folution  of  copper  will  not  precipitate  a 
particle  of  gold.  2d.  Platina  takes  up  a  ftill 
larger  quantity  of  the  oxygenous  principle,  and 
as  it  is  infoluble  in  the  nitrous  acid,  it  muft  be 
deemed,  in  the  antiphlogiftic  dodtrine,  to  have 
lefs  affinity  to  that  principle  than  nitrous  air 
has,  and  consequently  its  affinity  muft  be  very 
final  1,  and  yet  vitriol  of  iron  in  no  quantity 
will  precipitate  an  atom  of  it.  The  fame  rea- 
foning  applies  to  the  Solutions  of  other  metals, 
which  have  lefs  affinity  to  the  oxygenous  prin¬ 
ciple  than  iron  has,  and  which  contain  a 
finaller  quantity  of  it  than  a  frefh  made  folu¬ 
tion  of  iron  can  take  up,  none  of  which  are 
,  K  2  preci- 


f  32  Of  the  Precipitation  of  Metals . 

precipitated  by  it  in  a  metallic  form,  or  at  all,  if 
the  affinity  of  the  vitriolic  acid  does  not  inter¬ 
vene. 

Again,  why  iron  precipitates  copper  from  the 
vitriolic  acid,  may  be  explained  in  the  antiphlo- 
giftic  hypothecs,  fince  iron  is  faid  to  have  a 
greater  affinity  to  the  oxygenous  principle  than 
copper  has,  and  alfo  to  take  up  more  of  it.  But 
why  copper,  which  is  infoluble  in  the  dilute 
vitriolic  acid,  fhould  become  foluble  in  a  di¬ 
lute  folution  of  vitriol  of  iron  expofed  to  the 
air,  or  in  a  boiling  heat,  feems  to  me  difficult 
to  conceive  in  the  new  hypothecs,  for  the  iron 
fhould  not  only  retain  the  oxygenous  prin¬ 
ciple,  with  which  it  is  far  from  being  faturat- 
ed,  but  alfo  take  up  that  which  comes  from 
the  atmofphere.  Whence  then  does  the.  cop¬ 
per  attract  that  neceffary  for  its  folution  ?  or 
if  the  iron  divides  with  the  copper,  why  does 
it  ceafe  to  be  foluble  ?  or  if  not,  why  does  it 
ceafe  to  be  foluble  when  faturated  with  the 
principle  of  folubility  ? 

3d.  Iron  is  diffolved  by  the  concentrated  vi¬ 
triolic  acid,  only  by  the  affiftance  of  heat  3  yet 
If  to  a  folution  of  filver  or  mercury  in  that 
concentrated  acid,  a  piece  of  iron  be  inferted, 
the  filver  or  mercury  will  immediately  be  pre¬ 
cipitated  in  their  metallic  form,  and  the  iron 
diffolved.  This  feems  inexplicable  in  the  new 
theory,  for  fince  iron  cannot,  without  the 
affiftance  of  heat,  deprive  fulphur  of  its  oxy¬ 
genous  principle,  how  does  it  happen,  that, 

withou 


Of  the  Precipitation  of  Metals ;  1 33 

Without  that  affiftance,  it  deprives  filver  or 
mercury  of  that  principle,  though  they  have 
a  ftronger  attraction  to  it  than  fulphur  has  ? 

4th.  Why  can  neither  zinc,  iron,  or  mercu¬ 
ry  precipitate  tin  in  its  metallic  form,  though 
they  are  faid  to  have  a  ftronger  affinity  to  the 
oxygenous  principle,  and  to  take  up  more  of 
it  than  tin  does  ? 

5th.  Why  is  regulus  of  antimony  fcarcely  able 
to  precipitate  mercury  from  the  vitriolic  acid, 
though  it  has  a  greater  affinity  to  the  oxygen¬ 
ous  principle,  and  takes  up  more  of  it  than 
mercury  does  ?  On  the  contrary,  the  nitrous 
fait  of  mercury  is  eafily  precipitated  by  it. 

6th.  Why  does  not  iron  precipitate  lead  in  its 
metallic  form  from  the  nitrous  acid,  fince  lead 
takes  fo  fmall  a  quantity  of  the  oxygenous 
principle  ? 

7th.  Why  does  not  iron  precipitate  lead 
from  the  marine  acid,  in  any  form  ? 

Thefe  are  but  a  few  of  the  many  difficulties 
in  which  the  antiphlogiftic  hypothefis  is  in¬ 
volved.  They  are  fufficient  to  ffiew  that  its 
fimplicity,  though  feducing  in  fame  cafes,  be¬ 
comes  infufficiency  in  many  others.  Ipafs  over 
many  other embarraffing  objections  arilmgfrom 
the  precipitation  of  metals  by  different  acids,  as 
the  antiphlogiftians  have  not  even  attempted 
to  explain  any  phenomena  of  that  kind. 


K  3 


1 


S  E  C  T. 


i  34  Of  the  Properties  of  Iron ,  &c* 


SEC  T.  XII. 


Of  the  Properties  of  Iron  in  its  different  States. , 
and  its  Converfion  into  Steel 

i  ,  f 

IRON  ores,  perfedUy  exhaufted  of  their 
iron  by  fufion  through  charcoal  in 
high  furnaces,  produce  what  is  called  crude 
iron,  becaufe  it  is  not  malleable  ;  being  call  in 
moulds,  it  is  called  caf  iron  or  pig  iron. 

The  colour  and  properties  of  crude  iron 
differ  according  to  the  proportion  of  the  char¬ 
coal  it  was  melted  with. 

If  iron  ores  be  melted  with  no  more  char¬ 
coal  than  is  barely  neceflfary  for  their  fufion, 
the  crude  iron  wall  be  white ;  but  grey ,  if  a 
larger  proportion  of  coal  be  ufed,  and  if 
a  Hill  larger  black .  The  white  fort  is  the 
hardeft,  fpecifically  heavieft,  moft  brittle,  and 
imperfectly  metallized  ;  the  grey  more  flexible, 
the  black  the  fofteft,  but  very  brittle. 

Malleable ,  or  bar  iron  differs  from  crude  iron 
in  foftnefs,  flexibility,  and  malleability,  and  from 
fteel,  in  being  incapable  of  acquiring  the  fame 
degree  of  hardnefs  or  elafticity  by  tempering : 
it  contains  lefs  plumbago  than  either  crude 
iron  or  fteel ;  but  when  treated  with  acids,  it 

gives  | 


Of  the  'Properties  of  Iron ,  &ct  X35 

gives  out  more  inflammable  air  than  either  of 
them. 

Steel  is  capable  of  more  malleability,  hard- 
nefs,  and  elafticity  than  malleable  iron,  gives 
out  more  inflammable  air  than  crude  iron,  and 
contains  lefs  plumbago  than  crude,  but  more 
than  malleable  iron.  The  proportion  of  in¬ 
flammable  air  by  meafure,  in  thefe  3  forts  of 
iron,  were  found  to  be  different  both  by  Mr. 
Bergman,  and  Mr.  Vandermond,  Berthollet, 
and  Mange,  who  repeated  many  of  Mr.  Berg¬ 
man’s  experiments. 


C.  Iron.  Steel.  Bar  Iron. 


According  to  Bergman,  too  * 
gr,  contain  of  inflam.  air.  ^ 

i  4° 

4S 

50  meafures 

According  to  the  French] 
Academicians  J 

54 

74 

76 

.*  - 

The  abfolute  quantity  of-' 

plumbago  in  ioo  gr.  ac¬ 

•  2,2 

o,5 

0,12  gr. 

cording  to  Bergman.  j 

* 

Malleable  iron  is  convertible  into  fteel,  by  ce¬ 
mentation  with  various  fubftances,  and  particu¬ 
larly  with  charcoal,  in  a  welding  heat,  and  by  this 
procefs  it  gains  fome  weight.  Hence  it  is  plain 
that  plumbago  is  a  factitious  fubftance,  fince  it 
is  formed  in  iron  during  cementation  ;  but 
its  production,  and  the  properties  of  iron  in 
its  different  itates,  are  accounted  for  by  the 
antiphlogiftians  on  principles  very  different 
from  thofe  of  Mr.  Bergman,  and  will  form  the 
fubjed  of  the  following  difcufiion. 

K  4 


Accord- 


1 36  Of  the  Properties  of  Iron , 

According  to  Mr.  Bergman,^  malleable  iron 
giving  out  more  inflammable  air  than  fteel, 
in uft  contain  more  phlogifton  than  is  neceflary 
to  its  metallic  ftate  ;  in  cementation  the  iron 
attracts  the  fixed  air  of  the  charcoal,  which, 
meeting  with  the  fuperfluous  phlogifton,  com¬ 
bines  with  it,  and  forms  plumbago,  which, 
like "charcoal,  is  a  compound  of  inflammable 
air  and  fixed  air,  but  differs  from  it  in  this  ; 
that  in  plumbago  both  airs  are  more  condenfed, 
at  leaft  it  forms  a  more  compact  body,  and 
is  fpecifically  heavier.  Hence,  ift.  Steel  is 
heavier  than  the  iron  of  which  it  was  formed, 
having  acquired  fixed  air.  2d.  Steel  gives  out 
lefs  inflammable  air  than  the  fame  weight  of 
iron,  as  the  fuperfluous  phlogifton  which  it  con¬ 
tained  while  iron,  now  enters  into  the  compo- 
fition  of  its  plumbago,  which  is  indecompofable 
by  acids. 

The  French  Academicians,  on  the  contrary, 
think  ft  that  bar  iron,  during  cementation, 
abforbs  charcoal  infpecie ,  and  that  this  charcoal 
faturated  with  iron,  of  which  it  takes  -L.  of 
its  weight,  becomes  plumbago .  Hence  they  de¬ 
rive  the  increafe  of  weight  in  fteel,  and  ex- 
plain  why  it  gives  lefs  inflammable  air  than 
bar  iron  does.  They  alfo  think  that  the  in¬ 
flammable  air  produced  by  fteel,  is  contracted 
in  its  dimenfxons  by  holding  fome  plumbago 
in  folutiom 

f  29  Roz.  217. 

Crude 


*  3  Bergm*  54’ 


Of  the  Properties  of  Iron ,  &c. 

f 

Crude  iron,  they  fay,  contains  a  quantity  o 
dephlogifticated  air ;  bar  iron  lefs,  and  fteel 
none  :  if  by  containing  a  quantity  of  dephlo¬ 
gifticated  air,  they  meant  no  more  than  that 
crude  iron  generally  contains  fome  parts  not 
thoroughly  metallized,  bar  iron  fewer,  and  fteel 
none ;  it  fhould  not  be  denied,  and  certainly 
this  is  all  they  can  prove :  with  regard  to  the 
condenfation  of  inflammable  air  by  holding 
plumbago  (a  valuable  difcovery  made  by  Mr* 
Berthollet),  I  muft  perfectly  agree  to  it,  as  I 
found  inflammable  air  extraded  from  black 
crude  iron,  almoft  as  heavy  as  common  air. 
But  with  refped  to  the  introduction  of  fo  denfe 
a  fubftance  as  charcoal  into  a  bar  of  iron  an 
inch  thick,  it  feems  to  me  very  improbable ; 
and  that  fuch  a  fuppofition  is  ufelefs  and  in- 
fufficient,  will,  I  flatter  myfelf,  appear  from  a 
review  of  fome  fads  relative  to  iron  in  its  3 
ftates. 

Fads  relative  to  crude  Iron. 

Grey  crude  iron,  melted  without  any  addi¬ 
tion,  in  a  crucible,  whether  open  or  covered, 
is  converted  into  fteel.  3  Bergm.  45.  This 
fad  is  equally  well  explained  in  either  fyftem, 
the  plumbago  being  decompofed  by  the  un¬ 
metallized  part  of  the  crude  iron,  which 
thereby  becomes  metallized,  and  only  fo  much 
of  it  remaining,  as  is  neceflary  to  the  ftate  of 
fteel,  or,  according  to  the  new  theory,  the 
charcoal  being  converted  into  fixed  air  by  the 
dephlogifticated  air  of  the  unmetallized  part. 

If 


538  Of  the  Properties  of  Iron ,  &c. 

If  grey  crude  iron  be  expofed  without  any  ad¬ 
dition,  to  a  cementing,  that  is,  a  ftrong  white 
heat  for  a  few  days,  its  furface  will  be  found 
covered  with  fcales,  underneath  the  furface  it 
will  be  found  foft  iron ,  ftill  deeper fleef  and  in 
the  center  crude  iron,  Rinm.  §  265.  1.  Here 
the  progreftive  deftruCtion  of  the  plumbago  is 
well  marked,  in  proportion  to  the  facility  with 
which  its  decompofed  airs  can  efcape,  and  the 
ftates  of  the  iron  agree  with  that  proportion. 
But  the  antiphlogiftic  hypothefis,  which  fup- 
pofes  pure  air  in  crude  iron  and  loft  iron,  can¬ 
not  explain  how  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  the  heel, 
which,  in  this  cafe,  lies  between  both,  Ihould 
contain  none.  And  in  fact,  there  is  no  fort  of 
proof  that  foft  iron  always  and  necefiarily  con¬ 
tains  unmetallized  parts. 

Crude  iron,  cemented  with  charcoal,  be¬ 
comes  more  brittle.  Rinm,  §  265,  and  2 66. 
This  is  conformable  to  both  fyftems  :  but  fo  it 
will  alfo  if  cemented  with  plumbago.  Rinm. 
265.  21.  This  contradicts  the  antiphlogiftic 
hypothefis,  for  by  this  hypothefis  the  plum¬ 
bago  is  already  faturated  with  iron,  and  there¬ 
fore  Ihould  attraCt  it  no  longer*. 

The  only  proof  which  the  French  Acade¬ 
micians  give,  that  crude  iron  contains  pure  air, 

*  Mr.  Bergman,  it  is  true,  was  of  opinion  that  crude 
iron  was  not  altered  by  cementation  with  plumbago.  3 
Bergm.  47.  But  the  only  reafon  he  gives  is,  that  it  had 
loft  weight  ;  the  piece  itfelf  was  loft  before  it  could  be 
further  examined  :  why  it  had  loft  weight  is  eaftly  account¬ 
ed  for,  as  it  mufl  have  loft  fixed  air, 

'is, 


1 


»  * 

Of  the  Properties  of  Iron ,  &c.  139 

is,  that  having  placed  two  pieces  of  crude  iron 
?n  immediate  contad  with  each  other  in  a  cru¬ 
cible,  and  furrounded  them  with  charcoal, 
after  a  few  hours  expofure  to  heat,  they  in- 
creafed  in  weight ;  but  the  furfaces  in  contad 
with  each  other  were  calcined.  But  this  ex¬ 
periment  proves  no  more,  than  that  crude  iron 
is  not  perfectly  metallized,  but  contains  fome 
particles  in  a  calcined  ft  ate,  and  that  the  inter¬ 
nal  parts  give  out  fixed  air  or  water,  which 

calcines  the  furfaces  not  in  contad  with  the 

/ 

charcoal. 

Fads  relative  to  malleable  Iron. 

IF  malleable  iron  be  furrounded  with  char¬ 
coal  in  a  covered  crucible,  and  expofed  to  a 
welding  heat  for  8  or  1  o  hours,  it  will  be  con¬ 
verted  into  fleel,  as  is  well  known ;  but  if  the 
experiment  be  made  in  a  glafs  veffel  hermeti¬ 
cally  fealed,  this  converfion  will  not  take  place 
in  any  length  of  time  or  degree  of  heat. 
Rinm.  §  267,  N.  7.  This  is  inexplicable  in 
the  antiphlogiftic  theory,  for  the  charcoal  fhould 
equally  be  abforbed,  whether  the  veffel  be  her¬ 
metically,  clofed  or  not.  But  in  Mr.  Bergman’s 
it  is  eafily  explained,  for  the  charcoal  cannot 
be  decompofed,  unlefs  the  inflammable  air  be 
at  liberty  to  aflame  an  aerial  form  ;  juft  as  vi¬ 
triol  of  iron  will  remain  in  contad  with  an 
aerated  alkali,  without  expelling  the  fixed  air, 
or  any  union  of  the  acid  and  alkali,  when  both 
are  diffolved  in  a  veffel  well  clofed,*  and  as 


*  See  Lewis  on  1  Newm.  p.  272. 


light 


140  Of  the  Properties  of  Iron ,  &c, 

light  will  not  feparate  pure  air  from  nitrous 
acid  in  a  veffel  perfectly  full  and  clofed. 

If  a  bar  of  foft  iron  be  put  into  a  crucible 
well  covered  and  luted,  without  any  addi¬ 
tion,  and  kept  in  a  welding  heat  for  1 1  days, 
it  will  be  converted  into  fteel,  its  furface  co¬ 
vered  with  plumbago,  and  it  will  weigh  about 
1  per  cent  more  than  before.  Rinm.  §73.  xviii. 
Here  it  is  plain  the  charcoal  could  not  pene¬ 
trate  through  the  crucible,  but  fixed  air  eafily 
can,  as  it  is  well  known  that  crucibles  in  a 
white  heat  are  pervious  to  air.  The  plumbago 
then  clearly  owes  its  origin  to  this  air,  as  Mr. 
Bergman  explains  it. 

Mr.  Rinman  alfo  cemented  bar  iron  with 
chalk ,  and  after  keeping  them  1 1  days  in  a 
welding  heat,  he  found  the  iron  converted  into 
fteel,  and  covered  with  plumbago.  It  is  true, 
he  fays,  the  effedt  was  the  fame,  when,  inftead 
of  chalk,  he  ufed  quick-lime  ;  but  it  is  probable 
the  lime  he  ufed  on  this  occafion  was  not  well 
burned,  for,  at  another  time,  when  he  ufed,  as 
he  exprefsly  fays,  lime  perfectly  burned,  though 
it  had  been  expofed  to  the  air  half  a  year,  fo 
far  from  converting  the  iron  into  fteel,  it  ren¬ 
dered  it  perfectly  foft.  When  iron  was  ce¬ 
mented  with  chalk  for  3  hours  only,  it  had 
no  eftedt  upon  it,  as  it  could  not  give  out  its 
air  in  fo  fhort  a  time  ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
iron  loft  part  of  its  weight.  §  73.  ix.  Here 
alfo  we  fee  plumbago  formed  without  char¬ 
coal. 

.  Bar  iron  cemented  with  the  black  calx  of 

man- 


i 


I 


Of  the  Properties  of  lron9  &c *  141 

iftanganefe,  was  not  calcined  as  it  fhould  be, 
according  to  the  antiphlogiftic  theory,  but  on 
the  contrary,  converted  into  fteel.  Rinm.  §  73, 
xvii.  The  refult  was  the  fame  when  it  was 
cemented  with  flowers  of  zinc,  and  the  zinc 
was  reduced  to  its  metallic  form*  Ibid,  iih 
Which  laft  circumftance  contradicts  Mr.  La» 
voider’ s  table :  plumbago  appears  in  both 
cafes  to  have  been  formed  without  charcoal. 

Malleable  iron  cannot  be  melted  in  furnaces 
without  addition  ;  but  if  it  be  furrounded 
with  charcoal,  it  firft  becomes  fteel,  then 
crude  iron,  and  at  laft  melts :  this  crude  iron 
finely  contains  no  unmetallized  parts. 

FaCts  relative  to  Steel. 

THE  French  Academicians  fay,  that  if  crude 
iron  be  long  kept  in  fufion  in  a  covered  cru¬ 
cible,  it  will  at  laft  be  reduced  to  the  ftate  of 
malleable  iron ;  but  fteel  in  the  fame  circum- 
ftances  will  remain  unaltered.  Hence  they 
infer  that  crude  iron  contains  fome  principle 
which  deftroys  the  charcoal,  namely,  pure  air, 
but  that  fteel  contains  noneA  Yet  Rinman 
exprefsly  fays  that  fteel  alfo,  by  long  continued 
fufion,  will  become  malleable  iron,  §  266 ; 
and  in  their  own  experiment  crude  iron  mu  ft 
pafs  through  the  ftate  of  fteel  before  it  arrives 
at  that  of  malleable  iron. 

If  fteel  be  cemented  with  quick-lime,  it 
will  be  converted  into  malleable  iron,  becaufe 


*  29  Roz,  217, 


by 


142  Of  the  Properties  of  Iron ,  &c. 

by  the  affinity  of  quick-lime  to  fixed  air,  the 
plumbago  is  more  eafily  decompofed;  but  by 
cementation  with  calx  of  zinc,  it  is  not  al¬ 
tered,  Rinm.  §  73  ;  becaufe  fteel  contains  no 
fuperfiuous  phlogifton.  According  to  the  an- 
tiphlogiftic  theory,  the  pure  air  of  the  calces 
fhould  deftroy  the  plumbago. 

Thence  we  fee  that  the  new  theory  explains 
no  incident  or  property  of  iron  which  is  not 
as  well  explained  without  it  ;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  Mr.  Bergman’s  theory  elucidates  fadts, 
which  the  new  theory  leaves  in  obfcurity. 

To  the  proofs  which  Mr.  Scheele  has  given 
that  plumbago  confifts  of  inflammable  air  and 
fixed  air  in  a  concrete  fcate,  I  fhall  add  one 
more  refulting  from  Mr.  Pelletier’s  experi¬ 
ments.*  If  plumbago  be  diftilled  with  dry 
cauftic  alkali  in  a  pneumatic  apparatus,  it  will 
yield  inflammable  air,  and  the  alkali  will  be¬ 
come  aerated. 

*  27  Roz.  352. 


SECT. 


[  143  } 


S  E  G  T.  XIII. 


THE  patrons  of  die  new  theory  agree., 
that  metallic  inflammable  air,  uniting 
to  pure  air  in  a  read  heat,  produces  water. 

2dly.  That  fpirit  of  vrine,  during  its  in¬ 
flammation,  produces  both  fixed  air  and  wa¬ 
ter.  Mr.  Lavoifier  even  found  that  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  water  left  after  the  combuftion  of  fpi¬ 
rit  of  wine  was  fo  great  as  to  exceed  the  ori¬ 
ginal  weight  of  the  fpirit,  which  fhews  it 
mult  have  contained  a  large  quantity  of  phlo- 
gifton. 

3dly.  That  oils  and  refins  alfo  contain  in¬ 
flammable  air,  and  confequently  during  com¬ 
buftion  produce  both  water  and  fixed  air. 

4th.  That  both  inflammable  air  and  pure 
air  give  out  fire  during  their  inflammation. 

But  fulphur,  pholphorus,  zinc  and  regulus 
of  antimony,  to  mentioh  no  other,  alfo  in¬ 
flame,  in  common  air,  as  does  iron  in  dephlo- 
gifticated  air;  therefore,  according  to  the  rule 
which  requires  that  to  natural  effects  of  the  fame 
kind ,  :the  fame  caufe  Jhould  be  affgned ,  we  are 
led  to  conclude,  that  the  flame  in  this  cafe 

alfo 


144  Conctujion. 

alfo  proceeds  from  the  union  of  inflammable 
air  and  pure  air,  unlefs  it  fhould  be  proved 
that  thofe  fubftances  contained  no  inflamma¬ 
ble  air,  which  has  not  yet  been  done :  all  that 
the  antiphlogiftians  fay,  amounts  to  no  more, 
than  that  inflammable  air  is  not  neceflary,  fince 
dephlogifticated  air  gives  out  fire  enough,  a 
reafon  fufficiently  refuted  by  the  inflammation 
of  fpirit  of  wine  and  oils. 

Again,  volatile  alkalis  confefledly  contain 
inflammable  air,  and  though  they  hardly  de¬ 
tonate  with  melted  nitre  on  account  of  their 
volatility, yet  fal  ammoniac,  and  particularly  vi¬ 
triolic  ammoniac,  being  more  fixed,  readily 
makes  nitre  detonate ;  but  fubftances  which 
confefledly  contain  no  phlogifton,  or  hardly 
any,  as  ftones,  glafs,  metallic  calces,  &c.  will 
not  make  nitre  detonate.  Hence  we  are  au¬ 
thorized  to  conclude  that  other  fubftances 
which  make  nitre  detonate^  contain  phlo¬ 
gifton,  unlefs  the  contrary  be  fhewn ;  now 
fulphur,  charcoal,  and  moft  of  the  imperfedt 
metals  detonate  with  nitre,  and  hence  we 
have  a  fecond  reafon  deduced  from  analogy  to 
conclude  that  they  contain  phlogifton. 

Further,  if  nitrous  ammoniac  he  projected 
into  a  red  hot  crucible,  nitrous  air  is  produced  ; 
if  nitrous  acid  be  digefted  writh  fpirit  of  wine, 
nitrous  air  is  alfo  produced  ;  therefore,  in  other 
cafes  where  we  fee  nitrous  air  produced,  we 
are  authorized  to  think  that  phlogifton  is  pre- 
fent ;  now  fulphur,  phofphorus,  and  metals 

treated 


) 


treated  with  nitrous  acid  afford  alfo  nitrous  air, 
we  have  then  a  further  reafon  to  conclude  they 
contain  phlogifton. 

Therefore  when  we  fee  inflammable  air 
proceed  from  the  folution  of  metals,  or  by 
palling  the  ft  earn  of  water  through  them,  or 
through  fulphur,  it  is  much  more  reafonable 
to  infer  that  it  proceeds  from  the  metals  and 
fulphur  than  from  the  decompofition  of  water, 
of  which  we  have  not  a  Angle  undoubted  in- 
ftance. 

To  the  proofs  I  have  heretofore  given  that 
inflammable  air  and  phlogifton  are  the  fame 
fubftance,  juft  as  ice  and  the  vapour  of  water 
are  called  the  fame  fubftance,  no  objedtion  of 
any  weight  has  fmce  been  made.  Some  have 
thought  I  fhould  have  included  the  matter  ot 
heat  or  elementary  fire  in  the  definition  of  in¬ 
flammable  air,  but  as  fire  is  contained  in  all 
corporeal  fubftances,  to  mention  it,  is  per¬ 
fectly  needlefs,  except  where  bodies  differ 
from  each  other  in  the  quantity  of  it  they 
contain,  and  in  this  refpedt  I  exprefsly  men¬ 
tioned  its  difference  with  phlogifton  to  confift. 
Others  attending  to  the  quantity  of  water  con¬ 
tained  in  inflammable  air,  have  iuppofed  it 
to  he  an  effential  ingredient  in  the  compofttion 
of  this  air,  and  have  called  it  phlogijlicated 
water ;  but  they  may  as  well  fuppole  water  to 
be  an  effential  ingredient  m  common  air  or 
fixed  air,  and  call  this,  laft  acidulated  water ; 
for  inflammable  air,  equally  as  other  airs,  may 

J .  L  be 


be  deprived  of  its  water  without  any  limits 
tion,  and  yet  preferve  all  its  properties  un¬ 
altered,  which  {hews  the  prefence  of  water  to 
be  no  way  elfential  to  in  Laftly,  others  have 
thought  that  it  effentially  requires  an  acid  or 
an  alkali,  or  fome  faline  fubftance  for  its  bafis, 
as  if  there  were  any  more  repugnance  in  the 
nature  of  things  that  phlogifton  fhould  exift 
in,  an  aerial  ftate  without  any  bafis,  than  ma¬ 
rine  air,  or  alkaline  air,  or  dephlogifticated  air, 
&c.  when  it  is  evident  that  an  aerial  ftate  re- 

'  r 

quires  no  more  than  a  certain  proportion  of 
latent  heat ;  but  the  production  of  inflamma¬ 
ble  air  from  iron  by  means  of  diftiiled  water 
without  any  acid  or  fait,  has  effectually  done 
away  every  fufpicion  of  this  fort. 


F  I  N  I  S. 


t 


E  R  R  A  T  A. 

Page  ^  i,  line  i,  for  principle  read principles 

58,  —  3  from  the  bottom,  after  add  add  f 
67,  — — ■  8,  take  out  the  multiplication  lign  x ,  and 
add  the  lign  of  addition  + 

88,  y,  read  io  different  degrees. 

95,  . —  2  from  bottom,  dele  and ;  add  alter  metal  a 

comma. 

u6,  — — .  20,  dele  the  comma. 

131,  — — .  ig?  read  folution  of  vitriol  ^/’copper. 

137,  — —  1,  0/*  to  be  joined. 


t 


V  - 


I 


\ 


\ 


\ 


/ 


lately  fublijbed  by  the  fame  Author 

ELEMENTS  of  MINERALOGY,  8vo, 

An  ESTIMATE  of  the  TEMPERATURE 
OF  DIFFERENT  LATITUDES*  8vo. 


\ 


/
